Joseph Brown
Milo
LD 1964
Joseph Brown, Milo, ME
Testimony in Support of LD 1964
Committee on Labor and Housing
Public Hearing:  May 25, 2023
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to provide written testimony in support of LD 1964, 
An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid 
Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program.
My name is Joseph Brown and I’m a resident of Milo.  I am a small business owner – 
I own a small trucking business.  I am also a husband and father of three kids all 
under the age of five.
Last December, as our family was getting ready for our yearly Christmas party with 
my wife’s family, the phone rang. It was the doctor: Our youngest child had an 
abnormal kidney test result, and we needed to schedule an emergency appointment 
with a kidney specialist in Portland immediately. 
My wife and I started preparing for the worst, and I thought to myself: “Me and my 
wife are both self-employed, so how can I keep my business running to support my 
family and be three hours away while Winnie goes through all these tests? What if she
needs to do more?” Luckily it was a false alarm. But not every parent is as fortunate.
This is not the first time I’ve been faced with the difficult decision of choosing 
between financial security and taking time off to care for a family member.  I couldn’t
take any time off when my first two children were born. In the case of my second 
child, I returned to work the very next day, which ended up putting physical and 
mental stress on my wife (she wasn't supposed to lift anything heavier than a newborn
for 6-8 weeks, but we had a one-year-old at home). 
At that time, I was employed at a small business where I was one of five employees 
and my boss couldn’t afford to offer paid leave. I couldn't afford to take any time 
away from work – but even if unpaid leave were an option, there was no guarantee 
that my job would be waiting for me when I returned. I just couldn’t take that risk, 
especially with a family to support.
My situation is a great example of why you should consider removing the exemptions
of small businesses from certain parts of this bill relating to retaliation or job 
protection. All employees, regardless of how small their employer is, should have 
meaningful access to this paid leave program. Without protections from retaliation or 
job loss, folks cannot actually take paid leave if they need it – in my view, this renders
the program pointless.
“Life happens” to almost everyone at some point, and usually when we least expect it.
As a small business owner, I experienced firsthand how these situations can leave 
small businesses quite vulnerable.  But I’m not alone – other self-employed folks in 
my area have had similar experiences with facing a serious medical issue without any 
access to paid leave.  
All working Mainers, whether we’re in business for ourselves or working for 
someone else, should be able to take care of themselves or a loved one in times of 
illness or other crises without going into debt, or putting their jobs or businesses at 
risk.
A state paid family & medical leave system would provide all working people with 
the flexibility and security to take time away from work to care for themselves or 
family, and it would also help support businesses. 
LD 1964 is a chance for the Legislature to have a major, positive impact on small 
business owners, employees, and their families.  We cannot let this opportunity pass 
us by – Maine’s businesses and working families desperately need a state paid family &
medical leave program. I respectfully urge you to vote yes on this bill.  Thank you.
Sincerely,
Joseph Brown, owner of J. Brown & Sons Trucking LLC
Milo, ME
