 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA 
members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, 
amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information 
Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
 
 
 
Alison  Sucy,  Chief Operating Officer and Director  of Government  Affairs,   
on Behalf  of the Maine  Tourism  Association  
 
In Opposition  to 
 
LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission  
to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program 
 
May 25, 2023 
 
Senator  Tipping, Representative  Roeder, and Members  of the Joint  Standing  Committee  on Labor  and 
Housing:  
 
My name  is Alison  Sucy  and I am the Chief  Operating  Officer  and Director  of Government  Affairs  
for the Maine  Tourism  Association.  The Maine  Tourism  Association,  a non-profit,  is the state’s  
largest  tourism  organization  with nearly  1500  members.  MTA  has been  promoting  Maine  and 
supporting  its members  in every  type of tourism  business  such  as lodging,  restaurants,  camps,  
campgrounds,  retail,  guides,  tour operators,  amusements,  and historical  and cultural  attractions  for 
over 100 years.   
 
I present  this testimony  in opposition  to LD 1964  as our members  have  numerous  concerns  with this 
proposal.   
 
First,  we believe  that this proposal  will speed  up the shift in business  ownership  from  Maine’s  
smaller,  family-owned  businesses  to out-of-state  corporate  ownership  of Maine’s  tourism  businesses.  
The fewer-than-15-employee  businesses  do not have  to provide  an employer  contribution  and large  
corporations  can offer  their  own leave  benefits  product,  so the burden  of funding  this falls to the 
majority  of Maine’s  tourism  businesses;  for example,  those  that in peak  season  have  on average  
between  20 and 50 employees.  The tax to keep  the fund  solvent  will likely  have  to be increased  and 
will be paid by these  small  to mid-size,  family-owned,  multi-generational  businesses.  Combine  that 
with the workforce  shortages  and tremendous  costs  of doing  business,  and we will see more  and 
more  of our Maine-owned  businesses  sold to large,  out-of-state  corporations.  
 
While  we value  businesses  and members  of all sizes  at MTA  and the choices  national  brands  
provide,  we want  to keep  a strong  blend  with traditional  Maine  operations.  Lodging  properties —
motels,  B&Bs,  campgrounds,  camps  & cottages,  and resort  hotels —have  been  particularly  
susceptible  to turning  over ownership  to national  corporations.  Formerly  independently-owned  or 
family-operated  properties  where  the owners  knew  their  customers,  many  of whom  vacationed  there  
annually  for generations,  are being  lost. The pandemic,  retirement  of owners,  and ever-increasing  
costs  of doing  business  have  led to the loss of these  traditional  businesses.  The costs  of this bill in 
terms  of money,  time,  and workforce  will greatly  accelerate  this unfortunate  trend.  
 

 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA 
members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, 
amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information 
Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
 
Second,  without  a seasonality  exemption  there  will be an extreme  hardship  on our seasonal  
businesses.  Three  months  of paid leave  for workers  can leave  employers  without  a worker  for 50-
75%  of their  season.  Our members  have  questions  as to how this would  apply  to such  workers:  Self-
employed  individuals  can participate  so can a seasonal  business  owner  utilize  the program  at the end 
of their  season  to be paid for three  months  of their  off-season?  With  a low earning  threshold  to be 
eligible,  can a worker  get hired  only to take three  months  leave  with in the first few weeks  of work?  
Where  does  that leave  the employer  who invested  time and money  into hiring  and training  a person  
only to have  to start that process  again  one month  into their  short  season?  Can an employee  take the 
leave  in the last month  of season?  If their  job would  have  ended  with the business  closing  on October  
31, on October  15 can the employee  take leave  and get paid for the next three  months?  
 
Workforce  shortages  continue  to plague  the tourism  industry.  Delays  and difficulties  obtaining  H-2B  
and J-1 workers,  challenges  with housing  and transportation  for both foreign  workers  and Maine  
residents,  and simply  not enough  people  in Maine  with the ability  to work  seasonal  jobs make  the 
shortages,  experienced  by all industries,  particularly  glaring  for tourism.  This bill will worsen  
tourism’s  workforce  crisis.  
 
Third,  the hardship  exemption  of §850-J  (below)  from  the sponsor’s  amendment  is problematic.  If 
we truly  want  to help small  businesses,  then make  a complete  exemption  from  the law in its entirety.  
The vague  language  of imposing  “an undue  hardship”  would  be open  to wide  interpretation  under  an 
undefined  process.  To attempt  to prove  this burden  and qualify  for this exemption,  a business  likely  
would  have  to disclose  its finances.   
 
4. Hardship  exemption.  An employer  that employs  less than 15 employees  is not subject  to 
the requirements  of subsection  1 and 2 if compliance  with the requirements  of subsection  1 or 
2 would  impose  an undue  hardship  on the employer  that results  in significant  difficulty  or 
expenses  to the employer  when  considered  in relation  to the size, financial  resources,  nature,  
or structure  of the employer's  business  
 
Finally,  we have  concerns  about  the following  details  from  the sponsor’s  amendment:  
• The low threshold  for employees  to qualify  (6xSAWW  vs 12 consecutive  months  at the same  
employer  under  Maine’s  FMLA)  
• The duration  of the leave  (3 months  per year vs 10 weeks  every  two years  for Maine’s  
FMLA)   
• The application  to all businesses  regardless  of size (Maine’s  FMLA  does  not apply  to firms  
under  15 employees)  
• The employer  share  at 50%  (our New  England  neighbors  have  no employer  share  mandated,  
except  for MA for medical  only)  
• The broad,  subjective,  and undefined  family  definition  (“a significant  personal  bond  that is or 
is like a family  relationship” —as defined  by whom?)  
• The wage  replacement  and benefits  cap is higher  than nearly  every  other  state  (at 90%  if 
greater  than 50%  of SAWW  or 75%  if 50%  or less than SAWW  with 100%  benefit  cap) 
 
We sincerely  believe  that this proposal  will cause  great  harm  to Maine’s  tourism  businesses.  We 
don’t  want  to see a dramatic  increase  in the corporatization  of, and thus loss of, Maine’s  traditional  
family-run  businesses.  Thank  you for your  time and consideration  of our testimony.  
