  
 
May 2 4, 2023  
 
Senator Michael Tipping , Senate Chair  
Representative Amy Roeder , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee On Labor and Housing  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
RE: Sugarloaf testimony in opposition to L.D. 1964 , An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the 
Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program (SP0800)  
Public Hearing – Thursday, May 25, 2023 at 1:00PM  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee On Labor and Housing,  
 
As president and general manager of Sugarloaf, a four -season resort located in Carrabassett Valley, Maine, I am writing 
to express my opposition to L.D. 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid 
Family and Medical Le ave (PFML) Benefits Program. Sugarloaf’s greatest asset is its team members  and we 
undoubtedly recognize the importance of support and accommodation when a member of our staff faces family or 
medical challenges . However, the PFML program as proposed raises  multiple concern s. 
 
During the winter season, Sugarloaf employs roughly 750 team members with most serving on a seasonal or part -time 
basis.  As well, our summer/fall staff is largely made  up of seasonal and part -time workers.   By providing no exemption 
for seasonal or part -time employees, LD 1964 would put us at risk of facing severe staffing shortages during peak 
periods. We already operate in a tight labor market  and the impacts of losing even a small number of season al 
empl oyees for weeks or months at a time  are almost unimaginable . Leading a  profitable operation is  secondary to my 
concerns for the strain such a scenario would place on those left to take on additional duties and responsibilities.  
 
I’ll start by emphasizing t hat all workers having access to 12 weeks of paid leave through the proposed PFML program 
would create significant hardships for operations  of any size, and most certainly for us at Sugarloaf. Minimum  terms of 
employment such as those enforced by states  currently offering such benefits should be explored  as it is critical  that you 
ensure a fair balance between employee rights and the operational needs of Maine’s businesses.  
 
A mandatory payroll premium equaling 1% of wages would be a burden for employees and employers —however split.  
And does that amount truly sustain the program? Some among the few states that have implemented similar PFML 
programs initially underestimated costs and have increased the contributions required of both businesses and 
indivi duals. If a cap or any maximums on the proposed payroll premiums actually exist, it seems this language in LD 
1964 is foggy at best. This is especially important since a ccuracy of the program’s cost estimates  is unknown and just as 
it has been done in other states, imposing a premium increase would be the likely solution should Maine’s program 
launch, then fall short in  maintaining solvency . 
 
Another concern and one I ask that you thoroughly review is the proposed creation of  an entirely new department to 
manage a PFML program . Of the small number of states offering paid leave benefits, most utilize private insurance 
companies to manage such. LD 1964 stands to strap Maine taxpayers with additional government employees and 
  
 
proposes oversight be conducted by a committee of 13 with only two seats held by p ublic members and actual 
employers.  
 
Lastly, this legislation’s definition of ‘family members’ is exceptionally subjective. Beyond the standard inclusions, de -
facto grandparents,  grandchildren, and siblings are included, and as well, any other individual with whom the employee  
has a significant personal bond that is, or is like a family relationship, regardless of biological or legal relationship.  The 
ease in which one can become eligible for benefits under the proposed PFML program greatly strengthens my opposition 
to LD 1964 a s detailed in the Amendment dated 5/10/23.  
 
In closing, I want to thank you for your time and consideration. Maine has so much to offer its residents and visitors … 
and Maine is worthy of every effort to rebuild and retain a robust workforce.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Karl Strand  
President and General Manager  
Sugarloaf     
 

