Kate Hitchings Ahalt
Bath
LD 1964
Testimony In Support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the
Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program
Kate Hitchings Ahalt
Bath, Maine
May 25, 2023 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, 
My name is Kate Hitchings Ahalt and I live in Bath, Maine.  I am testifying in support
of paid family and medical leave for Maine. 
I am one of so many Mainers who are trying their utmost to contribute to society and 
our economy via a full-time career and at the same time to raise and support a healthy 
family.  In my household, both parents work demanding jobs, and we have two kids.  
We care deeply about both our jobs AND our family; and one of the hardest things as 
a parent is finding paid time off of work to have a child, recover from having a child, 
or perform a host of other critical parental functions that our society values - in 
theory.  To me, it’s time for Maine to signal that it values our ability to perform those 
functions in practice by providing Paid Family Medical Leave to all Mainers.  It just 
makes sense.  
When I had each of my children, I was lucky enough to have access to nearly four 
months of paid medical leave from my employer, allowing me to recover from 
childbirth, bond with my babies, and return to being a productive worker largely 
healed- but that kind of critical, stability-providing leave is far from accessible for all 
women.  Without PFML, women leave the workforce at astonishing rates, in large 
part to provide unpaid care to their families as access to quality care has become more
and more scarce throughout our state- and nationwide.  Put simply, if we don’t have 
paid leave from work, our choices as parents narrow considerably- either drop out of 
the workforce completely for some time, take unpaid leave (if even available to you) 
and imperil your family’s financial position, or return to work immediately while you 
search desperately for infant care.  None of these options are good for women, their 
families, or, long term, for their employers.  
I implore the state of Maine to take a stand and to make an investment in women’s 
equality of opportunity by supporting LD 1964. Thank you for your time and 
consideration on this important issue.
Sincerely, 
Kate Hitchings Ahalt

