Kate Beever
Maine Music & Health
LD 1964
Testimony In Support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the
Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program
Kate Beever
Portland, ME 04101
May 25, 2023
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, 
My name is Kate Beever and I live in Portland. I am here today in support of paid 
family and medical leave for Maine. 
I am a medical music therapist with an office in South Portland, and I work half of the
week at Maine Medical Center. In my 12 years as a clinician, I have worked with 
families all over the state- from York Hospital to Reddington Fairview to New 
Sweden. Clients come to music therapy to regain speech, mobility, and quality of life 
after an injury, accident, or newly diagnosed illness. These include traumatic brain 
injuries, Parkinson’s Disease, dementia, and cancer. Patients’ goals are medical- 
physical and cognitive- but they are also trying to manage the emotional affects of 
huge changes in their bodies and lives. Families are often in shock, trying to navigate 
the financial and logistical issues of hospitalization while worrying about their loved 
one. 
The themes we see over and over at bedside are stress and worry about the patient’s 
recovery, as well as the financial impact of medical needs. On top of growing medical
bills, caregivers are taking time off from work to be at bedside, figure out next steps, 
and then be at home when the patient is discharged to help with the transition and 
provide care at home. We have a shortage of affordable in-home care workers and 
rehab facilities, so parents or adult children of patients are learning how to handle 
things like a tracheostomy at home and prevent further injury that would re-admit 
their family member. This is an incredible level of stress, added to by knowing that 
“vacation” days are running short as they’re being used for caregiving.
If LD1964 passes, families will have a chance to get through one of the most difficult 
experiences in life- physical disabilities brought on by accidents, illnesses, and aging. 
They can make that transition home, have the space to breathe and find resources, 
without losing the income that is so necessary for survival.
I hope you will support LD 1964. 
Sincerely, 
Kate Beever, MA, MT-BC
