The Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
131st Maine Legislature 
Testimony from Katherine Johnston, Resident, Hallowell, ME 
 
In Support Of  
L.D. 1964 “An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid 
Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program” 
 
Thursday, May 25, 2023 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, distinguished members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee, my name is Katherine Johnston and I am a resident of Hallowell. I am the mother of 
two young daughters, ages 3 and 8 months old. 
 
I am writing in strong support of L.D. 1964. This bill will provide critical support to families and 
businesses and will make Maine a far more attractive place to raise a family. As the oldest state 
in the nation, we need families to choose Maine. Our communities and our businesses depend 
on this. 
 
I will be brief and focus my comments on the significance to families with newborns. I started 
drafting this testimony at 3:00am when my baby woke us up because she is teething. I was 
irritated and bone tired and it occurred to me how quickly we all forget how impossible the 
early days with a newborn are. I am only mere weeks away from this life-altering experience of 
being up at all hours of the night for months on end and even I have repressed it. It is barely 
possible to function as a human in this world when you are awake around the clock, only 
sleeping in 30-minute bursts, and yet that is what new parents endure. It is impossible to 
fathom unless you are in the thick of it. Biology makes us forget. 
 
Without a paid leave system, new parents often return to work within only weeks of having a 
baby who needs around-the-clock care. There is a reason sleep deprivation is considered a form 
of torture. Yet our society expects us to return to work in a barely functioning capacity - and 
where will that baby even go with the current state of child care? - or give up an income all 
together. It does not make sense. I did not return to work, and I didn’t have access to pay or 
benefits after about a month because I was ineligible for the current system of unpaid FMLA. 
This is common. This benefits no one, not the baby, not the caregivers, not the employer.  
 
I’ve seen examples of friends who have had access to paid leave in other states and it is 
incredible what this means in terms of setting a foundation for families forever into the future. 
They develop parenting competence, true partnership, and face the hardest weeks of life with a 
financial safety net. It is transformative. It is humane.  
 
This is a wise investment by and for Maine that will more than pay for itself many times over in 
better outcomes for families, communities, and businesses. It is the humane thing to do. Please 
pass L.D. 1964. 
