Kelsey  Holt 
Saco
LD 1964
Thank you for considering my testimony.
I am a resident of Saco, 40 years old, with a husband and two children, currently ages 
8 and 3.
I will share my experience with my second child who was born April 5, 2020.
By April 24, I had become so tired that I stayed in bed all day. My husband cooked all
the meals and took care of our son. If he had been at work, I would not have been able
to take care of my children adequately. I was sleeping in 3-4 hour stretches at night, 
waking up for 30-60 minutes to breastfeed my infant daughter. Some nights I would 
only get 2 stretches of sleep so napping during the day with my baby was imperative. 
Many days during the first 3 months postpartum I was crying, anxious and lethargic. I
was exhausted and struggling with breastfeeding. Since my husband was home with 
us, he was able to comfort and support me as well as make all of our food and meet 
the needs of our older son. At least 50% of the mornings I woke up so tired and 
defeated that I was crying. 
During this time my body was also still healing. I had stitches to close a tear from 
birthing which meant that I needed to limit my activities - only going up and down 
stairs once a day for the first few weeks, no heavy lifting and no walking farther than 
our yard. 
By early June (2 months postpartum) I was feeling a lot of irritability and anxiety. 
Unfortunately I was often taking this out on my older son, becoming very angry and 
yelling when the situation did not warrant this behavior. My husband's presence at 
home allowed me to take breaks, get more rest, and talk through my experiences with 
him. He was also able to spend a lot of quality time with our infant daughter. He often
carried her in a front pack while he did chores or took walks outside with both kids. I 
am certain this has led to a very close relationship between my husband and our now 
3 year old daughter.
By the end of June, I started having extreme mood swings and had difficulty taking 
care of myself and my children. I was so tired and emotionally dysregulated that it 
would have been impossible for me to function at a job. If I had been the sole parent 
at home, I would not have been able to adequately meet my children's needs. I fear 
that I may have hurt them or neglected them if my husband had not been home to 
share the parenting responsibilities.
Eventually, after many months of struggling with my mood, I started taking an 
antidepressant. The medication helped enough that I was able to be more functional 
and take better care of myself and my children. I definitely would not have been able 
to function in a workplace during this time.
If my husband had not been home, I fear that my children and I would have suffered 
much more. His presence at home ensured that our children's needs were met and that 
I was able to rest and recover as much as possible after giving birth.
I am confident that Paid Family Medical Leave will greatly increase the postpartum 
experiences of all people. Birthing mothers will be able to get the rest and healing 
they need and all parents will be able to closely bond with their new infants.
Thank you for reading my testimony.
