 Dear Senator T ipping, Representative Roeder , and honorable members of the  
 Committee on Labor and Housing:  
 My name is Kimberly Simmons and I am a sociologist  from Portland, the mother of 2  
 young adults and daughter of 2 older adults – the ham in the family sandwich.  
 I enthusiastically support LD1964, and respectfully disagree with some of the sponsor's  
 amendments and the Governor ’s proposed challenges.  In particular , I believe we  
 actually need a higher level of income replacement and job protections for all workers.  
 The Urgency of T emporary Income Replacement  
 As one opponent testified, “what you don’t know is scary” – I submit that among my  
 friends, what scares us is a parent falling, our spouse suf fering a heart attack, a child in  
 a car accident, a diagnosis of our own that puts our families at financial risk.  While we  
 are responsible planners, we know that we cannot prevent every emergency . It is also  
 impossible for the Legislature to address every extenuating circumstance in a bill.  
 LD1964 addresses the biggest needs of the most people and we should not allow the  
 worst-case-scenario outliers to deny us this progress.  
 A lack of paid leave doesn’t prevent emergencies, it just leaves us scrambling to live  
 without wages. With   1 in 4   Mainers unable to cover an unexpected expense of $400 or  
 more, this puts housing, food security and other basic needs in jeopardy . 
 For example, as the Speaker mentioned, 1 in 4 women return to work within 10 days of  
 giving birth.  This   results   in dismal rankings on maternal health, mortality and   infant  
 death   in comparison to other countries. The   Global Gender Gap study   ranks the United  
 States 83rd in the world for women’ s health and survival overall. Racism increases  
 health risks   for mothers and babies of color yet this group is often   excluded   from paid  
 leave of fered as a private benefit. Paid leave is possibly the most   significant intervention  
 we can of fer. 
 Without paid time of f, we may need to ignore our own health care, at a high price.  
 Delaying medical care leads to significantly worse public health outcomes, as recently  
 exacerbated by the pandemic, including “   increased morbidity and mortality risk among  
 those with underlying, preventable, and treatable medical conditions.   ”   As evidenced by  
 the torrent of gofundmes (See “   cancer patient living in van   ”  “  beloved bookstore owner   ” 
 or  Tim’s Stage 4 Cancer   as examples), Maine families depend on each other ’s 
 generosity already , but this private networking   exacerbates   existing inequalities in our  
 society and simply fails us as a genuine public safety net.  
 Unpaid caregiving is extremely expensive for women. According to a 2020 Oxfam study , 
 if American women earned minimum wage for the unpaid work they do around the  
 house and caring for relatives, we would have earned a collective $1.5 trillion. A 2023  
 labor department   report   estimates that women who are   now in their 40s will see lifetime  
 earnings reduced by $295,000 due to caregiving responsibilities.  W omen my age, in  
 our 50s, often suf fer financially if we juggle care for our parents as well as others in our  
 families,   decreasing our incomes by an average   of  33% – this is a decade when  
 non-caregivers often reach their highest income years.  1 1% of women in our 50s leave  
 the workforce entirely , to care for someone at home around-the-clock.  
 Why would we want our community to endure this level of chaos when an insurance  
 program can help us through?  A lower wage replacement will exclude families living  
 closest to the bone. These changes undermine the purpose of the program - to improve  
 the health and well-being of our communities.  W e should replace the highest level of  
 income possible while maintaining solvency and use the research completed by the  
 commission to find this balance.  
 Job Protection and Workforce Shortages  
 Similarly , who can really af ford to become unemployed when welcoming a new baby or  
 suffering from a medical emergency?  
 I turned 23 the year the   Federal FMLA   was signed, and   presumed   paid leave was  
 around the corner; we were one of a   handful of countries   without it even then.  Thirty  
 years later , no real progress has been made and now my own children must navigate  
 the same economy their grandmothers and I did - one both demanding we maintain  
 high levels of paid and unpaid labor and hostile to us for doing so when the roles  
 conflict. The age of first birth has   risen   over these   decades, in   large part   because  
 parenting is simply unaf fordable, and a growing number of young adults   plan to remain  
 childless.  While I respect all individual choices in family planning (and am horrified  
 others   read these statistics as reason to force pregnancy   on unwilling bodies), it is  
 slightly dystopian to create a collective so hostile to parenting and caregiving, when  
 different choices are replicable and relatively easy to make.  LD1964 helps make future  
 generations more possible.  
 I am of fended by the opposition’ s characterization of their employees as cheaters who  
 don’t want to work.   Maine women are, as a group, extremely hard workers. I am a hard  
 worker .  I teach part-time for the University of Maine system, and work far and beyond  
 the hours I am contracted to provide. I earn a low wage and do not qualify for paid  
 family and medical leave.  For my pregnancies, I simply had to leave the workforce and  
 rely on family support.  I needed ankle surgery and worked through a time I should have  
 used for rest and recovery .  I showed up with the utmost responsibility and commitment,  
 but ultimately have found myself burned-out and   demoralized   from the lack of  
 reciprocity of care.  The logic of adjunctification and   contingency   hurts morale and  
 drives educators   out of the workforce. As   analysis   of the “Great Resignation” shows, I  
 am not alone.  I DO want to work, but I do not want to be exploited, disrespected and  
 endlessly exhausted.   I urge the Legislature to pass LD 1964 in its original form to  
 genuinely allow the sectors that need to recruit and maintain a healthy workforce (like  
 education) to compete with industry . 
 As a board member of a small nonprofit, I worry about our ability to cover our extremely  
 responsible staf f who may experience a health emergency , a new baby , and cargving  
 crisis - again, the stuf f of life.  LD1964 would allow the State to replace the primary  
 employees wages which would free up budgeted resources for us to pay for short-term  
 substitute help.  This is so preferable to losing a trained and valued employee,  
 decreasing programming or service provision, or depending on volunteers (so often the  
 unpaid labor of women   , again) to fill the gaps.  Nonprofits   employ 1 in 6 Mainers   , and  
 only  20% report   offering Paid Family and Medical Leave in 2022.  Access to this  
 insurance program could significantly improve recruitment and retention in this sector , 
 and allow more employers to treat nonprofit staf f with dignity , compassion and respect.  
 Refuting the Notion that Caregiving = V acation  
 Maine women are   hard workers   and we participate in both the paid and unpaid labor  
 force- as caregivers and   volunteers   - at high rates.    According to   time-use data   , 
 women provide almost double the hours of unpaid domestic labor than men. W omen  
 volunteer in our communities at   higher rates   as well, and Maine   depends   on 
 volunteerism to get many of our community needs met.  Caregiving fulfills a community  
 need, yet is discussed as if it is a purely private experience and responsibility .  I wish  
 those opposing LD 1964 or wanting to diminish the benefit could spend a week in a  
 world without “women’ s work.”  
 The stress of juggling the demands of work and family without more support, erodes  
 women’ s well-being.  Described as “   time poverty   ,”  caregiving working women simply  
 lack the time we need to care for ourselves, resulting in an expensive   toll  on our own  
 health and mental health, again costing families and communities.  What if instead of  
 considering this a private problem, we understood our society to be externalizing the  
 cost of care onto individual women and named this as an unacceptable practice?  
 I am increasingly recognizing that I will eventually need more care myself.   Researchers  
 estimate that 69% of individuals reaching age 65 will need help with the activities of  
 daily living at some point in our lives. I hope to live into my 90s and I hope my daughters  
 will help with my care if I need them, but not at the expense of their own careers,  
 financial security , or well-being.  I presume you all want this too.  Paid Family and  
 Medical Leave is an essential program for our shared futures. Please support the more  
 generous benefits originally proposed in LD1964.  
 Sincerely , 
 Kimberly Simmons, PhD  
 Portland, ME  
