 
Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
 
Staff 
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony In Support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the 
Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical 
Leave Benefits Program 
 
 
May 25, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing,  
 
My name is Dr. Laura Blaisdell and I live in South Portland. I am testifying in 
support of paid family and medical leave for Maine in my role of as the current 
President of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics. 
Maine children and families need policies like paid leave offering time to bond, 
establish feeding and recover from the birthing process. With access to 12 weeks 
of paid leave, infants are more likely  to attend checkups and get immunized and 
are breastfed twice as long by parents who choose to. Paid leave decreases 
postpartum depression  and promotes shared child care responsibilities.  
Personally, I returned to work within one month of the birth of both my sons for 
lack of extended leave policies. As a pediatrician, I knew the benefits of kangaroo 
care and singing, talking and reading to newborns and was fortunate to have job 
protection. However, many families are vulnerable to the adverse impacts of 
unpaid leave. Ninety-five percent  of low-wage workers can’t access paid leave, so 
unexpected illness or injury could mean lost income, employment and health 
insurance. Paid family and medical leave promotes health equity and offers all 
Mainers a safety net to recover without slipping into unemployment or poverty. 
Mainer’s have long lived by the sagacious adage that an ounce of prevention is 
worth a pound of cure.  Allowing families to care for one another in times of need 
is not only common sense, but is worth every downstream benefit—both proven 
and obvious.  As pediatricians our professional belief in and dedication to are 
ounces of prevention, like paid leave. 
It is baffling that we as a country had not addressed this critical issue facing 
families, yet it isn’t confusing at all why Maine’s forward-thinking leadership would 
join the growing number of states supporting paid leave.  
Supporting LD 1964 will require consideration of the benefits and costs—both the 
ones we pay now and the ones we will pay later. In Maine, we live by Dirigo! and 
in so doing I hope you will support 1964.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Laura Blaisdell MD/MPH, FAAP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
