 
 
Maine State Legislature – Committee on Labor and Housing  
Public Hearing – May 25, 2023  
 
Testimony of Laura Hoch  
Senior Manager of Advocacy, National Multiple Sclerosis Society  
LD 1964 – An Act  to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and 
Medical Leave Benefits Program  
 
Chair Tipping, Chair Roeder and members of the Committee on LD 1964, An Act to Implement the 
Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Pai d Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program, 
and how they may affect those who live with multiple sclerosis (MS) and their families.  
 
MS is an unpredictable disease of the central nervous system. Currently there is no cure. Symptoms vary 
from person to pe rson and may include disabling fatigue, mobility challenges, cognitive changes and 
vision issues. An estimated 1 million people live with MS in the United States. Early diagnosis and 
treatment are critical to minimize disability. Significant progress is be ing made to achieve a world free of 
MS. 
 
At some point in their lives, people living with MS may need time away from work to deal with a serious 
illness, or their family members may need time away from work to care for them. The federal Family and 
Medical Leave Act (FMLA) provides important unpaid job -protected leave. However, just over 40% of 
workers in the U.S. have access to personal paid medical leave through employer -provided short -term 
disability insurance, which means many people cannot afford to tak e leave when they need it.  
 
Most people with MS are diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 50 —prime working years. People living 
with MS often continue working long after their diagnosis, but some may need time away from work to 
manage an unexpected change in health. Many workers may need to take medical leave at some point 
during their lifetime. In fact, over 50% of leaves taken under the FMLA were for a worker’s own illness; 
another 20% were for caregiving of a sick family member1. For those who must take time off without 
pay, it can be nearly impossible to make ends meet. MS is an extremely expensive disease. The average 
total cost of living with MS is $88,487 per year2. 
 
 
1 https://nationalpartnership.org/our -work/resources/economic -justice/paid -leave/key -facts -the-family -and-medical -leave -
act.pdf  
2 Bebo, Bruce et. al. The Economic Burden of Multiple Sclerosis in the United States: Estimate of Direct and Indirect Costs. 
Neuro logy May 2022, 98 (18) e1810 -e1817; DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200150. 
https://n.neurology.org/content/98/18/e1810  (accessed May 4, 2022).  
 
 
Caregivers also face financial challenges and are too often fo rced to choose between work and 
caregiving because they lack access to paid leave. An estimated 40 million adults in the U.S. provide 
$470 billion per year in unpaid caregiving3. These family caregivers are the predominant providers of 
long -term services and supports for people with illnesses or disabilities. Low -wage workers are hit 
particularly hard because  they are the least likely to have access to any type of leave, even though they 
are the most in  need of policies that help them prevent financial ca tastrophe when illness strikes.  
 
Given the disproportionate impact on low -wage workers, we applaud this legislative body for including 
language that addresses this and note that it is critical to keep in provisions such as the 90% benefit up 
to 120% of th e state’s average weekly wage. Additionally, many people living with chronic conditions 
create their own communities outside of the bounds of traditional families. This is why we commend the 
legislative language around the definition of family and extendin g it to significant personal bonds that 
are like family, regardless of biological or legal relationship.  
 
One concern we have with the current language is the determination of weekly earnings. The bill 
outlines a process by which the authority would aver age the previous four quarters of earnings. This 
may leave people who were not previously working  – or who previously worked a much lower wag e job 
-  but have been working for the required minimum of two quarters to receive a fraction of what they 
otherwise could and much less than they would need to suppor t themselves. We would instead 
encourage policy to reflect an employee’s current salary, so long as they have been working for the 
required two quarters.  
 
We support legislation that would create a paid leave program for a serious health condition; to car e for 
a family member with a serious health condition; to care for a newborn, newly adopted, or newly placed 
foster child and therefore support the passage of LD 1964 by this Committee. If you have any questions 
or would like to discuss these comments furt her, please feel free to contact Laura Hoch at 
laura.hoch@nmss.org or (475) 400 -0870.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 https://www.aarp.org/r esearch/topics/care/info -2015/national -survey -family -caregivers.html    
 
 
 
