Leah Deragon
Portland
LD 1964
LEAH DERAGON
PORTLAND, ME
May 25, 2023 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, 
My name is LEAH DERAGON and I live in PORTLAND, ME I am testifying in 
support of paid family and medical leave for Maine. 
To put my testimony in context, I am speaking not only as the working mother of two 
children but as the co-founder of Birth Roots, a non-profit that has been serving 
prenatal and postnatal families from 11 out of 16 Maine counties for the last 20 years. 
I testify today as a community leader in the service of perinatal health for two 
decades. I have personally supported three to four thousand local families and in my 
role I spend no less than 18 hours with these families helping them prepare for 
childbirth in the third trimester and adjust to their new role in the 4th trimester. I have 
easily logged 5000 hours helping new and expectant parents figure out the first 12 
weeks of new parenthood. So I testify today not on my own behalf but as a voice of 
thousands.
It goes without saying that we live in a time of stacked crises, cultural comorbidities 
one might even say. Look around, we are not well. Maine is not an exception to the 
national trends of both a maternal mortality crisis and a perinatal mental health crisis. 
Every day in every county in Maine we are suffering under and struggling with both a
childcare crisis and a protracted workforce crisis. Families are buckling under our 
inaction and stalled policies. I cannot think of a single piece of legislation that is as 
well researched, demonstrated, desired, or has the power to reverse our trending rates 
of maternal mortality or perinatal mental health crisis, as well as respond 
meaningfully to both the childcare crisis and the workforce crisis. ALL OF THIS for 
less than 1% of wages - shared equally between employer and employee. This 
legislation is a deal. Alternate solutions to these 4 escalating crises will cost us so 
much more, as will our inaction.
I hope you will support LD 1964. Thank you for listening, I’m happy to answer any 
questions. 
Sincerely, 
LEAH DERAGON

