Leigh Bermani
Hollis Center
LD 1964
I am submitting this testimony in favor of paid family and medical leave. 
My baby was born in June 2022.  Both my husband and I are educators.  People often 
think that we have the summers “off,” but in fact our employment contracts are for 
181 days.  Since our baby was born in the summer, after we had finished our contracts
for the year, my husband was given no family leave to use in the fall.  Fortunately, my
district does offer 30 days of paid parental leave that can be used within the first six 
months “to care for and bond with a newborn or a newly adopted child.”  I then took 
an additional 14 unpaid days.  I am very grateful to have had this time with my son, 
but I wish that my husband had been provided the same opportunity, and I wish that 
my time home with my baby had been longer.  
I truly believe that having to send my baby to daycare in order to return to work and 
maintain our health insurance exacerbated my post-partum depression (and this is 
backed by research: https://tinyurl.com/2p8fztft).  Both my husband and I looked at 
our baby boy when he was six weeks old and thought that in no way would we ever 
have been able to leave him at that time.  If we had each been eligible for 12 weeks of
paid leave, it would have felt so much better to have had him at home for 24 weeks 
rather than start daycare at 4 months (and I fully appreciate that we are “lucky” 
compared to so many families).  
I understand that a program of paid family and medical leave comes with costs and 
difficulties, but I am also aware that PFML is supported by a majority of Mainers, 
decreases turnover costs for small businesses, and helps to stabilize the workforce 
crisis.  Other states have strong PFML programs in place, and it makes those states 
more appealing to young families.  Maine, which has a rapidly aging population, 
would benefit from attracting more young families to the state and to the workforce.  I
urge the Legislature to move forward with a plan for PFML in Maine. 
Respectfully,
Leigh Bermani
Hollis Center
