295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against   
LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of 
the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical 
Leave Benefits Program  
Sponsored by Senator Daughtry  
May 26, 2023  
 
Good afternoon Senator  Tipping , Representative  Roeder , and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on  Labor and Housing .  My name is 
Malory Shaughnessy . I am a resident of Westbrook  and the Executive Director 
of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental H ealth Services. The Alliance is the 
statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s community -based 
providers of these important services , providing services annually to over 
80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance advocates for the 
implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices that serve to 
enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak Neither F or Nor Against LD 
1964 , An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to 
Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program . This testimo ny is  to 
share some concerns from the member providers of the Alliance and to present 
a possible solution  for these concerns.  
 
First , we want to clearly state that as employers, the member agencies of the 
Allia nce value their employees and strive to provide the highest wages and 
most comprehensive  benefit packages they are able to -- given current 
MaineCare rates .  
  
So, t he Allia nce concern  largely revolve s around the mismatch between the 
added costs to providers to implement this program  and the aforementioned 
MaineC are reimbursement rates. Most of the member  agencies of the Alliance 
provi de the bulk of their behavioral health services to MaineCare members or 
the uninsured , so their funding is very dependent on MaineCare  rates , and 
contracts paid  through the Mental Health and S ubstance Use Block Grants, 
which largely mirror MaineCare rates .  
 
Through rate reform initiatives that were brought forward by the legislature , we 
have this year finally  seen most behavioral health reimbur sement rates begin to  
catch up to the inflation ary impacts  of the past decade , and a new baseline has 
been set that h as begun to stabilize our system of care. To have th ese 
increased costs hit these agencies now without a corresponding increase in 
the rates to cover them, we will  see th is stability stumble and again see 
service cutbacks and facility closures . 
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  Mental Health  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Concepts, Inc.  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Couns eling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
KidsPeace Maine  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Pathways of Maine  
Portland  Recovery Community 
Center  
Progress Center  
Rumford Group Homes  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
The cost impacts are not simply t he increase of the employer portion of the  1% of wages, which for 
some agencies co uld be a substantial  amount. The cost  impacts also include the overtime wages to 
cover absent employees  in facilities that operate 24  hours a day . Due to the workforce shortage s, it 
is near im possible to  hire on new staff  for a short t erm as the position is held  for the absen t 
employee . These losses must just be absorbed  as there is no way for th e agencies to independently 
increase the rates for these services , and the agency ends up hav ing to reduce services or close 
down beds .  
 
These agencies  are the safety net for mental health and substance  use services in our communities . 
They are providing critical services that the Department of Health and H uman Services contracts 
them to provide for the health of our communities. Post pandemic , the demand for these services 
is growing and we simp ly cannot afford to see any more reduction  in access to care.  
 
Finally,  a possible solution to these  concern s. The Alliance propose s that a new  MaineC are Impact 
Statement  process be added to the legislative process , similar to the new Racial I mpact Statement  
process. “Upon the req uest of a legislative committee  such as this one , a commissioner or director 
of a state agency or the commissioner's or director's designee shall provide to that legislative 
committee  the data, analysis and other information within the agency's possession necessary for 
the Leg islature to prepare a  [MaineCare ] impact statement for legislation before that legislative 
committee or for legislation being prepared by that legislative committee. ” 1  These impact 
statement s would analyze the fina ncial impact  on the provision of  MaineCare services and how 
much the  rates must be increased to offset  that impact  so that needed services are not impacted .    
 
This committee could take a step in that di rection, b y adding an amendment to th is legislation 
calling for this analysis , so tha t the Main eCare impact cost could be added to the fiscal note of this 
legislation .  
 
We would also propose one other amendment that would add a member to the Paid Family and 
Medical Leave Benefits Authority  -- One member  who is an employer in an agency providing 
services covered by MaineCare.  
 
Thank you for your time and for the opportunity to present this ideas and concerns. I would be 
happy to provide additional information  for the work session if re quested.  
 
                                                           
1 https://legislature.m aine.gov/statutes//2/title2sec201.html   
