SenatorTipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Mareisa Well, I am the Vice Presidentfor Development & 
Community Engagement at Maine Family Planning, and l am here today to testify on behalf of Maine 
Family Planning in support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission 
to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program. 
Maine Family Planning is an organization that strives to ground our services, programs, and 
advocacy within the framework of ReproductiveJustice, a framework that was named and built by Black 
womento bring an intersectional lensto the reproductive rights movement. The fundamental tenets of 
Reproductive Justice as defined by the SisterSong Women of Color Reproductive Justice Collective are: 
The human right to own our bodies and control ourfuture 
The human right to have children 
The human right to not have children, and 
The human right to parent the children we have in safe and sustainable communities. 
One of Maine Family Planning ’s co-founders, former Republican state Senator David Huber, 
used to say, ”lf you don't like abortion, you better like family planning. ” The same could be said of paid 
family and medical leave — if you don't like abortion, you better like paid family and medical leave. 
People decide to terminate pregnancies for all kinds of personal reasons — all of which are valid — but 
consistently high among people's reasons are economic hardship factorsl that make pregnancy and 
parenting feel like untenable choices or, to be honest, like there is no real choice at all. That is not 
reproductive justice.' 
The United States is among only seven countries in the world that do not guarantee any paid 
family leave. The other six are Papua New Guinea and five small island nations in the Pacific Ocean: 
Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau and Tonga. We are exceptional in this regard, but not in 
the way that we like to talk about American exceptionalism. 
While Maine Family Planning supports all the reasons that people need paid family and medical 
leave, ourfocus today is on maternal and infant health outcomes. There is an overwhelming body of 
research demonstrating the economic, psychological, and physical health benefits of access to paid 
leave for new parents, their children, and their families? 3 4 
Paid family and medical leave is a powerful 
tool for advancing health, gender, economic, and racial equity.‘ 6 7 
Finally, as a Maine-based nonprofit 
employer, we welcome a PFMLprogram that we can participate in to bettersupport our employees and 
their families. We strongly encourage the committee to vote unanimously Ought to Pass on LD 1964. 
1 Low-wage workers bear financial burden of denied abortions I PBS NewsHour 
2 Paid Leave ls Essential for Healthy Moms and Babies - National Partnership for Women & Families 
3 Paid family leave and children health outcomes in OECD countries ~ PMC lnih.zzov)_ 
4 The urgent necessity for paid parental leave (gpaorgl 
5 Racial and ethnic disparities in access to and use of paid family and medical leave: evidence from four nationally 
representative datasets : Monthly Labor Review: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics lbls.2ov)_ 
5 Racial/Ethnic inequities in Paid Parental Leave Access - PMC lnih.govl 
7 Paid Family and Medical Leave: A Racial Justice Issue — and Opportunity - National Partnership for Women& 
Families ii 
ll
N 
ii 
,
I 
ii
.
l
>
i
. 
ii 
ll
.
i 
l/ 
ii
i
