Margo Simmons
Falmouth
LD 1964
Testimony In Support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the
Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program
Margo Simmons
Falmouth Maine
May 25, 2023 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, 
My name is Margo Simmons and I live in Falmouth . I am testifying in support of 
paid family and medical leave for Maine. 
I am a woman in my 80s, grateful to have provided love and care to my own family 
for many decades. However, I can attest that the demands of caregiving sometimes 
came at considerable costs. 
I gave birth to my first child in 1967, a full decade before the Pregnancy. 
Discrimination Act was passed. The cultural presumption was that I would happily 
stay home with my babies. However, I was college educated, which was rare for 
women at the time. I knew I could provide more to children in my community 
through teaching and ultimately opened a childcare center, but found the demands of 
full-time work and primary caregiving for small children untenable and returned to 
family caregiving for several more years.   In this decade I watched many friends get 
divorced. It became very clear that the economic arrangement of a single breadwinner
is dangerous for women and children and outdated in every way.  
When my youngest daughter entered junior high school, I committed to opening 
another business-  this time, an educational toy store and teacher supply company. 
Despite continued primary caregiving responsibilities, I was able to employ several 
people for 15 years. In the late 1990s my brother became seriously ill, my parents 
needed more support, and I was expecting my first grandchild. These events were 
both sad and joyful and intensely consuming, although  temporary , I was glad to 
bring my attention to those I love, but extremely sorry that it resulted in the closing of
my business. More support for interim solutions would have potentially allowed me 
time to make a different transition to eventual retirement.
Despite the advances my generation made, in terms of women’s rights and new 
opportunities to be in the workforce, I watched my daughter, become a mother 
without any additional public policy support than I had.  My granddaughters are now 
young adults, and I don’t see how they will achieve their own career aspirations and 
also become mothers. Being a grandmother has been an extraordinary joy for me and 
I hate to think my own daughter will miss this chance. I sincerely hope that Maine 
will be a leader and maintain women’s right to abortion and women’s rights to have 
children without risking their whole financial future.
As I age, my friends, and I care for ourselves, and our spouses and each other. 
However, we also rely on our younger family members from time to time. We also 
sometimes need to hire caregivers and want to pay them a fair wage, but often cannot 
afford to offer benefits like paid leave to them. While we wish to always be entirely 
independent and self-reliant ,  we are interdependent and Will experience events that 
require some love and care from others. This should not threaten the future careers or 
financial well-being of our children and their families.
 It is exhausting to think of all the billions of hours women spend in the other 40 
hours a week of unpaid “work”  mostly considered to be “women’s work”  that has 
hardly changed in my 80+ years on earth. It is time to make more progress for Maine. 
I fully support LD 1964 and hope you will too!

