 
 
 
WWW.CGAGROUP.COM  | @CGAGROUP  
 
May 25, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping 
Representative Roeder  
Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: LD 1964, “An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and 
Medical Leave Benefits Program ” 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing my name is Matt Marks, I am a Principal at Cornerstone Governmen t Affairs and here on behalf of 
AGC Maine.  
 
AGC Maine is concerned with the amended version of LD 1964 and recommends Maine explore a voluntary 
program before enacting the bill as presented. New Hampshire’s law was the first in the nation voluntary 
program in conjunction with a private partnership. Vermont announced its program in 2022, and like New Hampshire , the voluntary program allows for 60% wage replacement. Both plans provide six weeks of coverage, 
Maine places an additional challeng e at twelve weeks and 90% or 75% of wage replacement.  
 Below are our primary concerns about the bill as drafted:  
 
• The definition of covered individuals in §850 -A definitions, included in G, covers individuals with a 
“significant personal bond.” The defini tion is not clear or verifiable and should be excluded.  
 
• Intermittent leave requirement should be included in the total amount of leave.  
 
• In §850 -D ineligibility cases will be difficult to determine given the broad allowance under this law. 
Additionally, i t’s not clear how the Administration would address any penalties or action when a 
misrepresentation occurs , while it prohibits an individual providing a false statement or 
misrepresentation from participating for one year, it doesn’t address the associated  business losses. The 
grievance process should include additional legislative directives for rulemaking.  
 
• It’s not clear with available data if the administrative costs set at 5% reflect the potential costs.  
 
• Wage replacement should be lowered and be like  that of New Hampshire and Vermont.  
 
• Twelve weeks is extensive, it places a risk on many businesses that are struggling today to find eligible 
workers and operate shorthanded. As mentioned, our neighboring states allow six weeks.  
 
• As stated, we believe v oluntary participation should be the directive and we oppose the mandatory tax 
to both employers and employees. Additionally, the arbitrary decision on the small employer definition 
of fifteen workers should be adjusted to the SBA or another relevant stand ard.  
 
WWW.CGAGROUP.COM  | @CGAGROUP  
 • The substitute of private plans includes a provision in F that restricts plans that are not aligned with any 
benefits outlined in the proposed law. Given the vague definition of significant personal bonds , it 
appears that will be a barrier to utiliz ing existing plans.  
 
• §850 -K 2, disallows a change in employment status for anyone who applies and qualifies for PFMLA. 
However, it’s not clear how it would address unrelated decisions to the application, timing, or duration 
of that restriction.  
 
• The impl ementation schedule is aggressive for a mandatory plan and should be at least one additional 
year to allow for proper rulemaking, implementation, and the collection of funds to ensure solvency.  
 
 
I want to thank the members of the Committee for their time and am pleased to answer any questions, thank 
you.  
 
