j;l;.“ 
_ PG §i_%=;>:<*?1?i €>1) 
Y :1 Po:‘i:lancl, i\/1:311) ‘ 
p (2.97) 
www aclun 12: 
AMERICAN Clllli. LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
Ought to Pass - LDH 
1964 
An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop 
a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program 
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
May 25, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, good afternoon. My name is Meagan Sway andI 
am Policy Director for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by. 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions through advocacy, education, and litigation. On 
behalf of our members, we urge you to support LD 1964. 
The U.S. enjoys the shameful distinction of being the only country among its 
wealthy peers that doesn’t guarantee paid sick and family leave to workers. Whilea 
growing number of states have some form of paid leave program, the vast majority 
do not. The small amount of leave guaranteed by the federal and Maine family 
medical leave acts do not come with any pay. And Maine’s Earned Paid Leave law 
provides just 5 days (40 hours) of paid leave per year. 
Paid sick and family leave is nearly universal among higher-paid professional 
workers, who are more likely to be white. Among the lowest-paid quarter oftthe 
workforce, the majority of whom are Black and Latinx workers, ’ only half have any 
paid sick daysl and just 7 percent have paid family leave.2 In short, low-wage 
workers — far more likely to be people of color relegated to these occupations due to, 
1 Drew Desilver, As coronavirus spreads, which U.S. workers have paid sick leave- 
and which don’t?, Pew Research Center, March 12, 2020, available at 
https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2020/03/12/as-coronavirus-spreads-which 
u-s-workers-have-paid-sick-leave-and-which-dont/V 
2 Pronita Gupta, Tanya Goldman, Eduardo Hernandez, and Michelle Rose, Paid 
Family and Medical Leave is Critical for Low-wage Workers and Their Families, 
The Center for Law and Social Policy, available atl
~ 
https://www.clasp.org/publications/fact-sheet/paid-family-and-medical-leave-criticab 
low-wage-workersand-their-families/
historic discrimination — are often the ones who lack paid sick and family leave. 
These figures reﬂect grave racial, gender, and economic inequalities. 
Women, who comprise 60 percent of the nation’s family caregivers,3 are especially 
burdened by the lack of paid family sick leave, because when a family member falls 
ill it is overwhelmingly Women who will stay home with them. Without paid, job- 
protected family leave at work, women will lose income or be pushed out of the labor 
force. Such losses have catastrophic economic consequences, given that 64 percent of 
all families have a woman as the sole or primary breadwinner/1 a figure that is even 
higher in families of color. Women’s exit from work to perform unpaid family 
caregiving also helps sustain stereotypes about women’s suitability as workers and 
keeps them from achieving the footholds necessary for on-the-job advancements. 
Such losses, in addition to assuring Women’s continued segregation in lower-status 
roles and lower-Wage fields, are key drivers of the gender and racial Wealth gap. 
The ACLU has a longstanding commitment to redressing the adverse effects of 
racism and sexism and other forms of invidious discrimination in American society. 
That includes decades long commitments to paid leave reflected in our 
organization ’s policies. It includes commitments to defend essential health care 
coverage to address “harsh economic and social disparities that threaten our 
country’s democratic foundation and the cohesion of our society. ” For these reasons, 
we urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 1964. 
3 Halley Bondey, Caregiving, or career? The choice no woman should have to make, 
MSNBC, Jan. 29, 2020, available at https://Www.msnbc.com/knoW-your- 
value/feature/caregiving-or-career-choice-no-woman-should-have-make- 
ncnal 125616 
4 Sarah Jane Glynn, Breadwinning Mothers Continue to be the U.S. Norm, Center 
for American Progress, May 10, 2019, available at 
https://WWW.americanprogress.org/article/breadWinning-mothers-continue-u-s- 
norm/
A
2
