Testimony In Support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the 
Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program 
 
 
Melissa Caminiti 
South Portland, Maine 04106 
 
May 25, 2023  
 
 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing,  
 
My name is Melissa Caminiti and I live in South Portland. I am testifying in support of paid family 
and medical leave for Maine (LD 1964).  
 
I work full-time, and am lucky enough to have a job that allows me to buy into short term 
disability coverage. This coverage pays a fraction of my full weekly pay, but does none-
the-less allow me to have some income if I were to be out of work for an extended 
period. Recently I experienced an injury that required surgical repair and kept me out of 
work for several weeks. Had I not had a flexible job that allowed me to work remotely, I 
would have missed additional work due to my limited mobility.  
  
If this situation had happened at a different point in my life, the results would have been 
devastating. I was a single mother for most of my son’s life and during that period I often 
worked multiple jobs, and if I needed an extended period away from work, I would not 
have received any pay. If I lost my job and/or lost my income, even if temporarily, it 
would have impacted my ability to pay my utilities, rent, healthcare, childcare and car 
payments. While I was a single mother, I also didn’t have health insurance, so I would 
delay going to the doctor. This kind of situation often leads to people being much sicker 
and needing more extensive interventions once a health issue rises to a level that a 
healthcare provider must be seen. These interventions are likely to come with a need to 
miss work and therefore lose income. If this law passed, these types of situations would 
hopefully occur less often. 
  
My son is in his twenties now and he and his wife are currently in positions where this is 
also true—without the support of paid family leave, any health-related setback could 
cause a domino effect of resource disasters that could hinder their ability to sustain 
independence. With the passage of this law, they would most likely be able to sustain 
their employment and continue to contribute to their own lives and community in a way 
that feels more productive than if they were struggling to find new jobs or find a place to 
live.   
  
In my work I engage with under-resourced individuals, many of whom are entering the 
workforce after extended periods of incarceration and often with a history of substance 
use disorder. They have no safety net, and they aren’t often in a position to access or 
pay for short term disability coverage. Without these supports, and a way to continue 
receiving income, a person could easily end up losing whatever tentative housing they 
may have secured if struck by an injury, illness, or unavoidable caregiving 
circumstances. Additionally, those with substance use disorders often participate in 
frequent healthcare provider appointments and required counseling sessions – both of 
which commonly occur during day-time work hours and require brief absences from 
work. If this law passed, the at-risk individuals I work with would have a better chance at 
keeping a job and therefore keeping housing, etc. These items often make a critical 
difference between homelessness, sustained recovery from substance use disorders, 
and also reduced recidivism. 
 
I hope you will support LD 1964. Thank you for listening. I’m happy to answer any questions that 
may arise.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Melissa J. Caminiti 
 
 
Melissa Caminiti
South Portland
LD 1964
Testimony In Support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the
Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program
Melissa Caminiti
South Portland, Maine 04106
May 25, 2023 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, 
My name is Melissa Caminiti and I live in South Portland. I am testifying in support 
of paid family and medical leave for Maine (LD 1964). 
I work full-time, and am lucky enough to have a job that allows me to buy into short 
term disability coverage. This coverage pays a fraction of my full weekly pay, but 
does none-the-less allow me to have some income if I were to be out of work for an 
extended period. Recently I experienced an injury that required surgical repair and 
kept me out of work for several weeks. Had I not had a flexible job that allowed me to
work remotely, I would have missed additional work due to my limited mobility. 
 
If this situation had happened at a different point in my life, the results would have 
been devastating. I was a single mother for most of my son’s life and during that 
period I often worked multiple jobs, and if I needed an extended period away from 
work, I would not have received any pay. If I lost my job and/or lost my income, even
if temporarily, it would have impacted my ability to pay my utilities, rent, healthcare, 
childcare and car payments. While I was a single mother, I also didn’t have health 
insurance, so I would delay going to the doctor. This kind of situation often leads to 
people being much sicker and needing more extensive interventions once a health 
issue rises to a level that a healthcare provider must be seen. These interventions are 
likely to come with a need to miss work and therefore lose income. If this law passed, 
these types of situations would hopefully occur less often.
 
My son is in his twenties now and he and his wife are currently in positions where this
is also true—without the support of paid family leave, any health-related setback 
could cause a domino effect of resource disasters that could hinder their ability to 
sustain independence. With the passage of this law, they would most likely be able to 
sustain their employment and continue to contribute to their own lives and community
in a way that feels more productive than if they were struggling to find new jobs or 
find a place to live.  
 
In my work I engage with under-resourced individuals, many of whom are entering 
the workforce after extended periods of incarceration and often with a history of 
substance use disorder. They have no safety net, and they aren’t often in a position to 
access or pay for short term disability coverage. Without these supports, and a way to 
continue receiving income, a person could easily end up losing whatever tentative 
housing they may have secured if struck by an injury, illness, or unavoidable 
caregiving circumstances. Additionally, those with substance use disorders often 
participate in frequent healthcare provider appointments and required counseling 
sessions – both of which commonly occur during day-time work hours and require 
brief absences from work. If this law passed, the at-risk individuals I work with would
have a better chance at keeping a job and therefore keeping housing, etc. These items 
often make a critical difference between homelessness, sustained recovery from 
substance use disorders, and also reduced recidivism.
I hope you will support LD 1964. Thank you for listening. I’m happy to answer any 
questions that may arise. 
Sincerely, 
Melissa J. Caminiti
