Michelle Corry
Petite Jacqueline, Portland
LD 1964
Testimony In Opposition to LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of 
the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program
Michelle Corry
Portland,vMaine
May 25, 2023
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing,
My name is Michelle Corry and I live in Scarborough, however I run businesses in 
Portland and Brunswick.  I have been operating award-winning restaurants in Maine 
for 20 years. I have also worked as a waitress for over 15 years, many of those being 
in Maine, before we opened our businesses- five fifty-five and Petite Jacqueline.  We 
are 100 percent family run and have always strived to establish a postive and 
professional work environment with a focus on teaching and offering well being 
benefits above the industry norm, while at the same time creating a memorable 
"Maine" experience for our guests.
I am here today to oppose the Sponsor’s amendment LD 1964, “An Act to Implement 
the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical 
Leave Benefits Program.” This proposal costs, not only small businesses but it is 
another  employee tax without their consent.
Please remember that key word-small businesses.  Most of Maine businesses are 
literally "mom and pops".  And the continued added expenses of non-optional benefit 
programs such as 401k, EPL, salary threshold minimums, minimum wage increases, 
and raising food costs are making it unsustainable to be a small business in Maine.  If 
we are not careful, we will only have chain restaurants left in this state.  
When you go out to eat  now,  I am sure you often remark on how expensive it is and 
think, "this is ridiculous," and yet, I cannot and do not charge anywhere near what I 
should to recoup these increasing costs.
Right now my small business is trying to focus on things like mental health wellness 
for my staff.  We are looking at a program that will allow for free mental health visits 
for all of the staff,which includes addiction and stress issues.  However, if we incur 
further costs with bills such as these, we won't be able to even consider it.
Please keep in mind, to impose a tax on the workers in order to pay for something 
they may not want, or need, is not necessarily helping them. As it is now, I offer 
health insurance, dental and 401k match and very few of my staff opt for these 
benefits as they would rather have the money now to help with rent and rising food 
costs.  Additionally,  they feel sufficiently covered between unemployment, workers 
compensation, and the Maine EPL. . I urge you to, at the very least, reconsider the 
definition of "small business".  We could protect our small businesses and workers at 
the same time if we look at this threshold differently.  Many states consider a business
small, if under 500 employees NOT 50(50 employees is 2 small restaurants).  
Finally, I would ask you all to re-access some of the wording in this bill, for example, 
the fact that employees only have to work 6 weeks before being eligible seems 
excessive and incongruent to the 3 months it will pay.  I feel there is room to rework 
the bill to make it more approachable than as it is now.  Once again, we are creating 
legislature that is more aggressive than any in the country, and asking the employers 
and employees of Maine to compare themselves to cities as large as San Francisco 
and Seattle.  
Please vote LD 1964 ought not to pass. As crafted this proposal would likely cause 
harm to Maine businesses and the greater economy. Thank you, and I’d be pleased to 
answer any questions.
Sincerely,
Michelle and Steve Corry,
Petite Jacqueline, Portland, Maine
Five fifty-five North, Brunswick, Maine
