Michelle Carroll Foster 
Regional Vice President, State Relations 
202-624-2457 t 
michellefoster@acli.com   
 
May 25, 2023 
 
The Honorable Michael Tipping, Chair 
The Honorable Any Roeder, Chair  
Committee on Labor and Housing 
100 State House Station 
Cross Building, Room 202 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re: LD 1964 – An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits 
Program 
 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the committee, 
 
On behalf of the American Council of Life Insurers1 and our 317 ACLI member companies licensed to do business in Maine, accounting for 
97% of all life and annuity payments, we are neither for nor against LD 1964. 
 
Each day, life insurers pay out $920 million – $2.5 million every day – in life insurance and annuity benefits to Maine families. That and 
other products offered, by our members, protect Maine residents such as retirement savings and personal pensions, long-term care and 
disability income insurance, supplemental benefits and most importantly, paid family and medical leave which provides income during 
time off to care for family. 
 
Our members stand ready to offer paid family leave policies in Maine. Many private insurers are well-equipped to provide these important 
employee benefits as they have the capital, organizational structure, and professional staff with expertise to handle benefits including paid 
 
1 The American Council of Life Insurers (ACLI) is the leading trade association driving public policy and advocacy on behalf of the life insurance industry. 90 million American families rely on 
the life insurance industry for financial protection and retirement security. ACLI’s member companies are dedicated to protecting consumers’ financial wellbeing through life insurance, 
annuities, retirement plans, long-term care insurance, disability income insurance, reinsurance, and dental, vision and other supplemental benefits. ACLI’s 280 member companies represent 
94 percent of industry assets in the United States. 

family and medical leave. Insurers have a deep reservoir of customer service, claims and administrative staff who are skilled at 
administering these benefits. 
 
The ACLI and our members look forward to the continued work with the bill sponsors to ensure that paid family leave policies are available 
for all Mainers. 
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
Michelle Carroll Foster 
 

