 
Testimony In Support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the 
Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and 
Medical Leave Benefits Program 
 
Mollie Barnathan 
Portland, Maine  
May 25, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, 
 
My name is Mollie Barnathan and I live in Portland. I am submitting this testimony to 
share my strong support of paid family and medical leave for Maine. I am a certified 
postpartum doula and the co-founder of North Light Newborns, with seven years of 
experience helping families in the Greater Portland area. I have a Masters in Public 
Health with a background in global health and community development. I’m also the 
proud - and very busy - mom of three young girls.  
 
In my work as a postpartum doula, I have the honor and privilege of helping parents 
navigate one of the most fragile, most joyful, and most terrifying times of their lives. 
Sometimes, my work can seem simple - providing a nutritious meal or carefully folding 
a stack of laundry. Other parts are more complex, like teaching a new mom what the 
correct latch looks like or exactly the right tap on an infant's back to settle their 
stomach. And some of my most difficult work requires calming a mother - not the 
newborn - through tears, as the rollercoaster of postpartum hormones travels through 
the body and recognizing when a clinical diagnosis of a postpartum mood disorder may 
be necessary. 
 
I was drawn to this work because of my own very real and very scary experience with 
postpartum depression and OCD. My husband returned to work several weeks after my 
first daughter was born, leaving me as her sole caretaker for ten hours a day. We were 
new to Maine, living far from family, and had very few social supports. I was struggling 
to breastfeed, delirious with sleep deprivation and tormented by intrusive thoughts of 
harming my newborn and myself. Paralyzed by panic, I told my husband and my 
parents that I could not take care of the baby and begged to be hospitalized. Using our 
own professional networks and financial means, they mobilized care providers 
(psychiatrist, psychologist, overnight nanny, and daytime nanny) to support my mental 
health, keep me out of the hospital, and get our family back on track.  
 
The families I work with have the economic privilege to afford the care that should be 
given to all. We all know the proverb “It takes a village to raise a child” - well I’m here to 
tell you that village does not exist for low-income families. The lack of quality, universal, 
paid family and medical leave exacerbates health issues for both newborns and their 
parents.  
 
Scarce or no paid leave contributes to delaying babies' immunizations, postpartum 
mood disorders and other health problems, and causes mothers to give up breastfeeding 
early. Many who take unpaid leave go into debt and some are forced to seek public 
assistance. Essentially, lack of paid family and medical leave takes our most vulnerable 
new parents and gives them the least access to things like rest, restoration, and support.  
 
LD 1964 would provide life-changing support for families at a critical juncture in their 
lives. While nothing can prepare you to become a parent, the very least we can do as a 
society is provide a benefit that literally every other single industrialized country in the 
world is able to offer.  
 
I hope you will vote ought-to-pass on LD 1964 and I thank you for taking the time to 
read this testimony. 
 
Sincerely,  
Mollie Barnathan, MPH 
 
