Dear members of the Labor and Housing Committee, 
 
My name is Natalie Emmerson. I am a current senior at Morse High School and I am writing 
to express my support for Paid Family and Medical Leave. 
 
Currently, the United States is one of the few developed countries that does not offer Paid 
Family and Medical Leave to workers. When workers need to take time off to care for a new 
child, recover from a serious illness, or tend to a family member's health, they often face 
significant financial strain or are forced to quit their jobs altogether.  
 
Although I have not experienced this strain personally, I have seen its effects on classmates 
throughout my time in public education. Two years ago a student at Morse was in an 
accident that left them paralyzed from the waist down. In order to receive the care needed to 
save her life, her mom was forced to quit her job, requiring the family to start a Go Fund Me 
campaign and fundraise throughout the community in order to pay for her treatment. I have 
seen other classmates struggle with food and housing security due to younger siblings who 
have been hospitalized for long periods of time and families who struggle with the additional 
expenses of unplanned children.  
 
Paid Family and Medical Leave can help alleviate the problems faced by families in my 
community and citizens of Maine as a whole by providing workers with the financial support 
they need to take time off without risking their jobs or financial security. This can help 
improve the health and well-being of workers and their families, as well as lead to higher 
employee retention rates and improved recruitment efforts.  
 
Furthermore, Paid Family and Medical Leave can also help reduce healthcare costs and 
improve public health outcomes. By allowing workers to take time off to care for themselves 
or their loved ones, it can help prevent serious illnesses and injuries from becoming more 
severe and costly to treat. This, in turn, can help reduce the burden on the healthcare 
system and improve health outcomes for all Mainers.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Natalie Emmerson 
