Nick Robles
Monmouth
LD 1964
Testimony in Support of LD 1964
Nick Robles - Monmouth, ME 
Joint Committee on Labor & Housing
Public Hearing: May 25, 2023 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished Members of the 
Committee, 
My name is Nick Robles. I live in Monmouth, Maine, and I am an owner of Moody 
Lords, a record and vintage clothing store, on Congress Street in Portland, Maine. I 
request you vote to support LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of 
the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program. 
My shop, Moody Lords, has been in business since 2010. Our store sells new and 
used records and carefully curated vintage clothing. We’re an important spot for our 
loyal customers and for new folks exploring Portland, and we know that we’re an 
integral part of the local economy, as are all small businesses.
Yet, my fellow owners and I don’t have access to a paid family medical leave 
program, and I know it’s just a matter of time until any one of us will need it. I know 
that very personally because I recently moved my dad up to Maine so I could more 
closely monitor his care. I’m the one who will be called if his health takes a turn for 
the worse. That’s why I am calling on you to pass LD 1964 so that I can be there for 
my dad without jeopardizing my livelihood. 
I also want to urge you to make sure that no one faces retaliation or job loss for taking
leave that they need and deserve. While I am relieved that the bill exempts employers 
of less than 15 employees from paying the employer contribution, I do not support an 
exemption for small businesses relating to retaliation or job protection. If employees 
of small businesses can’t take leave without the fear of retaliation or losing their jobs, 
they cannot access the program. 
Furthermore, this program should be a public insurance plan administered by our 
government. Privatization often leads to higher costs and lesser services. 
Please vote to support LD 1964 to provide paid family and medical leave for all 
Mainers! 
Sincerely,
Nick Robles
Monmouth, ME
