Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy  
 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207 -622 -9288   www.maineforest.org  
Maine Forest Products Council Testimony in Opposition to  LD 1964  
“An Act to Implement Recommendations of the Commission to De-
velop a Paid Family Leave Benefits Program ” 
May 25, 2023  
Patrick J. Strauch, Executive Director  
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder , and distinguished members of the Labor and 
Housing Committee , my name is Patrick Strauch,  and I am the Executive Director of the 
Maine Forest Products Council. We represent  the diverse companies that are part of the 
forest economy. Our members include loggers, foresters, sawmills, papermills, and over 
8 million acres of commercial forestland owners. We employ over 15,000 direct work-
ers and support an additional 15,000 indire ct workers; 1 out of 25 jobs is in our sector 
and we are a significant component of Maine’s rural economy and communities.  
We believe the current Paid Family Leave Act (PFMLA) is too ambitious and costly to 
fit our currently struggling economy, and we shou ld establish a long -term stepwise ap-
proach for building a comprehensive policy that works for both employees and employ-
ers.   
We’ve checked in with our members to gather input for this testimony and here are a 
collection of responses for your consideration : 
• Our company is concerned that we will not be able to hire the additional people to fill in 
for employees out using this leave along with all the other leave options they currently have.  We 
have the lowest unemployment rates in our state that we have seen  in years.  It’s very difficult to 
find qualified candidates and the burden on the business to pay overtime rates to employees that 
we need to cover the shifts of employees out on leave  will be costly . It will legitimately shut 
down businesses and the water fall effect will be detrimental to the State of Maine.  
 
• We are extremely concerned not only about the extra cost of paying  into the plan as a 
business, but our employees do not want another tax on their pay during these high inflationary 
times.  Everyone is struggling to pay their bills with the inflationary costs, especially with every-
one being hit so hard with increased elec tricity rates/bills. Estimates place the wage tax at $400 
million for this program for employers and employees.  
 
• There is no incentive to return to work in this program design. Either a reduced wage rate 
or a mechanism to encourage returning to work as so on as possible instead of maximizing the 
allowable 12 -week maximum should be in the plan.  
 
• Qualifications for a family member are too broad and the “affinity” term is problematic. 
Without knowing the details of how the administration will determine this re lationship, it’s a 
qualifier for anyone to go out to care for anyone . This just can’t be the case.  We will never have 
enough employees to keep our businesses running . It’s a very slippery and ambiguous slope.  
 
   
 
2 
 • As written , an employee could go out for consecutive periods rolling over a calendar year.  Example: As written 
now an employee could qualify for consecutive 6 -month leave, this would be detrimental to business.  Even Short -
Term Disability plans via employer’s work on a rolling calendar year and you must work the number of days back 
to earn your next leave, to refuel your balance to be used in the future.  
 
We also concur with the Maine Chamber of Commerce additional points:  
 
• Potential for Annual Tax Hikes  – The bill req uires the Program Administrator to annually increase the tax amount 
on employer payrolls and employee wages if the program doesn’t have sufficient funds for administration and 
benefit costs.  
 
• Creates a significant new burden for small businesses  - Most MFPC member companies are classified as small 
businesses.  
 
• The proposal is an Outlier - LD 1964 essentially creates  a new short -term disability insurance program, and what 
would be one of the most benefit -rich programs in the country. Instead, Maine could consider extending the state’s 
existing FML program or proposing a bill that is more in line with neighboring New E ngland states.  
SUMMARY  
We anticipate that for an extended period slow housing starts will depress sawmill production, world markets for 
wood pulp will force production reductions, and loggers will continue to forestall equipment investments and 
struggle w ith high prices for fuel and parts in their businesses. This will be a tough period in the forest industry 
and our ability to respond to improved market conditions is dependent on policy leaders respecting the concern 
of the business community for the live lihood of the rural communities where we work in Maine.   
For these reasons we request that you not support LD 1964.  
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions the committee may have.  
