 
 
 
Members of the Labor and Housing Committee 
State of Maine 
Augusta, ME            May 25th, 
2023 
 
Dear Committee Members 
 
LD 1964 An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid 
Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program 
 
Hancock Lumber, a seventh-generation family business with fourteen locations and close to 650 
employees in the State of Maine, celebrates its 175th anniversary this year. Our mission is to enhance 
the lives of the people that work for the company, and we endeavor to provide our team with the best 
compensation and benefits possible.  
 
We follow the provisions of the federal Family and Medical Leave Act and, in addition, provide all 
employees with a jointly funded Short Term Disability program that provides up to 26 weeks of benefits 
for FMLA related absence. We would support further expansion of a paid leave program but contend 
that it must work for both employees and employers to be successful. As such, we do not support the 
proposed LD 1964 bill as drafted. 
 
While we have several concerns our principal issues are as follows: 
 
• Payroll Taxes – additional tax on both the employee and employer in what is already a highly 
taxed state, with the prospect of further tax increases if the program is underfunded. 
 
• Eligibility and Coverage too broad – extending the eligibility and coverage beyond the current 
federal FMLA provisions will create additional cost borne by employees and employers and be 
open to abuse. Benefits are too high and will discourage employees from returning to work, 
leaving significant gaps in an already challenged workforce. 
 
• State-run versus locally and independently managed – we strongly believe these benefits 
should be administered by individual employers rather than by a state-run program, to 
encourage employers to create the best culture and programs for their employees. 
 
We appreciate and understand the Labor and Housing Committee’s desire to provide paid family and 
medical leave benefits but believe that this should be a private program tied to the existing federal 
FMLA provisions with a benefit structure that provides short term support but encourages return to work 
as quickly as possible.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Paul R. Wainman 
President and CEO 

Paul Wainman
Hancock Lumber
LD 1964
Attached letter in opposition to LD1964 submitted on behalf of Hancock Lumber 
Company, Inc. of Casco Maine
