Testimony In Opposition to LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the 
Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program 
Paul Humphrey 
Kennebunkport ME 04046 
May 25, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, 
My name is Paul Humphrey and I live in Kennebunkport. I am here to oppose the Sponsor's 
amendment LD 1964, “An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to 
Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program." 
This proposal does not align with the needs of Maine's businesses and has serious implications 
on the States economy in the foreseeable future. 
I am here today representing the Board of the Ogunquit Chamber of Commerce and the 
Kennebunkport Business Association whose members jointly total 455 businesses in Southern 
Maine. Many of the businesses would be here today in person., however, staff shortages and 
the timing of this meeting coinciding with the kick-off of the summer season prohibit 
attendance by my fellow members. 
My wife and I personally own three cafe/grocery store type businesses and employ 
approximately 45 people at the height of the summer. 
The principle of creating a system or process that offers support for individuals or families in 
times of need and crisis is not what is in question for us. It is the manner it is done, and its 
unintended consequences. 
The unintended consequences are what I would like to focus on. 
The past three years have been very challenging when it has come to staffing operations, 
employee retention, meeting employees ’ expectations in pay and working hours, not to 
mention the lack of people wanting or needing to work. 
During the corona virus pandemic, there were much needed emergency Federal financial 
support mechanisms put in place to help people during the crisis. 
Unfortunately, we now have a situation where some members of the public/workforce have 
been educated on how to avoid working, removing the need to work as it was prior to the 
pandemic. This is one ofthe key reasons we see Maine businesses struggling to find employees 
to keep their doors open for business.
Currently we advertise for employees, and we receive a good number of inquiries and 
applicants. However, when we follow-up, more than 30% of the applicants decline further 
processing as the reason for their application to begin with was to simply satisfy State 
requirements to perpetuate their unemployment benefits. This loophole was quickly identified, 
although it has continued to be abused for 3 years, with what appears to be little policing. 
Returning to the FMLA bill, the consensus of the groups I represent is that there are insufficient 
measures, parameters nor robust mechanisms to avoid the system being abused, thus leaving 
employers without critical help during key busy times. The potential for business disruption 
due to lack of staffing is real as are the potential effects on the greater economy and tax 
revenues when multiplied by the thousands of businesses throughout Maine. 
My understanding is that under the bill, as it is written, we could lose all our employees on the 
same day, (let's say 4"‘ ofluly) with no checks or certification required from the employee 
without repercussions to prevent this happening repeatedly. 
Unfortunately, we now live in a time when the moral or ingrained need to work is diminishing 
from society in our opinion. There are now easier ways to support oneself and not work. For 
us, this bill is opening a large chasm ready for abuse with ramifications beyond the scope of the 
committee. 
ln addition, it seems seasonal businesses are most at risk for the dire consequences highlighted 
earlier negatively impacting the state's largest industry (hospitality) and its most lucrative tax 
driver. 
There a several specific but important points in the bill that l feel are not viable nor sustainable. 
- It would seem appropriate to have differing levels of taxation reflecting the nature of 
seasonal businesses versus year-round businesses. 
- the work force could potentially be claiming support for almost one third of the 
calendar year 
- Would employees be accumulating paid time off whilst not being present at work? 
- Determination of the weekly amount for an individual's benefit is calculated over the 
past 4 quarters. However, individuals only need to be employed for 6 weeks to receive 
the benefit. How does this work, especially if the employee joins the company duringa 
particularly busy period? An employee could work for 6 weeks ending with Labor Day; 
then could receive 12 more weeks of compensation at an even higher rate compared 
with their co-workers that continue to be employed through the fall. 
- Maximum benefit amount adjustment mechanism seems to mimic my previous point 
that average wages through the summer will be greater than after Oct 15‘ which is 
stated as the review point.
- There should be requirements for employees to notify their employer immediately 
when they intend to offer support to their family. ln so-doing, employers would be able 
to make appropriate arrangements for temporary help or replacements of said 
individuals. Notification from the administrator five days after the claim is filed is not 
workable and will lead to more confusion and stress for all parties. 
In summary: 
We have read the bill and do not feel there is sufﬁcient policing nor mechanisms in place to 
prevent widespread abuse of the system, which in turn will affect Maine's economy giving rise 
to further challenges. The unemployment system has widespread abuse and cannot be 
managed, so I struggle to see how the proposed process will also not be abused. 
There are too many ambiguities left unaddressed to realistically consider moving this bill at this 
time. 
A potential solution to provide the support and allow tighter control could be done in a similar 
way to the Health and Human Services program. There are regulations that must be adhered to 
failure to do so will be reported, and investigated. Some immediate funds would need to be 
available for emergency cases. 
We urge you to withdraw support for LD 1964. As crafted, this proposal would likely cause 
harm to Maine businesses and the greater economy. Thank you, and l'd be pleased to answer 
any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Paul Humphrey
l
