 Senator T ipping, Representative Roeder , and esteemed members of the Joint Standing  
 Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Peggy Haynes, I live in Freeport, and I  
 am pleased to submit testimony in support of LD 1964, An Act to Implement the  
 Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave  
 Benefits Program.  
 Paid Family and Medical leave is personal for my family . The arrival of our two adopted  
 sons into our world came without paid leave for my husband and I. The issue with  
 adoption, at the time, was it didn’t qualify for medical leave. Only pregnancy was  
 considered a medical leave. It has now evolved to family leave, including parental leave,  
 but it's always been unpaid.  
 This is an exciting time in someone’ s life, and it shouldn’t have to be overshadowed with  
 worries as to how you’re going to pay the bills. One of the most important pieces of this  
 legislation for my family is the inclusion of adopted children. Our family would’ve greatly  
 benefited from legislation like this being in place when my husband and I were raising  
 our two sons.  
 All we hear these days from pundits and the business lobby is there is a workforce  
 shortage and we’re in a tight labor market. By providing Paid Family and Medical Leave,  
 Maine businesses can attract more workers and gain a competitive edge regionally and  
 nationally . Some of Maine’ s largest employers, such as Unum and WEX, of fer paid  
 leave programs and they work. If we are going to be successful in our goals to keep our  
 youth in Maine to live, work, and raise a family , we need policies in place that benefit  
 workers   and  their families, policies like LD 1964.  
 I am grateful to Sen. Daughtry , my state senator , and Rep. Cloutier , for their leadership  
 on this incredibly important issue, and for building a broad coalition of support across  
 Maine. They’ve taken the time to listen to business owners, community leaders,  
 employees, and other stakeholders to hear how this legislation would impact them.  
 Responding to the needs of constituents is the job of the legislature, and they have  
 done just that.  
 I thank this committee for allowing me to share my thoughts and I urge you to vote  
 ought-to-pass on LD 1964. Thank you.  
