Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor and Housing Committee: My name is 
Rebecca Scarborough, and I live in Camden. I am testifying today to ask this committee to support LD 1964, 
which would create a Paid Family and Medical Leave program for workers in Maine. This is a personal issue to 
me. 
Eight days after I turned thirty, I had an aortic dissection (a tear in my aorta) that caused a stroke. I had 
emergency heart surgery and spent three weeks in in-patient rehabilitation, relearning how to walk and 
regaining strength on my left side. A month later, I was hospitalized again due to an infection in the surgical 
site. I stayed for four weeks, enduring seven surgeries. 
During these difﬁcult months, my mother took time off from work to be with me. For almost the entire timeI 
was in the hospital, she was beside me and able to help me when nurses were unavailable. When l was released 
from the hospital after the infection, I still needed IV antibiotics, and my mother learned how to give me those 
medications herself. 
My mom ended up retiring early from a full-time position to take care of me. She took care of me physically 
and took over the logistics of scheduling doctor appointments and outpatient therapies that I did not have the 
mental capacity to handle. 
We were fortunate, and even with the loss of my mother’s income my family was able to take care of me whileI 
healed. We were all safe. Unfortunately, too many people in Maine are not in the same situation. No one should 
have to go into debt or lose their house or job to care for themselves or a loved one. Paid leave would allow 
Mainers to care for themselves and loved ones during medical crises and recoveries. 
Maine’s PFML commission has made recommendations for establishing a paid and family medical leave 
program in Maine. There are areas where this bill can be even stronger. For example, this bill exempts small 
businesses from certain parts of the law, which means that small business owners may be able to retaliate 
against workers trying to use the paid leave program. This could mean that businesses may not hold jobs for 
people, and workers may avoid taking time off out of fear they will lose their jobs. Currently, this bill would 
also allow the state to privatize this program, and this needs to be run by and for the public. 
However, this bill is a major and important ﬁrst step in protecting the rights of all Maine Workers. I urge this 
committee to move this bill forward and make the necessary changes to make it even stronger. 
Thank you for your time. Ii
E 
ll 
t
l 
it 
Il 
t
l 
ii 
it 
it 
lzl 
J»
1
l
4 
ii 
s.
l
