Thank you for allowing me to address my concerns. 
I have been a Human Resources professional for the past 15 years and I have some major concerns 
about LD1964, especially in the hospitality industry.   
1. Lack of Clarity.  There has been very little information distributed about how this program 
will work.  What are the qualifications for eligibility?  I understand there is a dollar amount 
that must be paid in, but how often can they take the leave?  Are employees eligible to take 
consecutive leaves under this program?  What if the leaves are consecutive but covered 
under two different calendar years. Do they need to pay in an additional amount before 
they can take a second leave?  How is this handled for businesses that operate in other 
states as well? How would this effect someone who lives in New Hampshire, but works in 
Maine and vice versa?  What exactly constitutes a close bond?  If two co-workers are close 
friends and one is sick, could we potentially lose two employees for up to 12 months?  Must 
that person actually be a caretaker or just someone they feel close to?  Are we able to ask 
for proof of illness and being unable to work?  How will the state get their information?  We 
already submit multiple wage reports such as our UC1 reports, so what type of extra burden 
will this put on our already stretched HR teams across the state?   
 
2. Labor shortage.  Across the state, businesses are faced with labor shortages.  Employers are 
faced with challenges to find employees who will keep the business running.  H2B programs 
are becoming more prevalent as employers are finding it harder and harder to balance 
running a successful business with the lack of employees.  In response, employers are 
shortening their hours, limiting their offerings, and finding other creative means to keep the 
doors open.  Having employees leave for months at a time, simply because a person they 
have “a bond” with is sick is both ridiculous and damaging for businesses.  This is a great 
way to exacerbate the labor shortage.  Not to mention the extra burden this will put on 
already stretched HR and payroll departments across the state. 
 
3. Cost.  Inflation is extremely high right now. Families across Maine are struggling with basic 
necessities like groceries and heating oil.  This program makes employers pay more money 
and, not only that, taxes employees resulting in a loss of net income for all Mainers.  How is 
that a good thing?  Employers will undoubtedly need to raise costs of their goods and 
services in order to meet this challenge coupled with Mainers overall making less net 
money.  Clearly this is a problem. 
 
I urge everyone to kill this program before it kills Maine businesses and kills the spending power of 
Maine families.   
 
Thank you,  
Rebecca Vigue 
Dayton, Maine 
