 
 
In Opposition to LD 1964  
An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to 
Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program  
Committee on Labor and Housing   
May 25, 2023   
Good Afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished 
members of the Committee on Labor and Housing,   
My name is Robert Caverly, and I am the Vice President of Advocacy & Outreach  at 
the Maine Credit Union League. The Maine Credit Unio n League is the trade 
association for Maine’s 50 credit unions and over 725,000 members statewide. We 
respectfully submit the  following testimony in opposition to LD 1964.  
Credit unions are financial coop erative s that provide needed diversity in Maine’s 
financial services industry. The cooperative principles  credit unions are based upon  
include the concern for community that prompts credit unions to provide  outstanding  
benefits and positive company culture . These principles have led to several  credit 
union s being recognized on  the annual Maine Best Places To Work listing. Together, 
Maine credit unions have over 200 branches statewide and employ around 2,000 
Mainers, offering competitive benefits packages, positive work environments, and 
room to grow and develop professionally.  
As community members, employers, and financial cooperatives, we understand the 
importance of paid family and medical leave. However, it is our opinion that in its 
current form, the funding mechanisms in LD 1964 would have a negative  impact on 
credit unions and their members. At the credit union, each member is a part owner , 
sharing  their profits back with their members through dividends, lower fees, and 
better interest rates. Annually, the average credit union member saves an average  of 
$175 in interest  and fees compared to banking customers. Any policy that raises 
employment costs in an already challenging labor economy will impact the credit 
union’s ability to provide  these  financial benefits to members.  
The League thanks you for t his opportunity to share our viewpoint. We strongly urge 
the committee to take extra caution and care with this proposal to ensure that the 
unintended consequences it can create are properly accounted for.  
