Ronald I. Blum MD  
PO Box 104 
12 Gardner Street  
Patten , Maine 04765  
          
May 18, 2023  
 
To:  Senator Mike Tipping and Representative Amy Roeder, 
chairs, and other esteemed members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee    
Re: LD 1964  
 
 My name is Ronald Blum and I have been practicing primary 
care and Occupational medicine in  the Patten area since 1975.  I 
am writing to encourage you to pass this measure to provide 
paid Family and Medical Leave benefits to Maine citizens.  In my 
long experience working with parents and families, mill workers 
and farmers, I have seen first-hand  the difficult social impact of 
dealing with one’s own or family member’s illness.   
 One example, Mr. and Mrs . local family, live in a northern 
Maine village, and have often struggled financially, but still 
opened their home to multiple foster children, s everal of whom 
they ultimately adopted.  The Mrs. struggles with Multiple 
Sclerosis, and has become less ambulatory and more and more 
dependent, with flares leaving her occasionally incapacitated.  
While the father suffers from advanced diabetes with kidne y 
complications, requiring a complicated diet and insulin injection 
regimen, limiting his activity.  In recent years they have been 
forced to leave work, but a FML program could have provided 
major relief and allowed them to remain in the workplace and 
provide for their family much longer.  
 One of my own office employees once requested leave to 
care for her sick mother, who was also a patient I cared for.  Her 
siblings were attending the older woman weekends, but my 
employee needed to fill in during the week.  Our small business 
worked around her absence for the few weeks she was gone, and 
her mother recovered to live many more years with her family.  
That experience reinforced the value of such benefit in my mind.  
 
Please do what is best for Maine people  and pass LD. 1964.   
 
Thank you,        
Ronald I. Blum  
MD FAAFP FACOEM  
      
 
