Roxanne Kai
Woodstock, Maine People’s Alliance 
LD 1964
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee: My name is Roxy Kai and I live in Woodstock. I am here today in 
support of  LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission 
to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program.
Last year I collected signatures for Paid Family and Medical Leave with the Maine 
People’s Alliance. I personally collected signatures of and spoke with more than 200 
Mainers in Oxford County alone.
 
I spent days collecting signatures for PFML because it is personal for me. I have 
multiple chronic health conditions, including a condition called diastasis recti. This 
condition makes me prone to getting hernias. I currently have two unfixed hernias, 
and one hernia that needed to be fixed this past April that having PFML would have 
been a game changer for. I couldn't be on my feet more than 5 minutes without it 
prolapsing and needing to be pushed back in by myself or by the ER if I couldn't do it 
myself. It caused severe pain and was at risk of getting strangulated. For a little more 
than a month leading up to the date of my surgery, I was completely out of 
commission. After the surgery I had to expect a 6 week recovery time period, which 
took my body closer to 8 weeks due to my health conditions. In all, I was unable to 
function for almost 3 months.
 
I was without a job, and my husband who needed to help care for me, had to take 
unpaid days off both prior to the surgery and the recovery time afterwards, so we 
were living off of his minimal paycheck, and it put us way behind on bills. On top of 
this I have a 10 year old daughter with her own health conditions - PFML could have 
taken the stress off my family, as my husband would have been able to take paid time 
off to take care of me and my daughter, instead of being stressed to the max trying to 
make ends meet. Traveling to doctors appointments, ER trips, and my overall 
recovery would have been much easier without this additional stress.
 
When I was collecting signatures, I talked to Mainers from all over the political 
spectrum who shared their powerful stories. People told me about how PFML would 
have been a game changer for them like it would have been for me. These stories need
to be heard, so if you’re looking for a reason why PFML needs to be invested in, go 
spend some time in your community talking to people, asking them their story and 
genuinely listening to them with and open heart and open mind, and you'll hear that 
the PFML is least you could invest in to help Mainers.
 
Thank you for your time.

