Samantha  Paradis
Caribou, ME
LD 1964
Samantha Paradis (they/them) 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and esteemed members of the Labor and 
Housing Committee, my name is Samantha Paradis, and I'm here to testify in support 
of LD 1964 and a Paid Family & Medical Leave program.
I’m a life-long Mainer. I grew up in Frenchville and went to the University of Maine. 
I’ve worked in healthcare for 17 years and am a family nurse practitioner, specializing
in addiction medicine. I was also the mayor of Belfast from 2017 to 2019. 
I believe that paid family leave is a benefit anybody who works should be able to 
access. Many of the folks I treat work in service jobs. They make beds at hotels, work
on farms, lobster on the coast. They essentially run Maine’s economy. Without their 
service, Maine’s economy wouldn’t function. They are less likely to be able to access 
paid family leave and face loss of income, loss of their job, difficult choices, and even
health consequences when they consider taking time off to care for a family member. 
The people I care for, and every person, need to take time off to care for themselves 
or others. Without Paid Family Leave, many can’t afford to risk their paycheck to get 
the care needed. Some even end up leaving their jobs because they can’t get the 
healthcare they need. Not allowing for Paid Family Leave is an injustice. It not only 
affects the folks leaving their jobs; it affects us all. This creates a culture that values 
work over caregiving when, in reality, all we’ve got is each other.
This is something that has affected me personally, too. I was a foster parent for three 
years. Because I didn’t have paid leave at the time, I had to choose between unpaid 
leave and exhausting all my vacation time when I had children placed with me in 
order to ensure they were stable and settled in our home. I now work for a different 
employer and now have access to paid leave. This would have made such a difference
in my life then, and it does now. It feels like such a relief. It feels like my humanity is 
respected. 
I cannot understate the importance of Paid Family & Medical Leave. In respecting our
humanity as individuals, this program is invaluable—for our mental health, physical 
health, and overall well-being. It is time to pass and fund paid leave for all Maine 
workers - because care can’t wait. Thank you.
