 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent  
University of Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
DATE:  May 25, 2023  
TO:               Committee  on Labor and Housing  
FROM:          Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations          
                     samantha.warren@maine.edu / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:               LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission 
  to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing: I am writing on behalf of the University of Maine System 
(UMS) to inform your consideration of  LD 1964,  An Act to Implement the Recommend ations 
of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Progra m. 
With 5,200 regular employees, 2,400 temporary staff and 6,200 student workers in 2022,  
UMS is one of the state’s largest employer s. Consistent with our commitment to offe r 
wages and benefits that value our employees and foster their recruitment and retention,  the 
System already offers leave benefits that are widely considered competitive and fai r. 
Consistent with MRSA Title 26, Chapter 12 (UMS Labor Relations Act), we main tain that 
collective bargaining agreements are the most appropriate forum for determining the wages, 
benefits and working conditions of UMS employees.   
Across our six bargaining units (as well as for non -represented employees),  specific paid 
leave allocati ons vary . The se vital benefits  have been negotiated based on the 
priorities of employee s and their representatives, and the fiscal resources and operational 
needs of UMS as a public employer with important statewide responsibilities as Maine’s 
largest education and economi c development enterprise . 
For example, System faculty receive 20 days (four weeks) of paid family, sick or disability 
leave upon hire, earn one and two -thirds additional paid days each month after their first year 
of employment, and are able to accrue up t o 180 days (36 weeks). Additionally, faculty earn 
one and two -thirds paid annual leave days during their first 15 years of service, and two days 
each month thereafter, with a total of 40 unused annual leave days (eight weeks) available to 
be carried over f rom year -to-year. Most UMS bargaining agreements allow employees to be 
on an approved leave of absence for up to a full year, with the expectation that paid leave be 
exhausted before unpaid leave is taken. Furthermore, faculty are entitled to regular 
sabba ticals of up to one academic year at half pay or half the academic year/one semester at 
full pay, during which they continue to accrue additional annual and sick/family leave . 
Despite these relatively generous leave benefits, our initial analysis suggests  UMS 
would not likely receive approv al to meet the obligations of the proposed program 
through its current private plan. This has significant fiscal impacts on our System, but 
perhaps of greater concern, could have operational impacts on our public universities’ 
ability to deliver education, research a nd service to our students and the stat e. As we 
currently understand the proposal, our  employees could  potentially  stack their existing 
benefits with the expansive new ones offered under this program, and thus, take paid 
family /medical  leave for up to 64 weeks . This 64-week  calculation is  based on the maximum 
36 weeks  that can be  earned through  the existing  faculty CBA, plus 12 weeks provided in 
 
 Year 1 and 12 weeks provided in Year 2 by the new State plan, plus four additional weeks 
provided by UMS accrued over the period of the paid family/medical  leave but  does not  factor  
in other  paid annual leave .  
As you know,  UMS relies on revenue from two primary sources: State appropriation and 
student tuition and fee s. When adjusted for inflation, our State appropriation has actually 
declined over the past decade, and during that same period, we have held tuitio n flat seven 
times. Were the .5% payroll contribution  proposed by  LD 1964 be required from  UMS, we 
would need at least $1.6 million in new appropriations (based on taxable wages of $322.9 
million in 2022) — an amount approximately equal to a 1 % tuition increase for Maine students 
and their families. UMS would also need additive State funding to hire at least three additional 
human resources employees to administer the program across the System and fulfill reporting 
responsibilities.  
UMS benefits pr ofessionals continue to work to understand the intention and implementation 
of some provisions of LD 1964. For example, the bill uses a far more expansive definition of 
employee than is elsewhere in State and federal statute, including the Family and Medic al 
Leave Act and that governing Maine’s unemployment insurance and recently enacted paid 
leave. Given this, we assume the program would be inclusive of many of our temporary and 
student workers, including those who are funded throu gh federal work study, from which only 
federal and state taxes — and not FICA and other contributions — can typically be deducted .  
We look forward to learning more about LD 1964 , specifically about the Legislature’s plan to 
support State  entities like UMS pay for and administer the new benefit in a way that does not 
require us to reduce essential public services , increase student tuition  costs or constitute an 
unfunded mandate.  We a ppreciate that some  details will be determined through rulemaking, 
but especially seek  legislative clarity  on stackability.   
In the meantime, please know that  UMS has  long  seen the value of providing our 
employe es meaningful  paid leav e so they can  attend to their family and medical needs. Not 
only do faculty and staff  and their  loved ones directly benefit, but our universities benefit 
through increased employee satisfaction, productivity and less turnover, and our students and 
state benefit by our ability to retain world -class faculty and staff right here in Maine. For these 
reasons,  we are committed to being part of  conversations with the Legislature, our 
employees’ bargaining agents and other stakeholders to develop this mandatory 
statewide benefits program in a way that is workable for al l.  
Thank you for your thoughtful consideratio n of this important legislation. Please let me know 
what additional information I can provide on behalf of Maine’s public universities in advance of 
your work session.   
 
