May 2 5, 2023  
Senator Michael Tipping , Chair  
Representative Amy Roeder , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
Cross Office Building, Room 20 2 
Augusta, Maine 04333  
Re:  L.D. 1964 , An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop 
a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program  
Dear Senato r Tipping, Representative Roede r and Membe rs of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing; 
My name is Sara Squire s and I am the Public Po licy Director for Disability Rights Maine (DRM), 
Maine’s Protection and Advocacy agency for people with disabilities.   On behalf of DRM, thank 
you for the opportunity to offer testimony in support of LD 1964. 
DRM understands all too well the challenges people face when attempting to balanc e the care 
of a lov ed one with a disability with maintaining economic stability. Whether you are the pare nt 
or child of someone with a disability or that person is you, taking time away from work can be 
stressful, both emotionally and economically. 
While some individuals have understanding employers or access to generous leave time  that 
enables them to attain this balance a little more easily, this is unfortunately not the situation for 
many individuals across Maine . Taking time off work to meet your own medical  needs or those 
of a loved one can often mean a loss of income, forcing difficult financial choices to be made. 
Individuals should not have to choose between caring for themselves or their loved ones and 
earning a paycheck. 
Everyone should have access to paid family leave, and this bill provides a way for individuals to 
focus on what matters most when health care needs arise. We urge the Committee to vote 
ought to pass on this important legislation because Maine citizens should never have to choose 
between their health or the health of a loved one and their economic security. 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330 
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
Thank you for your time.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Sara R. Squires  
Public Policy Director  
Disability Rights Maine  

