 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1964, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family 
and Medical Leave Benefits Program 
 
June 1, 2023 
 
Chair Tipping, Chair Roeder, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is 
Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, 
I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County Commissioners 
Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide belated testimony to the Committee neither for nor 
against  LD 1964. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
What does LD 1964 do?  LD 1964 implements a paid family and medical leave benefits program based on the 
recommendations of the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program 
established by the 130th Legislature. The program provides up to 12 weeks of family leave and up to 12 weeks 
of medical leave to eligible covered individuals. Under the program, an individual is eligible for leave after 
earning at least six times the state average weekly wage (currently about $6,000) in the preceding calendar 
quarters prior to submitting an application or if the individual is self-employed and has elected to be part of the 
program. The maximum weekly benefit amount is capped at 120% of the state average weekly wage.  
 
In addition, this bill establishes the Paid Family and Medical Leave Insurance Fund to support the program. The 
funds for administrative costs and payment of benefits come from payroll contributions of no more than 1% of 
wages shared by employers and employees, except that as currently drafted, employers with fewer than 15 
employees are not required to make employer contributions to the program. Further, the bill establishes the Paid 
Family and Medical Leave Benefits Authority to advise the administrator on the implementation and 
administration of the program. The bill requires payroll contributions to begin January 1, 2025, and benefit 
claims to be processed beginning January 1, 2026. 
 
Discussion.  As a general matter, MCCA supports whatever decision the citizens of Maine and the Legislature 
make in regard to whether or not to implement a paid family and medical leave program. Additionally, some 
Maine counties offer their employees a voluntary “income protection” program where employees may make 
contributions to the program and receive income for periods of time when they are out on qualifying leave. 
 
The program described in LD 1964 is more expansive than programs currently in place for county government, 
and the program would involve employer contributions. In this regard, LD 1964 would add new benefits to 
county employees and new costs on county government, costs that would be borne by local property taxpayers. 
 
Given the impact on Maine property taxpayers, we encourage the Committee and full Legislature to make sure 
that the full costs of the program are known and understood before passing the bill.  
 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1964 
June 1, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide information on this bill to the Committee, and if you 
have questions or need additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
