Senator Tipping, Representa0ve Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Commi9ee on Labor and Housing; My name is Steve Hanington, and I am the President of Hanington Brothers Inc which is a 3rd genera0on logging company located in Macwahoc, Maine. Our company currently has 32 employees, operates 5 logging crews, owns 10 logging trucks and harvests wood that is delivered to at least 15 mills across the state. Our company started in 1958 by my father and Uncle, with 1 work horse that they rented from my grandfather. My son, Eric, is currently the 3rd genera0on owner. ASer earning a mechanical engineering degree from the University of Maine and working 9 years for Interna0onal Paper in two southern states, he decided to move back to Maine in 2017 and take over the family business.  Thank you for providing me with the opportunity to tes0fy on behalf of our company in opposi0on to LD 1964. While I respect the sponsors intent, this bill is nothing that the industry has asked for and it is nothing that we can support now, or in the future. As I men0oned, my son worked in Pulp and Paper for 9 years in 2 southern states. He is constantly reminding me of the signiﬁcantly higher cost of doing business in the State of Maine, compared to those southern states. I am here tes0fying on his behalf.   We are currently in need of 1 mechanic, 3 truck drivers, and 2 machine operators. Those unﬁlled posi0ons have a signiﬁcant impact on our ability to operate eﬃciently. Addi0onally, 2 of our machine operators have indicated that they will be re0ring aSer this year, one at the age of 65, the other at 71. One of our truck 
drivers has also indicated that he will be re0ring this year. As you can see, ﬁlling the necessary posi0ons to keep our business in opera0on is already diﬃcult.  The most recent sta0s0c is that there is a 40% non-par0cipa0on rate of the current work force in Maine. How can we expect to reduce this number if we con0nue to ﬁnd ways to compensate people while they are not working? In case you are not aware, logging is a seasonal business. We generally operate for about 40 weeks per year. As I understand it, the proposed bill would provide an employee with up to 12 weeks paid leave each year. This would leave us with about 28 working weeks, approximately half of a year.  We cannot ﬁnd employees to ﬁll our needs now. How can we expect to ﬁnd replacement workers, to ﬁll temporary posi0ons, in an already seasonal industry?  I have been working in the logging and trucking industry for over 40 years. This bill is the greatest threat to the survival of our family business since the late 1980s, when there were only two Workers Comp carriers leS, and it cost 70cents on every $1 of payroll to provide this insurance.  We have felt the eﬀects of addi0onal costs associated with the laws passed in 2019, regarding earned paid leave and Workers comp rate increases. If this business and labor climate con0nues to worsen, I am concerned that our business, as well as others, will be forced to reduce or cease opera0ons.  Thank you.   
