 
            Steven W. Bail ey                                                                                               Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Exe cutive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  
 
L.D. 1964  
 
AN ACT TO IMPLEMENT THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMISSION TO DEVELOP A 
PAID FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE BENEFITS PROGRAM  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder  and members of the Labor and Housing  Committee.  I am Steven 
Bailey , executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the legislative 
committees of the Maine School  Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents Association, 
neither for nor against L.D. 1964 . 
 
As school leaders we are committed to  supporting our employees and offer pay and benefits that are 
competitive in the marketplac e. Family  medical leave, both at the state and federal levels, has historically 
been an obligation of the employe r, not for payment to the individual but to assure the job will still be there 
upon return from the family medical leav e. Most usually, this leave is r un concurrently with other  sick, 
vacation, or other paid time off (PTO) leave an employee may have  accrue d so there is no im mediate expense 
to the employe e. 
 
The bill proposes that 1 percent of wages,  with half a percent paid by the employer and  the other half  by the 
employe e, be contributed to support the program it creates.  We do view t his as an unfunded mandate because 
it appears neither employer  or employee has a choice  in the matter . 
 
It further  creates an administrative burden to set up payrol l deductions and  determin e who is eligibl e, and then 
remit that 1 percent to the state. The proposal also does not seem to recognize  that school districts already 
have generous sick -leave benefits in negotiated contracts . 
 
The Associations recognize the im portance of  providin g safety nets for employees. For employees  who have  
less than robust  sick-leave benefits due to length of time on the jo b or leave that had been previously used, 
school employers  can unde rstand the need for providing this type of paid family medical leave . 
 
There are many unanswered questions on how this proposal woul d wor k. Is this at local expens e? Is it a cost 
to the state and not a responsibility to each school administrative uni t? We encourage the  Committee to better 
understand the  financial impac t of this bill before taking a positio n. Based  on our  initia l readin g, L.D. 1964  
would be a burden on school districts and  ultimately  local taxpayers . 
