                                    
 
May  22, 2023 
 
 
Dear Labor Committee Members,  
 
My name is Tony Cowles, and I am writing as a small business owner from South Portland in support of 
LD 1964.   
 
In addition to attracting well -qualified workers to our state, I believe this legislation could benefit so 
many Mainers. LD 1964 has the ability to revitalize the Maine workforce, by encouraging young people 
to stay in Maine, and to entice other qualified workers to come live and work in our state.  This program 
will benefit so many Maine working families, allowing them to care for loved ones, as well as to manage 
their own personal health needs. I believe that once this program is initially funded by the S tate, this 
type of universal coverage will pay for itself quickly. As a sole proprietor , I also see a corresponding 
benefit to small businesses who would be allowed to buy into this program. Fortuit ously, n ow seems like 
an especially good time for the legislature to act because of our curren t surplus.  
 
As a husband and father, I also see LD 1964 as a great boost  for working women in Maine.  Historically, 
too many educated young women have made the choice to leave the workforce after having children. 
This legislation could be a critical incentive to help women exercise their education, helping  them to stay 
engaged in their vocations. By allowing young women and families to briefly stay at home after giving 
birth or adopting a child, we are helping them to fulfill their career ambitions here in Maine.  
 
For these reasons, I believe that Paid Family and Medical Leave is a powerful incentive for business, for 
families, and for Maine.  I encourage you to support the health and future of our workforce by adopting 
LD 1964.  
 
Thank you for hearing my concerns.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Tony Cowles , Princ ipal 
Cowles Studio | Land scape Arc hitecture  
 
Tony Cowles
South Portland
LD 1964
Good morning,
I an unable to testify over Zoom, however I have attached written statement in support
of LD 1964. 
Thank you, 
Tony Cowles
South Portland, ME
