 
 
District  100: Brunswick  (part)  
  
Daniel  J. Ankeles  
7 Beech  Drive  
Brunswick,  ME 04011  
Daniel.Ankeles@legislature.maine.gov  
Cell Phone:  (207)  756-3793  HOUSE  OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE  HOUSE  STATION  
AUGUSTA,  MAINE   04333 -0002  
(207)  287-1400  
TTY:  MAINE  RELAY  711 
 
Monday,  March  13, 2023  
 
 
Testimony  of Rep.  Dan Ankeles  
Before  the Joint  Standing  Committee  on Marine  Resources  
Supporting  LD 581, An Act To Assist  Municipal  Shellfish  Programs  
 
Sena tor Reny,  Representative  Hepler  and honorable  members  of the Marine  Resources  Committee,  thank  you for the 
opportunity  to testify  today.  I am Representative  Dan Ankeles,  and I serve  House  District  100, a central  slice of 
Brunswick  that includes  our downtown,  Bowdoin  College,  the former  naval  airbase,  Mere  Point,  Maquoit  Bay and 
some  of the productive  flats in Maine.  It’s an honor  to submit  testimony  in writing  in support  of LD 581, An Act To 
Assist  Municipal  Shellfish  Programs.  
 
I want  to recognize  that the public  hearing  has already  taken  place  at the moment  you are recei ving this, but it was 
important  to me as a co-sponsor  to add my support  of this measure  to the record  so that you understand  that the 
Brunswick  delegation  stands  together  behind  this proposal.   
 
Senator  Daughtry  and Brunswick’s  Coastal  Resources  Manager,  Dan Devereaux,  have  worked  together  with the 
Department  to get LD 581 to a place  where  it isn’t interfering  with the good  work  that is already  being  done  by the 
Department  and still makes  incremental  gains  for Brunswick  and other  communities  with active  municipal  shellfish  
programs.   
 
The two changes  proposed  by both LD 581 and Mr. Devereaux’s  friendly  amendment  address  concerns  raised  by 
municipalities  during  regional  meetings  with the Department  held in 2022.  Concerns  other  than the application  fee 
and the educational  requirement  are within  the Department’s  power  to address  administratively  if they so choose.   
 
You’ve  already  heard  during  the hearing  how valuable  these  municipal  shellfish  programs  are to communities,  and 
the positive  ripple  effects  they have across  the state.  It is in our interest  as a Legislature  to ensure  that they are 
thriving  and can allocate  public  time,  money  and personnel  as efficiently  as possible.   
 
I am happy  to attempt  to answer  questions  or seek out answers  in advance  of the work  session.  I’m not an expert,  but 
I did cover  your committee  when  I worked  as a legislative  aide and have  also addressed  several  municipal  shellfish  
policy  questions  in the four-plus years  I’ve also been  serving  as an at-large  member  of our Town  Council.   
 
Thank  you again  for taking  a moment  to read this late addition  to the existing  body  of testimony.   
