Testimony on LD 581 “An Act to Assist Municipal Shellfish Conservation Programs”  
 
 
          March 14, 2023  
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources  
Cross Building, Room 206  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
 
 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Marine Resources, my name is Marissa McMahan and I am writing in support of 
LD 581, “An Act to Assist Municipal Shellfish Conservation Programs.”  I am a resident of 
Georgetown and a member of the Geo rgetown Shellfish Conservation Committee. I am also a 
scientist who has been working in marine fisheries in Maine for over a decade, and was a 
commercial fisher before that.  
 
As you likely know, t he Gulf of Maine is experiencing rapid climate -driven envir onmental 
change that threatens our fisheries resources and the livelihoods of thousands of Mainers. The 
wild harvest shellfish fishery has existed in what we now call Maine for over 10,000 years. It’s 
an incredibly important part of Wabanaki culture and  supports 1500 harvester livelihoods along 
the coast of Maine. It is also Maine’s second most valuable fishery, valued at over $25M in 
2021. However, shellfish are also incredibly vulnerable to climate change impacts. In particular, 
soft-shell clam population s have declined in recent years as waters have warmed and invasive 
green crabs, a voracious shellfish predator, have exploded in abundance.  
 
Maine’s shellfish  fishery is co -managed by municipalities and the DMR’s Nearshore Fisheries 
Program. There are 7 8 municipalities in Maine actively managing their shellfish resources. These 
municipal programs and the harvesters associated with them are doing an immense amount to 
support and enhance their local shellfish populations through restoration, stock enhancemen t, 
water quality monitoring, and community outreach.  Municipal s hellfish committees are made up 
primarily of volunteer members, many of whom  are commercial harvesters. They are stewards of 
a public resource and dedicate countless hours to protecting and en hancing th at resource.   
 
In recent years, many municipal programs have experimented with rearing seed clams for stock 
enhancement. The seed clams are purchased at a small size from a local hatchery, but need to be 
grown to a larger size before being planted on the flats so they are less susceptible to green crab 
predation. The gear and rearing techniques utilized for these nursery activities are typically 
regulated as aquaculture. Therefore, m unicipal shellfish programs must acquire a Limited 
Purpose Aquaculture (LPA)  license to rear small seed clams for wild stock enhancement.  
 
With limited ca pacity, funding, and staffing, shellfish committees are often already overburdened 
with the co -management and conservation of shellfish resources. The process to obtain a n LPA 
is an additional burden, and in some instances an insurmountable barrier to cond ucting shellfish 
stock enhancement. LD 581 reduces  some of th at burden by exempting municipalities from the 
fee required to obtain an LPA.  The e xemption from educational requirements, being proposed as 
an amendment to the bill, would also greatly reduce th e burden placed on municipalities that are 
working to enhance wild shellfish stocks.  
 
I encourage you to support LD 581 and I am grateful for your consideration of this testimony.  
 
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
 
Marissa McMahan, PhD  
Georgetown Resident and Shellfish Conservation Committee Member  
marissa.d.mcmahan@gmail.com   
207.837.5987  

