LD 1860
An Act to Create the Educational Opportunity Account Program
Presented by Representative LIBBY of Auburn
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs,
My name is Abigail Beal of Cherryfield, and I urge you to oppose LD 1860.
This bill would create educational opportunity accounts for participating students.  Deposits would be 
put into these accounts on a quarterly basis, the amount of which deposits would equal the average 
amount spent by the State on public school students.
This means that families would suddenly start receiving loads of “free money” every 3 months to spend
on their children's education.  
Once those families become dependent upon the money, what happens if the rules change?  What 
happens if the requirements for qualification are amended?  What if the state starts telling us that we 
have to teach things like “sex education,” CRT, and other such subjects that go completely against our 
firmly held religious beliefs?  Then what?
At that point, families would have to decide whether to compromise and keep the funding or stand firm
and lose the monies.  And many people would be unwilling to walk away from the subsidies they've 
come to expect.
So this is really all a matter of freedom.  We as homeschoolers have chosen a different path for our 
children on purpose.  We want something different than what the government schools have to offer.  
But if we start receiving government funding, we're going to get roped back into that state control and 
state schooling system, and we're going to lose the hard-earned freedoms we now enjoy.
Benjamin Franklin said, “ Those who give up essential Liberty to purchase a little temporary Safety, 
deserve neither Liberty nor Safety.”
Today are we truly willing to trade freedom for cash?!
We must cherish the blessings that our forefathers and mothers have secured for us with their lives.  We
must choose to remain free to teach and train our children in the way we believe the Lord expects us to.
For it is to Him that we are and ought to be accountable, not the Department of Education.
It is for these reasons that I respectfully urge you to oppose LD 1860.  Thank you for your time and 
consideration.
