LAURELZ LIBBY 
State Representative 
LD 1860 
An Act to Create the Educational Opportunity Account Program 
Laurel D. Libby 
442 Park Avenue 
Auburn, ME 04210 
(207) 632-7619 
Laurel.Libby@legislature.maine.gov 
May 8, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members 
of the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, 
i am pleased to introduce LD 1860, “An Act to Create the Educational Opportunity 
Account Program." 
Throughout Covid, i heard from parents whose kids were struggling with the hybrid 
model of education. They wanted to know what they could do to improve their child’s 
education, and I had little to offer aside from homeschooling as an option. To be sure,I 
also knew of families who loved hybrid education, but that only serves to highlight 
what I believe we all know to be true: Education is simply not one size ﬁts all. 
Every parent knows that a one-size- ﬁts-all approach doesn’t work for raising kids. 
Parenting methods that worked for one child may be completely out of the question for 
another child because every child is unique. Thankfully, there’s no shortage of 
data-driven resources available to help parents navigate the ever-changing journey of
parenthood. All too often we don’t see the same striving for improvement when it 
comes to educating kids. With all the advancements, why are parents still expected to 
accept a one—size-ﬁts-all “solution ” for their child's education? 
The U.S. public school system is designed to beneﬁt politically-motivated bureaucratsl , 
not parents, teachers, or students. Furthermore, parents are forced to pay taxes to fund 
public schools, which may not serve their children ’s unique needs. And while children 
of upper-income parents may have options, kids in lower-income households are 
generally stuck with the government-run school assigned to their zip code. 
There is a solution that some states have already adopted: school choicez . Rather than 
locking taxpayer money for education into government~run schools, school choice puts 
education funds where they belong: wherever they best serve the student. 
The gold standard for school choice are the Empowerment Scholarship Accounts3 in 
Arizona. These are education savings accounts (ESAs) with about $7,000 per student‘ 
per year already earmarked for that child’s education. Parents can decide how to spend 
the funds; including private school tuition, trade school or college classes, tutors, or 
even let it stay in the public school system, if it’s working for them. 
Parents, not unelected bureaucrats, know what's best for their kids. Many parents 
would seek alternative schooling options if they only had the opportunity, and school 
choice through ESAs gives it to them, as the evidence has proven in Arizonas since the 
program’s passage. A little closer to home, neighboring New Hampshire passeda 
school choice bill in 2021, and hundreds of children and their families are now enjoying 
the options that it has provided.
The U.S. system of federalism allows us to witness what works and what doesn’t work 
across the states; Maine students deserve the same liberty as those in Arizona and 
New Hampshire, which is why i submitted LD 1860 to bring school choice to Maine. 
Just like in Arizona, Maine parents would be able to decide what type of education best 
ﬁts their child, and fund it via an Educational Opportunity Account (EOA). 
Even with universal EOAs, public schools would still receive funding, even if the 
parents of some students choose to send their kids elsewhere. And with an 
Arizona-style solution, all kids would be allotted the same tax-deductible funding, 
regardless of their parent's tax bracket or zip code. 
Let’s talk speciﬁcally about LD 1860. This bill establishes a program in the Department 
of Education to create Educational Opportunity Accounts for participating Maine 
students to be funded by a portion of the State funding and used to pay their 
educational expenses. The list of eligible expenses is itemized in the bill, but includes 
tuition and fees at private school, tuition and fees at nonpublic online learning 
programs, textbooks, computer hardware, fees for summer educational programs, and 
tuition and fees at postsecondary institutions of higher education, among others. 
One important component of the bill is the Parent Review Commission. Made up of 
seven parents of participating students, the Parent Review Commission will havea 
voice in how to implement, administer, and improve the Educational Opportunity 
Account program. Maine parents deserve the opportunity to have a voice in their 
children's education, something that has been sorely lacking, particularly the last few 
years.
With the introduction of school choice, there would be abundant opportunities for 
lower-income parents to have many of the same educational resources for their 
children as wealthier parents. School choice would diminish the disparities currently 
inherent in the Maine education system, where families who can afford to often move 
to "better" school districts or enroll in private school, and allow all children the 
opportunity to get a quality education. 
School choice would break up the educational monopoly of public schools that allows 
them to corner the market without much incentive to improve services or lower costs. 
And equal funding for students would show us which schooling options earn parental 
support and enable educators and administrators to innovate and give kids the quality 
education they deserve. 
There's no time like the present to put Maine kids ﬁrst by enacting school choice and 
funding students instead of systems.
https://stanford revievv.orq/bureaucrats-stote -the-public-education —svstem-pare 
nts-must —take-it-backl 
https:[/www.edchoice.orq/schooL-choice/vvhat —is-school-choicel 
httpsj/www.azed.gov/esa 
httpszl/wvvw.usnews.c0rn/newslpotitics/articles/2022-O9-30/huqe-arizona-scho 
ol—v0ucher-plan-in-effect-after-foes-fail 
httpszl/ ﬁnance.vaho0.com/news/empowerment-scholarship-accounts —qrowinqj 
mportance- 153000359.htmL?quccounter= 1&quce_referrer=aHROcHM6Lv93d3c 
uZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&quce ,, referrer_siq=AOAAAHVxq 5—75eiPBf6n8zumtBqrrjg 
XOYkyvsB —lccRKCMZFc2f655oZtMh7WGN_H2Ncif_pzl669lBOKMVQgGnEkEq1 
iuVF 08uBLX1DndMdiJ KrvN RB2tK5lptsZCJKkJq8BT3f-bkk4JyRpkdcLp8OkL4ez 
UiXW30dwYQyTEUqzh3
