 
 
 
 
 
1310 L Street NW Suite 200, Washington, DC 20005  
 (202) 466 -3234   |   americansunited@au.org    |   au.org  
 
 
May 5 , 2023  
 
The Honorable Joseph Rafferty  
Chair  
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee  
Maine Senate  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  The Honorable Michael Brennan  
Chair  
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee  
Maine House of Representatives  
2 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Private School Vouchers Are Bad Education Policy  
 
Dear Chair Rafferty  and Chair Brennan : 
 
On behalf of the Maine  members and supporters of Americans United for Separation of 
Church and State, I write to urge you to oppose LD 338, LD 1741, LD 1798, LD 1838, 
LD 1841, and LD 1860 , each  of which would create a private school  voucher program 
that fund s private school education . These bills should be rejected because vouchers 
don’t work, lack important accountability measures, fail to serve rural students, fund 
discrimination, and violate religious freedom.  Public dollars should fund public schools, 
which serve nearly 90% of American schoolchildren.  
 
Voucher Programs Don’t Work  
Private school vouchers do not improve educational outcomes. Studies of the Indiana,1 
Louisiana,2 and Ohio3 voucher programs revealed that students who used vouchers 
actually pe rformed worse  on standardized tests than their peers not in voucher 
programs. In fact, the learning losses in Louisiana and Ohio are worse than those 
caused by the COVID -19 pandemic.4 And studies of long -standing voucher programs in 
 
1 Megan Austin, R. Joseph Waddington, and Mark Berends, Voucher Pathways and Student 
Achievement in Indiana’s Choice Scholarship Program , 22, Russell Sage Found., 2019.  
2 Parag A. Pathak & Christopher R. Walters, Free to Choose: Can School Choice Reduce Student 
Achievement? , 10, Am. Econ.  Journal: Applied Econ., Jan. 2018.  
3 David Figlio and Krzysztof Karbownik, Evaluation of Ohio’s EdChoice Scholarship  Program: Selection, 
Competition, and Performance Effects , 32, Fordham Inst., Jul. 2016.  
4 Math scores dropped by 0.4 standard deviations in Louisiana and 0.5 standard deviations in Ohio, while 
the pandemic lowered score s by 0.2 -0.27 standard deviations. Megan Kuhfeld, et al., The Pandemic Has 
Had Devastating Impacts on Learning. What Will It Take to Help Students Catch Up? , Brookings Inst. 
(Mar. 3, 2022).  
2 
 Milwaukee,5 Cleveland ,6 and Washington, DC7 found that students offered vouchers 
showed no improvement in reading or math over those not in the program. With a 
record proving they don’t work, there is no justification for funneling money into 
vouchers.  
 
Voucher Programs Inv ite Fraud and Abuse  
These bills fail to provide proper oversight and accountability measures for the private 
schools that take government money. For example, only LD 1798 requires that students 
take an assessment test, but they are not required to take the  same  tests as public 
school students. This would make it difficult to determine if using a voucher has a 
positive —or negative —impact on student achievement.  
 
The bills  also lack sufficient  provisions to ensure that funds are being spent 
appropriately . Only two bills require that the program be audited. This  is particularly 
problematic considering that vouchers have a history of fraud and abuse. In Arizona, for 
example, parents made more tha n 900 purchases at unapproved merchants totaling 
more than $700,000 in just one year.8 And in Milwaukee, a principal at a voucher school 
cashed checks made out to students who didn’t attend the school and used voucher 
funds to buy two cars.9 
 
Voucher Programs Don’t Serve Rural Students  
Nearly seventy percent  of Maine ’s public schools are located in rural districts ,10 but 
vouchers don’t provide an actual choice for students in rural districts. Rural communities 
have few, if any, private school o ptions.  And students aren’t guaranteed access to the 
private schools that do exist because they have limited enrollment and may deny 
admission for a number of reasons. Students who do use a voucher are generally still 
required to endure long, costly commut es, which can impact attendance rates and 
tardiness and could also have a negative effect on student achievement.11  
 
Vouchers are also especially harmful to rural public school systems. Even if only a few 
students at a rural school use a voucher, the scho ol will likely still take a financial hit. 
The school’s total state funding would decrease while costs for facilities, transportation, 
administration, and instruction stay constant. In addition, rural districts often rely heavily 
 
5 Patrick J. Wolf, The Comprehensive Longitudinal Evaluation of the Milwaukee Parental Choice 
Program: Summary of Final Reports , 7, School Choice Demonstration Project,  Univ. of Ark., Apr. 2010.  
6 Jonathan Plucker et al., Evaluation of the Cleveland Scholarship and Tutoring Program, Tech nical 
Report 1998 -2004 , 166, Ctr. for Evaluation & Educ. Policy, Univ. of Ind., Feb. 2006.  
7 Ann Webber et al., Evaluation of the DC Opportunity Scho larship Program: Impacts Three Years After 
Students Applied , 4, U.S. Dep’t of Educ., May 2019.  
8 Ariz. Auditor Gen. Rep. 16 -107, 24-Month Follow -Up Report , 3, Oct. 2018.   
9 Lindsay Wagner, School Vouchers: A Pathway Toward Fraud and Abuse of Taxpayer Dollars , NC Policy 
Watch , Apr. 24, 2013.  
10 Daniel Showalter  et al., Why Rural Matters 2018 -2019 , 112, Rural School and Community Trust, Nov. 
2019. 
11 Andrew D. Catt, Commuting Concerns: A Survey of U.S. Parents on K –12 Transportation Before & 
During the COVID -19 Pandemic , EdChoice  (Nov. 2020).  
3 
 on state funding. When vou cher programs are implemented, state funding will drop as it 
is siphoned away from rural districts to pay for voucher students in cities and suburbs.  
 
These Bills  Fail to Protect Students from Discrimination  
Public schools are open to and must serve all s tudents. Private schools, however, don’t 
abide by federal civil rights laws that apply to public schools and often deny students 
admission or expel them for a number of reasons, including based on their religion, 
sexual orientation, gender identity, academ ic abilities, or disability status. Taxpayer 
funded vouchers should not fund such discrimination at private schools; yet these bills  
nothing to protect Maine ’s students. They  include no nondiscrimination provisions.  
 
This puts many students at risk. For ex ample, students with disabilities who use a 
voucher would forfeit many of the protections provided to students under the Individuals 
with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) because they are considered parentally placed in 
private schools and lose the qualit y and quantity of services available to students in 
public schools.   
 
LGBTQ students also often face discrimination. In Florida, for example, a 2019  
investigation  uncovered 156 private schools with anti -LGBTQ views that educated more 
than 20,800 students with state -funded vouche rs.12 Of these schools, 83 had policies 
that allowed the schools to deny admission or expel LGBTQ students, and 73 called 
being gay or transgender a “biblical sin.”13 Students who are secular or religious 
minorities are also often discriminated against bec ause many schools impose a 
religious litmus test on students and their families. Some schools discriminate against 
students based on their or their families’ religious beliefs,14 and some condition 
admissions on adherence to certain religious principles an d church attendance.15 
 
These Bills Would Violate Religious Freedom  
Voucher programs around the country primarily fund religious schools,16 and there is no 
reason to believe th ese voucher s would be different. Yet, one of the most fundamental 
principles of religious liberty is that government should not compel any citizen to pay for 
someone else’s religious education. Passing these bills  would send money to religious 
schools in violation of this core religious freedom protection.  
 
12 Leslie Postal & Annie Martin, Anti-LGBT Florida Schools Getting School Vouchers , Orlando Sentine l 
(Jan. 23, 2020).  
13 Id. 
14 Kimberly Quick, Century Found., Second Class Students: When Vouchers Exclude  (Jan. 11, 2017) 
(“For ex ample, according to its written policy, a North Carolina private school accepting vouchers denies 
admission to ‘those in cults, i.e. Mormons, Jehovah Witness, Christian Science, Unification Church, Zen 
Buddhism, Unitarianism, and United Pentecostal.’”).  
15 See, e.g. , GAO -16-712, Private School Choice Programs Are Growing  at 27 (voucher school that 
required all students in fourth grade and above to follow a list of religious principles); Leslie Postal, 
Florida’s New Voucher Program Could Prompt Lawsuit , Orlando Sentinel , May 28, 2019 (private school 
that “enrolls about 300  voucher students…demands parents abide by a ‘lifestyle policy’ that forbids 
‘homosexual and transgender orientation’”).  
16 For example, 81% of students using a voucher in Washington, DC attend private religious schools. Jill 
Feldman et al., Evaluation of the DC Scholarship Program: An Early Look at Applicants and Participating 
Schools Under the SOAR Act , U.S. Dep’t of Educ., 29, Oct. 2014.  
4 
 Conclusion  
For all the above  reasons, Americans United opposes LD 338, LD 1741, LD 1798, LD 
1838, LD 1841, and LD 1860 . Thank you for your consideration on this important 
matter.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Nikolas Nartowicz  
State Policy Counsel  
 
cc: Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee  

