Maine Community 
g College System 
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
323 State Street, Augusta. ME 04330-7131 
(207) 629-4000 I Fax (207) 629-4048 I mccs.me.edu 
TO: Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
FROM: Becky Smith, Director of Government and Community Relations 
RE: Testimony neither for nor against LD 944, An Act to Allow Refugees, Asylees and 
Asylum Seekers to Qualify for In-slate Tuition 
DATE: March 23, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, please accept this testimony neither for nor against LD 944, An 
Act to Allow Refugees, Asylees and Asylum Seekers to Qualzﬂ for In-state Tuition on behalf of 
the Maine Community College System. 
The long-standing practice of the Maine Community College System is to offer ﬁnancial 
assistance to Maine residents pursuing a degree or credential from one of our seven colleges as 
our budgets allow and to give special tuition consideration to students from Maine. To this end, 
our Board of Trustees has set a policy that allows any person who has resided in Maine for the 
12 months prior to admission be charged the reduced in-state tuition rate of $2,880 (out of state 
tuition is approximately $5,760). We also allow residents of New Brunswick, Canada, to attend 
at the in-state tuition rate. 
Our Board of Trustees ’ policy allows special exceptions at the college president ’s discretion for 
some students who have demonstrated need. These decisions are made on a case-by-case basis 
and national origin is not a factor we consider in those decisions. Due to the flexibility given to 
our presidents, refugees, asylees and asylum-seekers would pay an amount that is relative to their 
ﬁnancial need. Generally, this would likely be either at the in-state tuition rate, or potentially 
even lower. Because we do not use country of origin as a decision point in this practice and do 
not ask for that information in our applications, we are unable to ascertain if this legislation 
would have any ﬁscal impact on our colleges. 
It is important to note that our workforce training programs, which are almost always free to the 
participants, or at least very low cost, are open to any resident of Maine through the Harold 
Alfond Center for the Advancement of Maine’s Workplace and we have been fortunate to train 
many new Mainers through these training programs.
The reason we are not testifying in support of this legislation is that we believe that our Board of 
Trustees, whom you delegate ﬁduciary responsibility of the Maine Community College System 
in Title 20-A §1206, should make tuition policy rather than the legislature. The statute states: 
7. Fees and charges. To establish and collect room and board fees and tuition and to set policies 
relating to other charges, including fees for the reasonable use of the colleges ’ facilities by others, as 
determined necessary by the board of trustees for the efficient administration of this chapter, to be 
credited to a separate fund and used for the purposes of this chapter; 
Our Board of Trustees has an intimate knowledge of our budgets, our student needs, and how best to 
serve the state. lt is our position that they be allowed to set tuition policy for Maine’s community 
colleges. 
Thank you.
