‘Aw 
(" 
'\ 
_‘ .%:;:i:" “i<§>1<s 
' 
H251??? at 
J €.i.rsi\.r<-arséttta-:>s 
UNIVERSHY OF MAit~E€ SYSTEM 
Testimony from the University of Maine System 
Presented by UMS Director of Government & Community Relations Samantha Warren 
Regarding LD 944, An Act to Allow Refugees, Asylees and Asylum 
Seekers to Qualify for In-State Tuition, March 22, 2023 
Sen. Rafferty, Rep. Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education & Cultural Affairs: My name is Samantha Warren and l am the Director of Government 
Relations for the University of Maine System (UMS). 
LD 944 would require that Maine’s public universities, as well as public community colleges and 
maritime academy, allow refugees who have been directly resettled in Maine to qualify for in-state 
tuition. It would also extend in-state tuition rates to other refugees, asylees and asylum seekers who 
meet the same requirements for establishing residency as are required of a U.S. citizen, which 
typically include having lived in Maine for purposes other than education for at least one year prior to 
enrollment. 
UMS policy on tuition residency classification already allows for this and specifically provides that: 
A non-U. S. citizen who has refugee status, and was resettled in Maine after arriving in the 
United States, is considered a Maine resident for tuition purposes. 
A non-U. S. citizen who is an asylum seeker is eligible for Maine residency for tuition purposes 
provided that he/she can document application for asylum and meets the same requirements 
for establishing residency in Maine as are required of a United States citizen. 
A non-U.S. citizen who has been granted asylum in the United States is eligible for Maine 
residency for tuition purposes provided that he/she meets the same requirements for 
establishing residency in Maine as are required of a United States citizen. 
Consistent with LD 944, our policy also already requires that all non-U.S. citizens applying for 
Maine residency for tuition purposes provide appropriate documentation related to residency and 
to verify their status with the Department of Homeland Security. 
As this Committee has consistently heard from UMS this session and in those prior, our System 
maintains that the authority to determine tuition rates, residency qualifications, and other decisions 
relating to financial management and resource allocation should remain within the purview of our 
governing Board of Trustees and administrators to whom they delegate authority. 
We are especially concerned about codifying this tuition residency policy in statute, as it severely 
limits our System's ability to be appropriately nimble in responding to need and opportunity in the 
state. For example, given concerning conflicts in the world, UMS is currently in the process of 
updating our tuition residency policy to allow students from war zones pay the in-state rate, rather 
than the typical international rate. Previously, on our own initiative, UMS expanded our residency 
policy to provide in-state tuition eligibility for all of our nation’s active military members, Veterans 
and Veteran-dependents using VA educational benefits regardless. lf LD 944 passed and the 
System wanted to make residency requirements more accommodating for refugees, asylees and 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent - 
University of 
Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque isle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
asylum seekers, we would need to come back to the Legislature to do so, rather than do so 
administratively. For this reason, we urge you to oppose this well-intended bill. 
Additionally, the Committee should be aware that while non-U.S. citizens are typically not eligible 
for federal financial aid, our public universities offer opportunities for talented new Mainers to 
access life-changing, high-quality postsecondary education. For example, the University of 
Southern Maine Promise Scholars program, which is supported by philanthropy, provides full 
scholarships and mentoring each year to 100 underserved, high-achieving students who are 
residents of Maine, including refugees and asylees, so they can graduate into the Maine workforce. 
Thank you for your ongoing support of the University of Maine System. 
Page 2 of2
