STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL & FINANCIAL REGULATION 
BUREAU OF INSURANCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office Location: 76 Northern Avenue, Gardiner, Maine 04345 
Mailing Address: 34 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
www.maine.gov/insurance 
Phone: (207) 624-8475  TTY: Please Call Maine Relay 711 Consumer Assistance: 1-800-300-5000 Fax: (207) 624-8599 
 
Janet T. Mills
Governor
Anne L. Head
DPFR Commissioner
Timothy N. Schott
Acting Superintendent
 
May 2, 2023 
 
Senator Donna Bailey, Senate Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  04333-0100 
Re: L.D. 1637 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Committee: 
The Bureau of Insurance opposes L.D. 1637.  
The purpose of this letter is to provide you with the reasons for the Bureau’s opposition.  
This bill seeks to remove all provisions of law requiring the revocation of a professional or 
occupational license for nonpayment of child support.  While the substance of the bill appears to 
mostly deal with fishing licenses, there are some significant changes made to the occupational 
licensing provisions in Title 10 that would affect the work of the Bureau.  
Our current law generally provides circumstances whereby the Superintendent of Insurance may 
deny, revoke, place on suspension/probation and impose civil penalties on insurance producer 
licenses. 
A circumstance that can result in discipline of licensees or denials of licensure is failing to 
comply with an administrative or court order imposing a child support obligation. 
This provision was adopted based on the NAIC’s Producer Licensing Model Act.  This model act 
was crafted by state insurance commissioners because of certain provisions of the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act that incentivized states to create a uniform standard for producer licensing. If 
states failed to substantially comply with a national standard, then the provisions of Gramm-
Leach-Bliley stated that regulatory authority over producer licensing would be taken away from 
the states.   
Maine currently substantially complies with the mandates of Gramm-Leach-Bliley as regards 
producer licensing.  But this could change if relevant provisions of our law are amended.  
Because longstanding policy has favored keeping regulatory authority of the insurance industry 
at the state level, we oppose this bill because it could have the unintended effect of endangering 
that policy.   
 
Senator Anne Carney, Senate Chair 
Representative Matt Moonen, House Chair 
May 2, 2023 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
I hope this information is useful to the Committee.  Please let me know if I can provide any 
further assistance. 
Sincerely, 
 
Timothy N. Schott 
Acting Superintendent 
 
Cc: Senator Eric Brakey 
