Hello members of the Committee,
My name is Amos Bickford, and I am a licensed firework technician in Maine, New Hampshire, 
Massachusetts, and Rhode Island. I have been doing fireworks for 8 years and work closely with people 
who have been doing it much longer than myself. I am submitting my testimony for the opposition of LD 
745. I was able to watch the livestream and view the bill. 
My main point of contention with the bill is that the issue does not seem to have been 
attempted to get corrected at the local level. This should be legislated at the local level and all attempts 
should be made to resolve the issue at the local level before it makes its way to state legislature. One 
localized event or series of events should not be the reason to put a stop for the rest of the state. Most 
towns have a noise ordinance that restrict loud noises after a certain time. I am aware that it is not a 
convenient nor a welcome noise, however, it is up to the local legislature of the town to put restrictions 
on what should and should not be condonable.
In the bill it is stated that the toy cannon cannot exceed 150 decibels at the cannon and in the 
hearing, it was stated that the definition be changed to “a sound which is unwelcome, causes distress, 
annoyance, or disturbance to unwilling listeners.” This definition is extremely vague and dangerous to 
the freedom of an individual. Anyone can claim that any noise is an annoyance or that it causes them 
distress. It is not just to allow such a vague description to infringe on a person’s right to entertain 
themselves on their private property. Again, this is something that should first be handled by the local 
legislature first.
The testimony given by Senator Brakey is one that is not incredibly detailed. He mentioned that 
the toy cannon is so loud that it is shakes the nearby residences. While I was not there, I do know that 
the display fireworks used to put on commercial fireworks displays are not typically capable of 
producing such effects as to shake a house. It would be highly informative to know exactly what was 
used since “toy cannon” is not descriptive enough to know what was used.
As somebody that works directly with the fireworks industry, and the products that are available 
for the consumer to buy, it is my knowledge that there are no such “consumer fireworks” for sale in the 
state of Maine. By definition, a toy cannon is a firework, and not a consumer firework, according to the 
Office of State Fire Marshals. This is a legal separation of “firework” and “consumer firework” which is 
not an obvious assumption to make. Therefore, it will or has the potential to interfere in the consumer 
fireworks industry. With that stated it would be appreciated that this be made clear that this in no way 
affects anything to do with consumer fireworks. 
In conclusion, I oppose this bill as not every possible effect has been considered. The 
consequences that this bill could have on personal freedom and commerce affecting the whole to help 
one or a few is not feasible.
Thank you for your time and consideration of my testimony in regards to LD 745.
Amos Bickford
