5“;- 
~" 
Eric Brakey 131$‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 745, An Act to Prohibit the Use of Toy Cannon Fireworks 
Devices That Exceed 150 Decibels Without Permission from Affected Property Owners 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
March 13, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety: I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of 
Aubum, New Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Thank you for your presence today as I present 
L.D. 745, “An Act to Prohibit the Use of Toy Cannon Fireworks Devices That Exceed 150 
Decibels Without Permission from Affected Property Owners.” 
For those who know my philosophy and legislative record, I am not generally inclined to bring 
forward legislation that seeks to prohibit anything, unless it clearly violates the life, liberty, or 
property of others. That is why I do not bring this 
This legislation, however, reﬂects the request of a constituent in Poland whose neighborhood has 
dealt with the repeated disturbance and nuisance of one individual repeatedly ﬁring off a loud, 
toy cannon. I am told the noise is so loud that it shakes nearby residences, disturbs animals, and 
frightens the elderly with medical conditions. As my constituent has described it to me, the noise 
pollution amounts to an infringement of the property rights of those living nearby. This is whyI 
have attempted to draft a policy solution, grounded in property rights, to give legal recourse for 
this repeated behavior. 
L.D. 745 is not an outright ban on toy cannons. Rather, it requires an individual who seeks to ﬁre 
a toy cannon over 150 decibels to receive permission from nearby residents whose property line 
is within 1000 feet of use. Each violation would merit a $100 ﬁne. If someone wants to go out 
into a remote area where there are no neighbors to disturb, they should be able to ﬁre off loud toy 
cannons to their heart's content. When they want to ﬁre off a loud toy cannon in a residential 
area, they should have to receive permission from their neighbors. 
I will also draw your attention to communications from my constituent who requested the bill. 
She relays a concem from the State Fire Marshal's Ofﬁce on the 150 decibel limit, suggesting 
this element may be difficult to enforce. She recommends substituting the deﬁnition of a noise 
nuisance from the Audiologist associates, "a sound which is unwelcome, causes distress, 
annoyance, or a disturbance to unwilling listeners." 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Luszczki, Ashley 
From: Gwin <goc99@roadrunner.com> 
Sent: Thursday, March 2, 2023 2:45 PM 
To: Luszczki, Ashley 
Cc: Brakey, Eric 
Subject: Toy Canon Public Hearing ~ March 13 
This mesS€\e* 01'iigii1atel s from outsidethe Maine LeSlatu1 ‘e; r 
11 - 
I Y A IV 
I am sorry I did not get back to you sooner. I had spoken with Richard McCarthy in the State Fire Marshalls Office. He 
said he was going to speak you and then get back in touch with me. He was concerned that if 150 decibels was put in 
the bill, it would have a hard time passing. if you do not have a way to detect the decibel level, how can we prove 
it. All l was able to fine was the Audiologist Associates comparisons noise nuisances----Fireworks 140 decibels 
Jackhammers 130 decibels 
Jet Planes on takeoff 120 decibels v 
Per Audiologist Associates definition of a noise nuisance~ ———- a sound which is unwelcome, causes distress, annoyance, or 
a disturbance to unwilling listeners. 
The normal neighborhood sound is 40 — 60 decibels. 
The people I have spoken with are appreciative that you are presenting this bill. We feel that it would be 
advantageous to eliminate the mention of any decibels. There is not a way to measure this. 
Gwin Gendron
1
