Silk '1' 
1:1 or 5%/1.»x1;'~;1; 
(31~':~'at::1 02~"1'm; {§(}’S’¥iR.\'{)R 
g 1S":' .u‘r; Hmlsz-1 S'Z'A'fi()?~i 
At’r;1&s‘m, it/§.s.z;\s1~; 
19433549901 
J.-\:~;i;'r M 21.1.5 D.-xx 3iZR(.§ES5 
G{)\~’X-IRNOR DIRii(."l ‘0R OF G{)VERa\'()R ’S 
ENERGY ()I-‘HCTE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act to Amend the Portfolio Requirements for Class ll Resources 
L.D. 399
& 
An Act to Eliminate the Repeal Provision on Waste-to-energy Renewable Energy Credits 
L.D. 437 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and I am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies neither for nor against L.D. 399 and L.D. 437 
This testimony is being provided regarding both L.D. 399 and L.D. 437 which l understand to be 
substantively the same. Both bills remove the repeal clause from 35-A M.R.S. §321O sub-§3 paragraph A 
as enacted by Public Law 2019, chapter 477 (the Renewable Portfolio Standard, or RPS). This paragraph, 
which was enacted to be repealed effective January 1, 2025, applies a 300% multiplier to the output of 
certain qualifying municipal electric facilities for the purpose of compliance with the RPS. This means 
each renewable energy certificate (REC) corresponding to each megawatt —hour generated bya 
qualifying municipal solid waste facility can be counted as three RECs by an entity retiring the REC for 
the purpose of compliance with Maine's Class ll RPS requirement. This provision became effective in 
2019 as part of a broader bipartisan RPS bill passed by this committee, and will remain through the end 
of 2024, granting qualifying municipal solid waste facilities a five-year period of increased value under 
the RPS. 
By design, the Class ll RPS requirement supports the continued operation of pre-existing generators. 
However, the available supply of Class ll RECs may decrease--for example, certain eligible Class ll 
generators may upgrade to become eligible to participate in the Class I/IA programs. Increased demand 
from other entities purchasing RECs can also tighten the available supply. 
ln 2021, as directed by statute, the GEO prepared a ten-year Renewable Energy Goals Market 
Assessment. ‘ This study provides important information and assesses the renewable energy market and 
its ability to meet the state's clean energy requirements. This includes analysis and review of the 
opportunities, potential, and challenges facing the state in reaching Maine's 80% RPS by 2030. 
‘ llttpszlfwwwJnainezgovfenergy/sitesfmainegov.energyf ﬁles;’iniinea 
ti1csfGEO ___State ‘?/£120of%20Maine%20Renewable%20Energy%2OGoals%20Marl<ct%20Assessment_F inal_March% 
202021 Lgdf
1
Regarding municipal waste-to-energy resources, the assessment notes that despite some interest in 
incorporating greater levels of municipal waste-to-energy generation in Maine's renewable portfolio, it 
is unlikely that any new waste-to-energy plants would be built to support the state's Class II REC 
requirement over the next decade. 
The temporary provision and sunset of the 300% multiplier to the output of certain qualifying municipal 
electric facilities for the purpose of compliance with the RPS was a product of broad, bipartisan 
negotiations in this committee in 2019. We recognize that waste-to-energy is a part of an established 
waste management hierarchy in the state of Maine with three active facilities — ecomaine located in 
Portland, Mid Maine Waste Action Corporation located in Auburn, and Penobscot Energy Recovery 
Corporation located in Orrington — and is an important issue for municipalities in the state. However, 
the outcome of the multiplier effectively allows two-thirds of the electric load that complies using 
waste-to-energy resources to be sen/ed without an associated renewable certificate, since one REC 
satisfies the obligation for three MWh of load. As Maine's clean energy landscape continues to evolve, 
the GEO is concerned that making permanent the bonus for municipal solid waste generators without 
an eventual sunset is not the most prudent solution to the state's long-term energy policy goals. 
Regarding the proposed amendment to L.D. 399 to establish an alternative compliance payment (ACP) 
rate for Class ll resources, the GEO is generally supportive. The GEO believes a reasonable cap on the 
value of Class ll resources can help contain costs for consumers in the event of a sustained increase in 
Class ll prices. The exact value of an ACP for Class ll resources however, should be carefully considered, 
taking into account the value of maintaining these existing renewable resources that play an important 
role in contributing to our decarbonization goals. 
Thank you for your consideration and l welcome any questions. 
Q~..x»~_C..4.»\ 
Caroline Colan, Legislative Liaison 
Governor ’ s Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
