PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:Members of the Joint Committ ee on Committ ee onEner gy, Utilities andTechnologyFrom:Jacob St ernDate:February 2, 2023Re:Testimon y inNeither for Nor Ag ainst t o L.D .399:An Act to Amend the P ortfolioRequir ements for Class II R esour cesand L.D . 437:An Act to Eliminat e the R epealProvision on W aste-to-ener gy Renew able Ener gy Credits
 Senat or La wrence, R epresentati ve Zeig ler, and the members of the Joint Committ ee onEner gy, Utilities, and T echnology ,
I am submitting the f ollowing t estimon y today on behalf of Sierr a Club Maine, r epresentingover 22,000 support ers and members stat ewide. F ounded in 1892, Sierr a Club is one of ournation ’s oldest and lar gest en vironmental or ganizations. W e work diligentl y to amplify thepower of our 3.8 million members nation-wide as w e work towards combating climat echange and pr omoting a just and sustainable econom y. To that end, w e are taking a positionneither in support of or in opposition t o L.D . 399:An Act to Amend t he P ortfolioRequir ements f or Class II R esour cesand L.D . 437:An Act to Eliminat e the R epeal Pr ovision onWaste-to-ener gy Renew able Ener gy Credits, both ofwhich contain identical language.
The legislation in question w ould eliminat e a sunset pr ovision so that r enew able ener gycredits (RECs) gener ated b y municipal solid w aste in conjunction with r ecycling w ouldcount 300% t owards the Class II r enew able ener gy requir ement f or competiti ve electricityproviders. While w e recognize that eliminating the 300% pr ovision w ould eff ectivelydevalue the Class II RECs gener ated municipal solid w aste, pot entiall y turning the f acilities’financials upside do wn o vernig ht, the statut e that sets the Class II r equir ement will need t obe changed at some point in the futur e to bett er align with Maine’s climat e goals. It w ouldbe imprudent t o continue t o consider municipal solid w aste gener ation a “r enew ableresour ce” in perpetuity and simpl y eliminating the sunset pr ovision is an ineleg ant solutionat best .
Sierr a Club does not consider electricity gener ation fr om municipal solid w aste to be eitherrenew able or “clean. ” It has pr oven impossible f or industry t o de velop a w aste combustionprocess, e ven with a lar ge biomass pr oportion, that does not pr oduce unacceptable t oxicand hazar dous air emissions. While some ad vanced w aste treatment t echnologies ar e

promot ed as alt ernati ve ener gy pr oducing, the ener gy conserv ed b y recycling andcomposting the sour ce mat erials e xceeds the amount of ener gy pr oduced b y thesetechnologies b y thr ee to five times.1Additionall y,as the nation with the lar gest hist oricalemissions of gr eenhouse g asses, the Unit ed Stat es has an oblig ation t o respond vigor ousl y.The Sierr a Club places primary emphasis on making substantial cuts in C O2emissions assoon as possible b y mo ving polluting fuel sour ces and shifting t o a clean and sustainableener gy econom y.
Thoug h we recognize ther e are issues with the e xisting statut e, w e would pr efer anappr oach that f ocuses on emission and w aste reduction as the long-t erm goal. P erhapssetting a timetable t o reduce incenti ves for municipal solid w aste gener ation, w hile alsoscaling up a separ ate funding sour ce for municipal solid w aste and r ecycling pr ograms? Ormaybe it’s time t o remo ve municipal solid w aste gener ation fr om the Class II scheduleentir ely and cr eate an incenti ve structur e that also f ocuses on w aste reduction andeducational outr each eff orts? W e hope this issue is r evisit ed and the committ ee is able t ohelp chart a course f or a brig hter, cleaner futur e for our stat e.
Thank y ou for your time and consider ation.
Sincer ely,Jacob St ern
--Vice Chair , Executi ve Committ eeSierr a Club Maine Chapt er
1Morris, Jeffrey, Comparative LCAs for Curbside Recycling Versus Either Landfilling or Incineration withEnergy Recovery, The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, July 2005.
