 
 
#15809857v1 
 RECYCLING • SOLUTIONS • ORGANICS • COLLECTION • ENERGY • LANDFILLS casella.com 
 
Testimony of Shelby Wright, Director of Engagement, Casella Waste Services 
 
Presented to the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
 
Neither for Nor Against LD 399, An Act to Amend the Portfolio Requirements for Class II 
Resources 
 
Sponsored by Representative James Boyle 
  
Neither for Nor Against LD 437, An Act to Eliminate the Repeal Provision on  
Waste-to-energy Renewable Energy Credits 
 
Sponsored by Representative Richard Campbell 
 
March 28, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is Newell Augur. I 
am a resident of Yarmouth and a partner at Pierce Atwood, LLP. I appreciate the 
opportunity to submit this testimony on behalf of Casella, neither for nor against LD 399, 
An Act to Amend the Portfolio Requirements for Class II Resources, as well as 
testimony neither for nor against LD 437, An Act to Eliminate the Repeal Provision on 
Waste-to-energy Renewable Energy Credits. 
 
The Juniper Ridge Landfill (JRL), owned by the State of Maine and operated by Casella 
since 2004, serves customers in every county in Maine.  The State-owned landfill 
utilizes a comprehensive landfill gas collection system to control methane emissions.  
These types of landfill gas extraction systems are in place throughout Casella’s 
footprint, which contributed to Casella being awarded the EPA’s Excellence in 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Management Award in 2012, celebrating the company’s 
achievement of a 45% reduction in total GHG emissions from 2005 to 2010. 
 
Casella has partnered with an energy partner to commission a renewable energy 
project that will process landfill gas into a purified renewable methane fuel (Renewable 
Natural Gas or RNG), to be used as a renewable fuel for transportation, building heat, 
or as a replacement for traditional natural gas. The JRL RNG project will produce 
energy equivalent to that necessary to heat approximately 3,500 homes per year.  
 
Many state-level waste hierarchies, including the Maine hierarchy1, were established at 
a time when landfill gas collection was not common practice, landfill gas to energy 
facilities were rare, and facility-level GHG emission reporting was not widely available. 
In this context, landfills were viewed as inferior to waste-to energy incinerators.  
 
 
1 https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/38/title38sec2101.html  (adopted, 1989, amended, 2007)  
 
 
#15809857v1 
 RECYCLING • SOLUTIONS • ORGANICS • COLLECTION • ENERGY • LANDFILLS casella.com 
 
However, today’s active landfills are equipped with aggressive gas capture systems and 
many, including the JRL facility, have added or will add energy recovery facilities. GHG 
reporting shows that these landfills have drastically reduced their emissions and are 
often less carbon-intensive than incinerators. 
 
To the extent that solid waste unsuitable for reuse or recycling continues to be 
generated, it is important for states to rank disposal options in a manner that reflects 
modern technology and an understanding of environmental and climate impacts.  For 
that reason, we would propose that in addition to the changes proposed in LDs 399 and 
437 – or perhaps in place of them - Maine should update its hierarchy to align with the 
federal EPA hierarchy.  This would mean ranking landfills that have energy recovery as 
equal to, or better than, waste-to-energy incineration.  
 
The EPA publishes two waste hierarchies – one for waste in general, and one 
specifically for food waste. Both rank source reduction, reuse, and various forms of 
recycling in the top tiers. The bottom tiers of the general waste hierarchy are “energy 
recovery” and “treatment disposal,” thus treating landfilling with energy recovery as 
equal to waste-to-energy incineration. Continuing this approach, the bottom tier of the 
food recovery hierarchy places landfilling and incineration on the same tier, giving 
preference to neither. Moreover, the EPA’s hierarchy includes nuance, noting that 
landfills with landfill gas recovery fit within energy recovery above treatment and 
disposal2.  
 
We recognize that these issues contemplate a public policy discussion that is also the 
purview of the Joint Standing Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources.  
Casella appreciates the opportunity to be part of that discussion as we all work to find 
solutions that both lower our energy costs and protect our environment. 
 
I’d be happy to answer any questions and will be present for the work session. 
 
 
 
 
2 https://www.epa.gov/smm/sustainable-materials-management-non-hazardous-materials-and-waste-
management-hierarchy  
