 
   
 Testimony in Opposition to LD 399, An Act to A mend the Port folio Requirements for Class 
II Resources ; and LD 437 , An Act to Eliminate the Repeal Provision on Wa ste-to-ener gy 
Renewable Energy C redits  
Sarah Nichols , Sustainable Maine Director , February 2 8, 2023  
 
Senator Lawrence,  Representative Zeigler , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is Sarah Nichols, and I am the Sustainable Maine 
Director for the Natural Resources Council of Maine  (NRCM) . Thank you for this opportunity to  
testify in opposition to LD 399 and LD 437 , which are both aimed at making  the temporary 
300% multiplier applied for the Class II Renewable Energy C redits ( REC s) for waste -to-energy 
facilities  permanent.  
 
Waste  should not even be  listed among  renewable energy sour ces, let alone be given special 
treatment with a 300% multiplier  in per petuity.   
 
NRCM strongly supports the increase of renewable resources that help reduce our dependence 
on fossil fuels, impr ove our environment, and provide long -term stability for our energy system. 
Truly renewable energy sources are those that are naturally regenerative. When we harness the 
energy created by the tides, sun, and wind, for instance, we do not destroy these reso urces —they 
are infinite. And it doesn’t take energy from our grid to create them.  
 
Municipal solid waste (MSW) on the o ther hand —which is our daily household and commercial 
trash —is made of finite  resources  that needed significant energy to create  and ship to a disposal 
facility . When burned, these resources  are destroyed , and they do not naturally renew.  The 
combustion process generates air pollution along wi th the heat used to make electrici ty. Plastic  is 
a particularly troubling  fuel source  since it’s made from fossil fuels. The plastics industry’s 
contribu tion to climate change is on track to exceed that of coal -fired po wer plants in this 
country by 2030.1  
 
NRCM ’s position is that if we are going to be burning trash, then we should at least make 
lemonade out of lemons and capture the energy  (and have stri ct pollution controls in place) . 
Capturing energy should be the required best practice for this disposal option, along with landfill 
gas capture, but we believe that neither should be considered to be a “renewable capacity 
resource ,” nor a “renewable resource ” in Title 35 -A Chapter 32 §3210 .  
 
Making disposal at a waste -to-energy plant cheaper work s against s ustainable waste policy .  
 
The waste -to-energy facility  in one of the bill sponsor’s town  of Orrington  is a key part of our 
state’s  waste processing infrastructure . But this facility  provide s a good example of one of the 
unintended consequences of waste -to-energ y. I often refer to these  facilities  as “hungry trash 
 
1 https://www.beyondplastics.org/plastics -and-climate   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 monster s” because they require a  steady stream of MSW  to operate.  In 2019 that facility was not 
being fed enough plastic to burn efficiently, so they imported 100 metric tons of shredded plastic 
from Northern Ireland. Two of those tons were  not unloaded safely at  the Mack Point cargo 
facility in Searsport , and the result was a devastating plastic pollution spill in Penobscot Bay.   
 
One big reason why that plastic waste was shipped to Maine  to be burned here , and why our state 
has never met our waste reduction and recycling goals , is because  disposal at a landfill or 
incinerator has  historically been the cheapest waste management option . If our state’s  energy 
policy is used to make disposal of waste at a landfill or waste -to-energy facility even cheaper, 
let’s say by ext ending this 300% mul tiplier in per petuity , for instance , it’s going to  make Maine a 
desirable location for disposal . It will also severely impact our ability to make the economics 
work in favor of waste reduction and recycling in our state and prevent us  from ever reaching our 
goals.  
 
For all the reasons I ’ve described above, we urge you to allow th is multiplier to sunset  in 2025  as 
planned  by voting o ught-not-to-pass on LD 399  and LD 437. Thank you for you r consideration 
of these comments, and I’d be happy to answer any questions.   
 
