g e House. or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Kathleen Shaw TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
l200 Sopers Mill Rod 
Auburn, ME 04210 
Phone: (207) 320-1969 
Kathleen.Shav»/@legislature.maine.gov 
April 26, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Kathy Shaw presenting 
LD 1682, An Act to Create the Maine Experiential Education Program 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Good afternoon, Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and fellow members of the 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee. As you know, I am Kathy Shaw, andI 
represent part of Auburn. I am pleased to present LD 1682, An Act to Create the Maine 
Experiential Education Program. 
This bill would create a leaming experience for all levels of education by offering students the 
opportunity to learn to grow from the “ground up” their own food, from acquiring 
seeds, planting, transplanting seedlings and then caring for and harvesting that food. 
Coming from a small farming family, my siblings and I early on had to help my mother care for 
and harvest from her garden — but before my mother would ever enter her garden, it was up to us 
little kids to chase out the snakes and toads, we might have missed a few every now and then, it 
was fun to hear her shriek. 
So, at the correct times of the year, we planted radishes, carrots and lettuces, soaked the pea and 
corn seeds, planted in hills cukes, squashes and melons. Dug potatoes and pulled cabbages, 
carrots and beets. We harvested Concord grapes for jelly, pulled corn from the stalks for canning 
and climbed all over apple and pear trees for the fruits to make dried fruit leather, cider and 
sauces. Our gardens fed our immediate family and our extended family seasonally and all winter 
long. The grocery stores in very rural Massachusetts at that time were a good distance away and 
dropping in to grab a can of peas or a loaf of bread were not easy options. 
We live in very different times now with the availability of foods readily at our ﬁnger tips, but 
locally grown, fresh food is something else entirely. We are at risk of losing the art of growing 
our own foods. As we lose touch with this most basic and fundamental experience of being 
human — the ability to feed ourselves and our families — we also lose touch with our natural 
environment. Reigniting that connection is critical to the health of our planet and the health of 
our commtmities. 
Experiential learning is an impactful way to engage students who might otherwise havea 
difﬁcult time in the classroom. Giving schools an opportunity, without mandating a cuiriculmn 
District 88: Auburn
change, to provide hands on learning experiences opens up new potential for deepening 
connections to art, science, history and other academic subjects while also equipping the next 
generation with these fundamental skills to feed and fend for themselves. 
This bill would expand on current garden programs and provide key funding to make 
experiences like mine accessible for more students in our public schools. This will allow schools 
to feasibly grow and maintain experiential programs to support Maine students ’ physical health 
and their mental and behavioral development across the state, while teaching them lifelong skills 
that will in turn help to maintain and cultivate our heritage industries. I urge your support. 
Thank you, 
Kathy Shaw 
District 88: Auburn
