 
                                                                                                   
Healthy Communities of the Capital Area Mission:  
to convene and support people, organizations, and  communities to collaborate on quality of life  and public health issues  
 
11 Mechanic Street, Suite 101, Gardiner, ME 04345 ~ 207. 588.5354 ~ www.hccame.org  
  
 
Testimony of Renee Page, Executive Director, Healthy Communities of the Capital Area, 
fiscal and staffing home to the Maine Farm & Sea to School Network  
 
In Support of LD 1682  An Act To Create the Maine Experiential Education Program  
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pleucker , and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry . My name is Renee 
Page. I am a resident of Farmingdale and Executi ve Director at Healthy Communities of 
the Capital Area  (HCCA)  in Gardiner . HCCA is the  fiscal and staffing home to the Maine 
Farm & Sea to School Network (MFSN) that hosts the annual Maine Farm & Sea to 
School Institute. MFSN is a statewide food systems ne twork  that supports the 3 pillars 
of farm to school: local food procurement, agriculture education, and experiential 
learning as both public health and economic development strategies .  
 
Today, I a m submitting testimony in support of LD 1682 “An Act To Cre ate the Maine 
Experiential Education Program. ” 
 
In addition to being an original  founding member of the ME Farm & Sea to School 
Network , I am a parent and a former school nutrition director , and have seen firsthand 
the positive impact experiential learning  can have.  From higher test scores to improved 
health behaviors and confidence -building, experiential learning provides memorable 
experiences and reaches more children than a traditional classroom setting. These 
factors play a role in both physical and men tal health  from the simple act of 
exposure to fresh air and sunshine to the unique teambuilding and interaction that 
experiential learning provides.  
 
One way MFSN supports experiential learning is through the newly established annual 
Maine Farm & Sea to S chool Institute. This year -long institute  provides school 
teams with tools, resources, and networking opportunities to create their own local 
action plans and strategies that encompass the classroom, cafeteria, and community, 
with support from a farm to sc hool Coach. These coach positions, though temporary, 
illustrate the need for a dedicated individual to support farm to school 
implementation to ensure success . Action plans often include  identifying an 
individual within the school or district to lead and i mplement these activities going 
forward. Herein is where the challenge lies - funding a dedicated position to help 
implement and institutionalize for the long term.  
 
As a former FoodCorps  Service Site and Healthy Maine Partnership, HCCA has seen 
first -hand the power of having a dedicated individual embedded within a 
school or district to oversee and implement  experiential learning initiatives. Quite 
often positive experiential learning opp ortunities are created by a teacher or individual 
driven to do so, but more often than not, are not sustained due to competing priorities, 
 
                                                                                                   
Healthy Communities of the Capital Area Mission:  
to convene and support people, organizations, and  communities to collaborate on quality of life  and public health issues  
 
11 Mechanic Street, Suite 101, Gardiner, ME 04345 ~ 207. 588.5354 ~ www.hccame.org  
  
 
the champion individual leaving the school, or the lack of a formal plan or dedicated 
resources to sustain it.  
 
Schools were forced during COVID to be creative with how they could safely teach once 
children started returning to in -person instruction. Many of them leveraged stimulus 
funds to create outdoor experiential learning opportunities and discovered it is an 
effective way to engage children in the learning process. Continuing this type of 
instruction is desired by school officials, teachers, and students, but in order for it to be 
effective and sustained, it needs additional support with dedicated personnel and formal 
sustainability plans.   
 
Maine is a spec ial place that lends itself naturally to experiential learning.  
Having children discover  all our s tate has to offer and develop  an appreciation for it at 
an early age  through effective experiential learning , can help them in deciding to stay 
here to start careers and raise families.  
 
Please support LD 1682  to help develop and sustain experiential learning opportunities 
throughout Maine schools.  Thank y ou Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pleucker, and 
esteemed  members of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and 
Forestry for your  time and commitment to Maine’s children  and schools . Please feel free 
to reach out to me with any questions you may have.  
 
Renee Page, MPH, PS -C, CLC  
 
 
Executive Dir ector, Healthy Communities of the Capital Area  
Home to the Maine Farm & Sea to School Network and  
Maine Farm to Institution  
r.page@hccame.org    207.446.9444  
 
Gardiner, ME  

