FOOORPS 
April, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
FoodCorps Testimony in Support of LD 1682 An Act to Create the Maine 
Experiential Education Program 
Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, 
My name is Ryan Parker, and l am the Maine Impact and Partnerships Lead for 
FoodCorps which is a national nonprofit organization which partners with schools 
in 13 states to provide students with experiential learning opportunities tied to food, 
cooking, and gardening. For the past 12 years, we have worked with Maine 
communities from the Katahdin Region to Portland, lndian Township to Eustis, to 
provide hands-on lessons that get students excited about eating fruits and 
vegetables and support school nutrition staff in getting nourishing meals on school 
trays. l am a lifelong Mainer and l live in Newport with my family where l serve, or 
have sen/ed, on several committees and boards. Perhaps most relevantly, l ama 
member of the RSU 19 School Board. l am here today on behalf of FoodCorps to 
ask you to support passage of LD 1682 An Act to Create the Maine Experiential 
Education Program. Thank you to Representative Shaw and her cosponsors for 
introducing this important opportunity for the schools and children throughout 
Maine, and for supporting experiential learning. 
Many people intuitively understand that humans of all ages learn best by doing. We do 
not learn to ride a bike by reading books about it, or hunt by doing worksheets, or drive 
by watching videos. All of those things are certainly useful learning tools, but most 
people, and certainly the vast majority of children, must use their bodies along with their 
minds to actually learn. Many educators and advocates have long been calling for less 
stationary time at a desk and more outdoor, tactile, and movement based learning 
opportunities. Most people, including most teachers, intuitively understand the reality that 
experiential learning is most beneficial to students. But, there has long been a reluctance 
to engage in teaching experientially due to many barriers, most of which come down to 
capacity. Because of what our public education system was originally designed to do, 
and because of the way it has subsequently developed over the past century, teachers 
are not taught in our colleges to engage in experiential learning. Those teachers that do 
teach this way will be the first to tell you managing an outdoor classroom and even 
hands-on activities inside is much different than managing indoor, sit-down, traditional
//, 
FOODCORPS 
classrooms. lt is harder, takes more prep-time, and often involves clean-up after lessons. 
It involves considerations around how children are dressed, what type of footwear they 
have on a given day, and having materials that can withstand weather and physical 
movement. For years many organizations and individuals have worked to chip away at 
these hesitations with resources, professional development, and full programs designed 
to help those early adopters who both recognize the value of experiential education, and 
want to take advantage of it. lt was long, hard, slow work to expand the educational 
paradigm. 
But the covid pandemic, for all its disruption and tragedy, carried with it the silver lining 
that many Maine schools were forced to quickly create new systems to educate our 
children in outdoor spaces where airflow is far superior to that in even our most modern 
school buildings. Federal Covid relief funding made much of this possible because it 
included hundreds of thousands of dollars schools had to use exclusively to create 
outdoor learning spaces. Most schools chose to invest in school gardens, school 
orchards, hoop and greenhouses, and pavilions. importantly, many schools hired specific 
people to help students and teachers take advantage of this new infrastructure; helping 
teachers connect the outdoor growing and learning spaces to existing standards and 
curriculum for all subjects from Fine Arts, to Language Arts, from Math and Science to 
Social Studies. 
While a select and small handful of schools have long been engaged in this type of 
education, the pandemic introduced it to many more. LD 1682 fills a critical need to 
help schools begin to take advantage of the realities most have seen with 
experiential learning over the past two years. This need has always been there but 
is now urgent. At the end of the coming fiscal year, Covid relief money will 
disappear from all school districts across the country. This has become known as 
the “Covid cliff.” School districts throughout Maine are preparing for this with 
school board members of all ideologies preparing to make hard choices to end 
important programs and support that always should have been there but were only 
possible through covid relief. Experiential and outdoor learning programs that 
began during the pandemic are among the most universally valued schools need 
help to continue outdoor experiential learning programs. 
The reasons for this are simple. Over recent decades, science has finally begun to prove 
what many have long known, and what dozens of schools around Maine have just begun 
to experience. Specifically, children do better, by every measure, when they can learn by 
doing, particularly if it is a natural setting (outside). Children make deeper learning
FOODCORPS 
connections when they can learn experientially. Children ’s behavior improves when they 
can get outside, meaning fewer office referrals and disciplinary actions, which means our 
principals can spend more of their time developing curricula and evaluating teachers. 
Mental health improves when children (and adults) are outside. These and other facts 
are well documented in dozens of studies, only a partiality of which are highlighted in the 
list accompanying this testimony. 
ln addition to the timeliness of this legislation, LD 1682 is well-crafted because it does 
not force anything on schools. Maine is a local control state and, as a school board 
member myself, l have strong opinions about local control. This bill provides support for 
experiential learning, but only to those districts who choose to use it. ln other words, this 
is not an educational mandate. Under this language, districts are free to chose to partner 
with the Department, or not. And if they do, they are free to stick to their own curriculum, 
connecting it to outdoor and experiential learning as they see best fits their communities. 
There is nothing in this legislation that dictates what must be taught. And, garden and 
other experiential education provides nearly infinite flexibility to meet schools where they 
want to go. 
Perhaps the most interesting, and useful part of this legislation is the fact that it strikes 
an often difficult to achieve level of support. Some programs provide one time support 
which may allow for an exciting project to be created, but not sustained. Other types of 
support become a crutch to achieve that sustainability. This legislation is based on the 
old proverb that it is better to teach someone to fish than give them fish. LD 1682 
provides for a gradual build up of programming which will then be sustained by the 
district itself. It will also, therefore, provide an opportunity for all schools that are 
interested in this type of program to take advantage of it relatively quickly as the state 
support can shift from one community to another in succession around Maine. 
FoodCorps ’ has long focused on this type of work. Our goal in Maine is always to help 
schools build outdoor learning spaces, learn to use them, and expand their use by 
teachers and students so they can realize all the benefits outlined above. We build these 
partnerships with the exit strategy in mind at the outset. We help districts to become 
self-sufficient, meaning they will continue to expand and use their experiential learning 
programs long after FoodCorps moves on to help other communities. As such, we work 
to build support in districts for the creation of positions like those outlined in this 
legislation. When FoodCorps partners with a school district, we usually plan to be there
FOODCORPS 
'3’! 
for two to six years, depending on many factors including size of district, level of existing 
infrastructure, culture of use, and more. With our limited resources, we are only currently 
in 7 communities throughout Maine. Since FoodCorps ’ inception just over a decade ago, 
we have served in several communities. There are approximately 192 school districts in 
the state. At the current rate, it would take FoodCorps nearly 800 years to reach every 
school, and every kid most of whom would thrive if they could grow up with experiential 
education as the norm. 
Maine is a leader in the realm of Farm to School programming, which means schools 
would have a lot of support if they were to participate in this program. Indeed, no other 
state brings a focus on the Sea to their programming. FoodCorps is a proud member of 
the robust and long-lived Farm and Sea to School Network, composed of organizations 
and individuals who support experiential learning based on gardens, food, fisheries, and 
agriculture, two of Maine’s most important industries. FoodCorps joins our partners in 
this network and beyond in recognizing the incredible value of experience to the 
development of young minds which grow into thoughtful, contributing citizens. I urge you 
to vote ought to pass on LD 1682. l am happy to answer any questions you may have, 
and l will do my best to provide any additional information you may require. l am happy 
to be of service when you discuss this bill in the work session. 
Thank you,
. 
~‘ 
>151 
;‘ =93: ...,_ *"
' 
- - >1; 
‘ = ~ ».<“‘r»~"-\>.,v= ‘1’ .'
-. 
,, ~,_,,\,»\,\,\,::!%-a'%=/ —’ V- 
V; ».;,- v,,r..:,{V,. 
Ryan Parker 
FoodCorps Impact and Partnerships Lead, Maine 
Q/an.parl<er@foodcorps.orq
FOODCORPS 
Suggested works: 
“Natural spaces and materials stimulate children ’s limitless imaginations" Robin C. Moore and Herb H. Wong, 
Natural Learning: Creating Environments for Rediscovering Nature’s Way of Teaching (Berkeley, CA: MIG 
Communications, 1997) 
“School Grounds as Sites for Learning: Making the Most of Environmental Opportunities," Karen Malone and Pau 
J. Tranter, Environmental Education Research 9, no.3 (2003) 
“Outdoor Kindergartens Are Better at Stimulating Children ’s Creativity than Indoor Schools," Copenhagen Post, 
October 10, 2006 
“ls Contact with Nature Important for Healthy Child Development? State of the evidence," in Children and their 
Environments: Learning, Using, and Designing Spaces, ed. Chritopher Spencer and Mark Blades, (Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2006) 
“2006 Shape of the nation Report: Status of Physical Education in the USA,” American Heart Association and the 
National Association for Sport and Physical Education, http:llvwvw.aahperd.orglnaspelshapeofthenationl. 
“Trends in Blood Pressure among Children and Adolescents," Paul Muntner, Jiang He, Jeffrey A. Cutler, Rachel 
P. Wildman, and Paul K. Whelton, JAMA 291, no. 17 (May 2004). 
“Green is Good for You," Rebecca Clay, American Psychological Association, April 2001, Vol 32, No.4 
“Think Beyond Drug Therapy for Treating ADHD,“ Victoria Stagg Elliott, AMA News, April 19, 2004 
“2007 Report: Child and Youth Well-being Index (CW/), 1975-2005, With Projections for 2006,” Kenneth C. Land, 
(Durham, NC: Foundation for Child Development, Duke University, 2007). 
“Suutarila Journal: Educators Flocking to Finland, Land of Literate Children, ” Lezette Alvarez, New York Times, 
April 9, 2004 
“Closing the Achievement Gap: Using the Environment as an Integrating Context for Learning, ” GeraldA 
Lieberman and Linda L. Hoody, (San Diego: State Education and Environment Rouncltable [SEER], 1998). 
“Place-Based Education: Connecting Classrooms and Communities, ” David Sobel, (Great Barrington, MA: The 
Orion Society and the Myrin Institute, 2004). 
“Effects of Outdoor Education Programs for Children in California, ” (Palo Alto, CA: American Institutes for 
Research, 2005).
