 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY REGARDING  
 
L.D. 1682  
 
AN ACT TO CREATE THE MAINE EXPERIENTIAL EDUCATION PROGRAM  
 
Senator  Ingwerse n, Representative  Pluecke r and members of the Committee  on Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestr y. I am Steven Baile y, executive  director of Mai ne School Management Association testifying on 
behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Superintendents Association and the  Maine School 
Boards Associatio n. MSSA is neither for nor against this proposal, while MSBA is te stifyin g in support  of 
L.D. 1682 . 
 
While  the positions on the L .D. may be different, the support for the project and the enthusiasm for the idea of 
this opportunity for learning is the sam e. 
 
MSSA and MSBA think the opportunities for this type of learning for students in grades  preK-grade 1 2 
should be avai lable for all students in Main e. Superintendents spoke of opportunities their staff and students 
already  participat e in and were  very supportiv e of all students being engaged in this experiential education 
progra m. School board members echoed  these comment s. 
 
We suppor t the intent of the bill, as outline d below : 
 
2. Purposes. The program shall:  
A. Develop and manage a grant program to help public schools and school administrative units create staff 
positions that support:  
(1)  The learn ing and academic development of students by ensuring that public schools and school 
administrative units interested in the program have the  capacit y necessary to  provid e experiential hands -on 
learning;  
(2)  The health and physical development of students by ensuring that public schools and school 
administrative units interested in the program have the  capacit y necessary to help students build 
connections between the food that they and their communities produce and the food that they prepare and 
eat; and  
(3)  The emotional and behavioral development of students by ensuring that public schools and school 
administrative units interested in the program have the  capacit y necessary to build, expand and  maintai n 
school gardens and other experiential learning spac es; and  
B. Provid e ongoing support to public school educators engaged in hands -on experiential education initiatives 
for continued education and professional development opportunities . 
 
Questions that were raised during the discussions included : 
 
 
 
 The projected fiscal note must be quite high for this to  occu r and specifi c funding sources are not  entirel y 
clear. With this coming out of the General Fund, what prioritie s need t o be made to fund this project and not 
something else, as equally importan t? 
 
A second concern was the eventual shift of the cost of the program from being state funded to a cost that 
would need to be picked up by the local distric t. The question arose “would some districts not seek to become 
involved in the early stages if the y knew it would be difficult if not impossible to  continue should local funds 
not be able to maintain this experience for future groups of students? ” 
