 
  
 
Testimony in Support of  
LD 1 682, An Act  to Create the Maine Experiential Education Program  
 
Vanessa Berry , NRCM Sustainable Maine Outreach Coordinator  
April  26, 2023 
 
Sena tor Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and membe rs of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservatio n and Forest ry, my name is Vanessa Berry . I am the Sustainable Maine  
Outreach Coordinator  for the Natural Resources Council of Maine  (NRCM) . I appreciate this 
opportunity to testify in support of  LD 1682. 
In my  role at NRCM , I work directly with Maine organizations, businesses, and schools  to address 
sustainability challenges and find meaningful solutions that support Maine people and our 
environment.  Before my work with  NRCM, I started my career in an elementary school  where I  
provided one -on-one support for students who were st ruggling in the tra ditional classroom setting , 
and I organized the school ’s Green Team  after hours . I am excited by the learning opportunities 
for all students that would be made possible  with passage of LD 1682.  
LD 1682 establishes a program to fund school staff positions that support hands -on opportunities 
for students to engage in a gricult ure-based education . An important example of the  need for more 
education  around local agriculture  occur red in the height of the pandemic, a time when most 
people  saw sparce or empty  produce shelves at their major superma rkets because of  an unraveling 
supply chain . During this increased time at home, many Mainers spent their free time learning 
how to bake their own bread or grow their own food.  For me personally, t he sig ht of empty 
grocery shelves was what finally push ed me to invest in Community Supported A griculture  at my 
local farms  for the first time . With  increased  investments in education  at Maine schools  about  
growing food  and sourcing food locally, we can help create health ier and more resilient 
communit ies that are less depend ent on global food systems  and over-processed,  prepared foods .  
In the school setting, there is a significant benefi t to students when schools integrate outdo or 
learning opportunities . Garden education offers hands -on experiential learning to all students . It 
utilizes different skills , allows kids to sh ow what they know  in a new way,  and it provides a direct 
connection to the  wonders of our  natural environment. T his can be particularly benefi cial for 
students who might struggle  with academic success or  behaviors  in the traditional classroom 
setting . In NRCM’s existing partnerships with schools,  many school projects rely on a clear 
champion or small team of dedicated staff with in the school communit y who will carry the torch 
and ensure the sustainability of any new initiatives.  Creating a designated staff position will help 
to ensure the success of these programs, rather than relying on parent or communit y volunteers 
with limited capacity and resources to support this work.  
Additional ly, school gardens provide an opportunity for cafeterias to become informal classrooms 
that extend  learning. Students  will have more excitement around trying different fruits and 
vegetables they grew themselves and  more awareness around the potential of wasted food , which 
is a growing environmental issue . This program is a great opportunity for schools to also 
incorporate food waste -reduction practices  through education and implementing new procedures 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 for saving uneaten food for human consumption, feeding animals, composting, or anae robic 
digestion . In our work at NRCM, we serve  as a resource  to help Maine schools  make use of edible 
food and reduce food waste through education, small -scale funding for waste reduction 
infrastructure, and logistical support , but this work continues with the day-to-day support  of our 
dedic ated school c hampions.  
Creat ing a program with funding  to support agriculture -based education helps Maine students gain 
exposure to new healthy foods  and learn skills that  can allow them to be more resilient, and it also 
ensures t hat schools have a de dicated champion , which is the key  to sustain this work . Thank you 
for the opportunity to  show  our support , and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
