March 6, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of Health and Human 
Services Committee:
My name is Abby Leibowitz. I am a resident of Biddeford and am submitting 
testimony on behalf of Sexual Assault Response Services of Southern Maine 
(SARSSM). 
I am submitting testimony in support of LD 566, An Act to Provide Funding for 
Sexual Assault Services.
My job at SARSSM is as a Forensic Interviewing Coordinator within the Children’s 
Advocacy Center Program. I have wanted to be a forensic interviewer since I was in 
college and learned what a Children’s Advocacy Center (CAC) does. The CAC 
model is meant to be a trauma-informed, neutral way for kids to talk about alleged 
sexual assault to one person, one time. A forensic interviewer is trained in how to 
gather facts from children ages 3-18 in a non-leading, non-suggestive, 
developmentally appropriate way while members of law enforcement, Child 
Protective Services, and/or prosecution observe from a separate room. 
I started my career at SARSSM after graduating college in 2018 as a Family 
Advocate - getting to know the ins and outs of a CAC before becoming an 
interviewer, which was my ultimate goal. About a year later I had the opportunity to 
move into the Forensic Interviewer role, requiring a 40 hour training in forensic 
interviewing protocols. The field of forensic interviewing is very research-based and 
requires consistent feedback from peers to maintain skills and best practice. I have 
attended multiple Advanced Forensic Interviewer trainings, have been trained in 
multiple protocols, and have completed specialty courses such as interviewing 
individuals with disabilities, children involved in trafficking, and children involved 
in online exploitation. In addition, I keep up with new research being published, 
attend relevant webinars, and am a part of multiple peer reviews with other 
interviewers throughout the state and country. In 2021 I was elevated to the position 
of Forensic Interview Coordinator which involves helping to onboard new 
interviewers, making sure their training is appropriate and up to date, and choosing 
the appropriate interviewer for new referrals. 
Having a job in the field of sexual assault, and more specifically, child sexual abuse, 
is rewarding but is not always easy. I love being a person who children can feel 
comfortable opening up and sharing their story with, but there are good days and 
bad days. Because my current salary makes it hard to pay my bills, student loans, 
and daily expenses, it can be difficult to justify staying in this work long-term. The 
terms vicarious trauma, burnout, and compassion fatigue come to mind when I have 
had a long week of interviews, or negative interactions with families or team 
members. I do use a counselor to decompress from these feelings, another expense 
in my life related to my work. I love my job and couldn’t see myself being fulfilled 
doing anything else. However, to be paid so little for what I do makes me feel 
under-valued as a specialist in my field. 
I have wanted to do this work for years and it makes me incredibly proud that I’ve 
gotten to where I am from when I started in 2018. However, I have considered 
leaving this dream job for one I would not be as happy with, but where I would 
make a more livable income. I believe I am an asset to my team and have done a 
vast amount of professional development and continuing education to become the 
best forensic interviewer I can be. I think it would be detrimental to this center if I 
were to leave my position, but in terms of budgeting and long-term life planning it 
does not feel feasible with the income trajectory I’m on. Your support for LD 566 
would mean the world to myself and others working in Sexual Assault Centers 
across the state. I want to thank you for your time in reading through my testimony 
and would implore you to vote in favor of the bill. 
Sincerely,
Abby Leibowitz
