March 23, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of Health and Human 
Services Committee:
My name is Arian G. Clements and I am a resident of Brunswick, ME. I am also a 
survivor of sexual violence, a parent of two adolescent girls in the Brunswick school 
system, and the Executive Director of Sexual Assault Support Services of Midcoast 
Maine (SASSMM) since 2016.
I am submitting testimony to express my urgent and emphatic support of LD 566, An 
Act to Provide Funding for Sexual Assault Services. 
I have been working in this field for over 25 years. I have seen the heart and 
dedication of hundreds of advocates slowly, but steadily work to shift our 
communities’ social norms and responses to sexual violence from ones of secrecy 
and shame and dismissal to recognition, empowerment, and healing. Advocates’ 
passion and commitment have been the driving force of this movement for 
decades; actively filling a critical unfunded public health community need with little 
to no recognition for the difficulty nor being paid for the true value of their work.
As an Executive Director, I have struggled and strategized for years in how to 
enhance our services and programming to reach more people through increased 
skilled staffing, while consistently fighting against a limited workforce budget, staff 
retention and burnout, and the damaging loss of their expertise and trusted 
partnerships built within our communities. It often feels like pushing a rock up a hill, 
only for it to roll back and crush you. The current funding structure for advocates 
working to end sexual violence is no less punishing nor is it sustainable to providing 
responsive and educated intervention and prevention services. It relies on young 
workers, taking entry level pay, doing trauma filled work with nuanced and 
specialized skills, to perform until they can’t afford to any longer. It provides no path 
for their continued growth as professionals nor financial sustainability for them to 
invest their time and energy in this field long term. The result is advocates leaving 
the work for less stressful and higher paying jobs and the loss of their expertise and 
skills in support of survivors.  
Advocates perform a vital piece in supporting survivors and their impacted loved 
ones and creating protective factors through education on the active prevention of 
harmful norms and practices. The longer advocates are in the work, the better they 
are at being advocates, trainers and educators, yet the funding of staff is built on a 
cycle of redundancy that undermines our efforts. Again, the rock.
This funding bill would be a positive and essential step toward increasing the 
sustainability of the services in our communities, supporting the professional 
development of all advocates, and recognizing the true value of a trained advocate 
to make positive change. I want to thank the committee for considering this funding 
bill and recognizing the critical core community services that advocates across the 
state play in creating safer and healthier communities for us all. I emphatically ask 
for your vote in favor of this bill.
Sincerely, 
Arian G. Clements 
Brunswick
Sexual Assault Support Services of Midcoast Maine (SASSMM)
arian@sassmm.org
