   
 
   
  
March 27 , 2023  
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services ,  
I join you today on behalf of the Maine Women’s Lobby. For over forty years, the Maine 
Women’s Lobby has advocated for gender -responsive and gender -equitable public policies, with 
a focus on those most affected by misogyny, sexism, and other forms of oppression. We support 
systems and proposals which increase the health, wellness, safety, and economic securit y of all 
people in Maine.  We are before you today In Support of L D 566, An Act to Provide Funding 
for Sexual Assault Services . Thank you to Senator Dusan for sponsoring this important bill.  
Two weeks ago , Governor Mills declared March 14 Equal Pay Day1. The press release reads: 
According to the United States Census Bureau, the difference between median earnings for men 
and women in Maine who wo rked full -time, year -round in 2021 was $9,991 . The release goes on 
to share that nationally , that gap is as much as $28,797 for American Indian and Alaska 
Native women.2 That disparity has widened  since 2016.3 
There are many reasons for this , but one of the primary reasons is that w omen ’s employment is 
clustered in low-wage , caregiving -focused  industries .4 The workforces that are most likely to 
be dominated by women  are some of the most undervalued *yet essential* workforces in 
our economy:  childcare, direct care, education al supports , and yes: anti -violence supports and 
services.5 And in case you are  wondering if women are simply choosing low -wage work , we 
would point out that wages actually drop in industries as the percentage of women grows.6 
In addition to the gendered pay disparity, this issue also touches on the gendered impacts of the 
services themselves. Though anyone can experience sexual violence,  most  sexual violence 
either occurs against women or in gendered circumstances , such as the high rates of sexual 
violence that trans people and queer or incarcerated men experience.7  
 
1 Maine Dept. Of Labor. (2023). Press Release: Governor Mills Proclaims March 14 National Equal Pay Day in 
Maine.  
2 US Census Bureau (2021). American Community Survey. Retrieved from 
https://data.census.gov/table?q=median+earnings+by+race&tid=ACSST1Y2021.S2002   
3 U.S. Census Bureau Current Population Survey, 2016 -2020.  
4 : “Women in the Labor Force: A Databook: BLS Reports: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.” Accessed December 2, 
2021. https://www.bls.gov/opub/reports/womens -databook/2020/home.htm .  
5 National Women’s Law Center. (2017). Low -wage jobs are women’s jobs. Retrieved from https://nwlc.org/wp -
content/uploads/2017/08/Low -Wage -Jobs -are-Womens -Jobs.pd f  
6 Levanon, et al. (2009). Occupational Feminization and Pay: Assessing Causal Dynamics Using 1950 –2000 U.S. 
Census Data. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1353/sof.0 .0264   
7 Dumont, R & Shaler, G. (2015). Maine Crime Victimization Report: Informing public policy for safer communities. 
Muskie School of Public Service, University of Southern Maine  

   
 
   
 When issues specifically intersect with women’s lives – whether it’s childcare or sexual 
violence – they are more likely to be overlooked and under -addressed.  
Sexual assault advocates are doing highly skilled, critical work, sometimes overnights, 
sometimes leaving family holidays to go to the hospital, sometimes meeting su rvivors in prison, 
sometimes missing multiple weekends in a row – and sometimes getting paid as low as $33,000 
per year. That’s about $15/hour - less than a living wage for an adult living alone in Maine, and 
only about half the living wage for an adult wi th one child.  
The fact that this is a gendered workforce, serving a gendered community, is likely not a 
coincidence. It is time to value the undervalued. Like other industries such as childca re and 
direct care – and unlike private, small -business -based workforces - state and federal contracts 
and funding streams often dictate the terms of th is employment. It is time for Maine to respond 
to this urgent  need and  invest in  this critical state resource . Sexual assault advocates are saving 
lives, and we should build a system that honors that fact .  
We hope you will vote Ought to Pass on LD 566.  
Thank you for your consideration.  
Sincerely,  
 
Destie Hohman Sprague, Executive Director  

