Testimony of Donna Brown 
Speaking in Favor For 
LD 566, An Act to Provide Funding for Sexual Assault Services 
Date of Public Hearing: March 27, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services: 
Thank you for the opportunity to come before you today. My name is Donna Brown. I am a citizen of 
the Penobscot Nation and serve as the Executive Director of the Wabanaki Women’s Coalition. I stand 
before you to present testimony in favor of LD5 66, An Act to Provide Funding for Sexual Assault 
Services. 
The Wabanaki Women’s Coalition was recognized by the IRS as a nonproﬁt charitable organization on 
October 2, 2013. The Coalition was ﬁrst awarded an Ofﬁce on Violence Against Women (OVW) 
Grants to Tribal Domestic Abuse and Sexual Assault Coalitions on October 1, 2014. These grants are 
only open to OVW acknowledged non-proﬁt Tribal Coalitions. Currently there are nineteen (19) OVW 
funded Tribal Coalitions across the country. The Wabanaki Women’s Coalition is a dual sexual and 
domestic violence Coalition. Our purpose is in our mission statement which is “To increase the 
capacity of tribal communities to respond to domestic and sexual violence and inﬂuence tribal, 
national and regional systems to increase awareness, safety, justice, and healing for all our relations. ” 
We provide teclmical assistance, training and resources to the ﬁve Wabanaki Advocacy Centers. They 
are the Maliseet, Mi’kmaq Nation, Indian Township Passamaquoddy, Pleasant Point Passamaquoddy 
and Penobscot Nation Domestic and Sexual Violence Advocacy Centers. The Advocacy Centers 
provide services for all survivors regardless if they live on or off the reservation/throughout the state of 
Maine. 
The Wabanaki Women’s Coalition is the Tribal equivalent of MCEDV and MECASA, and our 
member Advocacy Centers are the Tribal equivalents of MCEDV member Domestic Violence 
Resource Centers and MECASA member Sexual Violence Response Centers. 
According to the most recent statistics that were published by the Department of Justice in 2016:* 
84.3% of American Indian and Alaska Native women have experienced (more than 4 in 5) have 
experienced intimate partner violence, sexual violence or stalking in their lifetimes; 
* 56.1% of AI/AN women have experienced sexual violence in their lifetimes; 
* 27.5% of AI/AN men have experienced sexual violence in their lifetimes;
* Author, Researcher and Professor Sarah Deer, Citizen of the Muscogee Creek Nation states in the 
documentary, “A Broken Trust: Sexual Assault on Tribal Lands,” — “More than ‘/2 of American Indian 
and Alaska Native women have experienced sexual violence in their lifetime. They are the racial group 
most likely to be raped in the U.S. .. When you talk to Native women who have lived their whole lives 
on a reservation and they say, ‘I can’t think of anyone, any woman that I know who hasn’t been 
victimized in this way.’ Native Women have told me that what you do when you raise a daughter in this 
enviromnent is you prepare her for what to do when she is raped. Not if, but when.” 
Currently, the Wabanaki Women’s Coalition is 100% funded by OVW’s Grants to Tribal Coalitions 
which includes two fulltime staff members including myself and an Outreach Coordinator, as well as 
contractors who provide bookkeeping and web hosting services. Both full-time staff members provide 
training, technical assistance and various forms of support including culturally speciﬁc services to its5 
member programs consisting of the Domestic and Sexual Violence Advocacy Centers in each tribal 
community. We assist with tribal code revisions, serve on the Commission for Domestic and Sexual 
Abuse and also serve on a variety of task forces and Work groups within Maine. We also organize and 
conduct an Annual Survivors Retreat, Sexual Assault Institute and Tribal Leadership Summit to bring 
awareness and education on various issues, legislation and best practices regarding serving survivors of 
sexual assault. 
If this bill should pass, it would provide funding for the Wabanaki Women’s Coalition to hirea 
dedicated Sexual Assault Trainer who would provide training to the 5 Wabanaki Advocacy Centers as 
well as provide technical assistance, assist with awareness/educational events and community 
outreach. While the WWC currently provides these services, the hiring of an additional staff member 
would be able to increase our capacity to provide more individualized support, as well as training and 
outreach opportunities. The WWC would plan to retain its current bookkeeper for its OVW grant 
funding so the passing of this bill would also provide funding to hire a dedicated bookkeeper that 
would solely be responsible for providing such services speciﬁc to this funding. 
In conclusion, the Wabanaki Women’s Coalition is in support of LD5 66 and is thankful for the 
opportunity to highlight the disproportionate impact of sexual violence amongst Native Americans and 
why the passing of this bill is crucial to increase our capacity to serve our tribal communities. 
Thank you/Woliwon, 
Donna Brown, MSW 
Executive Director 
Wabanaki Women’s Coalition 
Sources: 
A Broken Trust: Sexual Assault on Tribal Lands (October 2019). Directors Maren Machles and Carrie 
Cochran. https://WWw.youtube.com/watch?v=-slFVM4ECUk 
Rosay (2016). Violence Against AI/AN Women and Men." 2010 Findings from the National Intimate 
Partner and Sexual Violence Survey. US DOJ.
