45.4 
OF NIAINE 
March 27, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Committee 
on Health and Human Services. 
My name is Fatuma Hussein and l’m executive director of the Immigrant Resource Center Of 
Maine (IRCM), the only comprehensive culturally and linguistically speciﬁc sexual and 
domestic violence resource center in Maine. 
Since 2009, IRCM has been providing culturally speciﬁc sexual violence services including 
advocacy, education and direct victim services such as safety plamiing, court accompaniment, 
interpreter and cultural broker services, transportation, medical accompaniment, support groups, 
referral services for immigration, mental health, medical, housing, ﬁnancial support and much 
more. 
Refugees, Asylum seekers and Innnigrants survivors are disproportionately affected by sexual 
violence. In fact, many of us come from War torn countries. Thus, sexual violence is a weapon of 
war. Many of you in this room would not relate to this but I do. 
We share the risks of all survivors in the United States to sexual violence although we experience 
increased vulnerabilities and isolation to its effects because of our cultural context in which we 
experience violence and of course barriers to accessing services. To ensure seamless services and 
increased access to sexual violence services, IRCM employs Multilingual and Multicultural 
Victim Advocates. This approach erases cultural and linguistic barriers. 
Sexual violence is in every community. It has NO color, ethnicity, cultural background, religion, 
economic status, or age. It takes on many forms and can occur throughout the life cycle. 
Examples of sexual violence include female genital mutilation; physical, verbal and 
psychological abuse; elder abuse; sex trafficking, sexual coercion and forced marriage. 
Many refugees, asylum seekers and immigrants come from war torn countries where sexual 
violence laws and protections do not exist. Under many African countries and traditions, sexual 
violence often goes unpunished and underreported. Many of these cultures have the Elder 
System that is responsible for making decisions Within their respective clans and tribes. It is 
shameful and a taboo to report rape, and/or any sexual abuse in many African cultures. 
1]Page
In Maine, our community has a long way to go to address sexual violence. Although there are 
signiﬁcant barriers to accessing resources to support culturally sensitive services, there is alsoa 
glimpse of hope. The immigrant resource center and its sister agencies Work tirelessly every day 
to meet the needs of survivors of sexual violence to provide wide range of services. 
In the last ﬁscal year, IRCM has provided sexual violence services to hundreds of survivors. And 
the credit goes to our wonderful, courageous, and resilient Advocates. Every day, they provide 
sexual violence services in 10 or more languages. Not only do they provide hope for our 
communities by changing a very rigid belief system, but they also must teach this system how to 
be fair regardless of the culture, skin color, language, immigration status and ethnicity. 
Imagine if we paid our Victim Advocates fairly. Imagine if we acknowledge the work, they do 
every day to enhance a community free of sexual violence. Imagine if ALL have the right to their 
bodies. Imagine if we had a world free of female genital mutilation. 
That is exactly what this movement does every singe day. For many years, sexual violence staff 
have been underpaid. We are here today to be heard, to be seen, and to be acknowledged. The 
work we do every day is extremely difficult. We serve people when their innocence has been 
taken away without their consent. We serve children to help heal them so that they can once 
again believe in this world. 
We are the change makers. We are the hope. We heal people. We believe in survivors. 
I strongly urge you to support this funding request, LD 5 66, “An Act to Provide Funding for 
Sexual Assault” . This bill is critical to the safety and well-being of our staff and survivors in our 
State. 
Fatuma Hussein, 
Executive Director, Immigrant Resource Center Of Maine 
fl1ussein@;uswo ﬁ11aineorg 
2IPage
