\' 
\ Children's Advocacy Center 
@ of Androscoggin, Franklin, 
g Er Oxford Counties 
' \ l\/larch 27, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of Health and Human 
Services Committee: 
My name is Jamie Lynn Millerl am a resident of Woodstock, Maine. I am employed 
by Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Services as a Forensic Interviewer for the 
Children ’s Advocacy Center of Androscoggin, Franklin, & Oxford Counties. 
I am submitting testimony in support of LI) 566, An Act to Provide Funding for 
Sexual Assault Services. 
As a forensic interviewer I have completed a nationally recognized forensic 
interviewer training. As a forensic interviewer I was trained to specialize in 
intewiewing children, that have been impacted by child abuse, in a child friendly, 
trauma informed, and forensically sound manner. I am a member of our 
multidisciplinary team responding to child abuse in our communities. My role is to 
gather information from the child, through conversation in a non-leading and non“ 
suggestive way, that will allow child protective services and/or law enforcement to 
conduct an investigation while reducing restraumatization to the child. I attend 
extensive ongoing trainings as this ﬁeld is constantly evolving. Sexual Assault Center 
staff and advocates are at the leading edge of trauma informed response. As the world 
around us changes and requires us to be even more trauma informed we are setting 
the example for others. This work is demanding and requires dedication. It can be 
heartbreaking at times but we keep showing up for those we serve. 
Higher wages for Sexual Assault Center Staff would help Centers retain quality staff 
and recniit qualified candidates for open positions. It would remind the current staft 
that although the work is hard, it matters and makes a difference and that we are 
appreciated. After all, we are paving the way to the future of sexual violence 
prevention and response efforts. 
I have a family of my own that I work to support. I am fortunate to work witha 
collaborative team of professionals and in a field of work that I am passionate about. 
The mission and hope for the future keeps me showing up every day. I have had to 
pick up a second job on the weekends to supplement my income to make ends meet 
financially and still do the work I do as a forensic interviewer Monday through Friday. 
I make more money on a Saturday working as a cashier in a cafe than I do ona 
weekday in my role as a forensic interviewer interviewing children who have endured 
unimaginable abuse. I ask them to recall events that they would likely rather forget\
about and to provide detail about those events and ask them to talk about how it made 
them feel. I listen. My role is to remain neutral, not validate, and still reduce any re- 
traumatization that could occur through the investigative process. We do this work 
and do it well, though not without immense dedication, ongoing training, and support. 
Higher pay would be a Way to show us that support and help us to continue doing the 
hard work we are all so passionate about. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. Please vote in favor of LD 566, An Act 
to Provide Funding for Sexual Assault Services.
i 
' ~ 
. 1 
I ,, Z ff. 2} _. 
._~ . . .1 w ~ ~ 1 ./J .1. 2 ~‘” — 
-.. 
K V’ J fa, Y, 
if <(d'(1! 
!/g ?/ 
9/ 
Jamie L. Miller 
j_am_i_e,Anj;iller{wcac-afo.93;
