Jay  Davis
Belfast
LD 566
Senator Baldacci, Rep. Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee. The undersigned supporters of Restorative Justice come from across 
Maine and have gathered on this page to support LD 566. We apologize for the 
lateness of this message, and we trust the legislators who will vote on  this bill will 
have access to it.
Restorative Justice is a voluntary response to wrongdoing and crime that brings 
together both people who have caused harm and those who have been harmed in a 
search for the best resolution possible for a circumstance that can be painful and 
damaging. The discussions are facilitated by trained practitioners and entered into 
after sometimes lengthy sessions with the participants. We believe restorative justice 
is the most humane and effective way to respond to crimes when those who have been
centrally affected wish to engage. This could include situations of physical and sexual
abuse, because it gives to victims a primary role in crafting a meaningful resolution. 
We should also note that there are many programs nationally facilitating responses to 
significant violence that utilize models wherein parties to a harm are not brought into 
direct conversation, yet restorative values are still at the center of the response.
It is not yet common in Maine to have  violent crimes resolved through Restorative 
Justice, though the days when that will be possible are shortening. Caring for victims 
of abusive crimes before a resolution process can be started is the job of counselors 
who work for government and private agencies. Their work is difficult and 
traumatizing at times; they are highly skilled in the concerns of power and control, are
aware of local resources and are dedicated to centering the needs of those most 
directly affected. We read that burnout and job changing are common. We know that 
this session of the Legislature is recognizing the high value of trained and committed 
staff people. We are thankful for that recognition; it’s past due, of course.
We consider ourselves dedicated allies with the victim advocate community in 
listening to, resourcing and centering the needs of those most directly harmed by 
crimes of interpersonal violence. We urge the 131st Legislature to support LD 566 
and raise the wages of these valued advocates to a level that at least approaches being 
liveable.
Thank you for your time and attention.
Jay Davis, Belfast
jaydavis543@yahoo.com
Senator Pinny Beebe-Center, District 12,  Maine
Mindy Kane, Bangor, representative for the Penquis Restorative Justice Program
Randall Reischer, Fort Kent, County Restorative Practices 
Leslie Ross, representative for Downeast Restorative Justice
Tim Hughes, Belfast
Leo Hylton, Warren
Sarah Mattox, Swanville
Jack Williams, West Rockport
Rachel Casey, Gray
Ed Modell, South Thomaston
Dr. Arthur Jones, Belfast
Dorothy Odell, Belfast
Karen Sites, Brewer

