DISABILITY 
RIGHTS 
MAINEIJ 
March 27, 2023 
Senatorjoseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
Cross Office Building, Room 209 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Re: L.D. 566, A11 Act Z0 Prowk/e Fzma’z' /1<gf0r Sex;/a/Arm////2 ‘ Sari/icer 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services:- 
My name is Katrina Ringrose and I serve as the Deputy Director of Disability Rights 
Maine, Maine’s Protection and Advocacy agency for people with disabilities. We know 
firsthand the urgent need for comprehensive and accessible support for survivors of 
sexual violence, which is Why I am here today to express our strong support for LD 
566. 
As the state’s only cross-disability advocacy organization, DRM has been advancing 
the rights of individuals with disabilities for 45 years. With a staff of 52, DRl \/[’s 
advocates and attorneys are experienced in creating positive change through 
negotiation, public policy reform, training, and litigation. DR\/I operates numerous 
federal, state, and private grants / programs, which serve individuals of all ages, across 
disability label. 
Studies have consistently shown that individuals with disabilities are at a higher risk of 
experiencing sexual violence than their non-disabled peers. In fact, national studies 
estimate that almost 80% of people with disabilities are sexually assaulted on more 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330 
207.626.2774 - 1.800.452.1948 ~ Fax: 207.621.1419 - drme.0rg 
MAINE'S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
than one occasion and 50°/0 of those experienced more than 10 victimizationsl This 
risk is even higher for individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities. 
Despite this elevated risk, people with disabilities continue to face numerous barriers 
to accessing appropriate support in both prevention and response. For example, many 
sexual assault prevention programs are not designed to accommodate individuals with 
disabilities. This can make it difficult for people with disabilities to access information 
and resources that could help them prevent sexual assault. 
Similarly, when it comes to responding to sexual assault, people with disabilities often 
face barriers accessing the criminal justice system and other support services. For 
example, people with disabilities may encounter negative attitudes from law 
enforcement or service providers, who may not believe their claims or take their 
allegations seriously. This can make it difficult to obtain justice or support. 
This funding will allow DRM to hire an advocate that Will directly represent people 
with disabilities experiencing these barriers, ensuring that they receive the support and 
resources they need to heal and recover. 
In addition, this advocate Will Work across programs to ensure all DRM advocates and 
attorneys are aware of the disproportionate risk to their clients, train DRNI staff on 
providing a trauma-informed approach to advocacy, participate in current coalitions 
and cohorts Working to end sexual violence, and continue to bring the disability 
perspective into the sexual violence prevention and response conversation in Maine. 
LD 566 is a crucial step towards ensuring that survivors of sexual violence with 
disabilities receive the support and resources they need to heal and recover. 
Sincerely, 
Katrina Ringrose 
Deputy Director 
1 
Sobsey, D., Doe, T. (1991). Patterns of sexual abuse and assault. Sexuality and Disability, 9(3), 243-259
