  
 
 
 
March 27, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services :  
 
My name is Keri Kapaldo  and I am here  today in support of LD 566 , An Act to Provide Funding for Sexual Assault 
Services.   
 
I am submitting testimony  today on behalf of  myself as a forensic nurse and  the St. Joseph Hospital Sexual 
Assault Forensic Examiner (SJB SAFE) Program .  The SJB SAFE Program  provides trauma -informed medical -
forensic care for all victims  of sexual assault, domestic violence, human trafficking, child abuse/neglect, and 
dependent adult abuse/neglect.  This bill is of particular im portance to the SJB SAFE program as we do not 
operate in a silo when caring for sexual assault victims. Best practice outcomes for our patients heavily rely on 
the presence of a sexual assault advocate not only during an accompaniment but also as a resourc e outside the 
hospital for support while a survivor navigates their healing holistically.  
 
In 2022, the SJB SAFE Program cared for 88 acute sexual assault patients, a 63% increase from 2021, resulting in 
over 320 advocate hours just for hospital accompani ment in our small community hospital. Furthering our 
response, we consulted with 64 additional patients who disclosed acute or historical sexual assault resulting in 
referrals to sexual assault advocacy agencies and/or direct support at the time of care, a  156% increase  from  
2021.  That ’s 152 times a survivor heard “I believe you” and “I’m here for you” from an advocate. That’s 80+ 
times an advocate traveled to our hospital, no matter time of day or night , to be at the side of a person  who 
needed them most.  
 
I’ve been a forensic nurse for over nine years, that’s a lot of sexual assault patients  I’ve cared for with an 
advocate at my side. When I reflect on this  I think about times when we sat in a chapel together because that’s 
where a survivor felt most comfortable. I think about when an advocate ran to McDonald’s at 1am because 
that’s the only food the survivor wanted in that moment. I think about times when they worked day and night 
to find safe shelter for someone being trafficked. I  think about the times they’ve colored and played games for 
hours on the floor of the ER with a pediatric patient. When I think about the impact an advocate has had I think 
of the tiny, seemingly insignificant acts that add up to big hugs, smiles, and a gl immer of hope in the survivor.  
 
I always tell my patients: “I can do a lot for you in these four walls, but once you’re discharged, I’m limited. 
Advocacy, that’s for life. They’re there at 3am when you can’t sleep, for a cup of coffee and a chat, or a fami liar 
face during a stressful time.” Advocates are just there for people. Unapologetically, there.  
 
Thank you for your consideration. We hope you will support LD 566 and I would be pleased to answer any 
questions you might have.  
 
Sincerely,  
Keri Kapaldo, BSN, RN, SANE -A, ME -SAFE -A/P 
 
 
360 Broadway  | Bangor,  ME 04401  | 207.907.1000  

