District 16: Blue Hill, Brooksville, Castine, Sedgwick, Surry, TrentonTestimony of Rep. Nina Milliken supporting 
LD 566, An Act to Provide Funding for Sexual Assault Services
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and fellow members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee. My name is Nina Milliken and I have the good fortune to represent House District 
16 which consists of the fine people of the towns of Blue Hill, Brooksville, Castine, Sedgwick, 
Surry, and Trenton and I write in support of LD 566 that is before the Committee’s 
consideration. 
In the early 1980s, Professor Mary Koss of University of Arizona, did a massive study of women 
in American Universities and Colleges to find out how many of them had suffered from an act or 
acts of sexual violence. It was the largest study of its kind that had been done at that point. Her 
findings were published in a 1984 edition of MS MAGAZINE and the public was shocked at that 
time to learn that 25% of women (that’s one in four) had experienced a rape or attempted rape 
while they were in college. A quarter. 
I'd love to be standing here today to tell you that with a lot of hard work and self-reflection, we 
have been able to improve on these statistics, but alas, we have done virtually nothing to improve 
this statistic and it remains unchanged in the nearly 40 years that have passed since Koss finished 
her piece for the magazine. Today, 15% of Maine girls reports being a victim of a rape of 
attempted rape by the time they finish high school.1 Since 1984, we have added to our 
knowledge that one in six boys will also suffer from a rape or attempted rape by the time that 
they transition into adulthood.2
We as a culture and society fail victims of sexual violence at every single turn. We fail them over 
and over and over again, and we have for generations. The criminal system as a means of 
obtaining justice for victims fails them, too. 2.5% of reports to police end up in a conviction and 
1State of Maine, (2021). 2021 MIYHS High School Report. Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey. Pg. 8. Retrieved 
from https://www.maine.gov/miyhs/sites/default/files/2021_Reports/Core_Reports/HS/MIYHS2021_Core_Reports_
HS_State/Maine_2021_MIYHS_High_School_Report.pdf  
2 1 in 6.org (n.d). Researchers have found that at least 1 in 6 men have experienced sexual abuse or assault, whether 
in childhood or as adults. S. Retrieved from https://1in6.org/statistic/
Nina Azella Milliken
276 Turkey Farm Road
            Blue Hill, ME 04614          
           Phone: (207) 412-8828
Nina.milliken@legislature.maine.govHOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002
(207) 287-1400
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
District 16: Blue Hill, Brooksville, Castine, Sedgwick, Surry, Trentonincarceration.3  If you look at sentencing examples for these crimes across the state, they often 
are counted in weeks or months, not in years. Some of you may remember the conviction of a 
young man named Brock Turner, a star swimmer at Stanford University in California. He was 
sentenced to a measly 6 months in jail following a conviction of rape. People were beside 
themselves about the short sentence. I remember thinking that it was a pretty impressive 
outcome; very rarely do victims get this outcome, and even less so when their perpetrator is a 
privileged, white man. 
 Imagine, if you will, going through the enormous emotional hardship of trying for a criminal 
conviction. Women literally open their bodies for forensic exams, vaginal swabs, pubic combs, 
interview after interview after interview with police, doctors, nurses, and prosecutors. Then they 
wait, often for years, for their case to come up, often bumping into the man or men that raped 
them in the grocery store, at the school, and at the pub. Very few cases ever see the inside a 
courtroom, but if the victim is extremely lucky, they then go to court where they are called to 
testify and then cross examined by your perpetrators attorney in front of the man who raped 
them. They'll answer humiliating and demeaning questions. If this all is fortunate enough to 
result in a conviction (again, very rare), imagine the heartbreak that would be felt by that victim 
when their offender is handed a sentence of just a few months. And, as I stated before, this would 
be a VERY lucky outcome.
The one place that we do not fail victims is here in this room. These folks show up. They show 
up in hospitals, in police interviews, in counseling appointments, in courtrooms, in living rooms, 
and often just on the other end of a middle of the night phone call. I can tell you as a victim of 
various acts of sexual violence that the trauma suffered by the victims is not only experienced 
between the hours of 9 and 5, Monday to Friday. It rears its damned head at 2am on Christmas 
Eve, over barbeques for Memorial Days and the Fourth of July, any time of any day. It’s 
inconvenient, and it's devastating. It often renders victims immobile. To put it bluntly, it sucks.
These women answer those calls. They suffer from vicarious trauma. They lose sleep. They lose 
time with their families. They take their work home with them. They help victims carry the 
heavy load of their traumas. It’s a huge burden and they bear it every single day. 
We owe it to these underappreciated, heroic Mainers to pay them better than we do, better than 
they would make slinging pizza and your neighborhood joint. We owe it to victims and survivors 
of sexual violence to ensure that these women and men continue to answer their calls and show 
up for them.  It’s been 40 years since we learned how widespread these crimes are. We have 
done so little to help in that time. Here is a place where you can help. Please do so by supporting 
the passage of LD566. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
3 RAINN (n.d). The Criminal Justice System: Statistics. Retrieved from: https://www.rainn.org/statistics/criminal-
justice-system
