March 15, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of Health and Human Services Committee:
My name is Susan Koch, I am a resident of Jay, Maine, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Sexual 
Assault Prevention and Response Services, in support of LD 566, An Act to Provide Funding for Sexual Assault 
Services.
As a long-time employee of a Sexual Assault Center, I have seen the need for our services become more 
complex.  When I started in the field we had a Helpline, support groups and did community education. Now 
we are in the schools doing Prevention Education for all ages, Community Education, Helpline, Support 
Groups, Human Trafficking Survivor support, drop-in services at schools and centers for survivors struggling 
with substance abuse, and have Children’s Advocacy Services. We support Survivors in the medical setting, 
court settings and with law enforcement. We collaborate with many systems to help the survivor.
The clients we speak with and support have also changed in that they come to us with more needs than 
before. Mental health issues, drug dependency issues, basic needs such as housing, among others - which we 
need to help them address even before we can support them with their healing journey.
Many Centers have fewer volunteers on our 24/7 Helpline, so staff is not only working during the days but also 
providing nights and weekend support for survivors of sexual violence. It has been a challenge for several 
years now to find volunteers to staff our Helpline. Along with our services, we also have to do fundraising, 
which is time consuming and getting harder with the economic atmosphere in the last couple of years.
Over my time as an advocate, raises in pay were generally 2% each year, but only if it was in the budget. And 
for many of us, the 2% did not reflect rising costs of living.  This past year raises were not in the budget and we 
did not see a raise in our pay.  But the cost of health care, gas, food, rent and other essentials did go up. For 
myself, if I did not have a spouse that also had income, I would not be able to continue doing this work.
We as staff/advocates are committed to this work and helping with the healing of the survivors of sexual 
violence, but we too need to survive and not worry about whether we can pay rent or pay for an unexpected 
medical bill. There is so much more that we do, and so many of the women and men I work with go above and 
beyond for survivors.  
In closing, it is my hope you realize the importance of our services for survivors, and the importance of the 
staff that provide those services. I am honored to work with such dedicated and caring people. 
I want to thank you for your time and hope you see the value of our services and our commitment and vote in 
favor of LD 566.
