 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1966, An Act to Allow Candidates for County Office to Participate  
in the Maine Clean Election Act 
 
May 31, 2023 
 
Chair Hickman, Chair Supica, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my 
name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland 
County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County 
Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide belated testimony to the Committee in 
support  of LD 1966. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  LD 1966 permits candidates for county office to participate in the Maine Clean Election Act. While 
our Association recognizes that not every candidate for county office will choose to participate in the Maine 
Clean Election Act, we support permitting those that desire to participate to be able to do so. Further, MCCA 
supports this bill to the extent that it permits candidates for county office who feel as though money is a barrier 
to running for such office to participate in the Maine Clean Election Act. In expressing our support for this bill, 
we are cognizant of the fact that the Clean Elections program is state-funded, including through the collection of 
qualifying contributions by participating candidates. Our support for this bill is conditioned on such funding 
remaining in place for this proposed expansion of Maine’s campaign finance laws. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in support of this bill, and if you have 
questions or need additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
