Janet Mills Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
Governor ‘ 
Con1missi0ner*s (lffiee 
2. El State House Station 
Jeanne Lamhrew, Phi). m9_Capiml Sires‘ 
€mnmiSSimmr Y p I Augusta. Mame 0ft33£Z-tttlil 
"rev" tel: (Z07) 287-3 26?; Fax: (2.0?) Z8/-3005 
'l‘T‘x": Diat '71 1 {Maine Rainy} 
Testimony of the Ofﬁce for Family Independence 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD 5, An Act to Expand Access to Postsecondarjy Education for Low-income Parents 
Hearing Date: February 7, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing committee on Health and 
Human Services, my name is Anthony Pelotte, and I serve as Director of the Ofﬁce for Family 
Independence (OFI) in the Department of Health and Human Services. I am here today to testify in 
support of LD 5, An Act to Expand Access to Postsecondarfy Education for Low-income Parents. Our 
thanks to Representative Meyer for sponsoring this Department bill. 
This bill would make a specific change to the current statute to increase the maximum income threshold 
for eligibility in the Higher Opportunity for Pathways to Employment (HOPE) Program from 185% to 
225% of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL). This change would carry no additional cost as the maximum 
number of program participants would remain the same and would be a simple programmatic change for 
the Department to implement. The proposed change would expand HOPE accessibility to a broader 
population, which is successfully helping Maine parents access quality education programs, cam degrees 
and other credentials, and promote economic stability for families with low incomes. 
The Maine Economic Development Strategy 10-year report‘ , published by the Department of Economic 
and Community Development in 2019, identiﬁed that 75,000 credentialed workers need to be added to 
the Maine workforce over the next 10 years. During the ﬁrst three years of operation, HOPE has helped 
216 parents with low-income earn a total of 230 credentials. Another 445 parents with low-income are 
currently enrolled in HOPE and working toward their credential of value. Thus far, most HOPE 
graduates, 70 percent, are earning credentials in the health care ﬁeld, which, as we know, is 
experiencing critical workforce shortages right now. 
An analysis of 2021 HOPE applicants revealed that 33 percent of denied applicants had countable 
income levels that contributed to their program denial. Of those applicants, 43 percent could have been 
deemed eligible if 225% FPL were the standard in 2021. Recent changes to Maine’s minimum wage will 
also adversely affect eligibility for some HOPE applicants and participants if the corresponding 
percentage of FPL is not raised. We will better understand the impact of this later this year. 
In short, the Department is proposing to increase the maximum income guidelines to 225% FPL to 
expand opportunities for families to brighten their own horizons and support the state’s needs. Expanded 
access to the HOPE Program can ensure credentialed workers keep Maine families, communities, and 
businesses strong. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and to 
make myself available for questions at the work session. 
‘ l1ttns£\2.r.nIw-mainegov/ctecdlsiteainirnneIaensieetiftilcejéailiti¢¢ ﬁl@s5DIi€l2,.E.2Q1§2.l9 smndi’
