Testimony in Support of LD 5, An Act to Expand Access to Postsecondary
Education for Low-income Parents
February 7, 2023
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer , and members of the
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Moriah Geer , I use she/her
pronouns, and I am a policy advocate at Maine Equal Justice and the director of our
Build HOPE project. MEJ is a nonprofit civil legal aid organization working to
increase economic security , opportunity , and equity for people in Maine. Within my work
with MEJ I have had extensive experience working with families in poverty and have
helped many access HOPE and similar programs as one of the most ef fective routes
out of poverty . Thank you for the opportunity to testify today in support of LD 5 An Act to
Expand Access to Postsecondary Education for Low-income Parents.
Maine Equal Justice is a big supporter of the HOPE program, and of all programs that
allow low-income parents to be able to pursue higher education in general. W e
wholeheartedly agree with the intended purpose of this legislation, to expand access to
postsecondary education for low-income parents so that enrollment will reach the cap
specified in statute, but we have some reservations about the path that is contemplated
in this bill to accomplish that goal.
During the 130th legislative session MEJ worked with this committee to pass LD 1748,
An Act T o Improve the T emporary Assistance for Needy Families Program and T o
Improve the So-called Leveraging Investments so Families Can Thrive Report
. One of
the things that this legislation did was require that DHHS and other state agencies to
“explore the feasibility of simplifying the application process for education programs,
including ASPIRE-T ANF, the Parents as Scholars Program (PaS), the Higher
Opportunity for Pathways to Employment Program (HOPE), and the Competitive Skills
Scholarship Program (CSSP) to a single application.” The goal of this provision is to
ensure that these critical programs are as accessible to eligible people as possible. A
working group was formed to work on this issue and has now met several times. I am a
member of this working group. Once this simplified  application has been created and is
in place, then it seems likely that we will see an increase in enrollment in the HOPE
program as more students are directed towards this resource. Increasing the income
www .maineequaljustice.org

threshold before giving this solution a chance to work seems premature and could allow
HOPE to fill up with individuals at the higher levels of the income spectrum, taking spots
away from the lower income parents that the program was created to serve.
Currently the program serves parents who are under 185% of the federal poverty
guidelines and who are matriculated into an education or training program. There are
800 slots available in the program and about 464 of those slots are filled. It would be
incredible to see this program reach the 800 student maximum, and we want to applaud
the work and thinking that has gone into reaching that goal. However , we would like to
see more done to reach the families that would be eligible under the current threshold
before contemplating an increase in the income threshold. Currently students enroll in
HOPE once they are already matriculating in a higher education program. There is little
or no outreach to parents who may dream of going on to college, but don't know that
there is a program that gives them that opportunity .
There are currently nearly 100,000 families receiving SNAP  benefits in Maine which
also has an income threshold of 185% FPL. Approximately 31% of these families, or
31,000, include children. If we subtract the roughly 4,000 families receiving TANF who
are eligible for the similar Parents as Scholars program, but not eligible for HOPE, that
leaves approximately 27,000 families with a parent potentially eligible for HOPE.  It’ s
these families that we envisioned could be helped by the HOPE program when it was
passed.
I, myself, have been a low-income parent who chose pursuing higher education as a
pathway out of poverty . I was lucky in many ways because I had known people who
went to school on the Parents as Scholars program, so I learned from them of the
support that I could receive from that program to achieve the goals I had for my family .
But if not for this, I wouldn’t have known about that option and I am not sure what would
have happened. I had always wanted to pursue higher education, but I don’t know that I
could have envisioned a path forward towards that goal without support. When you
spend each day uncertain how you will make ends meet it can feel impossible to
imagine any other life. Many of the families at the current income eligibility level could
also be interested in pursuing higher education, but don’t realize that there are options
for them. Increased outreach to families at the current income threshold could have
strong results. W e want to be sure that those families are prioritized in working to
expand participation as we seek to reach the cap..
In closing, I would like to reiterate that we support the goals of this legislation to make
sure that this program serves as many parents as intended, but believe that there may
be better ways to reach those goals. Maine Equal Justice would appreciate any
opportunity to work with DHHS and this committee to find ways to achieve this goal
while ensuring that the lowest income families are able to make the most of the life
changing potential of the HOPE program.
Thank you for your time and consideration, I am happy to answer any questions and
Maine Equal Justice can be present at the work session.
