1175 
Senator Lawrence 
Representative Ziegler 
Members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee 
Re: LD 1175, AN ACT To Provide for the Review and Uniform Application of 
All Transmission and Distribution Utility Rates 
Chairman Lawrence and Chairman Zeigler: 
My name is Debra Hart and I am a resident of Manchester, Maine. I am 
providing these comments in partial opposition to LD 1175 on behalf of the 
Dirigo Electric Cooperative companies. 
Our opposition is based on the Limitation on charges, which calls into 
question the procedures for COU rate changes in section 3502 and whether 
such procedures constitute ‘review and approval by the Commission. 
Procedures for rates, Chapter 35 for consumer-owned transmission and 
distribution utilities, the COUs are allowed to increase rates, tolls or charges 
by not more than 15% of the utility's annual operating revenue without going 
through a procedure at the Public Utilities Commission. COUs are required to 
file proposed rate changes with the Commission and hold a public hearing, at 
which time the Public Advocate, and any customer of the COU may present 
testimony and question the proposed rate change. In addition, the COU must, 
at least 30 days prior to the hearing, publish a notice of the amount of the 
proposed rate change, the percent of charge for each customer class, and all 
general information relative to the hearing. 
As drafted, we are not clear whether this was the sponsor's intent to change or 
invalidate the COU rate change process. We request that the bill be amended 
to include all language exempting COUs or defining the section 3502 process 
as satisfying the requirement that rates be reviewed and approved by the 
Commission. In addition, the COUs are also concerned that the language
prohibiting ‘any charge or fee related to metering that is not uniform for all 
persons taking service in the same customer class’ , which would prohibit a 
utility from charging a meter reading fee for consumers that opt out of AMI 
metered service, which would require utilities to recoup the cost of manually 
reading such consumers ’ meters from all consumers through rates. 
I'd be happy to try to answer any questions or provide you with additional 
information.
