_ . STATE OF MAlNE ' 
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION -I.‘ .., , __ W1
~ \._¢ 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ~ 
ADMINISTRATNE DIRECTOR 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
Neither for Nor Against . 
LD 1175, An Act to Provide for the Review and Uniform Application of All 
Transmission and Distribution Utility Rates 
April 4, 2023 A' 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint.Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for 
nor against LD 1175, An Act to Provide for the Review and Uniform Application of All" 
Transmission and Distribution Utility Rates on behalf of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
(Commission). 
The Commission is unclear What thisbill is intending to address. Currently, an investor-owned 
transmission and distribution utility cannot change the rate it charges to ratepayers without ﬁrst 
receiving Commission approval for that change in rates. Further, all similarly situated customers, i.e., 
customers with the same type of meter in the same customer class, must be charged the same rate. For 
a consurner-owned transmission and distribution utility, the lawl allows the utility to change rates" 
without Commission approval when that change results in an increase ofl 5% or less. If this bill, is 
intended to apply to COU rates, Without changes to current law (section 3502), there is a conﬂict that 
will need to be addressed if the Committee moves forward with this bill. 
The last sentence of the bill speciﬁes that the Commission may not approve any charge or fee related to 
metering that is not unifonn for all persons taking service in the same rates class. Assuming this 
language is meant to address opt-out fees a utility charges to those customers that choose to retain non- 
transmitting meters, the Commission would note that the charging of opt-fees and what those fees 
should be was addressed in several proceedings at the Commission. The Commission determined that 
it is appropriate for a transmission and distribution utility to. charge a customer an opt-out fee when that 
customer wants to retain a non-transmitting meter because there are costs associated with reading and 
maintaining that meter. The utility needs to retain staff to manually obtain meter readings every other 
month, as Well as to and fuel vehicles for staff to travel to locations around the utility’s 
service territory to perform these meter readings. The opt-out fees are uniform among those customers 
in each utility’s service territory. For those customers that have standard meters (transmitting), the 
charges associated With those meters are already uniform for all persons taking service in the same rate 
class. A' 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the Work session. 
1 
35-A M.R.S. § 3502 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-1039
