V S 
Z :4 if 
P O E €”"' 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1175 
An Act to Provide for the Review and Uniform Application of All Transmission and Distribution 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the committee, my name is James Cote andI 
am here today on behalf of Versant Power in opposition to LD 1175. 
While we remain unclear about the exact intention of this legislation, we are concerned that one of its 
provisions could bar the Public Utilities Commission from approving rate structures that necessarily and 
appropriately apply differently to certain customers within a rate class. 
One consequence of this legislation could be a prohibition on the administrative fee that utilities charge 
customers who opt out of having a meter installed that communicates directly with the utility via 
wireless technology. As you know, the installation of modern metering systems will be a key component 
of strengthening our grid and creating new opportunities and efficiencies for our customers, for example, 
through the enablement of innovative and beneﬁcial rate structures. 
Such a prohibition would be a signiﬁcant concern for Versant as the company’s current meters have 
reached end-of-life and must be replaced with more modern technology. Versant Power has worked 
closely with the Commission and other stakeholders to develop a policy that allows customers to choose 
to opt-out of a meter that communicates wirelessly, subject to a reasonable fee for such customers that 
reﬂects the additional cost necessary to manually read old meters at the customer ’s premises. This fee 
ensures that these costs are not inappropriately shifted onto other customers who have not opted-out of 
such meters. 
Additionally, we would bring the committee ’s attention to other scenarios, such as the Commission 
potentially considering “bonus” or non~recurring meters in the future to encourage the adoption of 
electric vehicles. Fee such as this, as an example, are by their very nature non-uniform fees to encourage 
and reward certain behavior related to the energy policy of the State. 
There are likely numerous additional reasonable policy justifications for allowing the Commission the 
discretion to set different rates for certain customers within a rate class. Special Rate Contracts for 
qualiﬁed commercial and industrial customers is one example. A policy to offer discounted rates to low- 
and moderate-income customers, as is done in some other jurisdictions, is another. We would also 
question whether demand and time-of-use rates may also be impacted. 
For these reasons, we would respectfully ask the committee to vote ought not to pass on LD 1175. 
Thank you for your consideration, and we would be pleased to bring additional information to the work 
session at your request. 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
