                                                            
 
Joint Testimony of  
the Appalachian Mountain Club, the Atlantic Salmon Federation, and Trout Unlimited 
Supporting LD 390:  
“Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 25: Standards for Placing Wood 
into Stream Channels to Enhance Cold Water Fisheries Habitat, a Major Substantive Rule of 
the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of Forestry” 
Presented by Eliza Townsend, Maine Conservation Policy Director, AMC 
Senator Ingwerson, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, I am Eliza Townsend, and I am presenting testimony 
today on behalf of the Appalachian Mountain Club, where I am the Maine Conservation Policy 
Director, as well as Trout Unlimited and the Atlantic Salmon Federation.   
Each of our organizations and our partners and affiliates have been working under the existing 
Chapter 25 rules to use strategic wood additions to restore and improve stream habitat for 
Atlantic salmon, brook trout, and other native fish and wildlife over the last decade.  These 
rules were initially adopted with our support just over a decade ago.  Since then, Maine’s state 
and federal agencies and NGO’s including ours have slowly built the staff expertise and capacity 
to plan and implement these projects. 
Partnerships among our organizations and others are beginning to implement this restoration 
at scale.  For example, with funding from the USDA-NRCS, TU and the AMC collaborated on 
installations in the Middle Branch Pleasant River in 2020, 2021, and 2022, and will be 
continuing in 2023.  To date, more than more than 2.5 miles of stream on the Middle Branch 
and its tributaries have been restored. A related partnership between ASF and AMC will address 
13 undersized culverts in the watershed this summer, and a similar number each of the next 
three years.  Last year TU and the Rangeley Lakes Heritage Trust began work on a similar 
partnership in the Upper Kennebago River for native brook trout. 
Strategic wood additions—often referred to as “chop-and-drop”—are intended to restore a 
natural condition to the state’s headwater and smaller streams.  Large wood in streams 
provides overhead cover, slows and attenuates flood flows, increases invertebrate insect 
populations that are the base of the aquatic food chain by providing both physical habitat and 
organic material to feed them, improves instream sediment sorting and storage, helps dig pools 
and improve gravel spawning riffles, and over time can increase groundwater recharge and 
lower stream temperatures.   
Prior to large scale timber harvest and use of most Maine streams for log driving, these streams 
naturally recruited trees from the riparian zone into stream channels and floodplains, providing 
important ecological functions, and improving habitat for native species, including brook trout 
                                                            
 
and Atlantic salmon.  These restoration projects are intended to replace wood that was 
removed by log driving, bull dozing, and heavy riparian cutting.  Done right, and combined with 
protected riparian zones, these projects can restore a more natural stream form with improved 
habitat and become self-maintaining if protected riparian zones provide for natural wood 
recruitment as trees age and die. 
Over the past decade, practitioners have learned a lot about how to apply these techniques in 
Maine streams and forests.  We have realized that some of the details in the rules adopted in 
2012, while well-intentioned, were overly prescriptive and in some cases difficult to apply in the 
field.  The changes proposed here recognize and apply what we’ve learned.  For example, the 
definition of a “key piece” of wood previously required use of increasingly large diameter wood 
as streams got wider, using standards used for many years by the State of Oregon in forests 
very different from what we find in Maine.   
The reality is that riparian forests in Maine streams rarely contain trees with DBH that meet the 
16-22” DBH standard required on larger streams.  However, practitioners have developed 
methods to use multiple log structures or strategically pin wood placements with trees or 
boulders on the bank to keep smaller pieces of wood in place as key pieces.  The new rules also 
increase the length of key pieces, which is often necessary to maintain stability with smaller 
diameter trees. 
We support these recommended changes, which will provide better guidance to practitioners, 
be simpler for the Maine Forest Service to permit and monitor, and help increase the number 
of projects and restored stream miles that can be completed. 
We do have one suggestion for an improvement.  The rules as currently drafted set a hard 
target: “Structures must be placed in the stream channel at a frequency of 3 structures every 
100 feet.” (emphasis added) We believe that 3 structures per 100’ is a good general standard or 
average, but is too specific to account for variations in natural conditions (stream channel 
alignment, availability of wood to drop, presence or absence of riparian trees or other 
structures than can be used to stabilize key pieces, etc.)  We’d suggest an amendment to 
“Structures should be well distributed along the stream channel with an average frequency of 3 
structures per 100 feet .” 
Overall, however, we support the rules and ask you to vote LD 390 Ought to Pass. 
For further information 
Erin Rodgers, PhD, Trout Unlimited Erin.Rodgers@tu.org  
Jeff Reardon, Atlantic Salmon Federation jreardon@asfmaine.org  
