    
  
   JANET T. MILLS  
              GOVERNOR  
 STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF  
INLA ND FISHERIES & W ILDLIFE  
284 STATE ST REET 
41 STATE  HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA ME  04333 -0041                       
                       
                        JUDITH CAMUSO  
                                     COMMISSIONER  
 
 
 
 
PHONE: (207) 287 -8000  FISH AND WILDLIFE ON THE WEB:  
www.maine.gov/i fw EMAIL ADDR ESS: 
ifw.webmaster@maine.gov  
 
                                                                                                TESTIMONY OF THE  
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE  
  
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION, AND 
FORESTRY  
 
IN SUPPORT  OF L.D. 390 
  
“Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 25: Standards for Placing Wood into 
Stream Channels to Enhance Cold Water Fisheries Habitat, a Major Substantive Rule of the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of Forestry” 
 
 
SPONSORED BY: Representative PLUECKER of Warren  
   
 
DATE OF HEARING:    February 27, 2023 
 
Good morning,  Senator Ingwersen, Representative Plue cker  and m embers  of the Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestr y Committee . I am Francis Brautigam , Fisheries Director  at the Department of Inland Fisheries  and 
Wildlife, speaking  on behalf of the Department,  in support for  L.D. 390 
 
The Maine Department of Inland Fisheries & Wildlife  (MDIFW)  have worked cooperatively with  the M aine Forest 
Service (MFS ) on their ‘Chop and Drop ’ program since its inception in 2012 .  We c ontinue to partn er on this 
effort and a re supportive o f the proposed legislation  to clarify  certain aspects , simplify the rule  for participants, 
and t o transition this west coast program to be more reflective of Maine ’s conditions  and opportunities .  When 
this program was initiated, mo st of the research and k nowledge regarding wood addition  in streams came f rom 
efforts and s tudies in the Pacific Northw est.  When the or iginal Chop  and Drop rule was drafted for use in 
Maine, adopted provisions ref lected pract ices in the No rthwest at the t ime.  Needless to say, there are 
significant diffe rence s in forest cond ition , geography  and land use histories be tween our Maine landsca pe and 
the Northwest .  After 10 plus years of imple menting  Chop and Drop s tyle wood addition  in man y small streams , 
we n ow have a much better i dea o f what  conditions and metho ds work well here to maximize the program goals 
of improving instream habitat conditions , while providin g opportunity for o ur forest manage rs to assist with 
shared stewardship  of our wild brook trout .   
Wild brook trout thriv e in cold, forested , headwater streams .  However , due to mostly past forestry practices , 
such as log  driving and past riparian area cutting , current  instream habitat condition  is heavily compromised i n 
many areas.  Although riparian  forests have regro wn an d recovered to some extent in most areas, stand age still 
has not reac hed the point of being able to recr uit natural wood fell into headwater streams  at the r ate 
necessary  to improve  stream habitat cond ition .  Hence this management action, when voluntarily  implemented  
using appro priate meth ods under the guidance of this rule and in areas conducive to wood ret ention and natural 
jammin g, can accelerate  many improvemen ts to natural stream process es and improve overall fish  habitat 
condition.  In appropriately suitable habi tats, “chop and drop ” wood addition s are some of the most cost 
effective and quickest way to facilitate ha bitat improvement  for brook trout.  
 The proposed  changes to this rule re ally address three needs :   
1) Simplify the required wood addi tion plan that reflect s available standing timber in Maine.   For example , 
transitioning the focus away f rom using overl y large trees that are rarely available  to more of a wood 
loading rate  utilizing available  standing timber .  Strategi cally felling available trees in  a way to maximize 
wood placement and jamming .    
2) Develop a streamlined  and consistent process between the MFS  Chop and Dro p program with  wood 
addition program s of the USDA ’s Natural Resources Conservat ion Service.  Th e propos ed changes to the 
MFS Chop and  Drop rule align compliance between the two program s and assur e participating 
landowner ’s compliance with  both program s. 
3) Clarify where and when the Maine Depar tment of Marin e Resou rces needs to be part of the process a nd 
wood addi tion plan development  for atlantic salmon habitats.  
 
The MDIFW support s proposed cha nges by the MFS  to the Chop and Drop rule.  We have , and will  continue  to 
be, an active part icipant in the implementation  of this program.  IFW  biologist s assist  with t raining parti cipating 
foresters and biologists , assist p ublic and private land owners and managers with plan development  when 
availa ble, assure progra m compliance  of participa nts, and do assist  with program outreach  where possible . Staff 
are available  to assist statewi de upon request  and we look forward to supporti ng the imple mentation of more 
projects into the future.  In closing we would like to thank the landowners that partner with MDIFW and MFS to 
conduct this very important work.  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
