Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Caner 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Melrose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chapter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Ernest Carle 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Mulliken Court PO Box 836 e Augusta, ME 043320836 Telephone: 207-62643005 Email: info@mainewoodlandowners.org at Website: wwwmainewoodlandowners org DEMQ COMMUNITY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Karla Black 
Deputy Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
In Favor of 
LD 390 
"Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 25: Standards for 
Placing Wood into Stream Channels to Enhance Cold Water Fisheries Habitat, a 
Major Substantive Rule of the Department of ACF, Bureau of Forestry" 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Karla 
Black, I am the Deputy Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking 
today in favor of LD 390, "Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of 
Chapter 25: Standards for Placing Wood into Stream Channels to Enhance Cold Water 
Fisheries Habitat, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of ACF, Bureau of 
Forestry." 
Landowners care deeply about wildlife, including ﬁsheries. Oﬁen when asked why 
they own woodlands most landowners respond that it is because of wildlife. They are 
cormnitted to engaging in activities and practices that enhance and support wildlife on 
their properties. This Resolve provides for legislative review of the changes to Rule 
Chapter 25 as proposed by the Maine Forest Service. The rule involves the permitting 
process for implementing cold Water ﬁsheries habitat enhancement projects that 
involve adding wood to stream channels. While it seems counter-intuitive to think 
about adding wood to a natural stream to enhance ﬁsh habitat, the practice is important 
for the survival of many important ﬁsh species including trout and salmon. 
The Maine Forest Service recognized that the rule that existed prior to rulemaking 
presented challenges because it was based on standards adopted by the state of Oregon 
where trees are bigger than they are in Maine. The rule was being sparsely utilized 
because the standards were difﬁcult to meet. This rulemaking addresses that issue. 
Adopting reasonable rules and regulations regarding enhancement projects provides 
landowners with greater opportunity to implement these practices on their lands. They 
A Nonprofit Corporation - IRC 501(c)(3)
often do so during a time when they are conducting a harvest. Landowners implement these 
practices even though they receive no economic beneﬁt for doing so. 
For these reasons, Maine Woodland Owners supports LD 390 and urges this Committee ’s 
favorable consideration. I would be happy to try and answer any questions.
