Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 390 
 
“Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review Of Portions Of Chapter 25: Standards For 
Placing Wood Into Stream Channels To Enhance Cold Water Fisheries Habitat, A 
Major Substantive Rule Of The Department Of Agriculture, Conservation And 
Forestry, Bureau Of Forestry ” 
 
February  27, 2023  
 
Patrick Strauch , Executive  Director  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker  and members of the Committee on  
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , the following is  testimony submitted on behalf of the 
Maine F orest Products Council in support of  LD 390 , “Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review 
Of Portions Of Chapter 25: Standards For Placing Wood Into Stream Channels To Enhance 
Cold Water Fisheries Habitat, A Major Substantive Rule Of The Department Of Agriculture, 
Conservation And Forestry, Bureau Of Forestry. ”  
 Chapter 25 provides a framework for landowners and land managers to improve cold water 
fisher ies as part of their manage ment strategy by setting guidelines for the placement of wood 
debris  in stream  channels to provide shade and habitat for brook trout and other  cold water  fish 
species. This m anagement  strategy , known as “ chop and drop ”, is managed closely by the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, and is overseen by licensed foresters and 
fisheries biologists.  
 
Our current framework is structured off of Oregon State standards, which don’ t alw ays translate 
well to Maine’ s forests. The proposed changes in LD 390 would bring the program more in line 
with Maine’ s forest characteristics and Natural Resource Conservation Service standards , which 
in turn would make this program more accessible for landowners.  
 
When considering our position on this bill, the Council consul ted with our Wildlife Committee 
and received the following feedback from one member  that we thought would be of interest to 
the committee : 
 
“We completed our second of these [chop and drop] projects last summer in collaboration with 
IFW and MFS and all went simply and smoothly. IFW helped in the field marking trees to cut 
and wrote the official plan, which MFS approved with no issues. We hired a contractor to cut 
the trees into the stream, making sensible tree substitutions when needed for safety or other 
reasons. A mile of stream enhancement for brook trout and other aquatic species was completed 
in a couple hours. ” 
 
As you can see, the Department maintains close oversight of this important stream restoration 
tool, and for Maine, these  changes make sense. For those reasons, we support LD 390 as 
drafted. Thank you for your consideration.  
 
