TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
In Support of L.D. 438 
“An Act to Clarify and Amend the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Licensing Laws" 
SPONSORED BY: Representative Wood of Greene 
DATE OF HEARING: April 19, Z023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Tim Peabody, Deputy Commissioner of the Department 
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in support of L.D. 438 
This bill makes the following changes to the laws governing licensing and registration by the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. 
(Sections 1 — 7) of this bill provides that all members of the Advisory Board for the Licensing of 
Guides (except state employees) are entitled to receive compensation. It increases the daily rate 
of compensation for examiners of the Advisory Board for the Licensing of Guides and the 
Advisory Board for the Licensing of Taxidermists from $50 per day to $150 per day plus per 
diem. These examiners are often required to work on a daily schedule not simply on a quarterly 
meeting or infrequent volunteer-type basis. The department has found it increasingly difficult to 
keep well-trained, professional examiners interested in serving at a rate of $50/day so they 
aren't willing to take a day off from guiding or working on their taxidermy business when they 
will make substantially less money. 
After the bill was printed, we noted a cross reference error in (Section 7). The reference to 
”Section 12855, subsection 6" should be replaced with a reference to "section 12953" (which 
applies to taxidermist). We would respectfully ask that an amendment to this section be made. 
(Section 8) of the bill increases the fee for a pheasant hunting permit from S18 to $29 and 
increases the amount that is retained by the authorized IFW agent from $1 to $2. The 
department received a request from the Windham Rod and Gun Club to propose a fee increase 
to the pheasant hunting stamp. The concept of a pheasant stamp fee increase is to ensure an 
effective program and enhance the recreational opportunity it provides. The fee goes intoa 
dedicated account to purchase, raise and release pheasant for hunting in York and Cumberland 
Counties. It's a model program of the Department working with partners to provide a valuable 
recreational opportunity for all ages of the sporting public. If we're able to continue the 
program as it currently exists, we need to keep pace with costs, and it's been more thana
decade since the last increase. The proposed fee is reasonable and supported by our partners, 
the Windham Rod and Gun Club. 
(Sections 9) removes the provision of law that allows a guide applicant to take a 2nd test for 
free. It is estimated that nearly half of the tests given are to those who failed the first time and 
are taking it again for free. This change may incentivize applicants to do better the first time 
they take the test. It also proposes to increase the cost of the guide application fee from $100 
to $125 to offset the cost of paying examiners to conduct in—person examinations. 
(Section 10) corrects a cross reference related to the guide oral examination that resulted from 
the changes in Sections 1-7 of this bill (guide compensation). 
(Section 11-12) of the bill proposes and clarifies an increase to the cost of the taxidermist 
application fee from $50 to $125 to offset the cost of paying examiners to conduct in-person 
examinations and it also clariﬁes that the taxidermist application fee applies to examinations for 
a general classification in addition to other classifications for first time applicants. 
(Section 13) of the bill brings consistency between ATV and snowmobile law by clarifying that 
the owner of a snowmobile is not required to register it if it is operated on land that they live on 
or land that they own or lease. This same change was made to the registration requirements for 
an owner of an ATV PLc. 215 that went into effect during 2021, this makes the law consistent for 
snowmobiles. 
(Section 14) implements the pheasant hunting stamp fee increase in section (8) of this bill on 
January 1, 2024. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
