 
 Memorandum  
Date : April 21, 2023  
To: Members of the Joint Health and Human Services Committee  
From : Adam Hoffer, PhD, Director of Excise Taxation, Tax Foundation  
Subject : Comments on LD 1174 , LD 1215, and LD 1558  Regarding a Ban on the Sale of 
Flavored Tobacco  Products  
Multiple  U.S. states and localities have banned the sale of flavored tobacco products, 
including Massachusetts, California, and the District of Columbia. The flavor bans in 
Massachusetts and California have been costly. Massachusetts saw a $125 million decline in 
revenues the first year after implement ation and California saw cigarette tax revenue decline 
by roughly 17.3 percent  in the first month after imposing its ban . California’s  annualized 
revenue decline could surpass  $300 million, e xceeding the state’s revenue loss estimates by 
more than 37 percent.1 A ban on flavored tobacco would disrupt Maine ’s tobacco market and 
significantly decrease the state’s  tax revenue.  
Proponents of flavored tobacco bans point to the decline in legal pur chases as a measure of 
success. But i dentifying the cause of the decline is paramount to determining the policy’s 
effects. Flavored tobacco  smokers may quit smoking after no longer being able to purchase 
their preferred products or they may continu e to smo ke by buying products across state 
borders or products that have been smuggled into the state.  
In the year following the Massachusetts flavored cigarette ban, roughly 90 percent of the 
decline in state cigarette sales simply shif ted to neighboring states. The 24 percent decline 
in Massachusetts sales was offset almost entirely by a 22 percent increase in sales in New 
Hampshire and an 18 percent increase in sales in Rhode Island.  
 
 
 
1 Adam Hoffer, “ California Flavored Tobacco Ban May Cost More than $300 Million in First Year ,” Tax Foundation , Feb. 24, 2023 , 
https://taxfoundation.org/california -flavored -tobacco -ban-revenue/ . 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maine  is in the middle of the pack when it comes to cigarette smuggling. Roughly 5 million 
packs are smuggled into the state each year, giving the state the 2 4th highest  smuggling rate 
in the country.2 A ban on the sale of flavored tobacco products will likely skyrocket the state’s 
smuggling rate and illicit cigarette market to all -time highs.  
Legislators must strike a difficult balance. They must simultaneously try to reduce the harm 
caused by smoking,  raise enough revenue to fund smoking cessation and other public health 
programs , and maintain a legal, well -regulated marketplace where participants can safely 
transact . As you consider these matters, we are happy to be a resource  and would be 
delighted to provide you with more research on this topic.  
 
2 Adam Hoffer, “ Cigarette Taxes and Cigarette Smuggling by State, 202 2,” Tax Foundation, Dec. 6, 2022 , 
https://taxfoundation.org/cigarette -taxes -cigarette -smuggling -2022/ . 

