            Preserving Hookah Culture &  Protecting Hookah Tradition across the US A 
 
 
www.nationalhookah.com  April 25 , 2023 
 
The National Hookah Community Association (NHCA) brings together, and serves as the voice of, hookah producers, 
distributors, sellers, hookah lounge owners, consumers, and community members who support the preservation of 
hookah’s cultural traditions.  We are writing to request that as you consider  LD 1174 and LD 1215 , bans on flavored 
tobacco products, you acknowledge  the cultural significance of hookah to minority and immigrant populations as well as 
the lack of youth access to, and use of , the product.   California too k a historic step in December  by enacting a statewide 
ban on flavored tobacco products , which exempt ed hookah , for these reasons.   NHCA has worked with California, and 
with many other state and local governments  including  Colorado, Columbus, Denver, San Diego, San Jose, Los Angeles,  
and others, to include exemptions for hookah in recent flavor ban  legislation .   
  
Hookah is a small category in the tobacco space, making up only roughly 0.005% of nicotine product  sales. However, 
hookah is an imp ortant cultural practice to many and one that has existed for centuries, originating in the Middle East and 
India.  Today, a broad cross -section of immigrants in the U.S. from around the world enjoy hookah  at home and in 
lounges  as a centerpiece for cultur al, business, and social gatherings.  Hookah is widely used by Middle Eastern, 
Armenian, Turkish, East African, Indian, Persian, Indonesian, and other minority immigrant citizens.  Hookah lounges 
across the country have come to serve as safe gathering plac es for many diverse ethnic and religious communities.  
Despite the importance of this social practice and tradition, NHCA members continue to find that many policymakers are 
often unfamiliar with hookah, its practice, and its community.    
  
NHCA fully sup ports efforts to eliminate youth access and usage of tobacco products, including hookah.  Hookah is 
unlikely to be used or consumed by youth for many reasons.  Hookah water pipes are  expensive,  several feet tall, not 
easily concealed, and the setup for use  is a lengthy process.  Lounges that offer hookah are restricted to of -age 
customers, preventing teens from accessing the product.  Recent research by the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) found that just 1% of middle and high school student s used hookah in the past 30 days, ten times less 
than the number of teens who vape.    
  
Shisha, the product used in hookah, is a combination of tobacco and a sugar substance such as honey or molasses, and 
the total product is only comprised of approximat ely 15% tobacco.  As has been the practice for hundreds of years, 
hookah is, by nature, a flavored product.  Unfortunately, noble efforts to address the teen vaping epidemic by banning 
flavored tobacco also would result in the ban of ALL hookah.   
 
A ban o n hookah would not only eliminate this important cultural practice for many U.S. citizens, but could also shutter 
many small, independent, and minority owned businesses.  Many of these businesses serve as community gathering 
places for immigrant population s in cities across the country.  Many hookah users are part of religious or ethnic 
populations that already face discrimination.  Eliminating this cultural practice would make many feel as though they are 
misunderstood and targeted as an outsider by lawmak ers and regulators.  
  
We ask that you do not target this important cultural practice and shutter minority and immigrant owned businesses .  
Please  grant an  exempt ion for hookah  from any flavor ban .  
  
National Hookah Community Association  
