 
 April 25, 2023  
  
To: Members of the Maine Senate Health & Human Services Committee  
From: Americans for Tax Reform  
  
Dear Senator,  
  
On behalf of Americans for Tax Reform (ATR) and out supporters across Maine, I urge 
you to reject LD 1174 and LD 1215, misguided legislation that seeks to restrict access to 
lifesaving reduced risk tobacco alternatives such as nicotine delivery systems thr ough 
prohibiting flavors in e -cigarettes. This bill, if enacted, would adversely affect employers 
throughout Maine, damage public health by increasing smoking prevalence, and 
foster a burgeoning illicit market.  
 
LD 1174 and LD 1215 would prohibit legal pr oducts sold by small businesses through 
Maine, which consumers use as an alternative to cigarettes. At this time of high inflation and 
economic uncertainty, imposing a prohibition on flavored tobacco and vaping products 
would diminish a crucial source of r evenue for many small businesses, reducing their job -
creating and sustaining capacity.  
 
Banning flavors in tobacco and vaping products would also reduce state tax collections. The 
Bay State serves as a cautionary tale. Since Massachusetts implemented a ba n on all flavored 
tobacco and vape products in the middle of 2020, cross -border purchases and growing black 
market sales have mirrored the decline in sales in the Commonwealth. In the first since 
months since the ban was enacted, Massachusetts retailers so ld 17.7 million fewer cigarette 
packets compared to the same six months in the prior year, while neighboring Rhode Island 
and New Hampshire combined to sell 18.9 million more as Massachusetts residents stocked 
up across state lines. This policy failure is costing Massachusetts more than $10 million 
each month  in forgone excise tax revenue. Should Maine pass either LD 1174 or LD 
1215, similar economic consequences will be felt in Maine.  
 
While the states of Rhode Island and New Hampshire have been some of the biggest 
beneficiaries of Massachusetts’ ban, crimina l syndicates have also benefited. Contrary to 
popular belief that tobacco smuggling is a victimless crime consisting of someone purchasing 
a few extra cartons across state lines, in reality most tobacco smuggling is run by multi -
million dollar organized cr ime syndicates. These networks, who also engage in human 
trafficking & money laundering, have also been used to fund terrorist and the US 
State Department has explicitly called tobacco smuggling a “ threat to national 
security ”. 
  
It must be noted that studies have repeatedly shown that flavors, which LD 1174 and LD 
1215 would prohibit, are critical to helping adult smokers make the switch to vap ing. Adults 
who use flavored vapor products are 43% more likely to quit smoking than an adult who 
  Page 2 of 3 
 uses un -flavored products, according to a recent study  from ten of the world’s top experts in 
cancer prevention and public health.  
 
Further, bans on flavored vaping products are shown to cause increased youth cigarette 
smoking. A study  from Dr. Abigail Friedman at the Yale School of Public Health found that 
when San Francisco imposed a flavor ban in 2018, youth smoking doubled. Before San 
Francisco’s flavor ban, the city had lower youth smoking rates than comparable counties like 
New York and Los Angeles. After the flavor ban, San Francisco’s youth smoking rate rose 
to 6.2% while comparable districts had an  average rate of 2.8%. LD 1174 and LD 1215 
would create a situation where similar public health consequences could occur among 
youths.  
 
Additionally, contrary to the claims of anti -vaping advocates, flavors play no role in youth 
uptake of vaping. Academic studies have found that teenage non -smokers “willingness to try 
plain versus flavored varieties did not differ” and a mere 5% of vapers aged 14 -23 reported it 
was flavors that drew them to e -cigarettes. National Youth Tobacco Survey results have 
shown no increase in nicotine dependency  among youths since flavored products entered 
the market and the CDC  has found that only 3.1% of youths use e -cigarettes daily, 
disproving the myth of an ongoing “youth vaping epidemic.”  
 
Paradoxically these bans may therefore increase youth smoking in the state: By definition, 
criminals and smugglers are unlikely to obey laws and would not follow rigorous age -
verification requirements mandated at reputable outlets.  
  
About E -Cigarettes and Vapor Products : 
  
• Traditional combustible tobacco remains one of the leading preventable causes of d eath 
in Maine. The negative health effects of combustible tobacco come from the chemicals 
produced in the combustion process, not nicotine. While highly addictive, nicotine is a 
relatively benign substance like caffeine and nicotine use “does not result in  clinically 
significant short - or long -term harms”.  
 
• Nicotine replacement therapies such as nicotine patches and gums have helped smokers 
quit for decades. In recent years, advancements in technology have created a more 
effective alternative: vapor products and e -cigarettes. These products deliver nicotine 
through water vapor, mimicking the habitual nature of smoking while removing the 
deadly carcinogens that exist in traditional cigarettes.  
 
• The CDC  has found that only 3.1% of youths use e -cigarettes daily, disproving the myth 
of an ongoing “youth vaping epidemic.”  
 
Benefits of E -Cigarettes and Vapor Products : 
 
• Vapor products have been proven to be at least 95% safer  than combustible 
cigarettes. A comprehensive analysis of nicotine product harm estimates that e -
  Page 3 of 3 
 cigarettes expose users to just 4% of the harm of combustible cigarettes.  
  
• E-cigarettes are also more than twice as effective  at helping smokers quit than traditional 
nicotine replacement therapies. According to one study,  a smoker attempting to quit 
with an e -cigarette has an  estimated 323% higher chance of achieving complete cessation 
compared to someone using a traditional nicotine replacement therapy like nicotine -
containing patches, gum, or mouth spray.  
  
• Vaping has been endorsed by over 100 of the world’s leading public health organizations  
as safer than smoking and an effective way to help smokers quit.  
 
• When e -cigarettes entered the market in 2003, the U.S. adult cigarette smoking rate was 
21.6%. Due to increased access to vaping, the U.S. adult smoking rate has plummeted to 
13.7% as of 2018.  
  
• An analysis  by Public Health England demonstrated just how effective vaping is in 
helping people quit smoking, noting that in just one year, over 50,000 British smokers, 
who would have c ontinued smoking otherwise, quit smoking with vaping.  
  
• A study from Value in Health Journal found  that legislative actions ban ning flavored 
electronic cigarettes are directly correlated with increased traditional cigarette sales.  
 
• Large -scale analysis  from Georgetown University Medical Center estimates that 6.6 
million American lives can be saved if most cigarette smokers switched to vaping. This 
would save more than 27,000 lives in Maine.  
  
For the reasons outlined above, ATR urges you to reject and vo te No on LD 1174 and LD 
1215.   
  
Sincerely,  
  
Grover Norquist  
President  
Americans for Tax Reform  
  
