 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
In Support of LD 1174 , An Act to Prohibit the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products  
 
Hearing Date:  April 25, 2023  
 
Senator  Baldacci, Representative  Meyer , and Members  of the  Joint Standing Committee on  Health and 
Human Services , my name is Jamie Cotnoir   and I am the Associate Director  of the Division of Disease 
Prevention at Maine CDC . I am here today to provide testimony on behalf of the Maine Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention  and will be speaking in support of LD 1174 , An Act to Prohibit the Sale 
of Flavored Tobacco Products . 
 
LD 1 174 prohibits the sale and distribution of flavored  tobacco products. This bill defines  a “flavored 
tobacco product ” to mean any tobacco product that imparts a taste or smell, other than the taste or smell 
of tobacco, that is distinguishable by an ordinary consumer either prior to or during the consumption  of a 
tobacco product. This bill also amends the definition of electronic smoking device (22 MRS § 1551, 
sub-§ 1-D) to further clarify that "electronic smoking device" includes any component, part or accessory 
of the device and also includes any substance that may be aerosolized or vaporized by that device, 
whether or not the substance contains nicotine and that it does not include drugs, devices or combination 
products authorized for sale by the United States Food and Drug Administration, as those terms ar e 
defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.  
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC) supports this bill and offers the 
following information for consideration.  
 
Cigarette smoking is the number one modifiable cause of death  and disease in the United States. In  
Maine, 2,400 adults die annually from smoking  and 27,000 Maine youth currently under the age of 18 
will die prematurely from smoking -related illness.  
 
Nationally, cigarette smoking is linked to between 80% and 90% of lung cancer deaths.  According  to the 
Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids, in 2019, tobacco use was estimated to cost $811,120,557 in direct 
health care expenditures in Maine. Flavored tobacco products, no matter the type, appeal to youth. In 
2021, nearly 8 in 1 0 youth who reported using tobacco products used flavored varieties.  
 
Cigarettes are prohibited from containing flavors except for tobacco or menthol. Other tobacco products 
including cigars and e -cigarettes are available in myriad of fruit, candy, and ot her flavors that mask the 
harshness and are appealing to young people. The vast majority of adult smokers first start before the 
age of 18 are more likely to start with flavored products. Menthol has analgesic properties making it 
even easier to inhale, in creases the likelihood of nicotine dependence, decreases the likelihood of 
 
 quitting, and contributes to disparity in use in certain vulnerable populations.  Young people, racial and 
ethnic minority groups, LGBTQ+ people, women, people with a low income, peo ple with mental health 
conditions, and members of the BIPOC community also are more likely to use flavored tobacco products 
than other population groups.  
 
Flavored tobacco products also disproportionately impact African Americans . It is estimated that 
approximately 40% of excess deaths due to menthol cigarette smoking in the U.S. between 1980 - 2018 
were those of African Americans, despite African Americans making up only about 12% of the U.S. 
population.  
 
Many states and communities, including a growing n umber in Maine, have restricted the sale of flavored 
tobacco products. This decision made in the interest of public health has resulted in loss of tax revenue. 
The Legislature will need to identify funding to offset this loss of revenue.  
 
Federal courts have found that federal law does not limit the authority of these jurisdictions to prohibit 
the sale of tobacco products in accordance with the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control 
Act passed in 2009. Research has also found that laws that do not include menthol cigarettes, or that do 
not apply to all tobacco retailers, may reinforce health disparities.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends this bill ought to pass as evidence shows that 
flavored tobacco products, including menth ol cigarettes, increase the risk of youth initiation, undermine 
tobacco treatment efforts, and contribute to health disparities.  Additionally, the Maine CDC suggests 
that the language specific to electronic smoking device found in the bill be reviewed for potential impact 
on regulations governing Maine’s Medical Use of Cannabis  Program and, specifically, that the 
legislation clarifies whether the provisions of this bill apply to these laws that refer to permissible 
paraphernalia.  
 
Thank you for your conside ration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony today. I can 
address questions from the Committee , and I will be available to participate in the work session.   
 
 
 
