 
 
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony in Support  of LD 1215  – “An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products ” 
And 
LD 1174 –  “An Act to Prohibit the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products ” 
April 25, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services. I am  Patricia Hamilton , Director of the City of Bangor’s Public Health and 
Com munity Services Department. I  am providing testimony on behalf of the Bangor City Council in support  
of LD 1215 , “An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Product s,” and LD 1174, “An Act to Prohibit the 
Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products.”  
On July 25, 2022, the City of Bangor amended City Code to ban the sale of flavored tobacco and nicotine 
products within c ity limits.  There was much debate at the time,  and the data supporting the ban was 
overwhelming. According to the Maine Centers for Disease Control  
• 70% of teen e- cigarette users cite flavors as a reason they use the product ; 
•  50% of high school youth who smoke cigarettes use menthol products ; and  
• 80% of youth who use any type of tobacco product started with a flavored product.   
The Fla vors Hook Kids Maine  Campaign reports there are over fifteen thousand flavored tobacco products 
on the market  today .  
Flavored tobacco products, including cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, and e -cigarettes, are 
undermining Maine’s efforts to reduce youth tobacco use, all while the Maine CDC is pumping millions of 
dollars through its Maine Prevention Network  to support tobacco, e -cigarette and vaping prevention. It 
seems counterintuitive that the state would spend millions to prevent tobacco use while at the same time 
allowing the sale of products that promote it.   
In 2009, Maine celebrated a 64% reduction in high school smoking rates. Unfortunately, that started to 
erode  around 2013 when the popularity of vaping increased.  According to the 2019 Maine In tegrated 
Youth Health Survey, 28% of Maine high school students said they’d used a vaping device in the last 30 
days.  Our Public Health Department staff speak often with parents, teachers, and administrators, all of 
whom cite vaping as one of the largest issues impacting schools today.  Vaping transcends both income 
and social groups and has permeated every corner of school life.  As mentioned earlier, 80% of youth who 
use any type of tobacco started with a flavored product.  It’s no coincidence that the v ast majority of 
vaping products, touted by the industry as “harmless water vapor” , are targeting our youth with yummy, 
carnival- like flavors.  

 
 
Ongoing and robust efforts at the state, regional and local levels to reduce tobacco use are no match for 
the tobacco industry.  We need you –  the Legislature –  to do our part by providing a strong policy 
framework to remove these danger ous products from s tore shelves.  With the full support of the Bangor 
City Council, I urge you to pass LD 1215 and LD 1174 to end the sale of flavored tobacco products in Maine.  
Thank you for your consideration. Please do not hesitate to reach out with questions.  
Patricia H amilton, PH&CS Director, patty.hamilton@bangormaine.gov  
Deborah Laurie, City Manager, debbie.laurie@bangormaine.gov  
Courtney O’Donnell, Assistant City Manager/ Director of Human Resources, courtney.odonnell@bangormaine.gov   
Richard Fournier, City Council Chair, richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
