 
www.gpmetro.org  
114 Valley St. • Portland, ME • 04102  
Phone:  207 -774-0351   Fax:  207 -774-6241  
Testimony in Support of LD 1739 -An Affordable Housing and Transit Financing Tool  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation April 25, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry and members of the Committee on T axation , 
 
I am Greg Jordan , Exec utive Director of the G reater Portland Transit District  (“GP Metro”). GP Metro is the 
state’s largest public transit agency providing  fixed route bus service and ADA paratransit service  to the 
municipalities of Brunswick, Falmouth, Freeport, Gorham, Portland, South Portland, Westbrook and 
Yarmout h. I am submitting this testimony to express our organization's support for LD 1739 . 
 
Public transit is an under funded enterprise in Mai ne which LD 1559  makes clear  and seeks to address.  Among 
other important  goals, t hat bill seeks to help the state ’s transit agencies avoid fiscal cliffs and preserve 
existing transit service while at the same time achieve appropriat e equity in how the state supports the 
different transit modes  which include bus and demand response , rail, and ferry .   
 
While LD 1559 strives to save  our existing statewide transit sy stems from deterioration , LD 1 739 expands 
one of the  most important financing tools we have to improve public transit. Because the state ’s tran sit 
systems lack dedicated source s of non-federal transit funding,  financing transit system  expansions is difficult , 
and usually  requires a project -by-project approach with c omplex funding collaboratio ns among multiple 
partners. In light o f this realit y, Tax Increment Finance (TIF) Districts are a valuable financing tool for 
munic ipalities  to fund  transit -oriented development s, and cover the cost of related transit capital p rojects 
and expanded operations , while sheltering residents from property tax in creases .  
 
In GP Metro ’s service area, the municipalities of Falmouth, Portland and Westbrook have enacted  transit TIF 
districts  to fund public transit investments . In particular, the ci ty of Westbrook ’s transit TIF program 
established the local funding needed to  nearly doubl e the level of service provided within that community  in 
2018 , without impact to prope rty tax  rates .  
 
Howev er, a  key limitation of th e sta te’s TIF law is th e 30-year  sunset provision , after which any ongoing 
operating expenses must be absorbed b y municipalities ’ general fu nds. This sunset prov ision p laces any T IF 
funded transit improvement s at risk  since they would then have  to co mpete for general fund dollars along 
with other municipal  services.  
 
GP Metro supp orts LD 1 739 to ensure the continu ation of funding f or expa nded transit services  as well as the 
continuity of those services  for residents who have come to rely on them .  
 
Thank y ou for your time and service to the state of Maine . 
 
