 
 
mainehousingcoalition.org                              info@mainehousingcoalition.org 307 Cumberland Street, Portland, ME 04101  
 
131st Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Testimony of Laura Mitchell, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition   
May 10, 2023  
in favor of LD 1739 An Act to Extend Development District Tax Increment Financing Districts 
sponsored by Rep. Amy Kuhn 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Nicole Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation. My name is Laura Mitchell, I serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition. 
The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) is a nonprofit membership organization of more than 140 Maine 
housing development, architecture, construction, design, engineering, shelter, and housing services organizations. We 
work to address Maine’s housing crisis by advocating for the creation and preservation of housing for all people in 
Maine.  
MAHC is submitting this testimony in favor of LD 1739, An Act to Extend Development District Tax Increment Financing 
Districts . LD 1739 would allow towns to extend expiring TIFs for 30 years, so long as the funds are spent on affordable 
housing or transit-related development. There is no cost – zero dollars - to the state and this bill provides towns with 
another tool to address Maine’s dire housing crisis. 
 
Maine is lacking more than 20,000 units of affordable housing. The demand is growing, and far outstrips supply. In addition 
to a comprehensive strategy at the State level, towns need all the tools and resources possible to play an active role in 
meeting the housing need. This TIF law change could provide communities with additional funding for affordable housing 
and transit— money that did not exist before. The State of Maine would not be fiscally affected. Its distribution of funds 
simply shifts. If TIF districts expire or are extended, the total amount of State funds to be disbursed is unchanged. Similarly, 
this new approach has no fiscal impact on County expenses either.  
 
The overall benefit of this proposal is that more affordable housing projects can be created. That’s why MAHC supports 
LD1739. 
Laura Mitchell
Maine Affordable Housing Coalition
LD 1739
131st Legislature
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
Testimony of Laura Mitchell, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing 
Coalition  - May 10, 2023 
in favor of LD 1739 An Act to Extend Development District Tax Increment Financing
Districts sponsored by Rep. Amy Kuhn
Hello Senator Nicole Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation. My name is Laura Mitchell, I serve as the 
Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition.
The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) is a nonprofit membership 
organization of more than 140 Maine housing development, architecture, 
construction, design, engineering, shelter, and housing services organizations. We 
work to address Maine’s housing crisis by advocating for the creation and 
preservation of housing for all people in Maine. 
MAHC is submitting this testimony in favor of LD 1739, An Act to Extend 
Development District Tax Increment Financing Districts . LD 1739 would allow 
towns to extend expiring TIFs for 30 years, so long as the funds are spent on 
affordable housing or transit-related development. There is no cost – zero dollars - to 
the state and this bill provides towns with another tool to address Maine’s dire 
housing crisis.
Maine is lacking more than 20,000 units of affordable housing. The demand is 
growing, and far outstrips supply. In addition to a comprehensive strategy at the State 
level, towns need all the tools and resources possible to play an active role in meeting 
the housing need. 
This TIF law change could provide communities with additional funding for 
affordable housing and transit— money that did not exist before. The State of Maine 
would not be fiscally affected. Its distribution of funds simply shifts. If TIF districts 
expire or are extended, the total amount of State funds to be disbursed is unchanged. 
Similarly, this new approach has no fiscal impact on County expenses either. 
The overall benefit of this proposal is that more affordable housing projects can be 
created. That’s why MAHC supports LD1739.

