Written Testimony before the State of Maine Legislature 
LD 446 – Resolve, to Update Allowable Limits on Mortuary Trusts for the Purposes of 
MaineCare Eligibility 
 
Position: Support 
 
Testimony By 
Erik Tiner 
  
Good Afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health & Human Services 
Committee.  
My name is Erik Tiner, and I am a managing funeral director at A.T. Hutchins Funeral Home in Portland, 
Maine. I have been a licensed funeral director for 18 years, and I am here on behalf of the Maine 
Funeral Directors Association in support of LD 446- Resolve, to Update Allowable Limits on Mortuary 
Trusts for the Purposes of MaineCare Eligibility.  
For the first 12 years of my career, it was my responsibility to help families plan for one of the worst 
days of their life, the loss of a loved one. Families that inquire and ultimately plan with a funeral home 
do so for two different reasons, emotionally and financially. Emotionally, they want to make sure that 
survivors or loved ones avoid having to make difficult decisions on the worst day of their life and relieve 
the burdens associated. Financially, these same families will often pre-pay for funeral goods and 
services, most often locking in costs from future inflationary increases. As with families that apply for 
Maine Care, these families are directed by the State of Maine DHHS to “spend-down” assets to qualify 
and part of this “spend-down” plan is to make sure an irrevocable Maine mortuary trust is created. I 
have met with several hundred families that applied for Maine Care in my career. For many years, the 
maximum allowable mortuary trust deposit of $12,000 was not an issue, but currently, and with 
inflation affecting everyone, in every industry, families that are wanting more funeral goods and services 
including but not limited to funeral home services, cemetery, church, newspaper, florist, and other 
third-party costs, this amount is simply is not enough. This is why I support LD 446.  
A typical traditional funeral service for a traditional burial is well over the current $12,000 dollar limit 
and a person that is being cremated with a Celebration of Life is very close and at times over the 
$12,000 dollar limit. It has been my experience that families coming to prepay their loved ones services 
are doing it to relieve the emotional stress and financial burden at the time. They are not doing it to 
“hide” money. What is now being created with a lower limit is emotional stress because families aren’t 
able to do what their loved one wanted because of financial regulations based on this cap.  
From manufacturing to the services industries, all of us have been affected by recent economic 
conditions and the inflationary rise of many, if not all goods and services in our state. In addition, funeral 
and associated costs have not escaped such increases. In fact, every aspect of funeral service has risen in 
the past several years. From the costs funeral homes face to stay in business 24-hours a day and seven 
days a week, family facing costs of funeral goods and services, and third-party clergy, newspaper, 
crematory, flower and cemetery costs, there is not any one instance where funeral pricing or these 
associated costs have remained flat over the years. However, the $12,000 maximum allowable to qualify 
for Maine Care has remained flat and needs to reflect these increases and to allow families applying for 
Maine Care to be able to set aside adequate funds to cover the associated funeral costs.   
Simply put, with your support of LD 446, it would enable these future families applying for Maine Care 
to include ALL funeral and third-party goods and services on the irrevocable Maine mortuary trust 
agreement. The purpose of this bill is only to update allowable deposited irrevocable funds for these 
essential goods and services.  
As you that you know, pre-planning and creating a mortuary trust with a funeral home is so beneficial to 
families that have entrusted a funeral home and professionals like ourselves, to make sure such goods 
and services are carried out the way that complete mortuary trust is written. So that in creating such an 
agreement while applying for Maine Care will include all of those wants and needs of the family at the 
time of death and minimizing having to pay out of pocket because of the current limitations. 
In closing, with reading about inflation in almost every direction, now is the right time to increase the 
allowable amount qualification of the Maine mortuary trust, and more importantly, to accommodate 
the needs and wants of the funeral consumers in our great state of Maine.   
Thank you for your time, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
ERIK TINER 
Managing Funeral Director                                  
O 207.784.4584    C 207.754.1311 
The Fortin Group Funeral Home 
Crosman Funeral Home 
Thibault Remembrance Center 
