Written Testimony before the State of Maine Legislature 
LD 446 — Resolve, To Update Allowable Limits on Mortuary Trusts for the Purposes of 
MaineCare Eligibility 
Position: Support 
Testimony by James R. Fernald 
Past-President of the Maine Funeral Directors Association 
April 18, Z023 
Co-Chairs, Senator Baldacci, Rep. Meyer and members of the Health & Human Service 
Committee, my name is Jim Fernald and am proud to say that I am a ﬁfth general Funeral 
Service Practitioner. I am a member of the Maine Funeral Directors Association Legislative 
Committee. MFDA is comprised of Funeral Practitioners throughout the State of Maine. Asa 
Representative of MFDA, as well as an owner of Brookings-Smith Funeral Homes with three 
chapels in the Bangor Region, I wish to go on record as supporting LD446 as currently written. 
For over 30 years I have been meeting families who have lost a loved one, the worst day of their 
lives. When plans are not made in advance, funeral planning can be a daunting task for most 
survivors. Because of this experience many families have faced, they commonly inquire about 
preplanning and prefunding. Preplanning helps the survivors during an emotional time knowing 
what is important with a persons funeral arrangements. There are many details to consider and 
having a plan established is a gift to the survivors. Many people also prefund their plan. This is 
accomplished with a Maine Mortuary Trust Agreement which eases the ﬁnancial burden many 
survivors face. Having the ability to prefund these plans is a huge relief to families. As families 
apply for Maine Care, they are directed by the State of Maine DHHS to "Spend Down" assets to 
qualify for Maine Care. It is allowable to place funds in an irrevocable Maine Mortuary Trust 
agreement to establish the funds needed to cover the funeral plans. Since 1998, the maximum 
allowable mortuary trust deposit of $12,000 has not been an issue, but currently with inﬂation 
affecting every industry, the maximum plan allowance is often not enough. Some of these 
additional services are; funerals or ceremonies in the funeral home or church, cemetery, 
newspaper, ﬂorist, memorials and other third-party costs. This is why I support LD 446. 
It has been my responsibility as a funeral practitioner to meet with families after a loss — but 
also to help families with preplanning of funerals to give them peace of mind knowing their 
loved ones plan is taken care of. I also supervise 6 other funeral practitioners within our ﬁrm 
and on average make between 250-350 preplanned arrangements a year. I would estimate that 
75% of these plans are prefunded through a Mortuary Trust Account. Having the funeral plan 
funded by the Mortuary Trust Agreement gives peace of mind knowing everything is taken care 
of. By allowing the beneﬁt of “spending down” assets from an estate helps ﬁnancially with the 
state, when the death happens. For many families, the survivors cannot afford the most basic 
cremation arrangements. It is a huge beneﬁt to the state so that when the person passes who
has no ﬁnancial means and the family cannot afford services, that takes the burden of the 
expense away from the state through General Assistance Funeral services. Over the years this 
system of "spending down" has worked for all involved it just needs to be increased to reﬂect 
today's costs. 
To be speciﬁc there are many situational aspects of a persons life — and eventual death need to 
be deﬁned. Although cremation has been a trend and is less expensive, depending on the 
needs of the family, the costs are almost to the $12,000 limit. Some examples of additional 
third-party expenses are obituaries, digging of a grave, cemeteries, urn vaults, a reception 
following a service, clergy honorarium and church fees, and many of these costs go up 
additionally if they need to occur on a weekend. We have found many DHHS agents that are 
agents or guardians of people in their care also want to include the actual cost of purchasing the 
cemetery lot, monument of gravestone marker to help a family in caring for a special needs 
person. Depending on where you live in the state the costs vary. Cemetery costs in Southern 
Maine are more expensive — and sometime the cities are more expensive than rural parts of 
Maine. In some cases, we need to ship remains out of state for proper burial in a family lot so 
there are additional transportation fees especially when using airlines for shipping and the need 
for another funeral home to receive them in the other state. Even with veterans, many want to 
be shipped to Arlington Cemetery if eligible for proper burial. As you can see each case is 
unique and it is our role to make all the details important so that not only the survivors but the 
person who beneﬁts from the trust have peace of mind knowing all the details are taken care of 
and funded through a Mortuary Trust Agreement. 
We would appreciate your support on LD 446. lt has been 26 years since this the limit has been 
increased. There have been many changes in costs in our community and especially post Covid. 
All the costs associated with funeral services have increased incredibly in the past couple of 
years. Let's allow this increase so that the citizens of Maine can plan and pay for the services 
they would like through Mortuary Trusting. 
Thank you for your time, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
James "Jim" Fernald CFSP 
Funeral Practitioner/General Manager 
Brookings-Smith 
133 Center Street 
Bangor, ME 04401 
lim.fernald@BrookingsSmith.com
