Written Testimony before the State of Maine Legislature 
LD 446 – Resolve, to Update Allowable Limits on Mortuary Trusts for the Purposes of 
MaineCare Eligibility 
 
Position: Support 
 
Testimony By 
Matthew Richard 
  
Good Afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health & Human Services 
Committee.  
My name is Matthew Richard, and I am a funeral director with The Fortin Group Funeral Homes of 
Lewiston & Auburn. I have been a licensed funeral director for 26 years, and I am here on behalf of the 
Maine Funeral Directors Association in support of LD 446- Resolve, to Update Allowable Limits on 
Mortuary Trusts for the Purposes of MaineCare Eligibility.  
In the past 20 years, it has been my role and responsibility at The Fortin Group to help families plan for 
one of the worst days of their life, the loss of a loved one. Families that inquire and ultimately plan with 
a funeral home do so for two different reasons, emotionally and financially. Emotionally, they want to 
make sure that survivors or loved ones avoid having to make difficult decisions on the worst day of their 
life and relieve the burdens associated. Financially, these same families will often pre-pay for funeral 
goods and services, most often locking in costs from future inflationary increases. As with families that 
apply for MaineCare, these families are directed by the State of Maine DHHS to “spend-down” assets to 
qualify and part of this “spend-down” plan is to make sure an irrevocable Maine mortuary trust is 
created. I have met with several hundred families that applied for MaineCare in my career. For many 
years, the maximum allowable mortuary trust deposit of $12,000 was not an issue, but currently, and 
with inflation affecting everyone, in every industry, families that are wanting more funeral goods and 
services including but not limited to funeral home services, cemetery, church, newspaper, florist, and 
other third-party costs, this amount is simply is not enough. This is why I support LD 446.  
From manufacturing to the services industries, all of us have been affected by recent economic 
conditions and the inflationary rise of many, if not all goods and services in our state. In addition, funeral 
and associated costs have not escaped such increases. In fact, every aspect of funeral service has risen in 
the past several years. From the costs funeral homes face to stay in business 24-hours a day and seven 
days a week, family facing costs of funeral goods and services, and third-party clergy, newspaper, 
crematory, flower and cemetery costs, there is not any one instance where funeral pricing or these 
associated costs have remained flat over the years. However, the $12,000 maximum allowable to qualify 
for MaineCare has remained flat and needs to reflect these increases and to allow families applying for 
MaineCare to be able to set aside adequate funds to cover the associated funeral costs.   
Simply put, with your support of LD 446, it would avoid having families modify their wishes or pay out of 
pocket during a difficult time because pre-planning limits were reached qualifying for MaineCare. In 
addition, it would enable these future families applying for MaineCare to include ALL funeral and third-
party goods and services on the irrevocable Maine mortuary trust agreement. The purpose of this bill is 
only to update allowable deposited irrevocable funds for these essential goods and services.  
With your support, funeral directors around the state will be able to have more comfortable 
conversations about ALL of the wants and needs of the families they serve. Likewise, families that apply 
for MaineCare will have the peace-of-mind knowing that ALL is pre-planned; encompassing every wish 
and detail they are looking for. From my 20 plus years of helping families pre-plan, my witness is that 
families that have the ability to make unrestricted decisions based upon what they want and need, are 
the families that are best served during a difficult time. Isn’t this how we should be serving every 
grieving family?  
As you that you know, pre-planning and creating a mortuary trust with a funeral home is so beneficial to 
families that have entrusted a funeral home and professionals like ourselves, to make sure such goods 
and services are carried out the way that complete mortuary trust is written. So that in creating such an 
agreement while applying for MaineCare will include all of those wants and needs of the family at the 
time of death and minimizing having to pay out of pocket because of the current limitations. 
Recently, last fall, I met Linda, the Power of Attorney for her mother tasked to pre-pay for arrangements 
for her mother whom was in a nursing home and would soon run out of money within the next couple 
of months.  Linda told me that her mother’s wishes were to have the same arrangements like her dad 
had when he died in the early 1990’s. She explained that mom was to be buried in a blue outfit of 
Linda’s choosing and that she wanted the same casket as what her husband had all those years ago. The 
clergy, newspapers, and cemetery expenses were added to create the irrevocable mortuary trust but 
the total had come out to over the allowable limit. Knowing the allowable amount, Linda was 
devastated to learn that she had to modify her mother’s arrangement to stay below the $12,000.   
In closing, it is Linda’s story that motivates funeral professionals to explain the importance of increasing 
the allowable limit of irrevocable Maine mortuary trusts to qualify for MaineCare. With reading about 
inflation in almost every direction, now is the right time to increase the allowable amount qualification 
of the Maine mortuary trust, and more importantly, to accommodate the needs and wants of the 
funeral consumers in our great state of Maine.   
Thank you for your time, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
MATTHEW D RICHARD 
Sales Manager II/Funeral Director                                  
Maine & New Hampshire 
O 207.784.4584    C 207.754.1311 
The Fortin Group Funeral Home 
Crosman Funeral Home 
