"~31 -c. -1 , 
as /9’ 54/ - as -/ 
1 ~ J- ¢~ 15¢. g ta‘ an re a
’ »~ "’%i*1>'~t ti? 0%-7K‘Y‘§‘ i” i * "1 do 
was -,5» A1; 
*2“? ~’¢{'." 1.., .>_‘l‘1’:' vii’ /5 
as .15 Mr 
Q, as: 
May 9, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs, 
I join you today on behalf of the Maine Women’s Lobby. For over forty years, the Maine 
Women’s Lobby has advocated for public policy which increases the health, wellness, 
safety, and economic security of Maine women and girls, with a focus on the most 
marginalized populations and communities. We are here in support of LD 348, " An 
Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain Schools, ” and thank 
Representative Cloutier for sponsoring this important bill. 
Menstrual equity — that is, the ability for everyone who needs them to be able to 
access safe and affordable period products — is an issue of gender equity. Over half 
the population has periods for much of our lives, and it is as normal and natural as any 
other bodily function. Yet we still know that many Mainers camiot access these essential 
products. Because of the stigma associated with periods, good data is hard to ﬁnd, but we 
know that organizations in Maine such as One Less Worry, Collect the Cotton, andI 
Support the Girls gather and distribute over 100,000 pads and tampons at several dozen 
sites in our state each year — a clear indication of the need. 
When people can’t access essential needs, they have to resort to reusing products, using 
them for longer than indicated, using items not intended as period products, or skipping 
school or work. These alternatives can pose serious risks to health and hygiene as 
well as educational and economic security. 
This issue disproportionately affects people who also experience sexism — women, 
girls, trans- and nonbinary people — and it’s hard not to notice the notice the 
connections between period-stigma and sexism. In the same way that other health 
needs which are primarily for women and girls — such as reproductive care and pregnancy 
or post-partum care — are seen as ‘add-ons’ or optional, period products have long been 
treated as something individuals should address, rather than embraced as a normal human 
function. Toilet paper is freely accessible in school bathrooms. Period products should be 
as well.
Title IX, part of the Education Amendments of the United States Civil Rights Act, 
protects every individual from being excluded from the beneﬁts of publicly funded 
education. Some students ~ ahnost all of whom are young women — are skipping school, 
missing class, or putting their health in danger due to lack of access to basic needs 
products. In these cases, economic insecurity, biology, and stigma have teamed up to 
make school harder to navigate for some people. 
For this reason, there is a movement to consider menstrual equity under the 
protections of Title IX. Harvard Journal of Law and Gender has explored this issue at 
length‘ , the T4PA Center, with support from the U.S. Department of Education, Ofﬁce of 
Safe and Supportive Schools, has created an implementation guide for schools in part to 
help address this period-based diseriminationl , and as recently as December, the US Dept. 
Of Education was considering including access to period products as part of Title IX 
compliance? 
LD 348 is an affordable, common-sense way for us to ensure that we are making schools 
safer and more accessible for all students now — joining 16 other states‘ . We do not need 
to wait for a lawsuit or federal guidance to meet the spirit of Title IX, and make sure 
that every student who menstruates can access the products they need to show up to 
school ready to learn. 
We hope you will vote ‘yes’ on LD 348. 
Sincerely, 
Destie Hohman Sprague, Executive Director 
Maine Women’s Lobby / mainewomenorg
