Erin Lawrence
Gorham
LD 348
Testimony in support of
LD 348, “An Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain Schools”
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Month 05, Year 2023
 Senator Rafferty,  Representative Michael Brennan, and Distinguished/Esteemed 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, our 
names are Annie Cunningham, Grace Cunningham and Erin Lawrence. We are 
seniors at Gorham High School and a member of the Girl Up club. I am before you 
today and I am pleased to speak in favor of LD 348, “An Act to Make Menstrual 
Products Available in Certain Schools.”
This bill is of great importance to us because of how much we personally have been 
in a position where products weren’t closely available. Not having the products I need
has caused a flood of anxiety and greatly pulled my focus away from my education. I 
have not only experienced this personally, but I have watched my friends go through 
the exact same struggle. If menstrual products became easily accessible everyday at 
school, girls could focus on the learning rather than stress of what they may need. 
School is stressful enough for young girls, and being able to fill this simple need 
would have an immense impact.
This bill would benefit many young women and spare them from the anxiety and 
inconvenience of being caught without menstrual products. In all, being unsure if 
your friend has anything, if you have anything, all causes distraction and shifts focus 
away from school work. 
NPR wrote in an article titled, "The case for free tampons and pads in schools”, “A 
study found that 4 in 5 menstruating teens said they have either missed class time, or 
know someone who missed class time, because they did not have access to period 
products. This statistic emphasizes that this isn’t an issue for a few students, this is a 
widespread issue that at some point will affect almost every student with a period. 
This will not only result in time spent out of class, but also focus lost due to the 
anxiety and stress of not having the resources needed. We cannot afford to be taking 
away from this many people’s education when we know there is a simple solution. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions
you may have.

