10275 W. Higgins Road, Suite 280; Rosemont, Illinois 60018- 3884  US • 800.225.4772 / 847.982.0800 • FX: 847.982.1012 • issa.com  
Rosemont , US   •   Parramatta, AU   •   Milan, IT    •   Seoul, KR  
 
 
 
May 9 , 2023  
 RE: LD 348 (HP 222) , An Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain Schools  (SUPPORT)   
 
Dear Chairman Rafferty , Chairman Brennan, Members of the Joint Committee on Education and Cultural 
Affairs : 
 
On behalf of ISSA, the Worldwide Cleaning Industry Association , I am writing in SUPPORT  of LD 3 48. If 
enacted, this bill  would ensure access to period products across Maine  by requiring free period products 
in schools . Access to me nstrual products is a necessity for female students , yet most  schools do not 
provide these hygiene products  like are required to do for toilet paper, paper towels, and hand soap. 
This can lead to students missing school or being unable to fully participate in class because they do not 
have access to the products they need.  
 
According to State of the Period 2021, a study commissioned by Thinx & PERIOD, “84% (more than 4 in 5 teens) have either missed class time or know someone who missed class time because they did no t have 
access to period products.” Providing menstrual products in middle and high school bathrooms would help ensure that students have access to the products they need to manage their periods, reducing the 
burden on them and their families, and allowing them to participate in school without interruption.  
 
ISSA – The Worldwide Cleaning Industry  has more than 10,500 members worldwide including 22 
member companies  in Maine . ISSA represents  the full spectrum of the cleaning industry’s supply -chain —
including distributors, manufacturers, manufacturer  representatives, wholesalers,  building  service  
contractors,  in-house service providers, residential cleaners, and associated service members. This gives 
ISSA a unique perspective regarding the need for increased access  to period  products  and disposal 
solutions  in away -from -home bathrooms.  
 ISSA believes menstrual care solutions  are an essential hygie ne product that should be  made  as available 
in schools  bathrooms as soap, toilet paper, and paper towels. Unfortunately, far too few schools  
consider the stigma of being left unprepared while away from home without necessary  menstrual care 
products.  
 
LD 3 48 – would have a significant impact on the education and physical health of Maine  students .  
 
For these reasons, ISSA is pleased to SUPPORT LD 3 48 and stand ready to help schools  implement this 
policy by supplying them with the best practices for menstrual care  in bathrooms if passed.  
 Sincerely,  
 
John Nothdurft 
ISSA - Director of Government Affairs  

