1 HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES
5 _ 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Kristen Cloutier TINY: MAINE RELAY 711 
Assistant Majority Leader 
33 Charles St. 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
Phone: (207) 807-1637 
l<lristerr.Cloi1ticr@legislature.maine.gov 
May 9, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Kristen Cloutier introducing 
LD 348, An Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain Schools 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed colleagues of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Kristen Cloutier andI 
represent House District 94, which includes a portion of my hometown of Lewiston. I am here 
today to introduce LD 348, An Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain 
Schools. 
Let me be blunt: it is expensive to menstruate. 
A box of 45 tampons or 48 maxi pads now costs $10.47, a 10% increase from 2021 to 2022.‘ 
Lower-income and unhoused Mainers who menstruate often struggle with what is known as 
“period poverty, ” or the inability to afford sufficient menstrual products. And unfortunately, 
“period poverty” is a very real and very common problem in our state. 
It is not uncommon for menstrual products to be rationed in lower-income households, where 
only a limited number of pads or tampons may be available to a young teen. While my own 
teenage daughter is fortunate to live in a household that can provide for her needs, many of her 
peers in middle school are not. 
In addition to many Mainers not having the ﬁnancial resources to purchase the products they 
need, our society has created a stigma around menstruation by treating it as shameful and 
embarrassing. We refer to menstrual products as “sanitary ” due to the misperception that 
menstruating is somehow “unsanitary. ” 
And while many Maine schools currently provide pads and tampons in a nurses office, which is 
incredibly helpful to students who menstruate, if a student is taken by surprise by their menstrual 
period (which anyone who menstruates knows is a common occurence), or if they were to run 
1 
As tampon shonage drags on, Maine nonproﬁts brace for challenges. 
WXQSI/iV»lVV\N.iJ3f¥QOfCi8iiVDEVi'S,G(}I'\'\/2@22!'O6f23/QQWSFIMl5CO2SUK3ff?DOF1~ShOi"i8§8-ii ’!-f‘ﬁ8i['i€jbfiFlQ5-Ci?8ii9i'l§1 €S‘iOf—!}§."f‘|i3fOii§S~XCP8SCi'§ i2§ii 
District 94: Part of Lewiston
out of products during the school day, they must request a visit to the nurses office. These 
requests oﬂzen lead to further shame and embarrassment on the part of our students.. 
I ask that you consider the following scenario: 
Imagine a student who has only just begun menstruating, whose family cannot afford enough of 
the products they need. They are rationed two pads or tampons to use for the entire day, which 
for them, is not enough. They can request a hall pass and risk the embarrassment of telling their 
teacher why they need to go to the nurses office, or they can risk bleeding through their clothing 
and suffer the social consequences from their peers. In the case of the tampons, they also risk 
contracting Toxic Shock Syndrome, a rare, life-threatening complication caused by usinga 
tampon for longer than the recommended 4-8 hours. 
Given these limited choices, some students choose not to attend school at all when they are 
menstruating. We have created a system where a lack of access to menstrual products presents a 
lack of access to educational opportunities. We can and must do better. 
Just as we supply toilet paper to students to address other bodily functions, so should we supply 
menstrual products to address menstruation. Young people should not be ashamed of normal 
bodily functions that they have no control over. Nor should they be forced into life threatening 
situations because of that shame. 
This legislation may sound familiar. It was proposed to this committee in the 130th Legislature. 
Since deciding to reintroduce the bill this session, I have worked with organizations like The 
Period Project and Aunt Flo, state advocates and educators, legislators from other states who 
have implemented similar programs and with the committee analyst to determine and generate a 
much more realistic ﬁscal note that is nearly half the cost. I hope this makes the legislation a bit 
more palatable for both members of this committee and those serving on the Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs Committee. 
Thank you for your consideration of this crucial legislation and of furthering equity in our public 
schools. 
I am happy to answer any questions. 
District 94: Part of Lewiston
