 
43 Gabriel  Drive, Post Office  Box 587 
Augusta , ME 04332- 0587  
 t: 207.622.7524 | f: 207.622.0836  
www .MaineF amilyPlanning. org 
info@MaineF amilyPlanning.org 
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of  
LD 348, An Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain Schools  
May 9, 2023  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, Maine Family Planning is submitting testimony today in support of LD 348, An Act to 
Make Menstrual Prod ucts Available in Certain Schools.  
 
Maine Family Planning operates 18 community clinics specializing in sexual and reproductive health and 
provides pass -through funding for family planning services to 43 partners in reproductive health throughout the 
state. We also operate a Prevention Education department that works with K- 12 educators, schools, and youth -
serving organizations on comprehensive sexuality education that is inclusive, medically accurate, and age appropriate.   
 
“Period poverty” is a term use d to describe the inability to access and afford menstrual products and is part 
of a larger conversation about menstrual equity. Menstrual equity seeks to destigmatize menstruation, provide comprehensive reproductive health education, as well as ensure acc ess to menstrual products.  
 
Nearly 1 in 4 menstruators aged 13 -19 reported struggling to access menstrual products in a nationally 
representative survey commissioned by Thinx and PERIOD in 2021. The same survey reported that 85% of students believe that s chools should provide free menstrual products, and more than half of respondents said that the lack of 
products made them feel uncared for  by their school . (State- of-the-Period -2021.pdf
)   
 
"Often schools will say, 'We send anyone who asks for (period products) to the nurse's office,'" says Nancy 
Kramer, founder of Free the Tampons, a nonprofit advocating for freely accessible menstrual products in every public 
restroom. "And if you just thin k about this – that a young girl is in school, she goes to the bathroom and discovers she 
needs something. She then has to ask for permission to go to the nurse's office, go to the nurse's office, get what she 
needs and go back to the bathroom. How much cl ass has she missed during that time?" (From: How Schools Can 
Address Period Poverty | K -12 Schools | U.S. News (usnews.com)  Sept. 2022)  
 
A lack of access to menstrual products impacts students’ ability to focus and learn. Persistent shame and 
stigma associated with menstruation gives rise to fear and embarrassment about a normal bodily process. Lack of access to menstrual pr oducts exacerbates this anxiety. LD 348 is compassionate, common -sense legislation that 
provides tangible, meaningful support for students, and we urge the committee to vote unanimously ought to pass. Thank you.   
 
  
 
Mareisa Weil  
Vice President of Develo pment & Community Engagement  
Maine Family Planning  
 
  
 
