 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY  
 
LD 348 – Ought to Pass  
 
An Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain Schools  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS  
 
May 9 , 202 3 
 Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan  and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs , greetings. My name 
is Meagan Sway , and I am Policy Director  of the American Civil Liberties Union of 
Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and pr eserving civil 
liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our 
members, I submit this testimony in favor of LD 348. 
 
Since 1972, the ACLU’s Women’s Rights Program been working to secure 
gender equality and ensure that all women a nd girls can lead lives of dignity, free 
from discrimination. This legislation fits squarely within that work. Menstrual 
equity is a basic equity issue. As scholar and activist Jennifer Weiss -Wolf has 
written, “In order to have a fully equitable and partic ipatory society, we must have 
laws and policies that ensure menstrual products are safe and affordable and 
available for those who need them.”1  
 
Menstruation is a natural monthly occurrence, experienced by over half the 
population for much of their lives, and should not be treated differently than any 
other basic bodily function. It’s unhygienic to not to have access to menstrual 
products, no less so than to lack access to toilet paper.  
 
Lack of access to menstrual products as the result of policies that do not 
consider the needs of people who menstruate in schools is a form of gender -based 
exclusion. Failure to consider menstrual needs is a form of sex -based discrimination 
that disproportionately affects women. Furthermore, lack of access can be 
particularly harmful to nonbinary people and transgender men who have 
disproportionate rates of poverty.  
 
Young people experiencing poverty are most affected by lack of access to 
menstrual products. These individuals, who are dependent on their parents for 
 
1 Jennifer Weiss -Wolf, Periods Gone Public: Taking a Stand for Menstrual Equity  
xvi (2017).  
  
 
resources , often cannot afford sufficient menstrual products and so 
disproportionately suffer the medical2 and psychological impact of reusing products, 
using products for longer than indicated, or not using any products at all. They are 
also more likely to have to suffer the societal effects of lack of access including 
problems with school attendance and the appearance of being unhygienic. Nobody 
in Maine should have to miss school simply because they cannot afford menstrual 
products.  
 
For schools to be equi table places of learning where every student has the 
chance to succeed, they must provide free menstrual products to everyone who 
menstruates. We urge you to support this legislation.  
 
2 The potential medical issues facing people without access to menstrual products, 
include infections that can cause susceptibility to cervical cancer and infertility.  
