 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health of all Maine people 
 
TO:   Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
 
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate  
 
DATE:  May 9, 2023 
 
SUPPORT – LD 348 , An Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain Schools  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, my name is Mikenzie Dwyer. I am a Public Health and Government Affairs 
Associate with the Maine Medical Association and I live in Windham. We are pleased to submit 
the following comments in support of LD 348, to make menstrual products available in all 
school bathrooms for grades 6 to 12.  
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. 
 
In the 130th legislature, LD 452 was passed through the committee with an ought to pass as 
amended report but died on adjournment. This bill seeks to complete the work in the 130th 
legislature and provide access to menstrual products for all students in school. The Maine 
Medical Association supports the intent to address period poverty – which 23% of students 
struggle with.  
 
Schools began implementing free school meals for all children in the 2019-21 school year, 
recognizing the need for our students to food in their bellies to learn. 34% of students in public 
schools qualify for free lunch. Students also need their hygiene needs met well to feel 
comfortable and confident in the classroom – setting them up for success. The Alliance for 
Period Supplies  has found 1 in 4 teens have missed class due to lack of access to period 
supplies.  
 
Public assistance programs such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and 
SNAP for women, infants, and children (WIC), although help to feed kids while they are home, 
do not allow for the purchase of feminine hygiene products. A year’s supply of tampons and 
pads cost around $70 to $120 – this does not include the cost of painkillers, heating pads, 
ruined underwear, etc. This estimate also does not account for conditions such as 
endometriosis which can cause sometimes month-long periods.  
 
The covid-19 pandemic exacerbated many inequities, including period poverty, which 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 negatively affected physical and mental health. One study  found about 49.4% of women 
experiencing period poverty had depressive symptoms, compared to 28.6% of women who 
had not experienced menstrual poverty. Providing access to menstrual products in schools for 
all students can help to address some of the determinants of our mental health crisis. 
 
The Maine Medical Association is dedicated to expanding access to care and improving health 
outcomes for all Mainers. LD 348 supports our student’s health and education. It is for these 
reasons we urge the committee to vote ought-to-pass on LD 348. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration of our comments. We are happy to answer any 
questions you may have. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Mikenzie Dwyer  
 
