 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Nicole Clegg and I serve as 
the interim CEO at Planned Parenthood of Northern New England, and I am pleased to 
submit testimony in support of LD 348.   
 
Planned Parenthood of Northern New England provides comprehensive reproductive 
and sexual health care to more than 14,000 people in Maine at four health centers 
located in Biddeford, Portland, Sanford, and Topsham. People turn to us for affordable, 
high-quality care including wellness exams, birth control, disease testing and treatment, 
cancer screenings, abortion care as well as a variety of primary care services. We see 
everyone who comes to us regardless of ability to pay, and in a typical year, we provide 
more than $4 million in free and discounted care to our communities in Maine.   
 
As a mission driven health care provider, we fundamentally believe everyone should be 
able to get affordable, high quality sexual and reproductive health care in their 
communities, no matter where they live or how much money they make, and we 
advocate for policies that help make this vision a reality.   
 
Lack of consistent, affordable access to menstrual products is a significant burden for 
many who are unable to reliably access or pay for them. People who menstruate spend 
over $1000 in the course of their lifetime on menstrual products, a cost that is prohibitive 
for many. A lack of access to menstrual products has been associated with negative 
health outcomes, including higher rates of cervical cancer and increased rates of 
infection, school absenteeism, and feelings of shame, fear, anxiety, and distraction.  
Unfortunately, the consequences are often most heavily borne by vulnerable groups 
including school-aged young people: 
  
● More than 4 in 5 students have either missed class time or know a classmate 
who missed class time because they did not have access to period products1. 
● 51% of students have used a menstrual product for longer than medically 
recommended because they did not have adequate access to products putting 
their health at risk2.  
 
1 “State of the Period:The widespread impact of period poverty on US students”, Survey Commissioned 
by THINX and PERIOD, 2019,  
2 “State of the Period 2021:The widespread impact of period poverty on US students”, Survey 
Commissioned by THINX and PERIOD, May 2021. 

● 38% often or sometimes cannot do their best schoolwork due to lack of access to 
period products.3 
● Nearly 1 in 4 students have struggled to afford period products4 
● 16% of students reported choosing to buy period products over food or clothes 
during the COVID pandemic. Latinx, rural, low-income, and college students 
were most impacted5.  
 
The lack of access coupled with the stigma surrounding menstruation can be 
particularly harmful for students. A recent survey found that the majority of teens 
reported feelings of shame, self-consciousness, and/or embarrassment about their 
periods, “reflect[ing] negative sentiments that follow [them] throughout their lives on 
what is typically a monthly basis, and a foundation for increased emotional anxiety with 
numerous potential effects.” In the same survey, 51% of students stated that they feel 
like their school does not care about them if they do not provide free period products in 
their bathrooms.6 
 
School bathrooms stock products, such as toilet paper, soap, and paper towels, and we 
need to be approaching menstrual products with the same perspective, they are 
necessities. LD 348 is an important step in addressing menstrual equity, enabling 
people with periods the freedom to work, study, and participate with basic dignity.  This 
legislation will benefit the young people of Maine, particularly low-income students, both 
directly by providing consistent access to menstrual products and indirectly by reducing 
stigma around menstruation via the visible provision of products alongside other 
necessities like soap and toilet paper. Periods should not hold anyone back, period.   
 
For these reasons, I strongly urge you to vote to pass LD 348 
 
3 Ibid 
4 Ibid 
5 Ibid 
6 “State of the Period:The widespread impact of period poverty on US students”, Survey Commissioned 
by THINX and PERIOD, 2019 
