V MaineTrans.Net 
/~\ ;./ redeﬁning gender EQUALITYMAINE 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Testimony of Maine Transgender Network & EqualityMaine 
LD 348: "An Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain Schools" 
May 9, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Health and Human 
Sen/ices Committee, my name is Quinn Gormley, I use she/her pronouns, and l am here today 
as the Executive Director of the Maine Transgender Network, Maine's sole organization 
specifically dedicated to supporting transgender people and those who love us, as well as 
EqualityMaine in enthusiastic support of LD 348, "An Act to Make Menstrual Products 
Available in Certain Schools." 
Much of the other testimony today highlights the serious equity concerns with the availability of 
menstrual products. People who menstruate need these products, yet too many struggle to 
access them. Young people, with no control over the conditions of their lives, should not have 
their education and developmentinterrupted just because they cannot afford, or perhaps forgot 
as we all do sometimes, a hygiene product they need. 
We are especially pleased that this bill is drafted in a gender inclusive manner. As our society 
grows increasingly inclusive, an understanding that more people than cisgender women require 
these products is growing. Simply put, it is important that we keep the "men" in "menstruation." 
Trans boys, and nonbinary people assigned female at birth that may choose to use the boy's 
room at school have need of these products too and they deserve to be included. 
That said, there are more reasons than transgender inclusion to put these products in the boy's 
room. Young men are increasingly aware of the needs of their peers. They wish to be supportive 
of their friends, their romantic partners, and their siblings who menstruate. Perhaps their sister is 
experiencing her first period and is embarrassed and unsure what to do in the middle of the 
school day. A kind brother could be supportive in this moment and grab her products she needs 
from the bathroom, reducing her chances of being spotted getting them herself. Including these 
products in the boy's room will make offering this support easier and less stigmatizing. 
This bill is a simple solution to a long overlooked problem. We urge you to vote ought to pass 
and to support the implementing funding of this bill. 
Thank you, 
Quinn Gormley 
On behalf of: MaineTransNet, EqualityMaine
