Rachel  Cummings 
Gorham 
LD 348
Testimony in support of
LD 348, “An Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain Schools”
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Month 05, Year 2023
Senator Rafferty,  Representative Michael Brennan, and Distinguished/Esteemed 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, our 
names are Rita Cummings and Rachel Cummings. We are students at Gorham High 
School and a member of GirlUp Club, whose mission is to create gender equity and 
help girls in need. . We are before you today and pleased to speak in favor of LD 348,
“An Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain Schools.”
We are writing to encourage you to take action by addressing period poverty among 
students in Maine. According to the Alliance for Period Supplies, 1 in 6 Maine 
women between the ages of 12 and 44 are living below the Federal poverty line. 
Many of these low-income female students are unable to afford necessary menstrual 
products — basic hygiene necessities. This reality highlights the need for menstrual 
equity: safe and affordable access to menstrual hygiene tools. 
Fifteen states currently have legislation to ensure the availability of free access to 
menstrual products in schools (California, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Hawaii, 
Maryland, New Hampshire, New York, Nevada, Oregon, Rhode Island, Utah, 
Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and Washington D.C.). Additionally, five other 
states have set up grant funding to provide period products in schools (Alabama, 
Missouri, Georgia, and North Carolina). The details of legislation surrounding free 
period product availability in schools differ between states. Some states require period
products to be available in middle and high schools, and some include elementary 
schools. Some also include public universities and colleges. Regardless of the slight 
differences between these bills, they address the need for the availability of menstrual 
products for students. 
Having free menstrual products in schools will not only address period poverty, but it 
will foster gender equity and enable all students to attend class. According to NPR, 
recent studies show that around a fourth of menstruating students still feel a stigma 
around menstruation. Another study showed that around 70% of students felt that 
their school environment made them feel self-conscious about their period. By 
making such menstrual products available, Maine will be taking steps toward ending 
the shame and stigma around periods. Additionally, having these menstrual products 
will allow students to attend class without the interruption of starting a period and not 
having the necessary menstrual supplies. Less class time will be missed, allowing for 
a more effective and successful education. 
Dispensing menstrual products in schools will help normalize periods by enabling all 
students to attend class while decreasing the stigma that often surrounds periods. Such
legislation will be able to address period poverty and supply the necessary menstrual 
products to students in need in Maine, allowing Maine to set an example of how a 
state can support its menstruating students.
