 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 Board of Directors  
 Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Alyssa Goodwin, MD  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward**  
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, 
PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Rep s 
**Medical Student 
Representatives  
 
Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed  
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207- 480- 4185 
 
www.maineaap.org    
 
TESTIMONY IN FAVOR OF  
LD 348: An Act to Make Menstrual Products Available in Certain Schools  
 
Good day, Senator Rafferty and Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. I am a mother, pediatrician  
and member of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics , and proud 
resident of Hallowell.  
 
Last fall, as my son and I walked through the lobby of his middle school, we passed a 
table where supplies were being collected for local shelters. I suggested that we 
purchase menstrual supplies to contribute. “Actually, we really need menstrual supplies 
here in our school. We run out really quickly ” he informed me. He explained that the civil 
rights group had been placing supplies in bathrooms for menstruating students to use, 
but that they quickly ran out as so many students are in need.   
 
I left the school with my thoughts racing. How could this be an issue in 2023? How is it 
possible that I was completely unaware of the issue until my 13-year -old son informed 
me of the problem? Later t hat day, as I drove to Walgreens to purchase supplies,  I drove 
by the state house. I couldn’t help but wonder if the people hard at work inside were 
similarly unaware of this issue.   
 
Menstrual products are essential for well -being and are a necessity for full participation 
of all people who menstruate. Inade quate menstrual support is associated with both 
health and psycho -social issues. Inadequate access to menstrual products can cause 
physical illness from infection, increased rates of absence from school and activities, and 
psychological stress. As we as a state look to improve the health of our population, 
decrease absenteeism, and address the mental health crisis among our youth, it just 
makes sense to address menstrual equity in our schools.   
 
I ask that you vote in favor of this bill so that schools may receive funding to distribute 
and stock menstrual supplies in all bathrooms for students in grades 6 -12. Lack of access 
to menstrual products is a problem with an exceedingly straightforward solution. 
Providing these products would be a concrete step towar ds increased equity in our 
state.  
 
Thank you for the work you do for our beautiful state and  thank you for your 
consideration of this bill.   
 
 
Rosamund Davis MD, FAAP  
 
Hallowell, Maine 04374  
 
 
