L 45 Melville Street Suite1 
ASSOCIATION or Augusta, ME 04330 
M A| N E Phone: 207 623.1149 
Volceof M i eRetail wwwretailmaine org a" 
March 30, 2023 
Senator Mike Tipping, Chair 
Representative Amy Roeder, Chair 
Members of the Labor and Housing Committee 
RE: Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 855, An Act to Provide that the Minimum Wage Increases by the 
Rolling Average of the Cost of Living of the Previous 3 Years; QUALIFIED SUPPORT of LD 998, An Act to 
Remove the Cost-of-living Adjustment from the Minimum Wage Laws 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing Committee: 
My name is Curtis Picard and lam the President and CEO of the Retail Association of Maine. I ama 
resident of Topsham. We have more than 350 members statewide and represent retailers of all sizes. 
Maine's retailers employ more than 85,000 Mainers. I am here today to provide support for LD 855, and 
qualified support for LD 998. 
First, while we fully recognize that the chance of either LD 855 or LD 998 getting majority support from 
this committee or the full legislature is slim to none, l would not be doing my job if l did not convey to 
the committee that we have had members reach out to us about this issue and about LD 998 
speciﬁcally. The annual increases are difficult for small businesses to swallow. The skyrocketing costs of 
doing business are real. That includes wages, electricity, and cost of goods. You see that in the prices of 
everything you buy in the grocery store and elsewhere. As we have said before, the annual indexing 
doesn'tjust impact the people making minimum wage, it impacts other staffers who rightly expect 
similar annual increases. 
LD 998 would remove the annual indexing of the minimum wage, and LD 855 uses a three-year rolling 
average but still allows for annual increases. Instead, we would recommend limiting the increases to 
every three years using an average ofthe previous three years. This would bring a bit more predictability 
to businesses, and we think this is a more reasonable approach that better balances the needs of 
employers with the needs of employees. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our thoughts. 
Sincerely, 
Curtis Picard, CAE 
President and CEO
