 
 
 
April 24th, 2023  
 
Senator Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
Representative Lori Gramlich , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in OPPOSITION to L.D. 1621: An Act Regarding Environmental Justice  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a netw ork of more than 5,000 small and large companies  across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in respectful opposition to L.D. 1621. 
 
The Chamber has concerns around the term, “environmental justice” and the impact it could hav e on the 
permitting process in Maine. It is critical that, when implementing this in the regulatory processes at the DEP, it 
does not do anything to further complicate the permitting process. We already have a rigorous and thorough 
permitting process in Ma ine, and anything that adds more challenges for projects to come online is of concern 
to the business community. For example, as we urgently need to combat the environmental and economic 
challenges that climate change imposes on all of us, it is important that we have a streamlined process so 
various renewable energy projects can get permitted and come online as soon as possible. The Maine State 
Chamber is a member of the Maine Climate Council, and we support the carbon reduction goals of 45% by 
2030 and 80 % by 2050. We also support adding 30,000 new clean energy jobs. To reach these goals, we need a 
consistent regulatory process.  
 
We would respectfully encourage the committee to vote, “ought not to pass” on L.D. 1621. Thank you for the 
opportunity to submit testimony. I am happy to bring back any additional information to the work session.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
