x
i
1
~
i 
Testimony of Maine’s Environmental Priorities Coalition 
in support of 
“An Act Regarding Environmental Justice” 
Before the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Committee on Environment and 
Natural Resources: 
My name is Beth Aheam and I offer testimony on behalf of the Environmental Priorities 
Coalition (EPC). The EPC is a partnership of thirty-seven conservation, environmental, and 
public health organizations who unify around a cormnon agenda every year. The EPC represents 
over 120,000 members in Maine who want to protect the good health, good jobs, and quality of 
life that depend upon a healthy environment. We wholeheartedly support LD 1621, which 
advances those goals by ‘deﬁning, prioritizing, and supporting meaningﬁll community 
engagement, equitable decision-making, and just environmental policies. 
In Maine and across the world, climate change and environmental concerns pose the greatest 
threats to communities that are already marginalized, overburdened, or underserved. For 
example, people who live in substandard housing, who are experiencing homelessness, or who 
lack access to reliable transportation are more vulnerable to the impacts of extreme weather 
caused by climate change. Because climate change and environmental hazards are inextricably 
linked to equity, solutions must be, too. 
Over several years, entities including the Maine Climate Council and its Equity Subcommittee, 
the Governor ’s Ofﬁce of Policy Imiovation and the Future, and the prior Legislature — as well as 
many, many Maine people and organizations — have acknowledged the urgency of equitably
addressing the climate crisis. Just last year, environmental justice legislation ‘ was enacted into 
law, with the full support of this committee and of the Department of Enviromnental Protection 
before being removed from the books during the appropriations process. Hence, Maine still lacks 
a legal framework to ensure that environmental policies are developed, implemented, and 
enforced in close partnership with the communities impacted "ﬁrst and worst" by environmental 
and climate threats. 
This is unacceptable. 
Maine needs processes and deﬁnitions to consider environmental justice and to ensure the 
thoughtful distribution of beneﬁts and mitigation of burdens as we implement the strategies of 
Maine Wont‘ Wait, the State’s four-year plan for climate action. Current structures and actions are 
insufficient and cannot be improved Without adequate stafﬁng and leadership. 
Many EPC member organizations will Weigh in with speciﬁc suggestions for deﬁnitions, 
processes, and timelines to strengthen and implement An Act Regarding Environmental Justice. 
As you evaluate and reﬁne these details, the entire Coalition urges your full-throated support of 
LD 1621, which must include an adequate ﬁscal note. 
Meaningful community engagement requires a meaningful investment in enviromnental justice 
leadership. Maine must settle for nothing less. 
Thank you. 
Beth Aheam 
Director of Government Affairs 
Maine Conservation Voters 
1 
130th Legislature, LD 2()l8: An Act To Implement Recommendations Regarding the lneorporation of Equity; 
Con;;:inie1'aIions in Regulatory Decision Making
