1 
 
 
 
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
LD 1621  
An Act Regarding Environmental Justice  
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT  
Public Hearing  
April 24, 2023  
 
 
Honorable S enator Brenner, C hair; Honorable Representative Gramlich, Chair; and 
Honorable Committee Members:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony IN SUPPORT for LD 1621.  My 
name is Jacquelyn Elliott . For nearly three decades I have been an environmental health 
and justice advocate and today  I am offering testimony as a Board Member of Slingshot .  
Slingshot is an environmental health and justice organization, working alongside  
communities most impacted by environmental health threats to take aim at p olluters  and 
build community power. Whether your community is facing polluted water, a leaking  
landfill or air pollution from oil tanks in your backyard, you deserve to know the facts,  
make your voice heard, and create the changes you want to see. Slingsho t is a team of  
seasoned organizers, bringing decades of experience working on campaigns in the region  
to organize alongside communities for a healthier, more just world.   
From this work, we know that Maine people  are currently living the nightmare of 
lands, waters, wi ldlife and human bodies contaminated with health -threatening levels of 
PFAS1 forever chemicals. Families have lost farms, livestock, crops and livelihoods  and are 
 
1 PFAS Project Lab, Northeastern University, Studying Social, Scientific, and Political Factors of Per - and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances . https://pfasproject.com/   

2 
 
facing uncertain f utures around health outcomes for themselves and loved ones . They 
are victims of regulation and a process that did not adequately consider harmful impacts  
resulting from policy decisions . PFAS are only one class of toxic chemicals that threaten 
the well -being of Maine’s people .  
Our indigenous neighbors cannot follow their cultural subsistence practices 
because the fish2 in the rivers sacred to them, are contaminated with PFAS , dioxin and 
other toxics at levels that could endanger health if consumed traditionally .  It is clear we 
need a definition of EJ (Envi ronmental Justice) in Maine law to adequately  protect the 
communities in  this state.  
LD 1621  replicates the DEP  (Department of Environmental Protection) -related 
portions of LD 2018 . This legislation was  voted OUGHT TO PASS  last year  in the ENR (Joint 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources) , and was supported by DEP  
(Department of Environmental Protection) . The bill was enacted into law and 
subsequently  removed during the appropriations p rocess . 
 Advancing toward the goal of EJ in decisions will require political courage and a 
commitment to provid e resources to implement policy.  Outcomes  from decisions 
intersect . Policy  choices are not isolated one from another. Bott om line, decisions  are 
made that determine the way people  get to live their  lives and raise their  families. As a 
once -resid ent of a front line community and someone who continues to work with those 
living in front line communities, I welcome this effort with LD 1621  to codify the rights of 
all citizens to live in neighborhoods protected from environmental pollution ; to have the 
option for  equal and meaningful participation in the development, employment, and 
application of environmental laws and policies; and able to depend on the fact those 
rights are enshrined in statute and rules  as a public purpose . 
However, for this bill to be effective, we need to make it significantly stronger.  We 
need to add definitions for Environmental Burdens & Benefits, as well as  EJ principles. We 
 
2 2021 ATSDR Annual Report, Helping the Penobscot Indian Nation. Review of Anadromous Fish for 
Consumption : 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/2021 -annual -report/listening -responding -taking -action/Penobscot -
River.html#:~:text=ATSDR%20identified%20anadromous%20fish%20species%20in%20the%20river,were%2
0identified%20and%20described%20in%20this%20fact%20sheet .  
3 
 
need to require the DEP to have a community engagement plan and conduct a  cumulative 
environmental be nefit and burden analysis whenever they are facing a  decision with the 
potential to impact Maine ’s EJ populations. We  need an EJ Advisory Council, and we must 
have  deadlines to  ensure these actions are implemented.  
LD 1621  establishes viable steps to begin that process  and seeks to provide state 
agencies and policy makers with a framework for decision making that includes EJ 
considerations. Maine must have clear and enforceable methods for engaging  impacte d 
citizens  and defending  the rights of those customarily disregarded and exploited  in policy 
decisions. LD 1621 acknowledges  long overdue safeguards  for Maine’s most neglected 
citizens who currently  face excessive environmental, energy, and transportation burdens  
and challenges . LD 1621  moves in the direction for all Maine’s citizens to share benefits 
and burdens of environmental policy decisions more equitably. It is a n essential 
beginning.  
 
Additional Considerations Going Forward:  
• We must continue to enhance opportunities for most -impacted citizens to 
participate meaningfully in environmental decision s from the beginning of 
those processes . 
• We must improve environmental review for new or expanding sources of 
air emissions and polluting discharges to water sources  in already 
burdened communities with particular attention to waste  processing and 
disposal  operations ; energy  production ; manufacturing  and other facili ty 
operations . 
• There should be consideration of cumulative and synergistic impacts from 
all contributing sources  in an area within a context of presumed 
contamination as relates to known toxics and exposures .   
• We must ensure  that existing facilities in these burdened communities 
comply with all environmental rules and regulations  and employ CEM 
4 
 
(continuous emissions monitoring) and utiliz e BACT (best achievable 
control technology ) for their operations . 
• We should encourage investment where there is existing infrastructure 
and the opportunity  to remediate  contaminated site s and develop clean, 
productive use  of that property . 
 
Amendments have been brought forth for consideration  that further clarify the 
defin ition of EJ and its application . I would ask that the Committee vote OUGHT TO PASS  
WITH PROPOSED AMENDMENTS . 
 
Jacquelyn Elliott , Board Member  
Slingshot  
Waterboro, ME  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com   
