 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1621, An Act Regarding Environmental Justice  
 
To the Joint Standing Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources  
by Josh Caldwell, Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  
April 24, 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, honorable members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Josh Caldwell , and I am the Climate and Clean Energy 
Outreach Coordinator  at the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). NRCM has been 
working for more than 60 years to protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s environment. I’m here 
today on behalf of our 25,000 members and supporters to testify in strong support of LD 1621, 
An Act Regarding Environmental Justice.  
Historically marginalized and underserved communities  are disproportionately impacted by 
climate change and environmental degradation .1 In order to effectively respond to the se 
inequitable effects, it is paramount that our state agencies provide due consideration to 
environmental  justice popula tions  and frontline communities in decision making.  Further, it is 
essential that definitions delineating “environmental justice,” “frontline communities,”  and 
related terminology are legally established in order to ensure statewide  accountability to those 
shared definitions.  Right now, state agencies do not have the tools to appropriately assess 
environmental justice in their decision making, and LD 1621  would help to fix that.  
The Maine Climate Council’s Equity Subcommittee has provided recommendations that call for 
meaningf ul community engagement and equitable implementation of the strategies contained 
within Maine’s Climate Action Plan.2 Without formal guidance for state agencies, th ese 
recommendation s are not enforceable.  Adopting environmental justice definitions and practices 
that adequately reflect Maine’s demographics and socio -cultura l characteristics will enable 
pursuit of our environmental and climate goals in an equitable manner with engagement from the 
communities  that are most impacted.  
LD 2018, passed last year, established the definitions for “environmental justice,” “frontline 
communities,” “fair treatment ,” and “meaningful engagement” following several community -
engaged listening sessions facilitated  by the Governor’s Office of Policy Innovation and the 
Future.  However, those definitions were stripped  from the bill during the appropriations process. 
 
1 https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa -report -shows -disproportionate -impacts -climate -change -socially -
vulnerable  
2 https://www.maine.gov/future/initiatives/climate/climate -council/equity -subcommittee  

LD 1621 would ensure that these same definitions become codified into law so that our state 
agencies can act upon them.  
LD 1621 would provide needed protections for Maine’s marginalized and underserved 
communities as we move forward on our climate response. Ma ine is already a national leader 
when it comes to implementing climate solutions, and it is past time that we  solidify our 
commitment to environmental justice w hile engaging the communities that are currently facing 
the brunt of climate change and associated environmental degradation.  
For these reasons, we urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on this important legislation. I 
am happy to answer any questions y ou may have.  
