April 24, 2023' 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director COIISETVEXIICY 
The Nature Conservancy in l\/lair .- 
Mame l<aitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org ' ' 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
RE: LD 1621 - An Act Regarding Environmental Justice 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and I am 
the Government Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in l\/laine. lappreciate 
this opportunity testify in support of LD 1621 - An Act Regarding Environmental 
Justice. 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on-the-ground solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborativeapproach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature 
Conservancy has been leading cc nservation in Maine for moreythan 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate.' 
TNC is especially grateful for the leadership and partnership from Speaker Talbot Ross 
on this bill. Our organization and the Conservation Law Foundation approached the 
Speaker and her team in December of last year to discuss how we could take tangible 
steps forward on environmental justice in Maine. We are deeply honored to be able to 
work alongside her to advance this important legislation and are eager to continue this 
work well beyond this session. Additionally, we are grateful to the many sponsors of 
this bill, including many members of this committee. 
Our organization has come to understand that centering equity in our work is critical to 
achieving TNC's vision of a world where ”the diversity of life thrives” . Conservation 
does not happen in a vacuum. The work of conserving natural places inevitably 
intersects with and affects human communities in ways that create both benefits and 
burdens. As conservationists and as people, it is our responsibility to understand the 
full range of these impacts—especially the burdens they impose on communities that 
have historically experienced oppression and marginalization, and still do today. 
LD 1621 has three critical components. lt adds definitions for key terms including 
"environmental justice" , "frontline communities" and criteria to define “meaningful 
14 l\/laine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, Maine 04011 natureorggmaine
involvement" . The bill then requires a more affirmative and proactive approach, 
requiring the Maine Department of Environmental Pro ection to actively seek out and 
facilitate the involvement of communities that may be potentially affected bya 
decision. Finally, it provides much needed financial capacity to the Department to carry 
out the provisions of this bill. . 
TNC unequivocally supports this bill, and we see it as a great step towards more future 
action on environmental justice in Maine. We are committed to pursuing additional 
efforts in future legislative session that include measures to ensure the equitabler 
distribution of environmental benefits and burdens, addressing cumulative impacts to 
environmental justice populations, and exploring how l\/laine agencies might develop 
specific community engagement plans in all decision making. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment in support of LD 1621. lam happy to answer 
questions now or in the future. .
