in A ' "s 
///V—\ '\ 
3,/. Maine Forest Products Council 
The voice of Maine's forest economy A \_,0 
'“-T“"“T“‘“"“""“"‘T"““’“"“""‘““Q‘IL“‘“r"3"?‘i1Er»>==~1~ “\‘<§K"!'F'!P ““<"“"=*-""'""" ‘“'~"" ------------- W,...”w.W..m...,,...........c,....W...e.,...m....,.........w.._sMW.mm... . . , , , , , , 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 1621 
“An Act Regarding Environmental Justice” 
April 24, 2023 
Patrick Strauch, Executive Director 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, l’m Patrick Strauch of Exeter and I’m here before 
you today to testify on behalf of the Maine Forest Products Council neither for nor 
against LD 1621, “An Act Regarding Environmental Justice. ” 
As drafted, LD 1621 would require “fair and equitable access” to the Department of 
Environmental Protection ’s decision-making process for certain populations that are 
deemed “environmental justice populations ” and “frontline communities ” with funds set 
aside for four new department positions and to reimburse certain citizens for travel 
expenses, facility rentals and meeting expenses. While the Council agrees 
wholeheartedly that all populations should have equal access to DEP’s regulatory 
process, we have concerns with some provisions included within this bill. 
While reviewing this legislation, please consider the following: 
Q As currently written, the legislation does not suggest evaluating policies and 
procedures in place at the State and Federal level (EPA) so that Maine’s compliance 
with Environmental Justice standards could be measured and goals established. Much of 
the emphasis by EPA is focused on education and outreach programs that are important 
ﬁrst steps in building awareness and understanding of EJ principles. As the decision 
makers, it would be inappropriate for the DEP to also ﬁll the role of advocate for any 
participant in a regulatory proceeding. There is a fine line between facilitating access 
and advocacy in a proceeding. We need to ensure that the department maintains its role 
as unbiased decision maker. 
0 If the committee wants to facilitate access and advocacy for environmental justice 
communities, it should consider ways to provide resources to environmental justice 
populations that do not potentially conﬂict with the department ’s regulatory role. 
0 The regulatory framework in Maine is strict and focuses on outcomes that protect 
all Mainers and recognize important communities as well. An example would be the 
process that took place just a few years ago with DEP, the Tribes and industry 
representatives that resulted in the most restrictive ﬁsh consumption rates in the nation for waterways 
that were identiﬁed as important to sustaining Tribal nations. 
535 Civic Center Drive, Augusta ME 04330 207-622-9288 www.maineforest.org
I Since the pandemic, the DEP, the Legislature and other state agencies have made available more ways to 
participate in proceedings through digital platforms such as Zoom. This has allowed for people far 
beyond the borders of our state, and even from across the globe, to participate in the rulemaking process. 
The state could ensure that the environmental justice populations can access these platforms. 
Q This legislation contains some broad deﬁnitions that are concerning. What are the “negative 
environmental consequences ” outlined under “Fair treatment ”? Environmental requirements are 
designed to meet environmental and health criteria for all Maine citizens regardless of where a mill is 
situated in the state. If a mill fails to demonstrate compliance, its licenses would be revoked. 
0 The deﬁnition of “frontline communities ” means “those people and communities that experience the 
consequences of climate change first and to a greater degree than other people in Maine communities. ” 
To us, it is unclear which Maine communities experience more of an impact than others. Are we 
considering how climate change impacts industrial activities here in Maine‘? With sea levels rising, does 
this mean affluent coastal towns are “frontline communities ” that deserve preferential treatment over 
Maine’s more economically stressed communities? More work needs to be done to clarify this 
deﬁnition. 
In closing, the Council’s membership has deep roots in rural Maine that supports our $8.1 billion industry, and 
in turn, we provide more than 33,500 jobs and an $1.8 billion annual payroll. One out of every 24jobs in Maine 
are linked to the forest products industry, and many of those jobs are in the very underserved communities that 
would, in theory, be served by this legislation. When our mills close, there is a real impact on the people who 
live in rural Maine. When we thrive, our communities thrive and when our communities thrive, we do too. Our 
past and future are intricately linked to all the people of Maine. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have at the work session.
2
