Solutions foru. 
Toxic-Free Tomorrow 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health 
IN SUPPORT of LD 1621 “An Act Regarding Environmental Justice” 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee. My name is Sarah Woodbury, and l am the director of advocacy for 
Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health’s mission is to make sure that everyone has equal 
access to safe food and drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic-free and 
climate friendly. Please accept this testimony in support of 1621 “An Act Regarding 
Environmental Justice” 
During the 130"‘ legislature, the legislature tasked the Governor's Office of Policy, Innovation 
and the Future (GOPIF) with advancing recommendations on incorporating equity 
considerations into the decision-making process of the various agencies. That resulted ina 
report with recommendations and legislation to move that process fon/vard. While the bill passed 
last session, it did" 
not get funded and died on the appropriations table. This bill is a continuation 
of that work and enacts a provision that requires fair and equitable access to Department of 
Environmental Protection decision-making processes for environmental justice populations and 
frontline communities. The bill provides appropriations for various positions in the department 
and for facilitator services, travel expenses, facility rentals and meeting expenses. 
While we all will experience impact from climate change, those impacts pose the greatest 
threats to communities that are already marginalized, overburdened, or underserved. A 2021 
study by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) found that “most severe harms from 
climate change fall disproportionately upon underserved communities who are least able to 
prepare for, and recover from, heat waves, poor air quality, flooding, and other impacts. EPA's 
analysis indicates that “racial and ethnic minority communities are particularly vulnerable to the 
greatest impacts of climate change" . lt is important that Maine do everything it can to make 
sure these vulnerable populations are given the necessary tools to combat the effects of climate 
change. 
This legislation advances definitions of environmental justice, fair treatment, and frontline 
communities developed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. ln general, these are 
appropriate deﬁnitions. However, when it comes to “frontline communities" we would urge an 
1 1 EPA Press Office. (2021, September 2). EPA Report Shows Disproportionate lmpacts of Climate Change on Socially Vulnerable 
Populations in the United States. EPA. Retrieved March 13, 2022, from https://www.epa.govlnewsreleases/epa-report~shows- 
disproportionate-impacts-climate-change-socia|ly- vulnerable. 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 I (207) 699-5795 l info@defendourhealth.org l defendourhealthorg
expanded deﬁnition. As written, it only applies to communities impacted first by climate change. 
As these requirements will apply broadly to all DEP decision making, in those contexts, frontline 
community should also mean those that experience the impact of pollution ﬁrst and to a greater 
degree, not just climate change. The term “frontline community ” has been broadly used within 
the environmental justice community and in environmental justice literature to reference 
communities disproportionately impacted by exposure to other pollution and toxics. Low-income 
communities, communities of color, and tribal communities are more likely to be impacted by 
exposure to toxic chemicals and there is evidence to suggest that manufacturing toxic 
chemicals such as PFAS can contribute to climate changez and that climate change can also 
increase the dangers of toxic chemicals ‘? 
LD 1621 will provide long-overdue protections to Maine’s most marginalized communities who 
will most feel the impacts of climate change. lt will make sure that those voices will be included 
in all steps of the policy-making process. And it will ensure that these communities are given the 
resources necessary to help survive the impacts of climate change. This bill is a step in the right 
direction. However, it could be stronger. Therefore, we at Defend urge the committee to vote 
“ought to pass as amended” with an expanded definition of “frontline community ” on LD 1621. 
2 Shreder, E., &amp; Kemler, B. (2021, September). Path of toxic pollution. Toxic Free Future. Retrieved March 13, 2022, from 
https://48h57c2l31ua3c3fmq1ne58b-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Report- Daikin-Path-of-Toxio 
Pollution.pdf 
3 Lovett, R. A warming Earth could mean stronger toxins. Nature (2010). https://doi.org/10.1038/news.2010.593 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 l (207) 6995795 I info@deiendouihealtlxorg I defendourltealttuorg
