  
 
 
 
    
    RACHEL TALBOT ROSS 
      SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
 
  
 
STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
SPEAKER'S OFFICE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1300 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monday, April 24th, 2023  
 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross presenting LD 1621, An Act Regarding 
Environmental Justice, Before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and 
Natural Resources  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, I am Rachel Talbot Ross. I represent 
House District 118 which is the Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, Bayside, East 
Bayside, Oakland and the University of Southern Maine Campus and I also have the 
distinct honor of serving as the Maine Speaker of the House. With this testimony, I am 
pleased to present LD 1621 , An Act Regarding Environmental Justice.  
 
Legislation from this committee  in June 2019 established the Maine Climate Council and 
charged it to update the state's climate action plan by identifying strategies for mitigation, 
adaptation and resilience through actions which minimize deleterious effects on persons 
of low and moderate income and ensure equity for all regions of the state. 
 
To recommend indicators and programs for these legislated goals, the Climate Council 
commissioned an equity analysis  from the George Mitchell Center at the University of 
Maine and established an Equity Subcommittee , chaired by Ambassador Maulian Dana 
of the Penobscot Nation and Dr. Gabriela Alcalde of the Sewall Foundation, on which I 
served as a legislative representative. 
 
Our subcommittee submitted its final report  to the Climate Council at the beginning of 
this year. 
 
Two years ago, Representative Doudera who now serves on the Climate Council's 
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee carried forward an intermediate set of related 
climate action plan recommendations in LD 1682  which further charged the Governor's 
Office of Policy Innovation and the Future to develop particular methods of incorporating 
equity considerations in decision making at the Department of Environmental Protection 
and the Public Utilities Commission and to make recommendations to this committee in 
the second session of the 130th. 

page 2 of 2  
Building on the concurrent work of the Equity Subcommittee, the Governor's office 
convened a large stakeholder group and, over three virtual listening sessions during the 
winter of 2021-2022, compiled these recommendations in their Report on Equity 
Considerations in Decision Making . 
 
From those recommendations, in March of last year this committee reported out its own 
bill, LD 2018 , which both broadened the eligibility for existing funding for intervenors at 
proceedings of the Public Utilities Commission and also directed the Board of 
Environmental Protection to update administrative and regulatory procedures through 
routine and technical rules at the Department of Environmental Protection to define 
environmental justice populations and to ensure that these communities are provided with 
fair and equitable access to the Department's decision-making processes. 
 
LD 2018 also contained an appropriations section to provide the Department of 
Environmental Protection with the resources necessary to accomplish this broadening of 
their regulatory process. 
 
Unfortunately -- and I believe erroneously -- despite this committee's work and interest, 
LD 2018 didn't find full favor on the Appropriations Table and, in the final days of last 
session, the section pertaining to administrative procedures at DEP and its supporting 
appropriation were stripped and the bill was enacted amended solely to apply to the 
Public Utilities Commission. 
 
After that lengthy recap, I want to assure you this bill in its entirety simply restores the 
language and appropriation that was stripped from this committee's report on LD 2018 in 
order to align current policy with this committee's direction last session employing state 
processes which are in harmony with evolving federal definitions for environmental 
justice. 
 
I also want to assure the committee that this bill places no additional regulatory 
requirements on individuals applying for environmental permitting. It simply provides 
the Department of Environmental Protection the directive and resources to broaden their 
own administrative procedures in a way that improves regulatory participation and 
strengthens public engagement with the most vulnerable affected communities. 
 
Last, I want to thank both the Governor's office and Commissioner Loyzim for their 
established commitment and ongoing dedication toward meeting these goals which were 
developed through the painstaking outreach of the Climate Council and the extensive 
stakeholder work of its Equity Subcommittee.  I am also grateful for the continuing 
interest in this bill from the Environmental Priorities Coalition and supporting work from 
other advocacy groups. 
