 
 
April 24 , 202 3 
 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
c/o Office of Fiscal and Program Review  
5 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
 
RE:  Support  of LD 1621 , An Act to Regarding Environmental Justice , with improvements  
 
Dear Senator  Brenner, R epresentativ e Gramlich,  and other members of the Committee,  
 
My name is Steve Clemmer, Director of Energy Research in the Union of Concerned Scientists 
(UCS) Climate and Energy Program. UCS is the nation’s leading science based non -profit 
organization with more than a half a million supporters, including more than 2 ,500 in Maine. On 
behalf of UCS, I offer this testimony in support of LD 1621 with improvements  (as specifically 
detailed in the attached Exhibit A) .   
 
In addition  to testifying in support of LD 2018 last year , I participated in the subsequent Maine Public 
Utilities Commission (PUC) proceeding to prioritize  funding to encourage greater participation by 
environmental justice  groups and disadvantaged communities in PUC proceedings , submitting joint 
comments with ot her environmental, community -based, and youth groups .1 I also participated in the 
virtual public forums organized by the Governor’s Office on Policy Innovation and the Future 
(GOPIF) , which incorporated feedback from diverse stakeholders  that attended tho se forums  into 
their February 2022  report to the legislature .2 
 
My comments on LD 1621  are also informed by work UCS is doing in collaboration with 
environmental justice, frontline, and disadvantaged communities  in other states and at the federal 
level. This includes being a  co-author and original signatory of the Equitable and Just National 
Climate Platform, which  has been  signed by 324 organizations .3 
 
UCS has support ed the creati on of state-specific  definition s of environmental just ice population s in 
many  of these efforts . However, we’re concerned that the current version of LD 1621  is not likely to 
result in a durab le and effe ctive state-specific definition  without significant improvements . 
 
 
1 Joint Supplemental Comments of Conservation Law Foundation, Union of Concerned Scientists, Natural Resources 
Defense Council of Maine, Acadia Center, Maine Conservation Voters, Maine Climate Action Now, and Slingshot. 
Amendments to Intervenor and Particip ant Funding Rule (Chapter 840), Docket No. 2022 -00299, November 21, 2022. 
Online at:  https://mpuc -cms.maine.gov/CQM.Public.WebUI/Common/ViewDoc.aspx?DocRefId={0DDF9B3A -9F16 -47A0 -
B1C5 -E1871356F2B8}&DocExt=pdf&DocName={0DDF9B3A -9F16 -47A0 -B1C5 -E1871356F2B8}.p df 
2 Governor’s Office of Policy Innovation and the Future Report on Equity Considerations in Decision Making Pursuant to 
An Act To Require Consideration of Climate Impacts by the Public Utilities Commission and To Incorporate Equity 
Considerations in Deci sion Making by State Agencies, Online at: 
https://www.maine.gov/tools/whatsnew/attach.php?id=6869935&an=1  
3 https://ajustclimate.org/index.html  
 
 Exhibit A below includes several recommended changes and improvements to the bill language  
drawing on  our experience and best practices from other states . The four main  improvements  include : 
1) modifying some of the existing definitions  to be more inclusive , 
2) adding new definitions for environmental benefits, environmental burdens, environmental 
justice principles , and environmental justice population s,  
3) requiring DEP to establish an  Environment al Justice Advisory Council , and 
4) requiring DEP to create an Environmental Justice Community Engagement Plan .  
 
As discussed  in our November 2022 joint intervenor funding comments to the  PUC , there is not one 
single definition of “environmental justice populations” that will be  uniformly applicable across every 
state seeking to define the term. The definition should reflect  the on -the-ground reality of geographic 
areas that are: underserved by the current infrastructure,  markets, and laws; lacking a ccess to 
environmental benefits; and overburdened by pollution,  infrastructure, and climate impacts. The 
definition should be based on demographic factors  including race, income, and limited English 
proficiency. In some circumstances, it will be  appropriat e to exclude high -income communities that 
are encapsulated by other indicators  (although we caution that communities generally perceived as 
wealthy are often not exclusively  so). The definition should also include an opt -in provision that 
allows some flexi bility for  designation of neighborhoods that meet certain criteria. Any definitions 
and thresholds used  should be carefully informed by resident input and local knowledge.  
 
At least eight o ther states, including six in the Northeast (CT, MA, NJ, NY, RI  and VT) , have adopted 
specific  definitions of environmental justice populations . Based on  analysis by the Conservation Law 
Foundation , we laid out four possible state specific definitions  of environmental justice populations 
for the Commission to consider  in our joint comments  using  criteria for income, race , and English 
proficiency that would cover  an estimated  32% - 57% of the Maine’s population . We support using a 
broader, more inclusive definition  of environmental justice populations in LD 1621  that would cover 
an estimated 52%  of Maine’s population . Using  this definition, Maine would be among the regional 
leaders in cover age of its population , compar able with Vermont  at 55% and New Jersey at 51%.   
 
The federal government also provides approaches to identifying environmental justice  populations in 
different contexts. However, we caution against wholesale adoption of those  definitions as we find 
them deficient in multiple regards —principally, for failing to use race as  an indicat or—and in any 
case, they are not designed to account for Maine’s  specific demographic composition.  
 
We do not believe a  state specific definition will conflict with the federal  definition and J ustice40 
initiative goal that at least “40 percent of the overall benefits of certain federal investments flow to 
disadvantaged communities that are marginalized, underserved, and ov erburdened by pollution. ”4  
This federal program effectively serves as a floor that states can build on . A state specific definition 
will allow Maine to  target  supplement al funding  at populations not covered by the federal definition.   
 
We believe these improvements to the bill will enhance the participation and contribution of more 
diverse perspectives in state agency decision  making that will res ult in stronger and better -informed  
decisions  and improv e services for all communiti es. We also believe that more robust processes and 
upfront opportunities for engagement may lead to greater public support and buy -in to the results, 
lowering  regulatory risk by obviating or reducing the need for subsequent challenges to agency 
decisions . 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify  on LD 1621 . 
 
4 https://www.whitehouse.gov/environmentaljustice/justice40/  
 
 Exhibit A: UCS recommended improvements to LD 1621  
 
1 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as  follows:  
2 Sec. 1. 38 MRSA §349 -C is enacted to  read:  
3 §349 -C. Environmental justice  
4 1. Definitions.  As used in this section,  unless  the context  otherwise  indicates,  the 
5 following terms have the following  meanings.  
6 A. “Environmental justice ” means the fair treatment a nd meaningful involvement of  
7 all people  regardless  of race,  color,  national  origin , ability, gender identify, sexual 
orientation, ethnicity or ancestry, religious belief, English language proficiency , or 
income  with respect  to the development, implementation and enforcement of 
environmental laws,  rules, regulations and  policies. Environmental justice seeks to 
ensure the equitable distribution of environmental benefits, protection from 
environmental and health hazards, and access to the decision -making process to have a 
healthy environment in which to live, learn, and work.  
8 B. “Fair treatment ” means  that no group  of people  bears  a disproportionate  share  of 
9 the negative  environmental  harms  consequences resulting  from  industrial,  
governmental  or 
10 commercial operations or  policies , and climate impacts . 
11 C. “Frontline communities ” means those people and communities that experience  the 
12 consequences of climate change first and to a greater degree than other people  and 
13 communities.  
14 D. “Meaningful  involvement ” means,  with respect  to the department ’s decision -making  
15 process, that:  
16 (1) People and communities have an opportunity to participate in  the 
17 decision -making  process  regarding  activities  that have the potential  to affect  the 
18 environment or public  health;  
19 (2) The department  seeks  out and facilitates  the involvement  in the 
20 decision -making process of potentially affected people and  communities;  
21 (3) The contributions of people and communities to the decision -making  process  
22 can influence the department ’s decision making;  and 
(4)The  department shall address  considers in  its  decision  making  the  concerns  
and contributions of people and communities provided as part of the  decision -
making  process , as well as any cumulative impacts on those people and communities.  
23  
E. “Environmental benefits” means the access to clean natural resources, including air, 
water, open space, and outdoor recreational facilities and venues; healthy homes and 
buildings; community revitaliz ation, ecological restoration, clean energy access, 
resilience planning, environmental enforcement; and a just recovery for communities 
most affected by longstanding underinvestment, environmental burdens and extreme 
weather and climate -related disasters.  
 
F. “Environmental burdens” means any destruction, damage or impairment of natural 
resources that is not insignificant, resulting from intentional or reasonably foreseeable 
causes, including but not limited to, climate change, air pollution, water pollutio n, 
 
 improper sewage disposal, dumping of solid wastes and other noxious substances, 
excessive noise, activities that limit access to environmental benefits and natural 
resources, inadequate remediation of pollution, reduction of ground water levels, 
impairm ent of water quality, increased flooding or storm water flows, and damage to 
inland waterways and waterbodies, wetlands, marine shores and waters, forests, and 
open spaces from industrial, commercial or government operations or other activity that 
contamin ates or alters the quality of the environment and poses a risk to public health.  
 
G. “Environmental justice principles” means principles that support protection from 
environmental pollution and the ability to live in and enjoy a clean and healthy 
environment, regardless of race, color, income, class, national origin, ethnicity or 
ancestry, ability, gender, identity, sexual orientation, religious belief, or English 
language proficiency, which includes: (i) the meaningful involvement of environmental  
justice populations with respect to the development, implementation and enforcement of 
environmental laws, regulations and policies; and (ii) the equitable distribution of 
environmental benefits and environmental burdens.  
 
H.  “Environmental justice populations” means a census block group (1) where the 
median annual household income does not exceed 80 percent of the state’s annual 
median household income (2) where people of color and/or indigenous people make up 
more than seven percent of the populatio n, but where the annual median household 
income does not exceed  150 percen t of the s tate’s annual me dian househ old inc ome, or 
(3) where more than one percent of households are categorized as limited English 
proficient. For a census block group that does not meet said criteria, but a geographic 
portion of that census block group meets at least 1 criterion, the commissioner ma y 
designate that geographic portion as an environmental justice population upon the 
petition of at least 10 residents of the geographic portion of that neighborhood meeting 
any such criteria . 
 
24 2. Consideration  of environmental  justice  populations  and frontline  communities.  
25 The department  shall  ensure  that persons  in environmental  justice  populations  and frontline  
26 communities   are   provided   with   fair   and   equitable   access   to   the   department's  
27 decision -making  processes  under  section  341-H. When the department makes decisions that 
have the potential to impact environmental justice populations concerning  the development, 
implementation and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations and policies, it shall 
implement its community engagement plan at the beginning of any related process, effectively 
address community concerns before moving forward with a decision, and shall conduct and 
consider in its final decision a cumulative environmental benefits and environm ental burdens 
analysis.  The department  shall  adopt  rules  establishing procedures to implement this  
subsection no later than July 31, 2024 . 
28 A. Rules  adopted  by the department  pursu ant to this subsection  must  define  
29 "environmental justice populations," taking into consideration, at a minimum,  median  
30 household income, race, ethnicity and English language  proficiency.  
31 BA. Rules adopted by the department pursuant to this subsection are routine  technical  
32 rules  as defined  in Title  5, chapter  375, subchapter  2-A, except  that the board  shall  hold 
33 a hearing  in accordance  with Title  5, section  8052  prior  to the adoption  of any rule 
34 proposed pursuant to this  subsection.  
3. Environmental Justice Advisory Council.  
By December 1, 2023, the department shall establish an Environmental Justice Advisory 
 
 Council. The department shall consult with the Environmental Justice Advisory Council, 
which shall provide recommendations to the department in developing the rules to im plement 
this section and its environmental justice community engagement plan. The Environmental 
Justice Advisory Council shall be comprised of at least 7 and no more than 9 members, with 
three appointed by the commissioner, four by the Speaker of the House , and the remainder by 
the Governor.  Members of the Environmental Justice Advisory Council shall be well -
informed regarding environmental justice principles and shall serve until the adoption of 
final rules and an environmental justice community engagement plan . The Advisory Council 
shall be comprised of environmental justice stakeholders including: scientific or other experts 
in environmental or public health matters holding academic position in colleges, universities 
or other research institutio ns and who work regularly in, or conduct substantial research 
regarding environmental justice concerns;   representatives of the environmental nonprofit 
sector;   representatives of conservation commissions or boards of health; residents or elected 
officials  of Environmental Justice Population neighborhoods. No fewer than four of the 
persons appointed to the Advisory Council shall be residents of Environmental Justice 
Population neighborhoods within the  state of Maine.  
4. Environmental Justice Community Engag ement Plan.  
By July 31, 2024, the department shall create and adopt an environmental justice community 
engagement plan that describes how it will engage with environmental justice populations as 
it undertakes its decision making. The plan shall take into c onsideration the 
recommendations of the Environmental Justice Advisory Council. The plan shall describe 
how the department will provide meaningful involvement in the department’s decision -
making process . 
35 Sec. 2. Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations  and 
36 allocations are  made.  
  
 
 5 
12 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 1 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, DEPARTMENT  OF 
2 Maine Environmental Protection Fund  0421  
3 Initiative: Provides one -time funding for facilitator services, travel expenses,  facility  
4 rentals and meeting  expenses.  
 
5 GENERAL FUND  2023 -24  2024 -25 
6 All Other  $150,000   $0 
7     
8 GENERAL FUND TOTAL  $150,000   $0 
9 Maine Environmental Protection Fund 0421     
10 Initiative:  Provides  funding  for one Public  Service  Coordinator  I position,  2 Law Clerk  
11 positions, one GIS Coordinator position and associated position  costs.  
12 GENERAL FUND  2023 -24 2024 - 
13 POSITIONS - LEGISLATIVE  COUNT  4.000  4.000  
14 Personal  Services  $210,522  $294,731  
15 All Other   $9,219   $12,292  
16 
17 GENERAL  FUND  TOTAL  $219,741  $307,023 
18 
19 ENVIRONMENTAL  PROTECTION,  
20 DEPARTMENT  OF 
21 DEPARTMENT  TOTALS  2023 -24 2024 -25 
22 
23 GENERAL FUND  $369,741  $307,023  
24 
25 DEPARTMENT TOTAL - ALL  FUNDS  $369,741  $307,023  
26 SUMMARY  
27 This bill enacts  a provision  that requires  fair and equitable  access  to Department  of 
28 Environmental  Protection  decision -making  processes  for environmental  justice  
29 populations  and frontline  communities.  The bill provides  appropriations  for various  
30 positions in the department and for facilitator services, travel expenses, facility rentals  and 
31 meeting expenses.  
 
