 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE IMMIGRANTS’ RIGHTS COALITION  (MIRC)  
Regarding  L.D. 1621: An Act Rega rding Environmental Justice  
Sponsor:  Representative Rachel Talbot Ross  
Public Hearing:  Monday , April 24 at 1:00pm 
 
 
Dear Members of the  Committee on Environment and Natural Resources : 
 
My name is Tobin Williamson and I am the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ 
Rights Coalition (MIRC), a statewide network of almost 100 member organizations working to 
enhance the lives of Mai ne’s immigrant communities. MIRC works to advance systemic changes 
in Maine through collaborative advocacy to ensure that voices of the state’s large, diverse, and 
growing immigrant communities are heard.  
One of the issues that has impacted immigrant communities most over the years is 
Environmental Justice. Stud y after stud y has shown that immigrants are dispro portiona tely 
impact ed by staying in unsafe homes  (with leadi, asbesto sii, etc.), living in unsafe areas (due to 
pollutioniii, flood  zonesiv, etc.), and working in unsafe conditions (with chemical  exposuresv, 
extreme temperaturesvi, etc.).  
We would like to see legislati on that defines phrases s uch as Environmental Benefits, 
Environmental Burdens, and Environmental Justice Principles. Indeed, we would like to see the 
establishment of an Environmental Justice Advisory Council, one which prioriti zes the voices of 
people with lived experience and personal impacts regarding environmental justice issues.  
We see L.D. 1621 as a starting point for further con versation s on environmental justice , a first 
step in the right direction but only the beginning of th is important work . Thank you  very much  
for your consideration of this  important issue.  
 
### 
 
 
i Undocumented immigrants fall through the cracks with child lead poisoning - The New Bedford Light  
ii Asbestos abatement is one of America’s deadliest jobs. Does it have to be? | Grist  
iii Environmental Inequality and Pollution Advantage among Immigrants in the United States - PMC (nih.gov)  
iv Exposure to Flood Hazards in Miami and Houston: Are Hispanic Immigrants at Greater Risk than Other Social 
Groups? - PMC (nih.gov)  
v Unhealthy work: Why migrants are especially vulnerable to injury and death on the job (knowablemagazine.org)  
vi Farmworkers are dying in extreme heat. Few standards exist to protect them | PBS NewsHour  
