~ 
. £_; 
eqg ~11_ 
1» 
3;; . . 1 -‘ 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES _ g, 
Vicki 21;“ dm 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
18 Trim Street AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
Camden, ME 042343 (207) 287-1400 
(207) 542-199° TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
Victoria.Douderanolegislature.maine.gov 
April 24, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Vicki Doudem introducing 
LD 1621, An Act Regarding Environmental Justice 
Before the Yoint Standing Committee on Environment and Nzztuml Resources 
Good day Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Environment a11d Natural Resources. My name is Vicki Doudera andI 
represent House District 41, the towns of Camden and Rockport. I am before you today to 
introduce LD 1621, An Act Regarding Environmental Justice. 
I am a cosponsor of this bill and was more than happy to pinch hit for Speaker Talbot Ross who 
is the lead sponsor. She sends her regards and apologies to the committee for her absense 
today but she also knows that I have been pretty passionate about this legislation. Let me take 
a moment to explain why and give a little background. 
Two years ago I sponsored LD 1682, which charged the Governor ’s Oﬂice of Policy Innovation 
and the Fut11re to develop ways to incorporate equity considerations in decision making at the 
Department of Environmental Protection and the Public Utilities Commission and make 
recommendations to this committee in the second session of the 130th. That bill went before 
the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee and was signed into law. A series of public 
stakeholder meetings were held over the following fall, building on the work of the Maine 
Climate C0uncil’s Equity Subcommittee, and based on those meetings, recommendations were 
compiled and presented to this committee. 
That report helped us generate LD 2018 in March of last year. That bill broadened the 
eligibility for intervenor funding for the Public Utility Commission, and directed the Board of 
Environmental Protection to update administrative and regulatory procedures through 
rulemaking at the Department of Environmental Protection to deﬁne environmental justice 
populations and to ensure that these communities are provided with fair and equitable access 
to the Department ’s decision-making processes. LD 2018 contained a ﬁscal note and — long 
story short — the section pertaining to administrative procedures at DEP was stripped and the 
bill was enacted solely with the Public Utilities Commission directives. 
District 4l: Camden and Rockport
This bill simply restores that language and appropriation that was removed from this 
committee ’s report on LD 2018. I’m so thankful that Speaker Talbot Ross took up this mantle 
and I am happy to answer any questions. 
Re19resentatz' 12e Vicki Doudera 
District 41; Camden and Rockport
