CENTRAL MAINE 
POWER 
Kathleen Newman, Director of Government Affairs and Community Relations 
LD 69 An Act to improve Electrical Supply Cost Transparency 
January 31, 2023 
Testifying: Neither for nor against 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology, my name is Kathleen Newman, submitting testimony neither for nor 
against LD 69, An Act to lmprove Electrical Supply Cost Transparency. 
While it could prove difficult to provide meaningful information about the cost per kilowatt hour 
for each source of the energy a standard offer customer is actually receiving, we believe the 
more information standard offer customers have about the energy they purchase over our 
system, the better. 
The PUC currently requires standard offer providers to provide Disclosure Labels that are 
available to every residential and small commercial customer four times a year. The Disclosure 
Labels contain generation resource and emission information. Medium and large customers can 
obtain similar information by contacting their supplier. 
Directing the Public Utilities Commission to adopt rules to require those standard-offer 
disclosure labels to include the cost of energy in cents per kilowatt-hour for each energy source 
used in the generation service will be difficult, but the PUC may be able to come up with a bid 
condition that starts to get at that requirement for future standard offer bids. 
Our concern is with how that new information is conveyed to the customer. With the current 
disclosure label, we post the updated information received from the standard offer providers on 
our website quarterly. Mailing the disclosure label, though the cost to CMP would be reimbursed 
by the standard offer providers, would be a significant expense — and requiring CMP to mail that 
information to our customers could add to the already existing confusion about our role asa 
delivery-only company. 
Thank you for your consideration.
