 
  
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 69, An Act to Improve Electrical Supply Cost Transparency  
 
By Rebecca Schultz, Senior Advocate for Climate and Clean Energy 
January 31, 2023 
 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology , my name is Rebecca Schultz. I am a senior advocate for cl imate and clean energy at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine, which is Maine’s leading environmental advocacy group with more 
than 25,000 members and supporters. I am testifying in opposition to LD 69, An Act to Improve Electrical 
Supply Cost Transpare ncy.1  
 
There are many aspects of the hidden costs of electricity that would benefit from  improved 
transparency to help  consumers , policy makers , and markets  alike deliver better social outcomes . This 
bill, however , would not accomplish that  purpose . In fact, t his bill would do  little to communicate the 
cost of electricity supply in a way that allow ed consumers  to make better informed decisions and  
instead would risk misleading consumers with  confusing information .   
 
The proposed bill would require “ a disclosure label that contains information on each energy source 
used in the generation service that the customer is receiving including the cost per kilowatt hour of each energy source.” The requirement would  not be help ful for the following reasons:  
 
• It is partially  redundant . Maine law already  requires electricity  suppliers to provide disclosure 
labels to help educate customers about  their electricity service.  These fact sheets , available on 
the Public Utilities Commis sion’s website, provide a breakdown of the energy resource mix and 
air pollution emissions associated with  the previous year’s  standard offer supply.
2 
• Cost information would be retrospective . The standard offer supply price for electricity is set 
annually through a competitive bidding process overseen by the Public Utilities Commission. Electricity suppliers develop estimates for the year ahead based on a variety of factors , including 
forecasts of wholesale electricity prices.  These  estimates skyro cketed  for 2023 due to high 
natural gas prices and our regional dependence on natural  gas for electricity . The resources that 
suppliers ultimately use to meet their obligation s, however,  will only  be known after the fact . 
Therefore, the disclosure would de scribe the previous year’s supply  costs  and not be useful for 
informing consumer decision s. 
• “Cost per kilowatt hour per energy source” is not relevant under our current market structure.  
U.S. electricity  markets are based on a “uniform clearing price auction”  model.  The market  sets 
prices for electricity regardless of what type of generator produce d that electricity. T he least 
expensive resource available is dispatched first , and a s demand increases, increasingly expensive 
resources are brought online  to meet demand. The clearing price for all dispatched resources is 
 
1 LD 69, An Act to Improve Electrical Supply Cost Transparency , available at 
https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getPDF.asp?paper=HP0044&item=1&snum=131 .  
2 Maine Public Utilities C ommission, Standard Offer Disclosure Labels, available at 
https://www.maine.gov/mpuc/regulated- utilities/electricity/standard -offer/disclosure -labels .  
 
  
set by the marginal unit, or the price that would need to be paid to meet the next increment of 
demand.  Therefore , while wind and solar may provide the cheapest energy on the market , they 
get paid the marginal price , which in our region is often set by  natural gas.3 The proposed 
requirement would disclos e the clearing price paid to resources but not reflect the cost of 
producing the electricity . It is not clear what the intended purpose would be of providing 
customers with this information.    
 
Cost transparency is a noble cause, one that must be pursued at each turn in our clean energy transition 
to ensure we are  keeping rates  down  for Maine ratepayers . LD 69  would not serve this purpose but  
would run the risk of confusing consumers on a crucial topic at a time when we need an educated and 
engaged public  to participate  in our climate future .   
 Thank you for your consideration of this testimony .  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
  
Rebecca Schultz 
Senior Advocate for Climate and Clean Energy  
Natural Resources Council of Maine  
rschultz@nrcm.org   
   
 
  
  
 
 
3 All markets in the U.S. use this uniform clearing price auction structure, which helps ensure that bids more closely 
reflect actual costs and creates a strong incentive to build inexpensive resources . ISO New Engla nd, How Resources 
Are Selected and Prices Are Set in the Wholesale Energy Markets, available at https://www.iso -ne.com/about/what -
we-do/in -depth/how -resources -are-selected -and-prices -are-set. 
