 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 585 
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 585, An Act to Allow Equitable Tolling of Post -conviction Review Filings  
 
DA: April 10, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission * respectfully submit s the following  testimony 
regarding LD 585.    Because the members did not reach a consensus, the testimony is neither for 
nor against the bill.    
 
 A majority of CLAC members oppose LD 585 as not necessary.   The current statute sets 
deadlines for filing p etitions that apply to different circumstances.    Generally, t he starting date for 
the one -year statute of limitations does not begin until after all appeal periods have expired;  judicial 
recognition of new constitutional rights; or the date on which the  factual predicate of a claim could 
have been discovered through the exercise of “due diligence.”  15 M.R.S. § 2128 -B.  In other 
words, the occurrence of any of these events, which may be years after a conviction, then triggers a 
one-year deadline for fili ng a petition  for post -conviction review .   
 
 Most CLAC members agreed that the concept of due diligence is sufficiently broad that it 
encompasses equitable tolling (which , according to the bill , rests on the petition er having purs ued 
rights “diligently an d with reasonable care” ), and that judges have historically permitted such 
delayed filings.  See, e.g., Neverson v. Farquharson , 366 F.3d 32 (1st Cir. 2004) (noting the 
availability of equitable tolling to a federal habeas petition, but finding such tolling not to be 
warranted under the facts).   Accordingly, the statutory change is not needed, and the better 
approach is to allow judges to continue  to evaluate claims of due diligence under the current law in 
light of evolving caselaw.      
 
 It was not apparent what additional or different types of circumstances would benefit from 
the addition of the proposed language, or whether cases have been dis missed as untimely under the 
current standard that would be treated differently under the proposed language.   Members 
expressed concern about the need to recognize the finality of judgments when all direct and 
collateral appeal opportunities have passed, as well as potential interpretation issues , particularly 
given the absence of any standard of proof  and the already available “due diligence” analysis . 
 
 Two CLAC members supported the change  as providing an opportunity for a limited 
number of persons to p etition under extraordinary circumstances , but agreed it was not appropriate 
to keep cases open to appeal “forever,” acknowledging the importance of finality of judgments.        
  
 
 
  
  *CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    
It consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
 
