' 
PO Box 7860 ' 
Portland, ME 04112 
www.aclumaine org 
AMERICAN OWN. LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
. Ought to' Pass — LD 585_ 
An Act to Allow Equitable Tolling of Post-conviction Review Filings 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON J UDICIABY 
' 
April 10, 2028V 
' 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, andI 
am the policy director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and 
U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support LD 585 because 
it wouldmake our legal system fairer.' 
“Historically, the courts have used equitable principles to ameliorate the 
harshness of the law.” Dasha v. Maine Medical Center, 665 A.2d-993, 996 (Me. 1995) 
(Lipez, dissenting). However, a court “cannot ameliorate such harshness in direct 
contravention of a statute. ” Id. That is why this bill is necessary. 
If enacted, this bill would allow for equitable tolling to prevent a period of 
limitations from barring a petition for post-conviction review as long as the petitioner 
pursued the petitioner ’s rights diligently and with reasonable care but failed to meet 
the period of limitations due to extraordinary circumstances. Courts elsewhere have 
found “extraordinary circumstances ” where corrections officers confiscated a 
petitioner ’s legal papers shortly before a crucial filing deadline, Valverde v. Stinson, 
224 F.3d 129, 133 (Zd Cir. 2000), and where the petitioner ’s attorney did no legal 
research, never spoke with or met the petitioner, made no effort to contact the 
petitioner after letters to the petitioner were returned undelivered, and failed to 
“keep [his] client reasonably informed about the status of [the case]” and failedto
“explain [the] matter to the extent reasonably necessary to permit [the petitioner] to 
make informed decisions regarding the representation, ” Baldayaque v. United States, 
338 F.3d 145, 152 (Zd Cir. 2003). 
Courts in Maine and elsewhere have recognized the applicability of equitable 
tolling in other areas of law. See, e.g., Miller v. Miller, 2017 ME 155, 11 15 (“The 
doctrine provides for equitable tolling in situations Where controlling officers conceal 
their culpable conduct from those who would otherwise bring an action on the 
corporation's behalf, or where they control the corporation to the extent that they 
could refuse to allow it to act in its best interest. ”); Wilson v. Paine, 288 S.W.3d 284, 
288 (Ky. 2009) (stating that the doctrine “prevents the culpable directors from 
benefiting from their lack of action on behalf of the corporation ” because “in most 
cases, defendants ’ control of the corporation will make it impossible for the corporate 
plaintiff independently to acquire the knowledge and resources necessary to bring 
suit” (quotation marks omitted)). 
The dual requirement of petitioner-diligence and extraordinary circumstances 
that this bill would establish in Maine statute are widely recognized in federal 
caselaw, and with good reason: Judges must be allowed to judge. That, essentially, is 
what this bill would allow. Judges are the ones most intimately aware of the factual 
circumstances surrounding a failure to meet post-conviction review filing deadlines. 
We urge you to vote ought to pass.
