 
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1572, An Act to Ensure Proper Funding of the Highway 
Fund by Imposing a Surcharge on Electric Vehicle Registration  
 
To the Committee on Transportation  
by Josh Caldwell, Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  
April 25, 2023  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Committee on Transportation, 
my name is Josh Caldwell. I am the Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator at the 
Natural Resources Council of Mai ne (NRCM) . NRCM has been working for more than 60 years 
to protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s environment, on behalf of our 25,000 members and 
supporters. I’m here today to testify in opposition  to LD 15 72, An Act to Ensure Proper Funding 
of the Highway Fund by Imposing a Surcharge on Electric Vehicle Registration.  
While  funding the clean transportation system of the future is an important consideration, this 
approach is not the right way to do so. Maine’s Clean Transportation Roadmap identifies vehicle 
electr ification as the number one strategy to reduce greenhouse gas  emissions from our most 
polluting sector .1 Accelerating the adoption of electric vehicl es (EVs ) throughout Maine is a top 
climate priority , and e stablishing  a surcharge for EV registration would be counterproductive to 
this aim . Dampening progress toward our EV adoption goals is not the right approach for our 
climate or for the thousands of Maine consumers seeking to purchase an EV.   
Maine’s Climate Action Pl an calls for 219,000 EVs on the road by 2030, the very first goal listed 
in the Plan and perhaps the most ambitious.2 The two-year Climate Action Plan progress report 
that came out at the end of 2022 found that Maine now has more than  8,500 EVs on the road, an 
exponential jump from years previous.3 Despite  that progress, we are still a long way off from 
our 2030 goal, and we cannot afford to slow down our EV adoption trends with a surcharge on 
EV registrations.  
We look forward to working with this Committee to decarbonize our transportation sector and 
estab lish sustainable funding sources to support that work, but this bill is not the way to do so. 
For these reasons, we urge the Committee to vote Ought Not to Pass on this legislation. I 
welcome an y questions you may have.  
 
1 https://www.maine.gov/future/initiatives/climate/cleantransportation  
2 https://www.maine.gov/climateplan/the -plan  
3 https://www.maine.gov/future/sites/maine.gov.future/files/inline -
files/MaineWontWait_2YearProgressReport.pdf  

