Testimony of Maria Fuentes , Maine Better Transportat ion Associat ion 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
LD 1572 - An Act to Ensure Proper Funding of the Highway Fund by Imposing a Surcharge on Electric 
Vehicle Registration  
 
April 25, 2023  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams,  and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation.  My name is Maria Fuentes, I am a resident of Hallowell, and speak 
today on behalf of my employer - Maine Better Transportation Association  (MBTA) - in support of 
LD 1572 – at least in concept.  
 
MBTA is a statewide coalition made up of organizations and individuals who plan, design, build, 
maintain, operate, and use Maine’s transportation  infrastructure  network.  Members include design 
engineers, transportation contractors and equipment dealers, airports, shippers, marine and bus 
companies, public works officials and others committed to our mission of advocating for long -term 
funding for the state’s trans portation network to improve the quality of life and enhance the 
economy for Maine people.   
 
As this Committee well knows, revenues going into the Highway Fund have been cratering for many 
years now.  Like other s, MBTA has been involved in past conversati ons and efforts to discuss 
sustainable funding, and the idea of a surcharge for hybrid and electric vehicles has come up in the 
past, including in past legislation.  Many states have incorporated such a surcharge.  
 
We have heard from those who believe that  it is unfair to place a surcharge on a vehicle which is 
making a positive impact on the goal of reducing carbon  emissions and  see it as a disincentive for 
people to purchase clean vehicles.  Regardless of where one may fall on that  issue , the fact remains  
that electric vehicles do damage to the roads and bridges that they  traverse,  as do those powered by 
fuel.  
 
MBTA does support a surcharge for electric vehicles because we think it is equitable for those who 
use the system  to help pay for its maintenance.  Having said that, we would like to see this effort as 
part of a larger discussion on transportation funding  and that looked at a wide range of options.  In 
2020,  the Blue Ribbon Commission  To Continue Studying and Recommend Funding Solutions for 
the State’s Transportation Systems , spent a great deal of time researching what other states did and 
what has worked or not worked in different areas.  They also p egged the unmet need of MaineDOT 
at $330 million per year, and obviously since then, costs have increased considerably in Maine and 
in every state in the country.  If the Committee and Legislature wanted to have a larger discussion 
of sustainable transport ation funding, looking at the Commission’s report would be a good place to 
start.  
 
Thank you for considering MBTA’s  testimony on LD 1572.  
