 
 
Testimony of The Maine Municipal Association 
In Support For 
LD 1572 - An Act to Ensure Proper Funding of the Highway Fund by Imposing a Surcharge on Electric 
Vehicle Registration 
April 25, 2023 
Sen. Chipman, Rep. Williams and distinguished members of the Transportation Committee, my 
name is Rebecca Graham, and I am offering testimony in support for LD 1572, An Act to Ensure Proper 
Funding of the Highway Fund by Imposing a Surcharge on Electric Vehicle Registration, on behalf of 
MMA’s 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC) who are elected by their selectboards and 
councils in Maine’s 35 senate district to establish positions on legislation impacting municipalities with 
the broadest understanding of the difference in impacts of policy on these vital services in all areas of the 
state. 
This proposal was evaluated as an option from the Blue Ribbon Commission on Transportation 
Funding, which had municipal representation on board while exploring options to address the way the 
roads and highways in the state are funded.  
The reduction in gas tax collection means that both the DOT and the Local Roads Assistance 
Program to municipalities will continue to struggle to be adequately funded. While electric vehicles are 
not contributing to the funds because they do not pay gas tax, they are equally using the roads and 
impacting these surfaces at the same rate as other vehicles that operate and are contributing to the funding 
system. Several provisions were considered including a vehicle miles traveled tax with reimbursement to 
lower income Mainer’s via their state filings. However, in a deeply rural state with many individuals 
traveling more than 30 miles to work, there was deep concern about the impacts of this method.  
Officials, some of whom operate electric vehicles, shared with staff they felt this was a fair fee to 
ensure that electric vehicles were also contributing to the funding of road maintenance, enforcement, and 
programs that create safer streets for all. As this fee level represents an estimate of the lost gas tax for 
average vehicle operation yearly, officials feel it is fair.  
One area of concern is the bi-annual proposal for the collection of the fee. Municipal officials, 
and their staff, will not be able to accept multiple payments for the same registrant with adequate systems 
currently, and ask that the committee consider a one-time collection at the time of registration only. This 
will avoid chasing down payments that are not received on time by municipal staff, or additional record 
keeping and review by that same staff, particularly in small communities with part-time hours.  
 Officials hope that you will consider this small change and support LD 1572. 

