Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Distinguished members of the joint 
standing committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business, My name is Addison Verrill, and I live in the town of Pittsfield. I am 
currently a junior at Maine Central Institute. I am testifying in support of 
LD—93, an act to ensure access for all caregivers to diaper changing stations in 
public restrooms. 
My grandfather never changed my mother’s diaper. His father had never 
changed his. In fact, my mother was toilet trained within two days when my 
grandmother went to work after my grandfather ’s union went on strike. He 
refused to change her diapers, despite the fact that he was, for that period, a 
stay—at—home dad. That was in the late ‘70’s. Years have passed, and times 
have thankfully changed. This is no longer the reality. My father stayed home 
with my sister in her infancy while my mother worked. He learned to change 
diapers. He changed mine as well. The new reality is that both partners ina 
new family contribute to basic childcare, and that includes changing diapers. 
However, public infrastructure does not reflect this reality. Restaurants, malls, 
and other public places often only have changing stations in the women’s 
restroom or in a family restroom (if they have one), and not all places have 
such facilities. If a father is out with a baby, or maybe multiple babies, where 
can they change diapers? 
Even if a mother or grandmother is with them, this lack of changing stations in 
all bathrooms promotes the inequitable distribution of childcare between 
parents, supporting the idea that the mother is the caregiver and the father 
need not worry themselves about such things. However supportive of equality 
the men in our society may be, they are forced to hand the baby off to their 
partner to change diapers because they do not have the facilities to do it 
themselves. While it may seem like a very small thing, this is a very important 
step in order to work toward a fair society in our state. 
I appreciate your consideration of LD—93, and I hope that you will support this 
bill as it advances the goals of equity. Thank you.
