45 Melville Street, Suite1 
. ‘E55;-‘I;-\$|! (I); Augusta, ME 04330 
M N E Phone: 207.623.1149 
Voice of Maine Retail vwvvv.retailmaine.org 
‘?;'¢";j£i'-::' ;'£‘)E..:'-.#')_//2 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Glenn "Chip" Curry, Chair 
Representative Tiffany Roberts, Chair 
Members of the Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Commerce Committee 
RE: Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD 93, An Act to Ensure Access for All Caregivers to Diaper 
Changing Stations in Public Restrooms — As Amended 
Dear Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the IDEA Committee: 
My name is Curtis Picard and I am the President and CEO of the Retail Association of Maine.l 
am a resident of Topsham. We have more than 350 members statewide and represent retailers 
of all sizes. Maine's retailers employ more than 85,000 Mainers. I am here today to testify in 
opposition to LD 93, as amended by the sponsor's amendment. 
While we appreciate the intent of the sponsor's legislation, we are concerned that it is trying to 
enact a one-sized fits all approach to address a problem we are not sure exists. Although LD 93 
has a number of exceptions, including whether the cost of installing would not be feasible, who 
would determine what is feasible? How do you handle a situation where the space constraints 
of the rest room would make it difficult to install one? We are concerned that small businesses, 
in particular, will not understand whether or not they are required to install one or not based 
on their localities use of differing building codes. 
We would also suggest that there are a number of public restrooms that would not be ideal 
locations — whether they are places like smoking or vape shops, or other places that would 
typically not admit children. 
Lastly, enforcement would be through the Attorney General's office after a complaint of 
violation is made. We think this would put businesses in a difficult spot of being cited for a law 
that would be difficult to comply with in many situations.
Thank you for the opportunity to share our thoughts with you, and we look forward to the 
discussion. 
Sincerely, 
Curtis Picard, CAE 
President and CEO
