122 State  Street,  Augusta, ME 04330 •  207-808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
Testimony  of Maine Public  Health  Association  in Support  of: 
LD 93: An Act to Ensure  Access  for All Caregivers  to Diaper Changing  Stations  in Public  Restrooms  
 
Joint  Standing Committee  on Innovation, Development,  Economic  Advancement  and Business  
Room  206, Cross  State  Office  Building 
Tuesday, March  28, 2023 
 Dear  Senator  Curry,  Representative Roberts, and  distinguished members  of the Joint  Standing Committee  on 
Innovation, Development, Economic  Advancement  and Business . My  name is  Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident  
of South Portland and  executive director  of Maine  Public  Health  Association. 
 
MPHA is  the state’s  oldest, largest,  and most  diverse  association  for public  health  professionals. We represent  
more  than  700 individual  members  and 60 or ganizations  across  the state.  The mission  of MPHA is  to improve  
and sustain  the health  and well -being of  all people  in Maine through health  promotion, disease prevention, and  
the advancement  of health  equity. As  a statewide  nonprofit  association,  we advoca te, act, and advise  on critical  
public  health  challenges,  aiming  to improve  the policies,  systems,  and environments  that underlie  health  
inequities  – but  which  also have  potential  to improve  health  outcomes  for all  people  in Maine.  We are not  tied 
to a national  agenda,  which  means  we are responsive  to the needs  of Maine’s  communities,  and we take  that 
responsibility  seriously. 
 
Maine Public  Health  Association  is in support  of LD 93: “An Act to Ensure  Access  for All  Caregivers  to Diaper  
Changing Stations  in Public  Restrooms.”  
 
While  many  businesses  and government  buildings  already  provide  diaper  changing tables  for parents  with  
infants  and toddlers  in their  public  restrooms,  these changing areas  are primarily  found in  women’s  bathrooms. 
Census  data  show  that 62%  of households  in Maine are married  couples  (gender  data unavailable),  and nearly  
5% of non- married  Maine households  are led  by a  male  householder. The  COVID- 19 pandemic,  opioid 
epidemic,  and other  public  health  challenges  and circumstances  have impacted  Maine’s  families.  Single  or 
partnered,  a parent  that can’t  access  the changing table  in the designated  women’s”  bathroom  may  be forced  to 
change  their  child’s  diaper  on the  floor  or another  unsanitary and  more  public  place. With  enactment  of this bill, 
single  and married  parents , regardless  of gender , will have  equal  opportunity to  provide  diapering care  for their  
children.  
 
Maine Public  Health  Association  believes  this bill i s a matter  of health  equity:  all parents,  regardless  of gender, 
should have  equal  access  to sanitary  and semi -private  places  to care for their  children . Thank you for 
considering our  testimony . 
