i,_ Department of the Secretary of State 
.5 E3111‘ 
Bureau of Corporations, Elections and Commissions 
.- 
‘\'rY7’ 
,H:’\<J» 
Shenna Bellows 
Secretary of State 
Julie L. Flynn 
Deputy Secretary of State 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
March I5, 2023 
Testifying Neither for Nor Against 
L.D. 769, “An Act to Reduce the Enrollment Requirement for Minor Political Parties That Seek 
Official Party Status" 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows, and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
ofﬁcer. I am speaking today neither for nor against L.D. 769 to provide the committee with 
information to consider in your decision-making. 
This bill would reduce the number of enrolled voters needed for a minor party to retain their qualiﬁed 
status from 10,000 to 5,000. Currently, there are two methods of forming a new party under Maine law 
governing state elections, Title 21-A, as follows: 
0 Section 302 - Organization about a candidate — sometimes called the “coattails ” method: 
o A group of voters who are not enrolled in a qualiﬁed party may ﬁle a declaration of intent to 
form a party, listing the name of its non-party candidate for Governor or President in the last 
preceding general election who received 5% or more of the total votes cast in that election. 
o The intent form must be ﬁled by the 180"‘ day before the next primary election (which falls in 
early to mid-December of the odd-numbered year preceding the next primary). 
o The qualifying party may then begin to enroll voters in the party and is eligible to participate in 
the subsequent primary election. 
v Section 303 - Organization by party enrollment: 
o A group of 10 or more voters who are not enrolled in a qualiﬁed party may ﬁle a declaration of 
intent to form a party between December ls‘ and December 30*“ of an even-numbered year. 
o The Secretary of State must certify whether the application meets the requirements of law 
within 5 business days after receipt and notify the applicants that they may enroll voters in the 
party. 
o On or before January 2"d of the next even-numbered year, the party must certify to the 
Secretary of State that they have enrolled at least 5,000 voters in the proposed party. 
o The Secretary of State must verify the proposed party’s enrollment ﬁgures within 15 business 
days of receiving the certiﬁcation; this determination may be challenged. 
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www. Maine. gov/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
Once a party has qualiﬁed to participate in a primary by either method, then the party keeps its 
qualiﬁed status by meeting the requirements of section 301: holding municipal caucuses anda 
convention during the election year and having at least 10,000 voters enrolled in the party, except that 
a qualiﬁed party does not have to meet this 10,000-vote requirement in the ﬁrst general election after it 
qualiﬁes. This bill would reduce the enrollment threshold to 5,000 for a party to retain its status. 
The State has an important interest in regulating the party formation process, and by extension, ballot 
access of the party’s candidates, to ensure that only those parties with a signiﬁcant modicum of support 
from the electorate can place candidates on the general election ballot through the primary process. 
This reduces the proliferation of parties with little public support and frivolous candidates that cause 
ballot clutter and lead to voter confusion. 
Accordingly, the Legislature must determine what is a reasonable threshold for a party to achieve to 
retain its qualiﬁed status once it has enrolled the ﬁrst 5,000 voters and participated in a primary asa 
qualiﬁed party. Is the proposed threshold of 5,000 enough to show that the party has a signiﬁcant 
modicum of public support, such that granting it access to the ballot will not result in overloaded 
ballots and frivolous candidacies? 
For all these reasons, I testify neither for nor against this bill. This concludes my testimony. Thank you 
and I would be happy to answer any questions that the committee may have. 
I 01 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.g0v/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
