éééq iiCHJSi§()Fi{Ef§{ESE§QT% ﬂ1AfES 
ﬁéggi 2sTATEH0usEsIAnoN 
=%’-Q" AUGUSTA. MAINE 0433340002 
(207)287-1440 
David Woodsome MAW}; RELAY 711 
1156 Sokokis Trail' 
Nonh \\’a\crh0roA ME 04061 
D1\id.\\' (>odso1nefz:! iegisl:-.11ure.maine.g0\ ‘ 
Cell: (I07) -13]-5643 
Testimony on 
L.D. 436, “An Act to Provide Career and Technical Education 
Students with Credit Toward High School Graduation for Work 
Completed in Career and Technical Education Centers and Regions” 
Presented by 
Representative David Woodsome 
District 139 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
Thursday, March 9, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and 
distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs: 
I am State Representative David Woodsome, and I proudly represent 
District 139, Limerick, Parsonsfield, and a portion of Waterboro. It 
is an honor to appear before you today for the purpose of introducing 
L.D. 436, “An Act to Provide Career and Technical Education Students 
with Credit Toward High School Graduation for Work Completed in Career 
and Technical Education Centers and Regions." 
With skilled trade jobs in demand, and America facing an ongoing 
labor shortage, L.D. 436 proposes a means of making a career path in 
the skilled trades a bit easier. This measure, if passed, would 
require school administrative units and career and technical education 
centers and regions to propose equivalency agreements that allowa 
secondary school student to gain core credit toward a high school 
diploma through career and technical education credit with approval 
from the Commissioner of Education. It likewise seeks to amend the 
high school diploma requirements to include core credit gained through 
equivalency agreements. 
Upon further review, however, I would like to propose one change for 
this Committee to consider. Rather than specifying that the 
Commissioner of the Maine Department of Education be given the 
authority to accept or reject the proposed equivalency, I submit that 
the language be revised, giving the authority more broadly to the 
Department. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
District 139 Limerick, Parsonsﬁeld and Waterboro (Part) 
Primed on 16C\ dtd paper
Beiit enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
Sect 1. 20-A MRSA §4722, sub-§2-C is enacted to read: 
2-(S. Career and technical education equivalency. A secondary 
school student may_ 
gain credit toward the student's diploma requirements through a 
career and technical 
education center or region as deﬁned in section 8301-A, 
subsecQ' _ons 3 and 6 with an 
equivalency agreement_wrsuant to section 83 06-B, subgction 
i ' 
Sec. 2. 20-A MRSA §8306-B, sub-§4-A is enacted to read: 
4-A. Equivalency agreements with afﬁliated units. A career and 
technical education 
center or region and its affiliated unit shall propose an 
equivalency agreement for credit 
gained through a career and technical education program to be 
accepted as a core credit 
toward a high school diploma. The corn-;m-issiener Maine 
Department of Edu_cation 
shall accept or reject the proposed equivalency agreement. If the 
e Maine Department of Education either designate 
an alternative equivalency agreement or request a new 
§q@@le _m>y 
agreement from the career and technical education center or 
region and its affiliated unit, . 
SUMMARY 
This bill requires school administrative units and career and 
technical education centers 
and regions to propose equivalency agreements that allowa 
secondary school student to 
gain core credit toward a high school diploma through career 
and technical education credit 
with approval from the of Maine Department of 
Education. It also amends the high school diploma requirements 
to include core credit gained through equivalency agreements.!!
