1\/[CL ,.t 
Maine Cu rriculum Leaders Association 
Championing Policies And Practices That Enhance Teaching And Learning 
Heather Manchester, MSAD 17, President 
Niki Chan, RSU 24, President Elect 
Deb Taylor, RSU 12, Treasurer 
Joanne Dowd, RSU 23, Secretary 
Debra McIntyre, Executive Director 
Testimony of Debra Mclntyre, Executive Director, on behalf of the members of the Maine 
Curriculum Leaders Association, testifying in support of LD 436 An Act to Provide Career 
and Technical Education Students with Credit Toward High School Graduation for Work 
Completed in Career and Technical Education Centers and Regions. 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, my name is Debra Mclntyre, and l am the Executive Director of the Maine 
Curriculum Leaders Association. On behalf of the members of MCLA, I am testifying in support 
of LD 436 An Act to Provide Career and Technical Education Students with Credit Toward High 
School Graduation for Work Completed in Career and Technical Education Centers and 
Regions, with the recommended amendments to the original proposal. 
We believe that students should be provided multiple pathways to demonstrate their learning. 
By allowing students to earn credit towards their high school graduation requirements through 
their participating CTE Center/Region, this increases a student’s flexibility in their schedule and 
encourages participation in programs offered at a career and technical education center. We 
believe that the school districts and the CTE Center/Regions should develop these equivalency 
agreements to specifically outline what courses would count for what credits. These 
agreements would be part of the annual cooperative agreements between the school districts 
and the CTE Center/Regions. 
This is not a small undertaking, but there are currently some school districts/CTE 
Center/Regions that already currently do this. If there was a three-year phase in period, we 
could work with the stakeholders who have successfully done this work to model a process for 
all districts and CTE Center/Regions. 
For these reasons MCLA supports LD 436 with the suggested amendments. Thank you for 
your time.
