State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Dwight Littlefield, Career and Technical Education Team Coordinator 
In Support of: L.D. 436 
An Act to Provide Career and Technical Education Students with Credit Toward High School 
Graduation for Work Completed in Career and Technical Education Centers and Regions 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Woodsome 
Co-Sponsored by: Senators Harrington and Rafferty, Representatives Lanigan and Sampson 
March 9, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Dwight Littlefield, and I am here today representing the Department of Education 
speakingn in support of LD 436, An Act to Provide Career and Technical Education Students 
with Credit Toward High School Graduation for Work Completed in Career and Technical 
Education Centers and Regions which require school administrative units (SAUs) and career and 
technical education (CTE) centers and regions to propose equivalency agreements that allowa 
student to gain core credit with approval from the Commissioner of Education. It also amends 
high school diploma requirements to include credit gained through equivalency. 
The Department believes that this bill addresses an important need in the field. Currently CTE 
schools work with each sending school individually to establish what will be accepted as credit 
towards graduation. Making sure each sending high school has an equivalency agreement lifts 
an obstacle to participation in CTE programs for many students. Further, equivalency 
agreements acknowledge the applied learning of core subjects CTE students engage in daily 
through their programs. The Department sees this as a strong example of the kind of work the 
Whole Student Framework supports and encourages. 
We would like to suggest two changes that we believe would make this bill stronger. First, the 
current language in LD 436 requires that the Cormnissioner must sign off on these agreements. 
Rather than adding this responsibility to the Department, We request that the Committee consider 
adding the equivalency agreement as a requirement of the Cooperative Agreement which sending 
high schools and CTEs are already required to have, and file with the Department, asa 
requirement of MRS, Title 20-A, Chapter 313 §8404: Center advisory committee, and §8457: 
Cooperative board authority. 
Second, we request that the Committee consider phasing in the equivalency requirement over the 
next three years. This will allow time for the high schools and CTEs to learn from the successful 
models and engage in intentional collaboration to develop equitable agreements across the state.
1
The Department is in support of LD 436, An Act to Provide Career and Technical Education 
Students with Credit Toward High School Graduation for Wo1‘k Completed in Career and 
Technical Education Centers and Regions with our suggested changes and will be available to 
provide additional information on LD 436 and respond to any questions during the upcoming 
work session.
