State of Maine 
State Board of Education 
Testimony of Paulette Bonneau, Vice Chairman ofthe State Board of Education and Member of 
its Career and Technical Education Committee 
In Support of: L.D. 436 
An Act to Provide Career and Technical Education Students with Credit Toward High School 
Graduation for Work Completed in Career and Technical Education Centers and Regions 
Sponsored by: Rep. Woodsome of Waterboro Sen. Rafferty of York 
Co-Sponsored by: Sen. Rafferty of York, Senator Harrington of York, and Representatives 
Lanigan of Sanford, and Sampson of Alfred, 
Date: February 9, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Paulette Bonneau. I am the Vice-Chair ofthe State Board of Education anda 
member it its Career and Technical Education Committee. I am here today on behalfof the State 
Board to speak in support of L.D. 436 An Act to Provide Career and Technical Education 
Students with Credit Toward High School Graduation for Work Completed in Career and 
Technical Education Centers and Regions. 
The State Board of Education (SBE) is intended to act as a body with certain policymaking, 
administrative, and advisory functions. Speciﬁcally, Title 20-A §405, sub-§7 recognizes the 
SBE as the designated state agency to “develop a state plan to administer any federal funds 
received for the beneﬁt of career and technical education and programs in the State.” Under this 
authority and in conjunction with the CTE division of the Maine Department of Education 
(MDOE) the State Board of Education has been actively involved in setting a roadmap for the 
future of CTE in t\/Iaine using the federal Perkins V state planning process and SBE‘ s strategic 
goals, 
In 2020, after a year-long review, the State Board received federal approval for a new five-year 
plan for CTE as required under the recently re-authorized federal Strengthening Career and 
Technical Education for the 21st Century Act (a.k.a. Perkins V). That plan highlights the 
importance of workforce development for Maine’s economy. The process also identiﬁed barriers 
to CTE success. 
Barriers to Success 
For the last few years, the State Board of Education CTE Committee has discussed systemic 
challenges that face CTE students, educators, and administrators.
