MAINE Q; T A T ii 
‘C U Ni M E R (.1E 
W-*~@- Q‘ /ivy;/,2 war ta W/@»w~ "‘~:>"/,;r4: ‘"'.»'' 
./_//“' .»'*’ W 4» 
7"' /'2e voice (3/'5/izzirze hrmm as 
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce In Support 
of 
L.D. 436 An Act to Provide Career and Technical Education Students with Credit 
Toward High School Graduation for Work Completed in Career and Technical 
Education Centers and Regions 
Chairs Rafferty and Brennan, and esteemed members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in Gardiner andI 
represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association 
made up of both large and small businesses, here to provide you with my 
testimony in support of giving students enrolled in career and technical education 
programs credit toward high school graduation for the work they complete in 
those career and technical education programs. 
The Maine State Chamber supports efforts to expand experiential learning 
and career and technical education. Among the workforce challenges Maine 
employers are experiencing, a mismatch of skills to fit job needs is a top concern. 
Many of our members have relied on partnerships with career and technical 
education providers to craft a viable talent pipeline and ensure that the newest 
generation of our workforce has the appropriate skills to build rewarding careers. 
For some time employers have struggled with the number of students enrolling in 
CTE programs and a depleting talent pool in trade and technical occupations. 
Under the Mill’s administration CTE programs have made significant strides in 
enrollment and growth. As these programs have grown some barriers that students 
experience as they approach program completion have come to light. One of these 
barriers is a student’s ability to meet their core credit requirements for graduation 
while attending CTE. There are many instances where a student must choose 
between taking their final math, science, or language arts credit, or completing 
their CTE program.
When students must choose between graduating from high school and 
completing their CTE program it is an injustice to the student, the program, and 
Maine’s economy. It is in everyone ’s best interest that school units and CTE 
centers work together to create equivalency across education requirements 
whenever possible. The Westbrook Regional Vocational Center has shown the 
validity of this measure by giving students the opportunity to show how their work 
in a vocational program meets core graduation requirements. Through the 
maintenance of portfolios students can demonstrate their ability to meet district 
graduation standards and career readiness. 
On behalf of our members and the business community at large the State 
Chamber has taken policy positions that aim to expand the size and abilities of our 
future workforce. This legislation eliminates a very real barrier that students 
experience. I ask that you give LD436 your support. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.
