Richard Lee
Richmond
LD 901
My name is Richard Lee, and my wife Kate Del Vecchio and I own and run a small, 
MOFGA-certified organic, horse, human, and tractor powered vegetable, flower, and 
fruit farm in Richmond.  We have been farming together since 2011 when I moved up
here to apprentice at Buckwheat Blossom Farm in Wiscasset in order to learn and 
acquire the skills to grow food on a home and small commercial scale.
Both of us are former MOFGA apprentices at two different farms, myself at 
Buckwheat Blossom, Kate at Webb Family Farm in Pittston, and together at New 
Beat Farm in Knox.  We without hesitation can say that not only were these work and 
learning experiences the backbone of our careers as farmers, but that our 
apprenticeships were invaluable.  
In conjunction with the MOFGA apprenticeship program, our apprenticeships gave us
the experiences needed to become farmers for over a decade.  Without the learning 
and working experience provided by our apprenticeships, we would not have 
developed the skills and knowledge required to grow food in a competent, efficient, 
and safe manner.  Particularly for myself as a person who grew up in New York City, 
I could not have developed the highly specialized skill of driving draft horses to 
accomplish the real work of growing food in addition to the myriad skills and 
knowledge in developing healthy soil, seeding, transplanting, irrigation, and using the 
tools and building the infrastructure necessary to accomplish those tasks.
As a person also working in the "skills" trades of carpentry and timber framing part 
time, I have been lucky to find people who appreciated taking the time to impart their 
skills to a younger and/or inexperienced person interested in learning what they know 
because they not only saw potential, but also knew the satisfaction of passing on their 
knowledge into the future.  I am very passionate about teaching and was an educator 
before my career in farming.  My choice to farm sustainably and on a small scale has 
as much to do with practicality as it does with economics.  We farm because we care 
deeply about the future of our planet, our local community and ecosystem, and the 
legacy we leave for our children and beyond.  We believe the work we do is vital for 
our future in the context of a changing, more unpredictable climate.  
The skills of small scale, organic farming are simultaneously as broad as they are 
specialized and require years of experience to develop competency.  I wouldn't dare 
say one could master growing food, but you can teach someone to be good at it with 
the proper training and experience.  One thing we do that is harder to teach except 
through daily example(i.e. apprenticeship) is to read the time and place in which 
you’re working in order to make and prioritize and reprioritize decisions on a weekly 
basis depending on weather, soil conditions, pest pressure, moisture levels, staffing, 
and more.  You learn to deal with inconsistencies, problems that you can and cannot 
predict, and you plan for those and make contingencies for those plans.  You also 
learn to be resilient and change or even abandon plans when you need to.  You learn 
that opportunity can spring from the learned experience of a “disaster.”  However, 
you cannot learn any of this without experiencing it.  I believe an apprenticeship is an 
excellent way to accomplish this.
We have had apprentices for three years now on our farm.  We have learned to our 
surprise (and mild horror) that we pay wages on the higher side for apprenticeships 
amongst our peers.  We strive to pay more and have increased our stipends every 
year; these stipends are the balance of what we calculate to be a minimum wage of 
$15/hr based on the value of the housing and more importantly the education we 
provide with extra time taken to explain the details and management side of farming, 
teaching apprentices how to use tools and their bodies properly for their longevity, 
and helping them learn things specific to their goals in growing food in the future all 
within the context of a larger ecosystem in which we are trying to harvest solar energy
to make food.  
Unfortunately we are also up against a capitalistic economy that views humans as 
“units” to plug into a money making machine, which is dominated by large scale 
farms and equipment with little regard to long term environmental costs to humans 
and environment alike, and is all undergirded by an expensive, fossil-fuel 
supercharged infrastructure built around transporting goods thousands of miles on 
roads and oceans that require vast maintenance. We also expect all of this to happen 
within two days.  I don’t think anyone would disagree with the statement that quantity
comes at the cost of quality and vice versa.  We strive for quality in our products, 
which means higher labor and also will translate to low cost to our health and 
environment.  We find it difficult to put a cost on one’s life, yet we pay dearly in 
health care by taking shortcuts with diet and processes, and investments in 
maintenance.  The bottom line is not money, but time and what time we are willing to 
put into the quality of what it is we are producing.
We are happy to invest that time into quality of life and environment.  We also 
struggle to pay ourselves, apprentices, and employees what we think we all deserve.  
Apologies to anyone in the financial or investment sector, but I think our work is 
more valuable than yours and we deserve to be paid at least as much as you.  I have 
wrestled with the conundrum of paying and getting paid throughout my farming 
career and have come to the conclusion that I don’t blame anyone who doesn’t want 
to farm because it’s hard work and doesn’t pay well.  You really have to believe in 
what you are doing to stay a small farmer.  We are beholden to market values and 
suppressed wages against our wills.  In resignation to living in a capitalist economy, I 
can at least acknowledge that we should be paying our workers a fairer wage.  We as 
owners at least come away with a theoretical increase in value and productivity of our
farm, apprentices and workers only take away their wages and their experience.  It is 
in this context that I support LD 901.  Everyone of our apprentices and workers 
deserve a better wage and in lieu of our inability to provide this, we hope that our 
society (tacitly through our state government) can support the people who are and will
be growing their food.
