 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce In Support 
of  
L.D. 901 Resolve, to Establish a Pilot Project to Support Farm Apprenticeships in 
Maine
 
Chairs Ingwersen and Pluecker, and esteemed members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in 
Gardiner and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business association made up of both large and small businesses, here to provide 
you with my testimony in support of a pilot project to support farm 
apprenticeships.
The Maine State Chamber and its business members support this legislation 
due to our policy positions around experiential and work-based learning. Our goal 
is to grow the size and skills of Maine’s workforce. With job training that 
develops real skills that lead to fulfilling careers and upward economic mobility, 
we are more capable of keeping a talented workforce in Maine. This piece of 
legislation is especially important because of the consequences of inaction.
For years family and independent farms in Maine have been consolidated 
our pushed out of the market by corporate farms with capital, machinery, and 
technology that smaller farms are not designed to have and cannot compete with. 
A crucial way to fight against the advantages of corporate farms is to have a 
skilled workforce. Without action this trend of consolidation will continue and 
have significant negative outcomes.
On the surface there are many food brands which gives consumers the 
illusion of choice. When you dig deeper there are strikingly few producers and 
processors that distribute food to our nation’s population. In the height of the 
pandemic a COVID outbreak at a single meat processing plant disrupted grocery 
store shelves nationwide. We should do our part to shelter Maine people from 
such a fragile food supply chain. Currently we are seeing other effects of 
consolidated food systems. Food prices have soared and inflationary pressures 
have created grocery bills that families are struggling to meet. 
In supporting this resolve I would point toward our partners at Educate 
Maine and FocusMaine. They have successfully begun innovative programs and 
apprenticeships in Maine’s rapidly growing Aquaculture sector. Their model of 
success could be replicated and adjusted for agriculture, giving this new venture 
best practices to build on.
If we work together to help our family and independent farms have the 
workforce they need to continue producing their product we can help Maine 
people be better situated in times of uncertainty. I ask that you pass LD901 and 
begin the process of increasing the skilled workforce base in this critical industry.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.  
  
 
 
