Dv’ 101 Western Ave. 
P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2074303334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
In OPPOSITION to LD 1279: “An Act to Strengthen Maine's Child Protection Laws by 
Limiting Contact with Violent Offenders ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Monday, April 10, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, l am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)‘ in opposition to LD 1279, "An Act to Strengthen Maine's Child Protection 
Laws by Limiting Contact with Violent Offenders. ” 
This bill would create presumptive jeopardy, for purposes of removing a child froma 
parent who has not actually harmed them, for that parent having allowed their child to have 
any contact with a person convicted of domestic violence who has not completed a certified 
domestic violence intervention program or another comparable intervention. Sucha 
structure would not do anything to actually help protect children from harm due to 
domestic violence but would instead create additional harm. MCEDV raises the following 
issues and questions for your consideration: 
0 Are we going to require every parent in the State of Maine to conduct a background 
check on every person their child might spend time with? Under this proposal, failure 
to do so would put you at risk of losing your children until you can rebuta 
presumption that you have created jeopardy for the child by dating someone witha 
history of domestic violence — even if you had no knowledge of their criminal history; 
even if that person's conviction was 25 years ago. 
Q This proposal would require that those who have been convicted of domestic abuse 
and violence, who have not completed an intervention program, not be around 
children - even their own children. And yet, there is no corresponding directive to the 
family court that this type of hardline prohibition should be factored into parental 
rights and responsibilities orders. So, if a family has a parental rights and 
responsibilities order that allocates contact and visitation to a parent who has been 
1 
MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year, including court advocacy services in the civil and criminal courts. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
rncedv.org
l\/ICEDV Page 2 of4 
convicted of domestic abuse and violence and who has not completed a certified 
domestic violence intervention program, because the family court has concluded, 
after assessing the individualized circumstances of the family, that contact and 
visitation between the parent and child is in the best interest of that child, the 
primary custodial parent can have their child removed from their custody for 
complying with their family court order until they can get into court to rebut the 
presumption they’ve caused serious harm. 
0 There is no “treatment ” for domestic violence. Policy makers should be clear on that, 
and our statutes should not suggest there is such a simple remedy. Maine law 
recognizes certified domestic violence intervention programs as the most effective 
intervention for people in our state who have chosen to use domestic abuse and 
violence. This proposal assumes these programs are a cure. They are not. They are 
the best intervention that we have, based on the evidence available. Feedback we 
have gotten from survivors confirms that these programs can be very beneficial, 
particularly for men who complete the program, but only if they are motivated to 
change? However, as with any intervention intended to change human behaviors 
and deconstruct oppressive belief systems, these programs are ineffective for those 
who are not motivated to change. Just because someone has completed the 48- 
week program, does not mean that there are not reasons to be concerned about the 
risk that person may continue to pose. Some program completers have gone on to 
commit severe violence against their current or future partners. Appropriate 
responses should center around assessment of individualized risk and not rely simply 
on program completion or lack thereof. 
0 There are people in our state, including parents who are safely and successfully 
parenting their children, who have been convicted of domestic abuse and violence 
before Maine’s certified domestic violence programs were even widely available or 
consistently referred to by the criminal courts. This proposal would presume we 
should interfere with their rights to parent, without further assessment of the actual 
risk they pose to any children or adult partners. 
0 Consider a family where one parent assaulted another. Police are called. The person 
who has caused harm is arrested and takes a step toward accountability for their 
action by pleading guilty to assault. The sentence is suspended, and the person is 
ordered to attend the 48-week program as part of their probation. The economic 
well-being of the parents, and so their children, are tied to each other. This bill would 
require the survivor parent and the children to live separately from the offending 
2 We encourage anyone interested in learning more about Maine’s Certified Domestic Violence Intervention 
Programs to review the report that MCEDV, together with the Maine Department of Corrections, submitted to 
the Maine Legislature ’s Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety in December 2020. That 
report can be found here: https:ljwww.mc_edg.Q_rglyvp< 
.con_te_nt1up.i.oad,s: ’2021£o1!,MC_§Dy;z020CBlPLegReport.pdf.
101 Western Ave. 
’ ' P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2o7_43O_3334 
parent for at least 48 weeks, with no contact between the offending parent and the 
children, or risk having the children removed by the state - regardless of the survivor 
parent's perspective. Ultimately, survivors want the person causing harm to change, 
and many of them believe that the person they love has the capacity to do so. They 
make choices about their living arrangements and relationship balancing the 
possibility of their partners ’ capacity to change their behavior with the risk of further 
harm, taking into account the broader reality of their circumstances. Our courts and 
systems must engage in a similar individualized evaluation. 
0 If you tie child removal so acutely to exposure to someone convicted of domestic 
violence, you will create disincentives for victims of domestic violence to call the 
police, to seek court ordered protection, to reach out for help from anyone who isa 
mandated reporter, which includes domestic violence resource center advocates. 
Conversely, you will create incentives for those who choose abuse and violence to 
manipulate survivors into situations where they can then use the survivor's use of 
reactive or resistive violence to further control them. 
This bill would incredibly and wrongfully exacerbate the tendency of our systems to 
center responsibility for changing the behavior of someone choosing to engage in abuse and 
violence on the person they are harming, instead of on the person doing the harm, and 
punish survivors of domestic violence (with the removal of their children from their custody) 
for circumstances that are out of their control. Rather than creating additional pathways to 
remove children from struggling parents, policymakers would help survivors of domestic 
abuse and violence keep their children safe and create homes where these children can 
thrive, by funding things that benefit all Mainers, such as greater access to appropriate, 
affordable child care; public transportation; low barrier financial assistance; access to legal 
representation, and safe and affordable housing. 
Thus far this session, this Committee has thoughtfully supported policy initiatives 
that are likely to be helpful and not harmful to families in crisis. We ask you to exercise that 
same thoughtfulness here and vote ought not to pass. 
As always, thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
|\/ICEDV Page 4 of4 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph= (107) 430-8334 
Email: andrea,@mgedv,org
Context 
The Maine Child Welfare Action Network (MCWAN) is a group of 
organizations and individuals in Maine working together to 
align, strengthen, and sustain efforts to ensure the safety and 
well-being of all Maine children, youth, and families. In January 
2022, MCWAN released a Framework for Child Welfare Reform 
that established core issue areas and challenges, and made 
priority action recommendations that were supported by data 
and research. The 2023 Strategic Child Welfare System Priorities 
build upon that framework with updated data and context. 
MCWAN will continue to update these priorities annually, to 
serve as an ongoing framework for action and a tool for 
measuring improvement. 
The tragic deaths of several Maine children associated with 
parental abuse or neglect in the summer of 2021 highlighted 
concerns about child safety that were already elevated following 
the deaths of two girls in 2017 and 2018. The COVID-19 
pandemic exacerbated challenges families were already facing, 
presenting increased risk to child safety and family stability. This 
has resulted in a child protective system that is overstressed. 
Improvements to the child welfare system will take time to 
implement and to yield measurable results. Sustained 
investments to support families experiencing challenges to 
safety and stability are essential to preventing child 
maltreatment and reducing the pressure on the state child 
protective agency. Ensuring the state agency has adequate 
capacity and caseworkers have support to conduct their work 
effectively is critical to child safety. Effective collaboration is 
needed between community providers and the state agency to 
build a system that supports family well-being. Coordinated 
oversight of the child welfare system is essential to the 
continuous quality improvement of the state Child Protective 
Services responsible for ensuring child safety and promoting 
family stability. 
Collectively, these ongoing and sustained efforts should move us 
toward a more effective system of child and family well-being. Priority Actions 
Equity: The State and Legislature should 
ensure equity is at the center of all 
system improvement efforts to address 
any disparities by poverty, race, 
geography, immigration status, gender, 
sexual identity, and disability. 
Prevention: The State should assume 
authority and responsibility for leading 
the development, implementation, and 
oversight of a statewide child 
maltreatment prevention plan. 
Coila boration: The State, Legislature, 
and Philanthropy should invest in 
rebuilding infrastructure for cross system 
collaboration to support families. 
Capacity: The Legislature and State 
should work together to build the 
optimal structure for state child welfare 
leadership and caseworker capacity. 
Supports: The State and Legislature 
should invest in concrete and economic 
supports for families as a means of 
reducing and preventing child 
maltreatment. 
Oversight: Child Welfare Advisory 
Oversight entities should continue to 
coordinate with the Legislature to 
provide recommendations for systems 
improvement.
Data 
Overall, the number of children in Maine experiencing substantiated child maltreatment increased 30% between 
2017 and 2021, from 3,286 to 4,263 children? Using the latest federal data for comparison, Maine's rate of child 
maltreatment in 2020 was 19.0 per 1,000 children, compared to the national rate of 8.4 per 1,000 children. ’ This 
rate of child maltreatment in Maine was the highest in the nation. 
Children are also entering the foster care system in Maine at rates higher than the national average. in 2021, the 
state rate of children coming into foster care was 3.6 per 1,000 children, compared to the national rate of 2.8 
per 1,000 children? ‘ There were 2,220 children in state custody on December 31, 2021, nearly the same number 
as the previous year, but 675 more children than in 2017, and the highest number since 2006.‘ 
Disparities by race remain, although looking at child maltreatment rates in Maine by race presents challenges, 
with race unreported for one out of four children. Available data shows that American Indian children and 
children of Two or More Races are 1.3 times more likely to have substantiated child maltreatment reports, 
compared to the rates of all children for whom race and ethnicity is reported? 
There are also disparities by geography, with wide variations by county. ln 2021, Somerset and Waldo had the 
highest rates of substantiated child abuse at 29.8 and 28.0 per 1,000 children respectively. In 2021, Cumberland 
had the lowest rate of child abuse at 8.0 per 1,000 children, while Sagadahoc had the second lowest rate at 9.3 
per 1,000 children. “ The rates of substantiated maltreatment and youth in foster care are more than 5x as high 
in some counties compared to others. For children in foster care, Aroostook had the highest rate at 15.8 per 
1,000 children, followed by Somerset at 15.1, compared to Sagadahoc at 2.7 and Washington at 3.3 per 1,000 
children. ’ 
Child welfare system involvement often crosses issues and systems. In 2020, the risk factors for maltreatment 
with the greatest prevalence were neglect, domestic violence, and drug/alcohol use.“ The income status of 
families is a significant predictor of involvement? A 2020 survey of incarcerated youth found 65% had a history 
of child welfare investigation. ” In 2021, a total of 26,584 reports were made for potential child abuse/neglect; 
9,808 were found appropriate, and 1,575 were opened for investigation. “ in the 8,208 where a case was not 
opened, family members may still face significant challenges that require supportive services. 
Progress 
Since January 2022, when MCWAN released the 
first Framework for Child Welfare Reform, there 
has been some progress on action steps. Several 
policies and investments were passed in the last 
legislative session that will improve child welfare 
responses across our state, including: 
~ Funding for prevention and intervention 
services to strengthen families 
~ increased capacity and autonomy ofthe 
Maine Child Welfare Ombudsman, 
' Support for older foster youth transitioning 
to adulthood 
~ A commission to study legal aid for families 
during assessment, and 
' More frequent child welfare oversight by 
the Health and Human Services Committee. The supplemental budget and change package 
also included important investments in the child 
welfare system: 
0 Additional caseworkers and supervisors 
dedicated to night and weekend shifts, 
~ A position in the DHHS Commissioner's office 
to develop a statewide prevention plan 
~ Discretionary funds to address family needs 
- Expansion of Family Visit Coaching, Parents as 
Teachers, and the Homebullders Program, and 
' Bridge funding for behavioral health services 
for children, youth, and adults. 
Collectively, these investments represent a 
significant response to support families, address 
child safety concerns, and reduce the strain on the 
child protective system in our state.
Chaﬂenges 
Prevention 
There is no statewide plan or coordinated system for preventing child maltreatment in Maine. A prevention 
position that was allocated by the 130th Maine Legislature to lead the development and implementation ofa 
statewide plan for child abuse and neglect prevention was still under development at the time of this 
publication. Maine is just one of 8 states that does not appoint a state agency to lead and coordinate statewide 
child maltreatment prevention efforts under federal Community-Based Child Abuse Prevention funds.” 
Cross System Collaboration 
Reports from the Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability in 2018 and Casey Family 
Programs in 2021 identified the need for the state child welfare agency to improve collaboration with 
community providers and other state agencies that serve the same families. “ The state child welfare agency has 
been working on collaborative agreements with law enforcement and hospitals. “ There are currently no 
targeted investments to improve collaboration between the state agency and other community providers. 
State Agency Capacity 
ln recent years, legislation has been introduced to restructure the state agency that is responsible for child 
welfare services. The Office of Child and Family Services (OCFS) Director is responsible for administering Child 
Welfare, Children's Behavioral Health, Children's Licensing & investigation, Early Care & Education, Youth 
Transition, Violence Prevention, and community-based contracts. “ One Associate Director of Child Welfare 
position leads the administration of all programs and contracts in the child welfare division. On the front lines, 
the current number of caseworkers (”445) includes many newly added positions, but hiring and retention are an 
ongoing challenge, and staffing issues have continued to be raised as concerns by the Ombudsman. “ 
Supportive Services 
Almost half (47%) of Maine families assessed by child protective services in 2020 were single parent households 
experiencing economic stressors." Parental substance use persists as a key challenge for families, with 50% of 
substantiated maltreatment cases citing this as a risk factor.“ There are roughly 9,000 children being raised by 
kin with no parent present, and an estimated 5,224 grandparents responsible for raising their grandchildren. ” 
Many children with disabilities, especially those in rural areas or with more intensive needs, are unable to live at 
home with their families due to a lack of community behavioral health services. ” There are an insufficient 
number of licensed clinical practitioners to fill open positions in treatment services statewide. 
Equity 
The state's highest per capita rates of maltreatment in 2020 were in rural counties that have less access to a full 
range of SUD treatment and recovery services. “ Available data for Maine shows that American Indian children 
and children of Two or More Races are 1.3 times more likely to have substantiated child maltreatment reports, 
compared to the rates of all children for whom race and ethnicity is reported. “ LGBTQ+ youth and youth with 
disabilities are at higher risk of experiencing violence in their homes.” The Justice for Children Task Force 
recently identified the need to assess systemic data collection with regard to race and other important markers 
of equity.“ immigrant families are facing significant challenges in acquiring housing, ” and need culturally 
competent information about Child Protective Services. Native families are facing a challenge to the Indian Child 
Welfare Act (ICWA) at the Supreme Court, threatening their sovereignty and best practice child placement as 
defined by lCWA.2“ 
PageI3
Oversight 
There are several state advisory oversight entities that play key roles in providing recommendations for 
improving the child welfare system, including the Child Welfare Ombudsman, the Child Death and Serious Injury 
Review Panel, and the Maine Child Welfare Advisory Panel.” Recent legislation requires these entities to share 
information and to come before the Health and Human Services Committee quarterly to update on emerging 
concerns, but will expire in June 2024.28 
Opportunities for Action 
Preventing future tragedies starts with reducing the prevalence of child abuse and neglect. This will require 
strategies and investments that stabilize families and decrease the need for child protective intervention. 
Prioritize Prevention 
Maine's prevention services should be restructured so the State assumes authority and responsibility for 
leading the development, implementation, and oversight of a comprehensive statewide prevention plan. 
' The position in the DHHS Commissioner's Office should facilitate work across state agencies to develop a 
plan that outlines Maine's theory of change for preventing child abuse and neglect. This plan should 
include a logic model and strategies, outcome measures, transparent investments, and a focus on equity. 
The State and Legislature should work together to ensure this plan is adequately funded. 
~ The State should reinstate DHHS as the lead agency for federal CBCAP funds, so DHHS can align these 
resources with the statewide prevention plan. 
v Philanthropy and Community Organizations should work together to address family support gaps that 
exist between prevention and intervention services by establishing flexible funds and direct financial 
assistance that are available to community providers and can be accessed to stabilize families. 
Improve Cross-System Col la boration 
Maine should renew investments in strategies that enable child welfare caseworkers and community service 
providers to work together to ensure children are safe and families are supported. 
' Philanthropy should support State and Community Organizations to adopt a framework and build 
infrastructure for collaborative work that includes the development of a logic model, strategies, and 
measures of success that build on learning from past and current cross-sector initiatives. 
~ The State and Legislature should allocate funding to support the full implementation of Family Team 
Meetings to include neutral facilitation at critical case points and training and coaching for all staff. 
~ The State should expand Regional Care Teams as a community-based model for supporting youth and 
families who are involved with multiple service systems. 
v The State, Municipalities, and Philanthropy should work together to meet the needs of immigrant and 
refugee families and provide culturally competent education about Child Protective Services. 
' The State and Legislature should join other states in establishing statutory language for child placement 
that aligns with the federal lndian Child Welfare Act. 
PageI4
Build State Agency Capacity 
State leaders and policy makers should invest in optimal agency structure and support for caseworkers and 
social workers to ensure the demands of child welfare operations and systems improvements are met. 
~ The Legislature should establish a Commission to convene key partners to assess and make 
recommendations on the most effective and appropriate state agency structure for providing services to 
children, youth, and their families. 
~ The State and Legislature should work together to provide adequate and sustained revenue to ensure 
child welfare workers receive sufficient training, supervision, and support for manageable caseloads. 
~ The State should train all staff to recognize and address disparities in child welfare based on poverty, 
race, geography, immigration status, gender or sexual identity, and disability. 
' The State and Legislature should work together to adequately fund and fully implement a model of peer 
support provided by parents who have lived experience of child welfare. 
Invest in Supportive Services 
Maine should invest in concrete and economic supports for families as an important means of reducing 
and preventing child maltreatment. 
~ Community Leaders, Philanthropy, Healthcare Organizations, and State Leaders should work together 
to invest in community-based universal supports and enhanced primary care initiatives, e.g., Family 
Resource*Centers and Healthy Steps. 
v The State should expand access to recovery peer supports and set and maintain adequate 
reimbursement rates for mental health and substance use disorder (SUD) treatment services, including 
targeted case management for anyone with SUD. 
~ The State should ensure all caregivers (including birth parents, kinship, grandparents, and resource 
families) receive equitable and sustained financial support and access to services. 
~ The State and Legislature should work together to address immediate, long-term, and structural 
challenges in the Children's Behavioral Health Services system. 
~ State leaders should work with Maine Housing and other housing partners to increase development of 
family-sized affordable housing and increase production of supportive housing for families. 
~ The State and Legislature should work together to increase the state Child Tax Credit and make it fully 
refundable. 
~ Healthcare Organizations should work with the State to expand buprenorphine availability in rural 
communities for caregivers who have Opioid Use Disorders. 
v The State should follow all recommendations released in the report for the Supporting Grandparents 
Raising Grandchildren (SGRG) Act and provide consistent, ongoing funding for kinship support. 
- The Legislature should establish a Commission to study and make recommendations for increasing 
Maine's clinically licensed workforce across child, youth, and family serving systems statewide. 
Pagel5
Ensure Effective Oversight 
Entities that play key roles in providing recommendations for improving the child welfare system should 
continue to build capacity to do this effectively, and the Legislature should provide ongoing oversight of the 
outcomes of all formal recommendations. 
~ The Legislature should make permanent the regular reports from all child welfare advisory oversight 
bodies to the Health and Human Services Committee that are set to expire in 2024 to continue ongoing, 
coordinated oversight of child welfare system improvement efforts. 
~ The Legislature should require key, consistent indicators of safety, permanency, and well-being of 
children in the child welfare system are included in annual OCFS reports. 
Conclusion 
The child welfare system includes all of us, and we must continue to work together now, and in the coming 
months and years, to improve the safety and well-being of Maine children and families. 
As a state, we have a continued obligation and opportunity to engage in a transformation of our child welfare 
system. Our efforts cannot be solely focused on and limited to the state child welfare agency. lt is critical that 
we also reduce the strain on Child Protective Services by doing everything we can to prevent abuse and neglect. 
We must act together to prevent future tragedies by building a child well-being and family strengthening 
system. 
The system responsible for protecting and promoting the welfare of children includes many partners: families, 
community service providers, schools, healthcare, philanthropy, and local and state leaders. We must all work 
together across sectors and on all levels, to envision and invest in a continuum of care that focuses on child 
safety and well-being and strengthens families across every community in Maine. 
PageI6
References 
1. Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Child and Family Services. Child Welfare Indicators CY2017-CY2021. 
2. National Chiici Maltreatment Report 2020. Table 3-3. Page 36. 
3. Children's Bureau. Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data for FY 2021. 
4. KlDS COUNT Data Center 2016-2021-children~in-foster-care-by-countv-of-removal and 2002-2017-children-in-foster-care- 
by-placerrienbcounty. 
5. MCA analysis of Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Child and Family Services. Child Welfare indicators 
CY2017-CY2021 data; compiling averages and using as denominators the number of children by race and ethnicity that are 
based on calculations from the Census 2020. See Children by race/ethnicity compared to 2010 Census in Maine 
6. KIDS COUNT Data Center Substantiated child maltreatment victims by county, 2017-2021 in Maine. 
7. l<lDS COUNT Data Center Children in foster care by county of removal, 2016-2021 in Maine. 
8. Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Child and Family Services. 2021 Annuai Child Welfare Report. 
9. Weiner, D.A., Anderson, C., & Thomas, K. (2021). System transformation to support chiid and family wei/-beina: The 
central role of economic and concrete supports. Chicago, IL: Chapin Hall at the University of Chicago. 
10. Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment. February 2020. 
11. Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability. Chiicl Protective Services investigations Report. March 
2022. 
12. Family Resource Information, Education, and Network Development Service. Community-Based Child Abuse Prevention. 
Contacts by State. httos:1,/friencisnrc.org/cbcap/what-is-cbcapi ’ . Accessed November 30, 2022. 
13. Casey Family Programs. Maine Review Summary Report and Recommendations 
14. Office of Child and Family Services Update. Health and Human Services Committee. September 19, 2022. 
15. Maine Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Child and Family Services. Organizational Chart 6/17/2021. 
16. Billings, Randy. Child welfare workers sound alarm, teiiing lawmakers of heavy workloads and long hours. Portland Press 
Herald. January 25, 2022. 
17. Maine Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Child and Family Services. Child Welfare Report 2020. 
18. Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Child and Family Services. 2021 Annual Child Welfare Report. 
19. Grandfamilies.org, GrandFacts. Maine Fact Sheet tor Grandiamilies. 
20. The United States Department oflustice. Justice Department Finds iyiaine in Violation of ADA For Over- 
lnstitutionaiization of Children with Disabilities. 
21. Portland Recovery Community Center. Find or Start a Center. Accessed November 30, 2022. 
22. MCA analysis of Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Child and Family Services. Child Welfare Indicators 
CY2017-CY2021 data; compiling averages and using as denominators the number of children by race and ethnicity that are 
based on calculations from the Census 2020. See Children bv race/ethnicity compared to 2010 Census in Maine 
23. Maine integrated Youth Health Survey. LGBT Student Health. Accessed November 30, 2022. 
24. Maine Justice for Children Task Force. 2021 Report to the Supreme Judicial Court. 
25. Ohm, Rachel. Portland scrambling to find housing for pregnant asylum seekers. Portland Press Herald. November 1, 
2022. 
26. Kelly, John. Supreme Court Probes Constitutionality of Indian Child Welfare Act. The imprint. November 9, 2022. 
27. Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability. information Brief: Oversight of Maine's Child Protective 
Services. January 2022. 
28. LD 1853. Resolve, To increase Oversight of the Child Welfare System. 
PageI7
