Janet T. Mills Maine Department ol'Healtl1 and Human Sci noes 
Governor" _ﬁm w (Tommissione ﬁs Olliu. 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Plr.D. __l ,»% 5- 
lei ll State House Station 
_ 
109 Capitol St: net 
Q. ._ ,“"T;':.:::';§/" __- 
t . 
_ ‘. A Augusta, Marne 04333-001 l 
(‘°"““““°“°' Tel: (207) 237-3707; Fax: (207) 2s7_300s 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of the Ofﬁce of Child and Family Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
In Opposition to LD 1279, An Act to Strengthen Maine ’s Child Protection Laws by Limiting 
Contact with Violent Oﬂenders' 
Hearing Date: April 10, 2023 
Senator Camey, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, I am Bobbi Johnson, Associate Director for Child Welfare at the Ofﬁce 
of Child and Family Services. I am here today to testify in opposition to LD 1279, An Act to 
Strengthen Maine ’s Child Protection Laws by Limiting Contact with Violent Oﬂfenders. 
We recognize and appreciate the well-intentioned origins of this bill; however, OCFS believes 
that the current statute is adequate to address situations where the facts and circumstances 
indicate someone in the household could be a threat to the safety of the children. 
LD 1279 would amend the provisions of law allowing a court to appoint a guardian for a minor; 
amends the deﬁnition of j eopardy and serious harm under Title 22, Chapter 1071; and establishes 
a presumption of jeopardy for circumstances in which the parent of a child or a person in contact 
with the child has been convicted or adjudicated of a crime of violence of any classiﬁcation and 
there is no documented record of successful completion of a certified domestic violence 
intervention program. 
OCFS is in opposition to this bill for several reasons. First, it runs contrary to one of the key 
tenants of OCFS’ child welfare work which is that people can and do change and that they 
should be offered the opportunity to change in order to safely care for their children. Second, the 
bill would create a “rebuttable presumption ” and the Law Court has determined that a rebuttable 
presumption in a child protection case is an impermissible burden shift given the fundamental 
rights at play. 
OCFS has signiﬁcant concerns about the far-reaching impact of this bill. The language is such 
that anyone convicted of any “crime of violence ” (which is notably not deﬁned in this bill or 
elsewhere in statute) could be subject to these proposed provisions which result in a ﬁnding that, 
regardless of other factors, a child is always in jeopardy when an adult living in the home has 
been convicted of a crime of violence and not completed a certiﬁed domestic violence 
intervention program, regardless of how long ago the conviction was. As an example, imagine a 
situation Where a father got into a bar ﬁght when he was 2l years old and was convicted of Class 
D assault. Today he is 42 and a father with no concerning behavior related to his temper, 
violence, or substance use in the past 21 years. If the Department were to become involved
because of substance use by the mother of his children, there Would be a presumption of 
jeopardy only because the father was involved in that altercation over 20 years prior. 
OCFS also notes that this bill is very broad in that it uses the language “crime of violence of any 
classiﬁcation.” This language is in no way limited to domestic violence-related crimes of 
violence, yet the only way to overcome the presumption is by completion of a certiﬁed domestic 
violence intervention program or comparable counseling for domestic violence. The domestic 
violence intervention program is an intensive one which does not have signiﬁcant applicability to 
crimes of violence not related to domestic violence. Furthermore, OCF S has concems that broad 
language around “an adult living in the child’s home” could penalize survivors of domestic 
violence and cause them additional trauma. 
The current deﬁnition of jeopardy in statute is reasonably broad, including “serious harm or 
threat of serious harm. If someone in the home has a recent history of domestic violence that has 
not been addressed through treatment, then the argument can be and is successfully made that 
they pose a threat of serious harm to the child. The unintended consequences of this bill would 
be too great. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have 
and to make myself available for questions at the work session.
