PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.aclumaine org 
AMERICAN GIVII. LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine . 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 1279 — Ought Not to Pass 
An Act to Strengthen Maine’s Child Protection Laws by Limiting Contact 
with Violent Offenders 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
April 1O, 2028 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, andI 
am the policy director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and 
U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I am here to oppose LD 1279. 
The ACLU of Maine has long talked with you and your colleagues about the 
collateral consequences of convictions. Collateral consequences are legal and 
regulatory restrictions that limit or prohibit people convicted of crimes from accessing 
rights, benefits and opportunities, merely because of their convictions. These are 
consequences that were not included in a judge’s sentencing order, but nevertheless 
punish people with criminal convictions long after they have served their time. This 
bill imposes the collateral consequence of potentially losing custody of one’s children, 
regardless of the underlying facts of a person’s conviction for a "crime of violence. ” 
A conviction for a “crime of violence ” is not in and-of itself a decision by a judge 
that a person is unfit to parent. Nor is a conviction for domestic violence. Indeed, as 
the Battered W0men’s Justice Project states, in child custody matters, 
Identifying domestic abuse is a first step, but just knowing that 
abuse has occurred or is still occurring does not tell you all you need 
to know in order to make informed decisions and take informed 
action. You need to know more specifically what is actually going
on — what the nature and context of the abuse are. You need to 
know who is doing what to Whom, Why and to What effect. And, in 
the context of a family law case, you need to know What is going on 
with respect to parenting and the health, safety and wellbeing of 
the children, as well as the parent who is subjected to abuse.1 
Yet LD 1279 erases very important context, presuming that a conviction is, in and of 
itself, a judgment about a parent’s fitness. And, because many survivors of domestic 
violence are themselves criminalized, this legislation has the very real potential to 
further punish survivors by taking away their parental rights. 
We urge this committee not to remove careful consideration by courts of the 
individual factors that make up a child’s best interest, and not compound the harms 
of the criminal legal system. Please vote ought not to pass on this legislation.
