Maine Children ’s Alliance 
Testimony of Melissa Hackett 
Policy Associate, Maine Children's Alliance 
In opposition to LD 1279: ”An Act to Strengthen Maine's Child Protection Laws by Limiting 
Contact with Violent Offenders" 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and esteemed members of the Judiciary Committee. 
My name is Melissa Hackett, and i am offering testimony in opposition to LD 1279 on behalf of 
the Maine Children's Alliance. Our organization is a public policy, nonproﬁt improving the lives 
of Maine children, youth and families through research, collaboration, and advocacy. My policy 
focus is child welfare. 
Since this bill relates to child safety, it feels important to begin with what we know about child 
abuse and neglect. We know from research and evidence what the risk factors are, and we 
know what can work to prevent and lessen harm. It is also important to ground our 
conversation in the recognition that it is best for children if they can grow up safely with their 
families - rather than being separated from them. Our strategies to reduce child maltreatment 
must reﬂect this, by working to strengthen families so they can provide safety and stability for 
their children. 
Effective strategies impact individual behaviors and acknowledge the relationships of family, 
school, community, and societal factors that inﬂuence risk and protective factors for violence. ‘ 
This includes modifying policies, practices, and societal norms to create safe, stable, nurturing 
relationships and environments for children. Targeted efforts include policy solutions to provide 
economic and concrete supports to families in times of need, and services that ensure essential 
supports like child care, home visiting, and primary care are available to families." 
The conditions in households that lead to risk for child maltreatment are complex and nuanced, 
often involving parental challenges, including domestic violence. Economic hardship and social 
isolation often exacerbate issues. In order to prevent harm in these situations, we need to 
intervene with the speciﬁc supports families need to address challenges to child safety.
Given the complexity and sensitivity of each family's situation, these decisions are best left to be 
handled on a case-by~case basis by the providers, caseworkers, attorneys, and judges focused in 
this area of work, to ensure the appropriate supports and services are put into place for families 
to work toward safety and stability when there are challenges that need to be addressed. 
We also know that social stigma and fear of losing a child to state custody often prevent parents 
from seeking help when they need it. This is especially true for women who are victims of 
domestic violence. We should not underscore the fear and stigma they already face in accessing 
support by creating an additional burden on them regarding a failure to protect - at the risk of 
losing custody of their child — as this bill would do. 
We all care deeply about the safety and well-being of Maine's children. We must engage in 
policy discussions that represent meaningful opportunities to reduce risks to child safety, and 
better support families in achieving safety and stability. This proposal offers no such pathway to 
these solutions, and instead could have a negative impact on families navigating challenging 
situations in their efforts to achieve safety for their children. I strongly urge the committee to 
vote ought not to pass. Thank you. 
l 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Violence Prevention, Prevention Strategies 
https:ﬂwww.cdc.gov/violencepreventlon/chlldabuseandnegleciprevention.html 
" 
Chapin Hall, A Key Connection: Economic Stability and Family Well-being. Addressing economic hardship asa 
factor in child welfare involvement https://www.chapinhall.0rg[proiect/a-key-connection-economic-stabilltv~and~ 
family-weil-beingl
