April Fournier
Portland
LD 1970
Wednesday May 31, 2023
Ya’at’eeh shi k’ei doo shi’ dine’e’
Shí éí April yinishyé
Honágháahnii nishłį
Fournier báshíshchíín
Ákót’éego diné asdzáán nishłį́
T’ahdii kǫ́ǫ́ honiidlǫ́
Ahéhee’
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the Committee,
My name is April Fournier, my pronouns are she/her, I am a citizen of the Navajo 
Nation and a resident of Portland. I am providing testimony today in support of 
LD1970-An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act.
My opening greeting was in my Nation’s language. It’s not perfect and is very hard to
say. I didn’t grow up speaking our language. I didn’t go to ceremony. I’ve only really 
been able to access and connect to my culture since entering into adulthood. I am born
for the Honaghaahnii Clan, the One Who Walks Around Clan by my mother.  It’s not 
that she didn’t want to teach me, or neglected to pass on that sacred wisdom…it’s 
because she couldn’t. 
In 1955 my mother was born Lorraine Virgie Wood in Ganado, Arizona on Dinetah 
(what we call our homeland).  She grew up in their small village in the desert with her
mother, aunties and grandmother and uncles, an older brother and soon a baby sister.  
Some of her earliest memories are playing with old coffee cans in the dirt and singing 
songs of our ancestors. In 1960, 18 years before the Federal Indian Child Welfare Act 
was passed, her older brother was away at boarding school, her baby sister still an 
infant and my grandmother became sick with tuberculosis.  While she was very sick, 
the government came and told her they would take care of her daughters while she 
was ill, so she could get better.  And when she was better, they would bring them 
back.  She didn’t see my mother or her sister for another 30 years.  Their older brother
came home from boarding school, 8 years old, and found his little sisters vanished. 
They were given, by the government, who took guardianship of them, to a white 
couple from Iowa, on their way to re-settling in California. Their hair cut, their names
changed, their clothing carefully picked to match and blend into a culture and 
community that was not their own. 
My mother has been on a lifetime journey of reconnecting and repairing what was 
stolen. My sister and I, our children and the next generations will also have to work at
something that was as easy as breathing and coded into our blood because of the acts 
of the government to interfere with our family. 
The Federal Indian Child Welfare Act was enacted in 1978, to protect families like 
mine, to protect generations from losing their connection to their community, their 
culture, their family and their ancestors.  Once again our peoples, here on the 
Dawnland and across this country, are threatened by a government that was never 
built to support us, to steal our sovereign right to care for our children, and try to 
make decisions for us without us.  We cannot let the Supreme Court steal this 
protection away from our communities and must now make it happen at the State 
level to protect our families. 
Thank you for your time and your work on behalf of our communities. 
Ahé heé 
April Fournier
Portland, ME

