My name is Claire Millikin Raymond, I live in Owls Head, Maine and teach for the 
University of Maine and Bates College.  
I urge you to protect and preserve the original intent of the Indian Child Welfare Act by 
signing into law LD 1970, “An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act.” 
Protecting the Indian Child Welfare Act on the state level is the right thing to do 
ethically in terms of human rights and also it will ultimately benefit the entire 
population of Maine by protecting Wabanaki children from unsafe practices. Children 
who are protected from childhood injustice become adults who are productive citizens, 
and the Indian Child Welfare Act has been shown, over decades, to protect Indigenous 
American children from injustice. The Indian Child Welfare Act was originally enacted 
on the national level to put an end to decades of cultural genocide in which Indigenous 
American children and infants were taken from their families of origin to be reared by 
White run boarding schools and in White families. The psychological trauma resultant 
from these practices is now widely known and it is unthinkably wrong to return to such 
practices. Moreover, if Maine wishes to stand with other states in preserving human 
rights standards codified by the United Nations, then it is vital to recognize that the 
Indian Child Welfare Act is the gold standard of protecting Indigenous American 
children from cultural genocide. Maine will do the right thing if it signs into law LD 
1970, and secures on the state level the safety of Indigenous American children living in 
Maine.  By signing into law LD 1970, Maine will be in keeping with international human 
rights principles and also will lay the foundation to create a healthy vibrant community 
for all Mainers in the future.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Claire Millikin Raymond
Owls Head
LD 1970
My name is Claire Millikin Raymond, I live in Owls Head, Maine, and teach for the 
University of Maine and Bates College. 
I urge you to protect and preserve the original intent of the Indian Child Welfare Act 
by signing into law LD 1970, “An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act.”
Protecting the Indian Child Welfare Act on the state level is the right thing to do 
ethically in terms of human rights and also it will ultimately benefit the entire 
population of Maine by protecting Wabanaki children from unsafe practices. Children
who are protected from childhood injustice become adults who are productive 
citizens, and the Indian Child Welfare Act has been shown, over decades, to protect 
Indigenous American children from injustice. The Indian Child Welfare Act was 
originally enacted on the national level to put an end to decades of cultural genocide 
in which Indigenous American children and infants were taken from their families of 
origin to be reared by White run boarding schools and in White families. The 
psychological trauma resultant from these practices is now widely known and it is 
unthinkably wrong to return to such practices. Moreover, if Maine wishes to stand 
with other states in preserving human rights standards codified by the United Nations,
then it is vital to recognize that the Indian Child Welfare Act is the gold standard of 
protecting Indigenous American children from cultural genocide. Maine will do the 
right thing if it signs into law LD 1970, and secures on the state level the safety of 
Indigenous American children living in Maine.  By signing into law LD 1970, Maine 
will be in keeping with international human rights principles and also will lay the 
foundation to create a healthy vibrant community for all Mainers in the future. 

