James McCarthy
Brunswick
LD 1970
To: Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary 
Re: Support for LD 1970, An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act, 
sponsored by Rep. Donna Bailey, D-York.
Dear Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee, my name 
is James McCarthy and I live in Brunswick. I’m a retired journalist and a member of 
the Episcopal Committee on Indian Relations. I appreciate this opportunity to submit 
written testimony in support of LD 1970.
In preparing these remarks I took the time to read “Beyond the Mandate,” the June 
2015 report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission that spent three years 
investigating and reporting heart-rending testimonies of Wabanaki citizens who’d 
been placed in non-Indigenous foster homes both before and after the enactment of 
the federal Indian Child Welfare Act in 1978. 
First and foremost among the hard truths within that report are the painful stories of 
the long-lasting harm suffered by Wabanaki children who’d lost their connection to 
culture, extended family and community after being taken into non-Wabanaki foster 
care. I trust you will be mindful of the deep suffering many Wabanaki citizens still 
feel as a result of the lingering presence of what the commission described as 
“institutional racism in state systems and the public.” (Page 64). Passing LD 1970 
would show our Wabanaki neighbors that we have taken their suffering into our 
hearts and minds and are committed to making sure those past abuses will never 
happen again.
I appreciate the written testimony by Todd A. Landry, director of Maine’s Office of 
Child and Family Services, supporting this bill. I share his concern that the pending 
Haaland vs. Brackeen case before the U.S. Supreme Court creates uncertainty about 
ICWA’s future on the federal level. Your committee and the 131st Legislature can 
remove that uncertainty by joining at least 12 other states that have acted to codify 
ICWA protections on the state level. This would protect Wabanaki children, families, 
culture and sovereignty if the U.S. Supreme Court decides in June to weaken or 
destroy protections that have been known as the “gold standard” of child welfare 
policies for 40 years.
As Landry concluded in his testimony, “Enshrining these rights and safeguards into 
State statute will provide continuity regardless of the U.S. Supreme Court’s ruling.”
I also would note that Maine is one of 26 states that filed “friends of the court’ briefs 
in 2019 supporting ICWA in the pending Brackeen vs. Haaland case. I trust your 
committee will be reassured by this amicus filing and the fact that the Child 
Protective Division of the Maine Attorney General’s office helped craft the language 
of LD 1970. 
Thank you for the important work you are doing. I appreciate your time and 
consideration of my testimony in urging you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1970. In 
doing so, you will be joining thousands of other Mainers who are working with the 
Wabanaki Alliance to heal our relations with all our Wabanaki friends and neighbors.
