 
 Testimony  in Support  of LD 1970:  An Act to Enact  the Maine  Indian  Child  Welfare  Act (ICWA)  
To: Senator  Carney , Representative  Moon en, and honorable  members  of the Joint  Standing  
Committee  on Judiciary  
From:   Janet  Hough,  401 S Edmunds  Rd, Edmunds  Twp  ME 04628  
Re:  Support  for L.D. 1970 : An Act to Enact  the Maine  Indian  Child  Welfare  Act (ICWA)  
 
I urge  your  Committee  to vote  unanimously  OUGHT  TO PASS  on LD 1970.    
In 2012  Wabanaki  Tribal  leaders  and the Governor  of the state of Maine  established  the historic  
Maine  Wabanaki -State  Child  Welfare  Truth  & Reconciliation  Commission , which  delivered  its 
final  report  in 2015 . Using  the findings  reported  by this Commission , state  and Tribal  child  
welfare  workers  have  collaborated  to advoca te for systemic  changes  in child  protection  
procedures  and public  policy , knowing  that the well-being  of Native  children  is inextricably  
linked  to their  connectedness  to their  culture,  their  land,  and their  Tribal  community.  It is this 
knowledge  that underlies  the specific  child  protection  procedures  and standards  established  in 
the 1978  federal  Indian  Child  Welfare  Act (ICWA)  on which  this state  ICWA  bill (LD 1970)  is 
modeled.   
The federal  Indian  Child  Welfare  Act is currently  under  threat  in a case  pending  befo re the US 
Supreme  Court : Brackeen  vs. Haaland . As I expect  you know,  Maine  is one of 26 states  that filed  
“friends  of the court” briefs  in 2019  supporting  ICWA . In addition,  Maine’s  U.S. Sens.  Susan  
Collins  and Angus  King  and Rep.  Chellie  Pingree  are among  the 87 members  of Congress  who  
signed  the “friends  of the court”  brief  supporting .  
In ruling  on the upcoming  ICWA  case, the Supreme  Court  could  weaken  or destroy  impo rtant  
child  welfare standards  that protect  all Native  children  including  Wabanaki  children,  families,  
culture  and sovereignty.  By enacting  LD 1970 , Maine  would  codify  the ICWA  procedures  and 
standards  on the state  level  and thereby  affirm  its commitment  to support  the well-being  of 
Wabanaki  children,  their  families,  and their  nations . 
I strongly  urge  the Judiciary  Committee  to vote  unanimously  OUGHT  TO PASS  on LD 1970.   
