We in Maine have a moral duty to implement LD 1970, the Maine Indian Child 
Welfare Act, into law. 
I testify 
•as a descendant of English settlers in New England and across the 
country, who profited from the genocide against the people living here, 
from the time when our family patriarch arrived in Connecticut in 1632. 
•in memory of the 1890 Wounded Knee Massacre, in which soldiers used 
four rapid-fire cannon with our family name on them to kill hundreds of 
men, women and children.
•from hearing shocking stories of the horrors of the so-called Indian 
Boarding Schools, both in the US and Canada, up through 1996. 
•with awareness of t he Maine Wabanaki-State Child Welfare Truth and 
Reconcilation Commission, which found evidence of cultural genocide in 
this state, through failure to comply with the 1978 federal Indian Child 
Welfare Act (ICWA), and under ' the 1948 United Nations Convention’s 
definition of genocide, Article 2 Sections b and e. These reference an 
intent to destroy through “causing serious bodily or mental harm to 
members of the group” and “forcibly transferring children of the group 
to another group.” ' (finding #4 of the Commission's report in 2015). 
Although Maine has come a long way, the efforts at genocide from within the 
United States continue, with the latest legal attack against ICWA now awaiting 
an imminent decision from the Supreme Court. To prevent potential serious 
damage to the survival of tribes and to child welfare in general, more than 20 
states have passed their own state-level versions of this acknowledged model 
for effective and humane child welfare practice. 
ICWA must be strengthened, not destroyed. Please pass LD 1970, unanimously
and expeditiously.
Jeffrey Hotchkiss
Portland
Jeffrey Hotchkiss
Portland
LD 1970
We in Maine have a moral duty to implement LD 1970, the Maine Indian Child 
Welfare Act, into law. 
I testify 
    • as a descendant of English settlers in New England and across the country, who 
profited from the genocide against the people living here, from the time when our 
family patriarch arrived in Connecticut in 1632. 
    • in memory of the 1890 Wounded Knee Massacre, in which soldiers used four 
rapid-fire cannon with our family name on them to kill hundreds of men, women and 
children.
    • from hearing shocking stories of the horrors of the so-called Indian Boarding 
Schools, both in the US and Canada, up through 1996. 
    • with awareness of the Maine Wabanaki-State Child Welfare Truth and 
Reconcilation Commission, which found evidence of cultural genocide in this state, 
through failure to comply with the 1978 federal Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA), 
and under 'the 1948 United Nations Convention’s definition of genocide, Article 2 
Sections b and e. These reference an intent to destroy through “causing serious bodily 
or mental harm to members of the group” and “forcibly transferring children of the 
group to another group.” ' (finding #4 of the Commission's report in 2015). 
Although Maine has come a long way, the efforts at genocide from within the United 
States continue, with the latest legal attack against ICWA now awaiting an imminent 
decision from the Supreme Court. To prevent potential serious damage to the survival
of tribes and to child welfare in general, more than 20 states have passed their own 
state-level versions of this acknowledged model for effective and humane child 
welfare practice. 
ICWA must be strengthened, not destroyed. Please pass LD 1970, unanimously and 
expeditiously.
Jeffrey Hotchkiss
Portland
