John Maddaus
Committee on Indian Relations of the Episcopal Diocese of Maine
LD 1970
Testimony of the Committee on Indian Relations of the Episcopal Diocese of Maine 
In Support of LD 1970 An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act
Submitted for the Public Hearing Before the Maine Legislature’s Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, May 31, 2023
Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is John Maddaus, and I serve as chair of the Legislative 
Committee of the Committee on Indian Relations of the Episcopal Diocese of Maine. 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in support of LD 1970 An Act to 
Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act. 
The Episcopal Committee on Indian Relations was formed by resolution of the 
Diocesan Convention in 1991. For over 30 years, we have lived into our mission “to 
deepen our relationship with the Wabanaki of Maine, to stand with the tribes in the 
pursuit of justice, to affirm their inherent sovereignty, and to support the preservation 
of Native languages and culture.”
Like many others in the state of Maine, we followed and to varying degrees 
participated in the work of the Maine Wabanaki-State Child Welfare Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission in 2012-2015. We were profoundly moved by the 
testimonies of tribal citizens regarding their experiences as children who were 
removed from their families and communities and placed in non-Indigenous foster 
homes where they suffered multiple forms of abuse. The removal of even one 
Wabanaki child from their family and community is bad enough, but removal 
happened to Wabanaki children at a rate 5 times that of non-Wabanaki children. And 
this removal continued after the passage of the federal Indian Child Welfare Act 
(ICWA) of 1978 and right up to the time of the Maine TRC, despite Maine being 
identified in 1999 as in violation of ICWA. That systematic bias, rooted in the cultural
assumptions of white, middle class people, is horrendous. The removal of Wabanaki 
children and their placement in non-Indigenous foster homes built on the legacy of 
forced removal of Indigenous children nationwide to be placed in boarding schools or 
put up for adoption by non-Native families. The Maine TRC correctly concluded that 
systematic child removal of Indigenous children from their families and communities 
is a form of cultural genocide, and a violation of the 1948 United Nations Convention 
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, Article II, section (e). 
The members of the Episcopal Committee on Indian Relations understand that 
Indigenous children are best raised within their extended families, communities, and 
cultures, and that tribal sovereignty includes the right of Indigenous nations to make 
decisions about what is best for children who are tribal citizens. We agree with the 18 
national child advocacy organization that have labeled ICWA as the “gold standard” 
in child welfare policy and practice. Christians, including Episcopalians, have 
participated in the past in the practice of removal of Indigenous children from their 
families and communities. The 2022 General Convention of The Episcopal Church 
adopted a resolution to investigate The Episcopal Church’s participation in the history
of Indian boarding schools. Sadly, however, some people who identify as Christians 
are among those pursuing the current challenge to the constitutionality of ICWA at 
the federal level. We stand in opposition to the assumptions underlying their 
challenge to ICWA. We reject the assumptions of race and class and religious 
superiority that claim that Indigenous children are better off raised by white middle 
class Christian families who offer material advantages for the children involved while
advancing Christianity. We call this rationale what it is: an attack on Indigenous 
children, families, nations, and cultures. 
Wabanaki and Maine state child welfare workers, attorneys, and judges, among 
others,  have invested a great deal of time and effort since 1999 in seeking to bring 
Maine into compliance with the federal Indian Child Welfare Act. Much has already 
been accomplished in Maine, and the work continues. While the Supreme Court of the
United States deliberates on the constitutionality of ICWA at the federal level, we ask 
that the State of Maine join with 12 other states that have already written the 
protections of the ICWA into state law. 
We urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1970, and thank you for your 
consideration of our testimony. 

