May  31, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
RE: LD 1970  – An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the Government 
Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this 
opportunity to testify in support of LD 1970 , An Act to Enact the Maine 
Indian Child Welfare Act . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization 
dedicated to conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided 
by science, we create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s 
toughest  challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We use a 
collaborative approach that engages local communities, governments, the 
private sector, and other partners.  TNC  has been leading conservation in Maine 
for more than 60 years and is the 12th largest landowner in  the state, owning 
and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  
 
Too often when it comes to the decisions that affect their people, lands, waters, 
and livelihoods, Indigenous Peoples have been denied the opportunity to 
participate in meanin gful ways, resulting in the exclusion of important rights -
holders from decision -making processes.  As an organization committed to 
creating a future of healthy lands, waters, and communities, we believe that 
one of the most effective and enduring actions we  can take is to strengthen 
Indigenous Peoples’ voices, choices, and actions.  
 
This is a major focus of TNC’s work around the world.  As an organization, TNC  
has endorsed the UN Declaration on the Rights of  Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP). 
The UNDRIP describes t he fundamental rights of Indigenous  Peoples and 
supporting principles necessary to protect and fulfil those fundamental rights. 
In addition to  endorsing the Declaration, TNC has committed itself to respecting 
its principles, using it as a  reference in policy development, and serving as an 
ally to Indigenous efforts to grow the  influence of the UNDRIP in development 
and policy reform contexts around the world.  
 
Here in Maine, we continue to learn about the historical and ongoing injustices 
faced by Wabanaki children, families , and communities , and w e acknowledge 
the urgency of addressing the m. A disproportionately higher rate of Wabanaki 
children in Maine are taken into foster care than non -Native children . By 
codifying the Indian Child Welfare Act i n Maine , LD 1970 would protect 
Wabanaki children, families, culture , and sovereignty if the U.S. Supreme Court 
decides in June to weaken or destroy existing protections . 
 
LD 1970 is a critical step toward recognizing the rights to self -determination 
and so vereignty of the Wabanaki Tribes of Maine, which TNC  strongly supports.  
We urge this committee to support LD 1970 . Thank you for the opportunity to 
comment.  
