LD 1970, An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
June 5, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is 
Martha Proulx and I live in Belfast, Maine.  
I submit this testimony to urge you to support LD 1970, “An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child 
Welfare Act.”  
In March of this year, I retired after 38 years from Maine’s Office of Child and Family Services, the 
agency that oversees Maine’s child welfare system.  Part of my job responsibilities since 2005 had 
been the liaison to the federally recognized tribes.  In that role I worked closely with the Wabanaki 
tribes to ensure that the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) was followed.  This act is best practice in 
child welfare and ensures that Native children remain connected to their family, their tribe, and 
their tribal community.  Maine has led the way nationally in being committed to and following the 
Indian Child Welfare Act.  In addition, the state engaged with the Wabanaki tribes to form the 
Maine Wabanaki-State Child Welfare Truth and Reconciliation Commission.   This Commission was a 
landmark event and has been a model for other states.   
It is important to note that caseworkers, Assistant Attorneys General, and the Maine State court 
system already abide by the Indian Child Welfare Act.  Codifying this practice in Maine law will 
reinforce this practice.  Passing LD 1970 will ensure that Native children can grow up with their 
family, extended family, community, and culture. These strategies include state child welfare having 
to make active efforts in working with children and their families that would keep children safe, 
prevent separation and loss of their family, and reunify children when removal does occur. The Act 
requires preferences to place children in their culture and their family, providing children with 
continuity of belonging and support for their identity and development. The Act will bring qualified 
expert witnesses to inform and guide court decisions.  It will, however, not cause undo burden on 
the state nor will it cause any financial changes as it will continue the practices already carried out. 
I urge you to vote in favor of LD 1970: “An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act.” 
 
Sincerely, Martha Proulx 
Martha Proulx
Belfast
LD 1970
Please find my written testimony in support of LD 1970 attached.
