Meret Bainbridge, Saco, ME  
On behalf of the Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network  
P.O. Box 8, Augusta, ME 04330, www.muusan.org , info@muusan.org  
 
Maine 13 1st Legislature – Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
Testimony in Favor of LD 1970, Public Hearing May 31, 2023  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen,  
and esteemed M embers of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary:  
 
My name is Meret Bainbridge. I am a resident of Saco  and a constituent of Senator Donna Bailey 
who is the sp onsor of LD 1 970, An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act . 
I am testifying in favor of LD 1970 on behalf of my organization, the Maine Unitarian Universalist 
State Advocacy Network (MUUSAN ), which links Maine ’s 26 UU congrega tions in faith -based 
advocacy . Unitarian Universalists  recognize the inherent worth and dignity of every human being.  
 
Many UU congregations in Maine  have engaged with educational programs by Wabanaki 
R.E.A.C.H. to learn about the devastating ef fects of child removal policies prior to the passage of 
the federal Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978, policies  that resulted in the force d remov al of 
Indigenous children not only from their families, but also their tribe , culture , and language , 
resulting in damaging effects to the individual children, cultural genocide  and generational trauma .  
 
In 1978, according to the National Indian Child Welfare Association, nationwide 25% to 35% of 
all Indigenous children were removed from their homes by state child welfare and private adoption 
agencies. As many as 85% of those children were placed outside of their families and 
communities — even when fit and willing relatives were availabl e. According to a 2015 report of 
the Maine Wabanaki -State Child Welfare Truth & Reconciliation Commission, Wabanaki children 
were placed in to foster care at similarly  higher rates th an non -Native children . Even after ICWA’s 
enactment, a disproportionately higher rate of Wabanaki children in Maine are taken into foster 
care than non -Native children.  
 
ICWA has been labeled the “gold standard” in child welfare policy and practice by a coalition of 
18 national child advocacy organizations.  Maine’s U.S. Sens. Susan Collins and Angus King and 
Rep. Chellie Pingree are among the 87 members of Congress  who signed the “friends of the 
court” brief supporting ICWA in the pending U.S. Supreme Court review of ICWA’s 
constitutionality in the Brackeen vs. Haaland case that is expected to be decided in June.  Maine 
is one of 26 states that filed  a “friends of the court ” brief in the case.  If the US Supreme Court 
were to strike down ICWA, it would have devastating consequences t o Indigenous  children, 
families , and communities . 
 
By enacting L D 1970, Maine would join 12 other states that have acted to codify ICWA protections 
on the state level. This would protect Wabanaki children, families, culture and sovereignty if the 
U.S. Supreme Court decides in June to weaken or destroy protections that have been known as 
the “gold standard” of child welfare policies for 40 years . 
 
Maine ’s Unitarian Universalist congregations urge you to vote OTP on LD 1970, An Act to Enact 
the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act . It is a moral and ethical obligation to protect Wabanaki 
children in Maine from a return to the  devastating policies of the past, and ensure they grow up 
within their communities  in support of their tribal identities and cultures.  
 
  

