PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444
www.aclumaine.org
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
LD 1970 – Ought To Pass 
An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
May 31, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen  and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede , and I am Policy Counsel  for 
the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing 
and preserving civil lib erties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our 
members, I urge you to support LD 1970  because it is necessary to mitigate the cultural genocide 
of Indigenous people . 
European settlement in the Americas inv olved not just the mass murder and forced 
removal of Indigenous people from ancestral lands, but also cultural genocide through the 
separation of children from their Indigenous families and placement in settler homes. In 1969  
and 1974 , the Association of A merican Indian Affairs published  report s showing  “that 25 to 35 
percent of all Indian children had been separated from their families and placed in foster homes, 
adoptive homes or institutions, and 90 percent of those placements were in non -Indian homes. ”1 
“[T]he consequences to Indian children, Indian families, and Indian tribes of abusive child 
welfare practices that resulted in the separation of large numbers of Indian children from their 
families  … ” cannot be overstated . Mississippi Band of Choctaw In dians v. Holyfield , 490 U.S. 
30, 32, 109 (1989) . United States Senate hearings “in 1974 yielded numerous examples, 
statistical data, and expert testimony documenting what one witness called ‘[t]he wholesale 
removal of Indian children from their homes, .  . . the most tragic aspect of Indian life today. ’” Id. 
(citing  Indian Child Welfare Program, Hearings before the Subcommittee on Indian Affairs of 
the Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, 93d Cong., 2d Sess., 3. ).  
1 Association of American Indian Affairs, Indian Child Welfare Act, available at 
https://www.indian-
affairs.org/icwa.html#:~:text=%E2%80%8BThe%20Association%20completed%20two,were%2 
0in%20non-Indian%20homes. 
2 In 1978 , after holding more hearings about Indigenous child removal, Congress enacted 
the Indian Child Welf are Act (ICWA) . In enacting this law, Congress found  
(3)that there is no resource that is more vital to the continued existence and
integrity of Indian tribes than their children ...;  
(4)that an alarmingly high percentage of Indian families are broken up by the
removal, often unwarranted, of their children from them by nontribal public and 
private agencies and that an alarmingly high percentage of such children are 
placed  in non -Indian foster and adoptive homes and institutions; and  
(5)that the States, exercising their recognized jurisdiction over Indian child
custody proceedings through administrative and judicial bodies, have often failed 
to recognize the essential trib al relations of Indian people and the cultural and 
social standards prevailing in I ndian communities and families.   
25 U.S.C. § 1901.  The final Congressional finding is especially pertinent now, as the  possibility 
of a federal retreat from ICWA ’s protectio ns has left  it to states to enact similar protections. 
Even before the United States Supreme Court heard Brackeen v. Haaland , eleven states had  
stepped in to supplement federal protections with  ICWA -like laws.2 Colorado, North Dakota, 
Montana, and Wyoming  recently  joined that growing list of states. This bill gives Maine a 
chance to help ensure the continuity of Indigenous culture, regardless of changes in federal law. 
We urge you to vote ought to pass . 
2 Alaska, California, Oregon, Washington, Iowa, Mi nnesota, Michigan, Nebraska, New 
Mexico, Wisconsin and Oklahoma.  
