Myke Johnson
Portland
LD 1970
My name is Rev. Dr. Myke Johnson, and I am a retired minister living in Portland. I 
am writing in support of LD 1970. 
In 1978, the U.S. Congress worked closely with American Indian and Alaska Native 
elected officials, child welfare experts and families whose children had been 
unnecessarily removed from their homes to pass the Indian Child Welfare Act of 
1978. ICWA was designed to protect Indian children and families from biased child 
welfare practices and well-documented disregard for their families and culture. 
In 1978, according to the National Indian Child Welfare Association, nationwide 25%
to 35% of all Indigenous children were removed from their homes by state child 
welfare and private adoption agencies. As many as 85% of those children were placed
outside of their families and communities — even when fit and willing relatives were 
available. 
In Maine, according to a 2015 report of the Maine Wabanaki-State Child Welfare 
Truth & Reconciliation Commission, Wabanaki children were placed in foster care in 
similarly higher rates than non-Native children prior to ICWA’s enactment in 1978. 
The rates for Maine were the second highest in the nation at that time. Even after 
ICWA’s enactment, a disproportionately higher rate of Wabanaki children in Maine 
were taken into foster care than non-Native children. The Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission was part of a concerted effort to educate child welfare workers in the 
standards of ICWA, and to broaden public awareness. 
ICWA serves the best interests of Wabanaki and other Native American children by 
keeping them connected to their culture, extended family and community, which are 
proven protective factors. ICWA has been labeled the “gold standard” in child welfare
policy and practice by a coalition of 18 national child advocacy organizations. 
Nearly 500 tribes, hundreds of supporters, and at least 87 members of Congress 
support ICWA as the abiding standard in Native child welfare. Maine’s U.S. Sens. 
Susan Collins and Angus King and Rep. Chellie Pingree are among the 87 members 
of Congress who signed the “friends of the court” brief supporting ICWA in the 
pending U.S. Brackeen vs. Haaland case. 
By enacting LD 1970, Maine would join 12 other states that have acted to codify 
ICWA protections on the state level. This would protect Wabanaki children and 
families if the U.S. Supreme Court decides in June to weaken or destroy these 
protections
