LD 1970, An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
May 31, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is 
Penthea Burns and I live in Lewiston, Maine.  
I submit this testimony to urge you to support LD 1970, “An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child 
Welfare Act.”  
The Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) lays out a much-needed model for how child welfare systems 
can promote child safety through actively working with parents and extended family and 
recognizing that children belong in their community.  
ICWA honors the sovereign rights of Native families, communities, and governments to be the 
decision makers about their children and the ones to raise and care for their children. ICWA was 
established to remedy the disproportionate removal of Native children from their family, culture, 
and community.  
Eight years ago, the Maine Wabanaki-State Child Welfare Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
completed their investigation of the experiences of Wabanaki people in the Maine child welfare 
system, finding that the taking of Wabanaki children into state child welfare represented an act of 
cultural genocide that threatens the very existence of the tribes. A former DHHS caseworker who 
testified to the Commission, stated “… of course, the word ‘genocide’ to me means killing people, 
but it means more than that: it means killing a culture, and I don’t think I ever thought of any of our 
practices as killing a culture.”  
Nothing can undo the harm that has been done by decades of taking children, which began in the 
1800s. We can, however, do something to stop that taking from continuing.  
LD 1970, the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act, will codify in Maine law strategies designed so that 
children can grow up with their family, extended family, community, and culture. These strategies 
include state child welfare having to make active efforts in working with children and their families 
that would keep children safe, prevent separation and loss of their family, and reunify children 
when removal does occur. The Act requires preferences to place children in their culture and their 
family, providing children with continuity of belonging and support for their identity and 
development. The Act will bring qualified expert witnesses to inform and guide court decisions.  
LD 1970 will make a Maine law that calls for a level of government-to-government cooperation that 
puts Native children and their families in the center. Children need a sense of belonging, community 
roots from which they can grow and thrive. A community needs their children for hope, purpose, 
and continued existence.   
I urge you to vote in favor of LD 1970: “An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act.” 
Sincerely, Penthea Burns 
Penthea Burns
Lewiston
LD 1970
Testimony attached. 
