122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Support of:  
LD 1970: An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act  
   
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
State House, Room 438 Wednesday , May 31, 2023 
 Dear  Senator Carney , Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary . My name is Rebecca Boulos . I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine 
Public Health Association.  MPHA is in support of LD 1970: “ An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare 
Act.” 
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA  is to improve 
and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical 
public health cha llenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously.  According to the American Public Health Association’s Tribal Public and Environmental Health Think Tank
 
2018 report : “…the unique history of forced relocation, intolerance of cultural norms and practices, and 
discriminatory state and federal policies enacted over several generation s has resulted in historical trauma, 
adverse childhood experiences, distrust, and societal alienation (among Indigenous  communities).”1 Historical 
and intergenerational trauma and discrimination, and systemic racisma are intricately intertwined in public  
policies that influence determinants of tribal members’ health. These structural inequitiesb are pervasive and 
cross -cutting, leading to differential health outcomes for t ribal communities, and restricting their power to 
influence determinants of  their  health.  
 The Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) of 1978 was passed in response to decades of federal and state policies that encouraged  systematically removing Indigenous  children from their families and communities and forc ing 
 
a The “system of structuring opportunity and assigning value based on the social interpretation of how one looks (which is what we 
call ‘race’ ), that unfairly disadvantages some individuals and communities, unfairly advantages other individuals and communities, 
and saps the strength of the whole society through the waste  of human resources.” See Jones CP. 2018. Toward the science and 
practice of anti -racism: Launching a national campaign against racism. Ethnicity & Disease ; 28(S uppl 1): 231– 234.  
b The “personal, interpersonal, institutional, and systemic drivers —such as, racism, sexism, classism, able -ism, xenophobia, and 
homophobia —that make those identities salient to the fair distribution of health opportunities and outcomes. Policies that foster 
inequities at all levels (from organization to community to county, state, and nation) are critical drivers of structural inequities.” See 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health and Medicine Division; Board on Population Health and P ublic 
Health Practice; Committee on Community -Based Solutions to Promote Health Equity in the United States; Baciu A, Negussie Y, 
Geller A, et al., editors. Communities in a ction: Pathways to h ealth equity. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2 017 
Jan 11. 3, The Root Causes of Health Inequity . 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  assimilation into white, non- native families. The effects of these forced removals extended the intergenerational 
trauma of colonization. C hildren were stolen from their families , from their tribes, in an act of cultural 
genocide ; and were raised  without connections  to their native  cultures, traditions, kin, and language. Inde ed, the 
intergenerational and damaging effect s of these efforts  persis t in the health disparities e xperienced by  tribal 
communities  today.2 
 
Our individual ide ntity is connected to relationships with our families, our community, our land, our heritage, 
and our culture. ICWA serves as a model in child welfare legislation  because of its recognition and 
prioritization of cultur e and connection in health and wel lbeing. The law dictates that for Indigenous  children in 
the adoption system , the first preference is to place them with their extended family, followed by other members 
of their tribe . The 2012 Annie E. Casey Foundation report, Stepping up for Kids , found that “ Kinship care helps 
children maintain familial and community bonds and provide s them with a sense of stability, identity, and 
belonging, especially during times of crisis. Kinship care also helps to minimize the trauma and loss that accompany parental separation.” Kinship care is especially important for Indigenous  children, as “[f] or many 
Indigenous  people, the almost complete lack of recognition of culture as a determinant of health and the lack of 
access to culturally competent care results in an alienating and disheartening experience.”
3 
 
In June, the United States Supreme Court will decide on Brackeen vs. Haaland; this case is attempting to overturn ICWA. E nsuring that ICWA  protections are enshrined in state law , as this bill will do,  will help protect 
future generations of Indigenous  children, families, and communities fro m the trauma  of forced removal and 
assimilation . 
 We respectfully request you to please vote LD 1970 “Ought to Pass.” Thank you for your consideration.   
 
1 Tribal Public and Environmental Health Think Tank. Priorities in Tribal Public and Environmental Health . American Public Health 
Association. 2018.  
2 Native Child Advocacy Resource Center. Practice Brief 3: Tribal Children and Forced Assim ilation . September 2022.  
3 Roundtable on the Promotion of Health Equity and the Elimination of Health Disparities; Board on Population Health and Public  
Health Practice; Institute of Medicine. Leveraging Culture to Address Health Inequalities: Examples from Native Communities: 
Workshop Summary. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2013 Dec 19. A, Culture as a Social Determinant of Health. 
Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK201298/  
