 
  
 Hello Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee. My 
name is Taylor Cray, and I am the Outreach Team Leader for Preble Street Advocacy. I am 
writing today to ask that you please vote in favor of LD 1970: An Act to Enact the Maine 
Indian Child Welfare Act. 
At Preble Street, our work focuses primarily on housing, shelter, and food security. This work 
stems from a dedication to community and relationship-building, the nature of which requires 
that we identify points of connection between ourselves and others. We cannot engage in the 
work of community-building, particularly in social services and advocacy work, without 
acknowledging the ongoing harm that has been caused to many communities, including 
Indigenous communities, by this very work. Throughout much of history, current history 
included, organizations, government entities, and various other groups in positions of power 
have made decisions “for the benefit” of Indigenous communities, attempting to strip these 
communities of their autonomy, sovereignty, and cultural identity. Indigenous communities 
have long resisted the actions of these organizations, and it is our responsibility to stand 
alongside them and follow their leadership. 
The current national threat to the Indian Child Welfare Act poses a great risk to indigenous 
sovereignty and the well-being of Indigenous people. When children are removed from their 
homes, it is a tragedy. When children are entirely removed from their homes, families, 
communities, and cultures, it is a devastating attack on the culture and leads to the erasure of 
a culture. We cannot stand idly by and allow ICWA to be challenged without doing everything 
in our power to protect indigenous children and communities. 
Codifying ICWA protection in Maine State law will help to prevent the continuation of the 
genocidal practices that ICWA seeks to prevent. When children are removed from their 
homes, cultures, and families, their sense of belonging and connection to self begins to falter. 
As human beings, we require connection and the feeling of being interwoven with something 
larger than ourselves. We seek the knowledge that we are not alone in the world, that we can 
fall back on our community when we lose touch with ourselves. When children grow up 
without this connection to self and community, they face much higher risk of difficulty later in 
life. For children in Native communities, they are also losing the ability to continue living 
within their own cultural identities. This is dangerous not only for the children, but for the 
cultures themselves. 
Indigenous communities have resisted colonial influence ever since the first contact of 
colonial powers to their communities. Despite continued attempts to destroy Indigenous 
peoples and their culture, these communities have persevered and preserved their traditions, 
languages, and heritage. Protecting the welfare of Indigenous children is vital to the 
protection of Indigenous culture. We must do everything possible to ensure that Indigenous 
children stay within their communities and their cultures. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Taylor Cray
Preble Street
 
 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.org
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to 
homelessness and hunger

 
  
