 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Child and Family Services  
11 State House Station  
2 Anthony Avenue  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel.: (207 ) 624 -7900 ; Toll Free: (877) 680 -5866  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) ; Fax: (207) 287-5282  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
  
 
 
May 31 , 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney , Chair  
Representative Matt Moonen , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding  the Office of Child and Family Services’ support 
for LD 1970 , An Act to Enact the Maine Indian Child Welfare Act.  This bill would enact the 
Maine I ndian Child Welfare Act to establish procedures and standards for cases concerning 
custody proceedings, out of home placements, termination of parental rights, and adoption 
involving Indian children.  
 
The impetus for this bill  was the current uncertainty r egarding the future of the Federal Indian 
Child Welfare Act (ICWA) due to a pending case before the US Supreme Court  (Haaland v. 
Brackeen) . OCFS, our colleagues in  the Office of the Attorney General, the Tribes, and other 
stakeholders have been closely mon itoring the progress of  that case through the federal courts  
and we share the concern that the US Supreme Court could find ICWA partially or fully 
unconstitutional , thereby eliminating important safeguards for custody and child welfare 
proceedings involving Indian children and families. Enshrining these rights and safeguards into 
State statute will provide continuity regardless of the US Supreme Court’s ruling . 
 
OCFS provided technical support in the development  of this bill and is aware that the Child 
Protective Division at the Office of the Attorney General had a primary role in helping craft  this 
language . We support its passage and implementation  to ensure stability of practice and provide 
appropriate statuto ry protection for the rights of the Tribes and Indian children and families.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dr. Todd A. Landry  
Director  
Office of Child and Family Services  
 

