35$“ <4-=;¢7-\ 
,, HoUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
3 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Ann Maﬂack TTY: Maine Relay 711 
130 Scraggle Point Road 
Spruce Head, ME 04859 
(207) 594-4831 
Ann Matlacl<@legislature.maine.gov 
April 21, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Ann Matlack introducing 
LD 1336, An Act to Increase Transparency in Municipal Ballot Referenda 
Expenditures 
Before the State aml Local Government Committee 
Good morning, Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government. My name is Ann Matlack, and I represent House 
District 43, which includes the communities of Cushing, Thomaston, South Thomaston, St 
George and part of Owls Head. I am pleased to present LD 1336, An Act to Increase 
Transparency in Municipal Ballot Referenda Expenditures. 
LD I336 is a straightforward bill that addresses a gap in Maine’s campaign ﬁnance laws. Its aim 
is to bring the same campaign ﬁnance transparency that exists for state ballot questions to those 
in smaller local jurisdictions. It accomplishes this by requiring that ballot question spending over 
$5,000 in all Maine communities be subj ect to reporting laws. Today, reporting laws for local 
ballot questions only apply to municipalities with a population of 15,000 or more. 
Transparency in campaign ﬁnance serves an important public interest. Put simply, voters havea 
right to know who is speaking to them in a campaign. Is it neighbors coming together to express 
support or opposition? Is it an individual or a corporation with a vested interest in the outcome of 
the vote? Required disclosures reveal who is behind campaign spending, how much is being 
raised and spent, and how the money is spent. It helps communities understand who stands to 
gain or lose. 
The principle is the same whether the issue is on the state or local ballot: voters need accurate 
information in order to make well-informed choices. In small towns, a little spending can goa 
long way, and often spending is one-sided. It is critical that timely information be made available 
during campaigns so that communities can fully understand what is at stake when deciding ona 
ballot question. In recent years, there has been campaign spending in small town elections on 
issues ranging from mining to municipal broadband that have gone undisclosed because there is 
no legal requirement for these expenditures to be reported. 
LD 1336 would require anyone raising or spending $5,000 in a local ballot question campaign in 
a town under 15,000 to report these expenditures using the system of electronic ﬁling developed 
by the state’s Ethics Commission. This is reﬂected in the amendment shared with this committee. 
This would ensure transparency without creating unnecessary burdens on smaller municipalities. 
District 43 Cushing, Thomaston, South Thornaston, St. George and part of Owls Head
As Maine towns face questions about their future — Whether it is about the best way to provide 
broadband internet access, setting building and development standards, or the role of cruise ships 
in the local economy — private citizens need all the information they can get. LD 1336 would 
ensure that people in all communities, regardless of population, beneﬁt from timely and 
accessible campaign ﬁnance information. 
Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis said famously, “The most important political ofﬁce is that 
of private citizen. ” Every one of us in elected ofﬁce understands that it is the private citizens— 
the voters — who make it possible for us to serve. Democracy relies on citizens to do their job, 
and we must do what We can to make sure they have the tools they need to fully exercise their 
franchise. 
Secondly, Justice Brandeis wrote and spoke wisely about the importance of transparent data, 
open meetings, and the role of the press in a free society, concluding that, “Sunlight is said to be 
the best of disinfectants. ” It’s time we shine some light on this small but important corner of 
Maine ballot campaigns. I hope you will vote Ought to Pass on LD 1336. 
Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
District 43 Cushing, Thomaston, South Thomaston, St. George and part of Owls Head
