c.»‘ 
oil! 
TO: The Honorable Tim Nangle 
The Honorable Holly Stover, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
DATE: April 21, 2023 
RE: LD 1336 —An Act to Increase Transparency in Municipal Ballot Referenda Expenditures 
Good morning Senator Nangle and Representative Stover. 
My name is Will Hayward. I'm a resident of Portland. l am here today as the Advocacy Program 
Coordinator on behalf of Maine Citizens for Clean Elections. lam testifying in support of LD 1336, An Act 
to Increase Transparency in Municipal Ballot Referenda Expenditures. 
Maine Citizens for Clean Elections has been the leading campaign finance organization in Maine for over 
twenty years and one of the nation's most respected state-based organizations advocating for 
democratically funded elections. We are proud of our national reputation. But we are all Mainers, and 
our nonpartisan mission has always been with and for the people of this state. 
We support LD 1336 because it addresses a significant loophole in i\/laine campaign finance law: 
currently, no disclosure of any type is required for campaign spending in nearly all municipalities under 
15,000.1ln recent years, news reports have indicated that there is significant spending on ballot question 
campaigns in smaller municipalities, particularly around issues such as municipal broadband. ’ The 
amounts and funders of these campaigns typically remain undisclosed, since there is no law to compel 
their disclosure. This deprives voters in these municipalities of crucial information they need to make 
important decisions; if a flood of spending on mailers, phone calls, and texts is coming in on one side or 
another of an issue, voters have the right to know who is behind it. 
LD 1336 takes an important and measured first step towards fixing this problem. It sets the threshold for 
spending that needs to be reported relatively high, at $5,000, to eliminate the reporting burden for truly 
small-scaie, local campaigns. Additionally, it only covers ballot questions campaigns. While candidate 
campaigns are worthy of consideration for additional disclosure, ballot question campaigns are where 
1 
MCCE is aware of three municipalities under 15,000 people that have opted into the disclosure requirements for 
larger municipalities: Bar Harbor, Standish, and Union. 
“Charter-funded group campaigns against Maine municipal broadband, riling residents and ’partners ’”l\/laine 
Public, 2022. 
https://www.mainepublic.org/business-and —economy/2022-O7-O7/charter-funded-group-campaigns-against-maine 
-municipal-broadband-riling-residents-and-partners 
PO Box 18187, Portland, Maine 04112 l Tel: (207) 831-MCCE (6223) 
www.mainecleanelecti0|1s.0rg | ini‘ i:»(::f~iimimrcierizii1i<>i,:§i<>ns.<>rg
MCCE Action to SLG 2 
LD 1336 April 21, 2023 
the current concern arises — of large undisclosed sources of outside spending, and these campaigns 
represent the most important first step. And finally, as addressed in the amendment shared with this 
committee, this legislation would put campaign finance reporting in these smaller municipalities with 
the Ethics Commission. This would allow information to be disclosed in a trusted and tested system and 
avoid requiring small municipalities to develop campaign finance reporting infrastructure on their own. 
We believe this bill represents an important first step to address the most major undisclosed spending 
taking place in l\/laine politics. We hope this committee will address this important issue, and vote Ought 
to Pass on LD 1336. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. l would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee.
