POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT 
LD 82 An Act to Improve Access to Children's Behavioral Health Services 
Presented to Maine's Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
As the state's largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of An Act to Improve Access to Children ’s Behavioral Health Services. NAMI Maine advocates strongly to 
provide mental heath services to the 1 in 4 Mainers who are affected by a mental health challenge. We 
also support work to increase the capabilities of the state to meet the needs of all community members. 
According to the CDC, only 20% of children who require behavioral health care services receive them in 
their home and community, with children in rural communities having lower rates. Fees for service 
perpetuate this problem. Prior to the pandemic, Maine had the highest rate of children diagnosed with 
anxiety and third highest rate of children diagnosed with depression, along with being identified witha 
critical shortage of providers. As the pandemic continued, the mental health system continued to 
experience a depletion of services, providers, and treatment options for children. in the Spring of 2022, 
the State of Maine was cited by the Department oflustice due to the lack of available community 
resources and services for the young people of the state. Children continue to wait for months to 
receive appropriate treatment. Adding a financial barrier to receiving needed services causes an 
unnecessary burden to families already faced with a lack of available services. 
NAMI Maine supports the work and initiatives of this committee in ensuring that the future of our state 
is receiving without additional barriers the care and treatment they need. The investments of this 
committee will provide critical resources and allow for the best possible outcomes for our children. 
Although it may be an additional cost for the state initially, this would save the state future spending on 
higher and more expensive care in the future. 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the NationaIA/liance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) is the state's largest grassroots 
mental health organization. With support from national and regional aﬁiliates, the agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone 
impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine engages with leaders and community partners at ail levels to improve the state's mental 
health system through collaboration and education. 
LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
Programs www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
(207)622-5767 O HannahL@namimaine.org
