‘\€ 1ow~§ . . , .. 
-SQ» Mame Town & City Clerks ASSOCIGHOI1 
7' 
Local Govemment Center e 60 Community Drive 
Augusta, Maine 04330-9486 
4f3.,AsS°G\\» 1-800-452-8786 (In Mame) 0 207-623-8428 
Fax 207-626-5947 
Date: February 22, 2023 
To: Senator Craig Hickman, Senate Chair 
Representative Laura Supica, House Chair 
And members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
From: Patti Dubois, Chairperson, Legislative Policy Committee 
Maine Town and City Clerks’ Association 
Re: LD 750- An Act to Eliminate the Limits of Candidates ’ Speech at the Polls 
Position: Oppose 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association is in opposition of LD 750 and we thank you for 
the opportunity to outline our points for your Committee. 
Although many municipal clerks from small communities say they wouldn't be significantly 
impacted by passage of this bill, others from mid to large sized communities expressed 
significant concerns about the impacts of this bill. Clerks acknowledged that removing 
speech restrictions could potentially relieve wardens from monitoring the candidates ’ 
speech. However, discussions between candidates and voters could result in more people 
gathering in the area, resulting in more congestion for those entering and/or exiting, along 
with even more complaints from voters who at this time do not like having candidates at 
the polls. Political topics are polarizing and can result in heated discussions which could 
lead to violence. All of this activity could negate the benefit of wardens not having to 
monitor candidates ’ speech. 
Clerks in opposition noted: , 
- Voters gathering to speak with candidates would impede/obstruct/inhibit the flow of 
voters entering and exiting the polls. 
o Many voters are intimidated by the candidates at the polls. 
- Election workers could be pulled away from other duties to continuously monitor the 
entrances to the polls. 
~ When voting takes place at a municipal office, non—voters could be impeded from 
entering and would be unable to avoid the political discussions. 
Representing Over 400 Municipalities
Q?» ‘OWNQ . . .. 
§ Mame Town & City Clerks’ ASSOCICl ‘|'l0I‘| 
F Local Government Center e 60 Community Drive 
Augusta, Maine 04330-9486 
v- 1-800-452-8786 (In Maine) - 207-623-8428 
“‘55° Fax 207-626-5947 
o Allowing political discussion could add more chaos to an already congested 
atmosphere and could easily be divisive, which could add to voters’ anger and the 
potential for violence. 
Municipal clerks noted that the current law allowing candidates at the polls to greet voters 
results in the most complaints received from voters on Election Day. Voters are unable to 
avoid the candidates when voting in person and routinely question why they are allowed to 
be there. Based on this common theme, clerks respectfully request that consideration be 
given to designate a specific area where candidates can be located when at the polls so 
that they can be positioned in such a manner that voters who wish to speak to them could 
do so while those who do not can easily avoid them. Moving candidates to a designated 
area was done during the pandemic and resulted in fewer complaints from voters. 
Candidates often say that they enjoy being at the polls to see their friends and neighbors 
making it a paity-like event. Clerks feel that Election Day is for the voters, not for the 
candidates, and that campaigning should be finalized by that point. Candidates who truly 
want to see their friends and neighbors can do so while campaigning in their districts ’ 
neighborhoods. 
Past testimony from this association requested the prohibition of candidates from the 
restricted area of 250’ around the polling location on Election Day where voter influence is 
prohibited, since it is likely the main reason that some candidates are at the polls. Clerks 
and Wardens are often spending valuable time monitoring candidates and fielding 
complaints regarding candidates, rather than focusing on servicing the voters. 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association appreciates the opportunity to share its 
testimony with the Committee. Should any questions arise, please feel free to contact me at 
207)680-4210 or by email: pclubois@water\/ille-me.gov . 
Representing Over 400 Municipalities
