Department of the Secretary of State 
Bureau of Corporations, Elections and Commissions 
'\'E!¥?Ii' 
Shenna Bellows 
Secretary of State 
Julie L. Flynn 
Deputy Secretary of State 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
March 08, 2023 
Testifying In Opposition to 
L.D. 750 “An Act to Eliminate the Limits on Candidates ’ Speech at the Polls" 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
officer. I am speaking today in opposition to L.D. 750. 
Under Title 21-A, section 682, subsection 2, influencing a voter in any way ~ including by a candidate 
~ is explicitly prohibited. Any deviation from what is currently allowed in law would be problematic 
for municipal clerks and voters. 
According to the National Conference on State Legislators (NCSL), 28 States prohibit influencing 
voters/soliciting votes/political persuasion, 10 states prohibit voter intimidation/interfering with voter, 
and 3 states prohibit peddling/advertising. This is all done for good reason as any scintilla of 
electioneering has no place anywhere near a polling place. Voters should feel comfortable walking into 
and out of their polling place without feeling obligated to speak to candidates trying to convince them 
of their qualiﬁcations or pressured to have to change their vote based on this interaction. Additionally, 
our municipal clerks should be able to focus on administering the election instead of being called away 
from their duties to mediate any friction that will likely arise should this bill be passed. 
Maintaining the current boundaries the law places on candidates, and their representatives, at the 
polling place is imperative to ensure elections are free from undue inﬂuence and obstruction. 
For the above reasons, we oppose L.D. 750. Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions 
that the committee may have. 
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine,gov/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
