L LE€\€3uE OF WOMEN VOTERS“ 
. s 
i~!i;li~*zi§ ’ "“< 
»i:’i, .1 
3 2. 
2 i 
it , 5... 
TO: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: I\/larch 8, 2023 
RE: LD 750 - An Act to Eliminate the Limits on Candidates ‘ Speech at the Polls 
Good morning Senator Hickman and Representative Supica. My name is Will Hayward and I am 
here today as the Advocacy Program Coordinator for the League of Women Voters of Maine. We 
are testifying in opposition to LD 750 An Act to Eliminate the Limits on Candidates ‘ Speech at 
the Polls. 
The League of Women Voters of Maine is a nonpartisan political organization that has been 
working for over 100 years to encourage informed and active participation in government, to 
increase understanding of major public policy issues, and to influence public policy through 
education and advocacy. We never support or oppose any political party or candidate. 
Activities in and around the polling place can sometimes result in tension between important 
competing values. On the one hand, the polling place has a venerable tradition in Maine asa 
place where members of a community greet each other and speak about a wide range of 
matters on their mind, both political and non-political. On the other hand, many voters — quite 
reasonably — view the act of going to the polls as a private and personal matter during which 
they would prefer not to be approached by strangers or to engage in uninvited conversations. 
Over the years, the legislature and election officials have done a good job of balancing those 
interests, and our polling places remain an important "public forum" in which most people are 
reasonably comfortable. However, there are reports of voters who for various reasons have felt 
uncomfortable when voting. Some of them would like to see more emphasis on privacy and the 
right to pass in and out of the polls without being approached by anyone. 
Our nonpartisan election observers have been present at polling places in each election since 
2020. In 2022, we covered over 100 polling places across all 16 counties with 112 volunteers. 
One of the most common complaints we heard from voters on Election Day was that they felt 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@1wvme.org 207.622.0256 www.lwvme.0rg
LWVME to VLA March 8, 2023 
LD 750 
distinctly uncomfortable being accosted by candidates on their way into the polling place -— it 
can feel like running a gauntlet. It can feel intimidating to voters. 
We believe that current law strikes a reasonable balance between First Amendment rights and 
voter intimidation. LD 750 would upset that balance. It would allow candidates in the polling 
place to declare their candidate status and ask for votes. Candidates could put voters on the 
spot: "Do I have your vote?" Because they could do so inside the polling place, these 
conversations would be audible to people behind the barrier and in the voting booth. Possibly 
creating a raucous and partisan atmosphere, it could disrupt the smooth conduct of the 
election. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the 
Committee. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
inf0@1wvme.org 207.622.0256 www.lwvme.org
