northernlighthealth.org 
 
Greg LaFrancois, President
AR Gould Hospital
140 Academy Street
PO Box 151
Presque Isle, Maine 04769
Office207.768-4021
Email  glafrancois@northernlight.orgLD 1187 An Act to Protect Inpatient Psychiatric Services in Northern Maine by 
Preserving the Current Reimbursement Rate 
Testimony in Support 
April 19, 2023 
 
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Gregory LaFrancois and am here today speaking in 
strong support of this legislation.  I am the President of Northern Light AR Gould 
Hospital located in Presque Isle Maine. 
 
AR Gould Hospital prides itself on providing the services needed to care for the citizens 
of Aroostook County.  In addition to primary and specialty care, AR Gould operates a 
state-of-the-art cancer center, dialysis center, and cardiovascular lab.  We are licensed 
as an 89-bed inpatient hospital inclusive of acute rehabilitation, mother baby, intensive 
care, and medical surgical units.  We work collaboratively with three other hospitals in 
the County to make possible our rural way of life. 
 
Access to behavioral health services is extremely limited in the County.  We do not have 
many of the community-based programs that exist in other regions of Maine.  Many of 
our most vulnerable citizens present to our emergency departments seeking any level of 
help that might be available.  For some we can offer outpatient services.  For most 
children and many adults an inpatient hospitalization is required.  We rely on Northern 
Maine Medical Center, and they have consistently gone above and beyond to care for 
our most vulnerable patients.  Without NMMC our patients would spend days and 
weeks in an emergency department treatment bay.  They deserve better. 
 
No one else in the County can provide the services NMMC provides.  I suspect there 
would be plenty of alternatives up here if there was money to be made in IP psych 
services.  There is not, but NMMC finds a way to provide the service and is committed to 
continuing to provide the service.  I have to believe a reduction in rates would make this 
service unaffordable to deliver.  I cannot imagine what our most vulnerable citizens 
would do without inpatient psychiatric hospitalization at Northern Maine Medical 
Center.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support of this important legislation. 
 
 
Greg LaFrancois 
President, AR Gould Hospital 
