Nikolas Lallemand
Fort Kent
LD 1187
I want to express my concerns surrounding the Maine Department of Health & 
Human Services decision to reduce psychiatric rates. I recently transitioned to 
NMMC after 17 years in the Higher Education field. Prior to NMMC, I served as the 
Director of Student Support Services at the University of Maine Fort Kent. A large 
part of my role was to oversee clinical and non-clinical counseling services. Across 
the country, there is an overwhelming gap in the number of services available for 
mental health. The University of Maine System Chancellor, Dannel Malloy, listed the 
expansion of mental health services as one of the top priorities for the UM system in 
FY22. If this plan moves forward, NMMC will no longer be able to financially 
sustain the current support programs in place. The impact this would have to the 
hospital, surrounding areas, and access to all Maine patients would be astronomical. 
We are the only hospital north of Bangor that is equipped to serve children and adults 
in crisis. As the current Patient Access Manager at NMMC, I witness firsthand the 
already critical levels faced across the state. We regularly accept patients needing 
mental health services as far away as Portland. 
The services at NMMC have provided essential support after my partner and I 
decided to take guardianship of my 14-year-old nephew. When the majority of local 
agencies are maxed out, NMMC was there to provide clinical and emergency services
in his times of need. NMMC's behavioral health unit is one of the reasons why he will
be continuing to college in the fall. 
My fear is that these changes would have a much larger ripple affect across the entire 
state of Maine for years to come. As a state with the oldest median population, loss of 
these services will give yet another reason why folks decide to leave. As a member of 
Maine Spark, this decision goes against the very core of retaining our state's 
population. 
As a transplant to the state of Maine, my partner and I have contemplated if it is even 
viable for us to remain long term residents based on the already limited number of 
services in our area. He's a cancer survivor and had to spend 5 months out of state just
to receive hyperbaric oxygen treatments for dental surgery as a result of past radiation
treatments.  Just recently, White Smiles Dental made the difficult decision to close 
their Fort Kent practice for not being able to find providers. My nephew has been on a
waiting list for 5 months for just a regular cleaning. We love this state and want to be 
able to continue building our lives here! 
We CANNOT afford to jeopardize an already critical program. I urge you to consider 
the long-term impact over short-term financial efficiencies. 
