Q3! 
x1 l ‘-ll 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 1187 
An Act to Protect Inpatient Psychiatric Services in Northern Maine by Preserving the 
Current Reimbursement Rate 
Presented to the loint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 19,2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Troy Jackson. l serve as President of the Maine Senate 
and have the great honor of representing Aroostook County in the Legislature. I am here today 
to introduce LD 1187, ”An Act to Protect Inpatient Psychiatric Services in Northern Maine by 
Preserving the Current Reimbursement Rate." 
Northern Maine Medical Center is the only provider of inpatient psychiatric services north of 
Bangor. Ensuring this critical care remains in Fort Kent is vital to the health and well-being of 
families in Aroostook County. However, the Department of Health and Human Services has put 
forward a revised reimbursement formula for inpatient psychiatric services that would have 
devastating consequences in northern Maine. 
The bill before you would prevent the Department from moving forward with the revised 
reimbursement formula in an effort to protect access to critical psychiatric care in rural Maine. 
Rough estimates suggest that this would result in a roughly $2 million loss in reimbursements. 
There is no question that a loss like this would likely result in cuts to services or the closure of 
entire facilities. 
NMMC began providing inpatient psychiatric care more than two decades agg to fill a critical 
gap in care across the region. The provider was approached by the Department due to the need 
for this type of care north of Bangor. The fact that NMMC remains the only provider of these 
services in northern Maine illustrates that lower rates would do little to sustain these services 
in the region. It's hard to put into words what this would mean for families who have loved 
ones in need of this care. 
The loss of these services would only result in more strain being put on our public safety and 
hospital systems. When people have a mental health crisis and there's no treatment options 
ready for them, experience has shown us that those folks end up either in a jail cell or an 
emergency room. Jails and emergency rooms are not the right way to treat a mental health 
crisis. Don't take my word for it — law enforcement has been raising the alarm about this issue 
for years. Supporting inpatient psychiatric services is a far better alternative. 
Stare H01/s0 (307) Z87-15()(l * Cell (207) 436-0763 "’ 
Fax (Z07) 287-5862 * T0// Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 7/1 
S' e/10/01"./clc"/<.v0r11@g/Mai/.00/71 * Web Sire;/egis/Q/ ‘z.1I'e.I11ui/m.g0\r'/(re/1:/Ic
The people of northern Maine deserve adequate care within their own community, and this is 
what the current reimbursement rate for NMMC allows. This rate also shows acknowledgement 
of the unique circumstances that are faced by health care systems in the region, because 
attracting professionals to work in the area is more difficult without the draw of a bigger city. 
There are also far fewer community and outpatient services in northern Maine than there are 
in the more southern parts of our state, making inpatient care even more essential to the 
community's well-being. So this is both an issue of access to care and a question of equity for 
the Mainers living in some of the most rural parts of our state. 
Ensuring that NMMC continues to receive reimbursement that addresses the necessity of the 
services it provides will ensure that northern Mainers have access to care that's appropriate for 
their needs in their own community. Thank you for your time today. l hope you will join me in 
supporting the measure. I'd also be happy to answer any questions.
