   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Barbara Burt, Vice -chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lucy Van Hook  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Chairpersons Chipman and Williams, and all members of the Committee on Transportation : 
 
My name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am 
testifying in opposition to LD 145, “An Act to Increase the Penalties for Operation of a Motor 
Vehicle While Using a Handheld Electronic Device or Mobile Telephone,” be cause it would fail 
to act as a meaningful deterrent to people using their phones while driving  and instead 
exacerbate our country’s criminalization of poverty . 
 
Increasing fines does not make our communities safer.  Reflecting this truth , an issue brief on 
crime deterrence from the National Institute of Justice states that increasing the penalties of a 
crime does not effectively deter people from committing that offense.1 In fact, one study from th e 
same government agency found that people subject to fines were more likely to commit crimes 
in the future than offenders who received no court -ordered punishment at all.2 
 
Because of racial disparities in police interactions, we  can also reasonably assume that the 
burden of increased fines for distracted driving will disproportionately fall on Mainers of color. 
Using data from 130 police and sheriff’s departments across the state, we know that Black 
Mainers are subject to traffic stops at a rate twice as high as would be expected given their 
relative proportion of the general population.3 
 
In rare cases , LD 145 would also inhibit  people’s ability to make ends meet . Many Mainers 
would be unable to afford the fees laid out in this bill, as recent Household Pulse data suggests 
that two in three Mainers are having difficulty paying for normal household expenses, with more 
than one in six saying afford ing regular expenses  has been “very difficult.”4 Suspending driver’s 
licenses wou ld further threaten Mainers’ ability to provide for themselves. Maine is 
predominantly rural, with reliable public transportation only available in certain, more urban 
areas of the state. Removi ng people's driving licenses would severely hinder  their ability to 
maintain employment and increase their risk of further interaction with the criminal justice 
system.5 
 
Instead of making our communities safer, LD 145 would increase the economic burden p laced 
on people with the least ability to pay these fines, potentially trapping Mainers with low income 
in a cycle of poverty and incarceration .6 Even worse, the financial impacts of these increased 
fines would fall upon Mainers who are already subject to bias and discrimination, especially from 
 
1 National Institute of Justice, “Five Things About Deterre nce.” https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/nij/247350.pdf  
2 Office of Justice, “ Effectiveness of Court -Ordered Punishment – Fines Versus No Punishment.” 
https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtual -library/abstracts/effectiveness -court -ordered -punishment -fines -versus -no-
punishment  
3 Portland Press Herald, “Study reveals racial disparities in South Portland arrests .” 
https://www.pressherald.com/2023/01/06/study -reveals -racial -disparities -in-south -portland -arrests/  
4 Household Pulse Survey, Week 54, Spending Table 1  
5 Brennan Center for Justice, “Driver’s License Suspensions Perpetuate  the Challenges of Criminal Justice Debt.” 
https://www.brennancenter.org/our -work/analysis -opinion/drivers -license -suspensions -perpetuate -challenges -
criminal -justice -debt  
6 Fines and Fees  Justice Center, “How Fines and Fees Criminalize Poverty: Explained.” 
https://finesandfeesjusticecenter.org/articles/how -fines -and-fees -criminalize -poverty -explained/  
 
   
 law enforcement. Because of LD 145’s failure to prevent distracted driving, and the financial 
threat it represents to Mainers with low incomes, Maine Center for Economic Policy urges this 
committee to vot e no on LD 145.  
 
 
