Sen. Benjamin Chipman, Chair
Rep. Lynne A. Williams, Chair
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation
Maine State Legislature
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
RE: L.D. 145, An Act to Increase the Penalties for Operation of a Motor Vehicle While Using 
a Handheld Electronic Device or Mobile Telephone.
Chairman Chipman, Chairwoman Williams, and distinguished members of the joint standing 
committee on transportation:
My name is Meryl Poulin. I am an attorney at Gideon Asen LLC, a law firm that specializes in 
personal injury and medical malpractice litigation. A large part of my job is representing 
individuals and families who have been the victim of someone else’s distracted driving. I am here 
today, however, in my capacity as a member of the Maine Trial Lawyers Association, an 
organization committed to providing justice throughout Maine, to express our strong support for 
LD 145.
To provide a perspective that is unique from others here today, I want to share what I have seen in 
my work representing individuals and families who have been devastated by someone else’s 
distracted driving. 
To begin with the obvious, LD 145 is about providing a consequence for an action. A penalty to 
be paid by a person who engages in dangerous behavior. And there’s no question that’s how it 
should be – the person who engages in dangerous behavior is the person who should pay the 
penalty. 
The harsh truth of distracted driving, the truth I want to impress upon you today, is that it is very 
often the completely innocent drivers paying the most severe penalties. I want to share an example. 
A family from central Maine- husband and wife in their mid-forties, who have been married for 
over twenty years, two children both around twenty years old, and two grandchildren- both under 
the age of two. Very early one morning in September of 2021, husband is driving family car to 
work. Wife is in the passenger seat because she’s going to drive the car home after dropping 
husband at work. 
As the two drive along, they come upon a bend in the road. As they drive around the corner in the 
bend, they’re met with the blaring headlights of another vehicle, that has crossed over the 
February 22, 2023
Page 2
centerline, into husband and wife’s lane. It is headed straight for them. Husband and wife have 
nowhere to go to avoid impact. The vehicles crash head on. 
Husband is ejected from the vehicle and killed. First responders found the upper half of his body 
dangling out the driver’s side window.
Wife survives but her legs are crushed, and she’s spent most of the year and a half since the crash 
bound to a wheelchair. 
She lost her independence, her high school sweetheart, the hopes and plans she’d made for her life. 
Her kids lost their dad, her grandkids lost their grandfather, and this family lost its breadwinner. 
Why? Because the driver who crossed the center line was distracted by an electronic device. He 
drifted across the center line and never even hit the brakes before he struck, injured, and killed 
these folks.
This is the kind of carnage that distracted driving causes. This is just one example. In the year 
2021, this crash was one of approximately 400,000 where someone was injured because of 
distracted driving, and it was one of 2,841 crashes where someone was killed as a result of 
distracted driving. 
What is even more shocking is that this is entirely avoidable. Entirely. There is never any reason 
that anyone needs to be engaging with a device while they are driving. Ever.
LD 145 increases the penalty for the people who should be paying the penalty. If that serves to 
deter those people from engaging in distracted driving, it will mean fewer instances of innocent 
people paying the penalty – innocent people like the ones I’ve described — who paid a penalty 
they should have never had to pay. 
On behalf of the Maine Trial Lawyers Association, we appreciate the opportunity to provide our 
comments in support of LD 145. I am happy to answer any questions the committee may have. 
Sincerely,
Meryl E. Poulin, Esq.
Gideon Asen, LLC
95 Main Street 
Auburn, ME 04210
mpoulin@gideonasenlaw.com 
www.gideonasen.com 
