- 
MAINE POLICY I N _ 5 T .|l 
Tj u T ‘E 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 145: “An Act to Increase the Penalties for 
Operation of a Motor Vehicle While Using a Handheld Electronic Device or Mobile ' 
Telephone ”' 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and the distinguished members of 
the Committee on Transportation, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as director of 
policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a nonpartisan, 
non—profit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic freedom in 
Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in opposition to LD 145. 
This bill would significantly raise ﬁnes for Mainers ticketed for driving while 
using an electronic device in situations .“including but not limited to...while the vehicle is 
temporarily stationarybecause of traffic, a traffic light or a stop sign.” 
Current law provides an exemption for drivers who utilize a “hands-free mode” 
on their device. But, if police ﬁnd a driver using more than one ﬁnger to operate a cell 
phone-—even while stopped in trafﬁc—they may issue a ﬁne. LD 145 would make these 
penalties extremely steep, even for a ﬁrst-time offender. 
The bill proposes to raise the ﬁne for the ﬁrst offense of ten-times the current 
penalty to $500. For the second offense, it proposes to quadruple the current penalty to 
$1000, and for the third and subsequent offenses, the bill adds an additional penalty of 
license revocation. 
The irony is not lost on us that supposed proponents of civil liberties and 
criminal justice system reform would support a bill that would give police greater license 
to accost Maine people on the roads, backed up by punitive ﬁnes. What if someone who 
can barely afford to get to work and back is ticketed $500 and cannot pay it? That 
person can become trapped in the negative cycle of late fees and summons. Is this what 
the Mainers barely making ends meet really need from their government? 
Clearly, this bill is intended to make roadways safer--there is certainly no doubt 
that many drivers are unsafely using electronic devices while driving. The question is 
whether the law itself or the ﬁne is a sufficient deterrent. When making new laws or 
more stringent penalties, one must remember that all laws are backed by force. 
‘ 
Please deem LD 145 “Ought Not To Pass” and resist these and other efforts to 
punitively punish Mainers for low-level offenses. Thank you for your time and 
consideration. 
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com i Post Ofﬁce Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550 1K
1
4
E 
if
I
s
l
I (1 
l% 
1:
I
1
l 
ll
F
I
