1
131st Legislature
Senate of 
Maine 
Senate District 29 
Senator Anne Carney
3 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0003
Office (207) 287-1515
Testimony of Senator Anne Carney supporting
LD 145, An Act to Increase the Penalties for Operation of a Motor Vehicle 
While Using a Handheld Electronic Device or Mobile Telephone
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation
February 23, 2023
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and esteemed colleagues on the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, I am Anne Carney, and I proudly represent Senate District 29, 
which includes South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough. Today I am pleased to 
offer my testimony in support of LD 145, “An Act to Increase the Penalties for Operation of a 
Motor Vehicle While Using a Handheld Electronic Device or Mobile Telephone.”
Some of you might recall that Maine banned texting while driving in 2011. But in late 2019, 
Maine’s stronger hands-free driving law first took effect. Maine is one of 24 states that prohibit 
handheld phone use while driving. Texting while driving is banned in all states except for 
Missouri and Montana. Since late 2019, more than 3,000 people have received tickets each 
year—3,648 in 2020; 3,232 in 2021; and 3,200 in 2022. For a Maine police officer to stop a 
driver and issue a ticket, they only have to see a phone in a driver’s hand. In a recent Portland 
Press Herald article, Lt. Bruce Scott from the Maine State Police Traffic Safety Unit said, “I’ve 
definitely seen a difference since it’s been prohibited, but it’s still commonplace to see people 
with phones in their hands. We’ve got a ways to go.” I agree with Lt. Bruce Scott. We’ve got a 
ways to go. LD 145 will help us get there.
Last year, Maine saw 3,154 crashes with distracted driving listed as a factor. Eleven crashes were 
fatal, and more than 1,100 (over a third!) caused injuries. Though not every accident was caused 
by a handheld device, this continues to be a serious problem despite our existing hands-free law 
and enforcement penalties. According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
sending or reading a text takes your eyes off the road for five seconds. At 55 miles per hour, 
that’s like driving the length of an entire football field with your eyes closed. The cost of 
distracted driving is high: traffic accidents drive auto insurance premiums up; result in costly 
emergency room, hospital, or urgent care visits; and strain Maine’s emergency medical services 
system. 
Another devastating cost of distracted driving is that Maine continues to set records for the 
number of pedestrian deaths each year. Last year, 21 pedestrians died, which followed 20 
pedestrian deaths—the previous record—in 2021. Anecdotally, I hear from my constituents, 
whether they are riding a bicycle, running, or walking, that drivers are not paying attention to 
stop signs and traffic signals and that drivers are driving at high speeds. 
2As lawmakers, we have a duty to help promote public safety. LD 145 is a straightforward bill. It 
promotes public safety by increasing the penalty for using a handheld electronic device or 
cellphone while driving from $85 to $500 for a first offense and from $325 to $1,000 for a 
second offense. It would also add a penalty for a third offense: drivers would temporarily lose 
their license. 
I urge this committee to determine what steps are needed to better enforce our hands-free driving 
law. If drivers choose to not put down their phones while they drive, then we need to increase the 
penalties for violating the law. I know that costly fines and the possibility of losing a driver’s 
license are harsh penalties; I also know that fatalities and injuries have an enduring effect on 
accident victims, their families, and those who continue to engage in unsafe driving behavior. 
Thank you for your consideration and time. I am happy to answer any questions you might have.
Anne Carney
State Senator, Senate District 29
South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough
