TESTIMONY OF
Timothy S. Doyle
ON
L.D. 145, “An Act To Increase the Penalties for Operation of a 
Motor Vehicle While Using a Handheld Electronic Device or 
Mobile Phone” 
Good afternoon, Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and 
members of the Transportation Committee.  My name is Tim Doyle 
and I am the Vice President of Maine Motor Transport Association.  
The Association is comprised of over 1,700-member companies, 
whose employees comprise a large portion of the nearly 34,000 
people who make their living in the trucking industry in Maine.
I am here today to testify neither for nor against LD 145, but would 
like to offer additional information to the Committee.
One of the primary missions of the Maine Motor Transport 
Association is Highway Safety.  The goal of our members, and their 
professional drivers, is to share the road safely with the rest of the 
motoring public.  As such, our members expect and demand that their 
drivers follow all federal, state, and local laws as they deliver the 
freight that keep our economy moving.
The dangers of distracted driving, such as the use of handheld 
cellphones and other electronic devices while driving a vehicle, 
should no longer be in question.  There are many studies that clearly 
define these dangers and the prohibition of the use of such devices 
should now be widely known by all motorists, especially commercial 
truck drivers.  Professional drivers are not only prohibited by state 
laws, but also by the federal motor carrier safety regulations that 
govern our Industry.  A violation of the handheld cellphone prohibition 
can not only result in high fines for the driver and motor carrier, but 
can also can impact a carrier’s safety rating with the FMCSA.
Despite wide acceptance that their use is illegal and dangerous, 
unfortunately you don’t have to travel far to see violations taking 
place on the roads.  While it is more common to see violations taking 
place in passenger cars, pickup trucks, and SUV’s...we are not naive 
and understand that our Industry must also be diligent and continually 
educate and supervise our drivers as well. 
All this is to say that it’s important for all motorists to be free of 
distraction while operating passenger cars and commercial vehicles.
Until the issue of distracted driving is no longer a problem, our 
Association will continue to educate our members of the dangers of 
distracted driving and we will support the efforts of other 
organizations that do as well.  
While we do not take a position on whether or not the fines should be 
increased for violating these laws, we appreciate that the discussion 
generated by this bill has likely helped serve to raise the awareness 
of the dangers of handheld cell phone use and distracted driving. We 
applaud the sponsors for bringing the bill to the Committee.
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions the 
committee may have.
