Tom Tupper
Kennebunk
LD 145
The proposed increase in fines for using a hand-held device while driving are long 
overdue. There is not a single day that I do not see somewhere in northern New 
England, whether on the interstate, a state road, county road, city traffic or even in 
downtown Biddeford ( where there have been recent “sting operations” ) multiple 
people looking down at a mobile device or even flagrantly holding a cell phone to 
their ear or mouth while driving or while waiting at a traffic light. 
I spend a lot of time on Maine’s interstate highways, and it is not uncommon to see 
vehicles drifting out of their lanes or crossing rumble strips. At other times, drivers 
ahead will be driving unnaturally slowly, forcing me too pass, only to see them 
eventually speed up and pass me - over and over again.
Is a large financial penalty harsh? Yes, of course. The consequences of a “distracted 
driver” crash are potentially far more harsh. For the hourly wage earner slapped on 
the wrist with a $500 dollar fine, that should be a sufficient deterrent. An offending 
white collar worker, executive or medical professional may require a 2nd, more harsh 
financial slap on the wrist, but, eventually, it will work. As a retired physician, I have 
seen financial penalties work miracles in at least one out of state hospital where I 
formerly had staff privileges - the penalty being levied by hospital administration for 
grossly delinquent (overdue), unsigned medical records, which potentially had a 
negative impact on patient care and medical billing.
Driving is distracting enough with, increasing traffic, poor signage, an inadequate 
number of lanes ( especially in the greater Portland area ), and the complexities of 
ever increasing vehicular electronic technology, without having to drive even more 
defensively because of some people insisting on talking, texting, surfing social media 
sites, watching movies  or even participating in Zoom meetings while behind the 
wheel!
