1 
WATER SPORTS INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION 
March Z2, Z023 
TESTIMONY ON LD 693 ATTRIBUTED TO BRAD FRALICK OF THE WATER 
SPORTS INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION 
Chairpersons LaFountain, Landry and members of the Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife Committee, 
My name is Brad Fralick and I am the Chief Government Affairs Officer of the 
Water Sports Industry Association (WSIA). Our national trade association 
represents all aspects of the towed watersports segment of the recreational 
boating industry. Our members include manufacturers, retailers, and 
ancillary equipment suppliers and of course, customers encompassing the 
sports of waterskiing, tubing, wakesurﬁng, wakeboarding and parasailing. 
I am here to express our organization's opposition to LD 693. The WSIA was 
formed over 40 years ago with the mission of educating all enthusiasts of 
towed water sports on the best practices with regard to safety and etiquette 
on the water. Having ski boats, pontoons and wakeboats within our scope- 
we are no stranger to the controversy that can develop on small lakes with 
wakesurfing. Wakesurﬁng is a unique sport in which a specially designed 
boat creates an artificially tall wake in which a rider surfs without being 
pulled by a tow rope. In order to create this tall wake the boat must be in deep 
water, to try this in shallow water would result in a wake a fraction the size of 
a deep water one and certainly not surfable. This reality causes the boats to 
do their sport in deep water, one would not knowingly try in shallow water. 
The key word is this sentence is knowingly, since wake boats can be bought 
used, there is no absolute guarantee that the owner would have gone through 
our dealer's mandatory wakesurﬁng education program at the time of 
purchase (this is a requirement for all new boats sold). This is where 
education comes in. Because of the environmental damage that could be 
caused by attempting to wakesurf in an area where you shouldn't, we strongly 
Director of Operations Membership & Finance Manager Chief Gov’t Affairs Ofﬁcer Director of Gov’t Affairs 
James Krawczyk Naomi Haworth Brad Fralick Lee Gatts 
PO Box 568512, Orlando, FL32856-8512 0 (407) 835-1363 0 inf0@wsia.net 0 www.wsia.net
urge, and will assist the Department in every way possible, that the 
Department launch a statewide education effort to inform boaters of where 
they should be engaging in the sport. The WSIA did such a statewide program 
in Maryland in 2019. Based upon WSIA's Wake Responsibly curriculum, WSIA 
and the State of Maryland placed signs at every boat launch ramp and created 
tens of thousands of educational ﬂyers for marinas, hotels and restaurants. 
We even had theaters show PS education videos prior to showing the main 
feature. In 2023 WSIA has digitized our Wake Responsibly curriculum and it 
will be available free of charge to state agencies across the country in May. We 
would be honored if the State of Maine would avail themselves to this 
curriculum. 
We wholeheartedly feel that education is always the best first step to impacta 
problem and urge this approach rather than the passage of LD 693. 
Thank you for considering my testimony. 
Director of Operations Membership & Finance Manager Chief G0v’t Affairs Ofﬁcer Director of Gov’t Affairs 
James Krawczyk Naomi Haworth Brad Fralick Lee Gatts 
PO Box 568512, Orlando, FL32856-8512 I (407) 835-1363 0 info(d)wsia.net 0 www.wsia.net
FINAL REPORT February 2022 
(height, energy, and power) to levels equivalent to non-wakesurf boats operating under 
typical planing conditions. A second example, in which the largest wave was used as 
reference for the non-wakesurf boats (Condition la), an operational distance of 425 ft or 
greater was required. These results are summarized in the table below. 
Results for required operational distance illustrating how data from this study may be used 
Operational distance required by wakesurf 
Reference condition _, 
boat to attenuate to reference condition levels 
Example 1 Maximum Wave Height: >500 ft. 
non-wakesurf boat planing at an operational Total Wave Energy: >575 ft. 
distance of 200 ft (Condition 2 - planing) Maximum Wave Power: >600 ft. 
Example 2 Maximum Wave Height: >425 ft. 
non-wa kesurf boat transition to planing at an operational Total Wave Energy: >425 ft. 
distance of 200 ft (Condition la - largest wave) Maximum Wave Power: >425 ft. 
in addition to these conclusions, this document offers a summary of research priorities pertaining 
to the topic of boat-generated waves on lakes and rivers.
X
