March 20, 2023
Claire Pendergast
77 Woodland Trail
Waterford, ME  04088
Re:  LD693
To Whom it May Concern,
I am in complete support of LD693.  I live on a small lake in Waterford, ME.  Our lake is the home to a 
pair of loons and usually 1 to 3 baby loons each summer, we have 5 Bald Eagles on our lake with a very 
large Eagle’s next.  We’ve had 4 baby eagles successfully leave the nest between the last two summers.  
We have many ducks, Common Merganser, Great Blue Herons, snapping turtles, bass and other fish.  
Around the lake live coyote, fox, mink, snowshoe rabbit, deer, bobcats, wild turkeys, fisher, squirrels and 
a plethora of birds including hummingbirds, robins, blue jays, crows, hawks, woodpeckers, tufted 
titmouse, goldfinch, sparrow, finch, nuthatch, wood thrush, brown headed cowbird, wren, black capped 
chickadee, cardinal, Baltimore Oriole, Eastern Bluebirds, and the Common Grackle to name a few.  All 
these species rely on the lake to provide water, food and nesting areas for either themselves or their 
prey.  The large wakes produced by these wake boats erodes the shoreline and disrupts the nesting and 
habitat for all these animals or their prey.  The wildlife is one of the reasons that Maine is such a sought 
after vacation and hunting location.  Please set some regulations on these wake boats, so our wildlife 
can survive.  Please do not allow these wake boats to be used on small or shallow lakes that do not have 
the square footage to allow the wakes to die down before they get to the shore.  These large waves on 
these smaller or more shallow lakes destroy the habitat of these amazing creatures that create our 
fragile ecosystem.  Please do not allow the sport of a very few ruin the habitat and beauty for the 
majority of Mainers.  There are plenty of large lakes in Maine that can handle these wake boats, so 
these individuals can enjoy these boats on either the ocean or large lakes.  
Thank you for listening to my concerns.
With Gratitude,
Claire Pendergast
77 Woodland Trail
Waterford, ME  04088
s
