Diana McLaughlin
Wayne
LD 693
March 22, 2023
Re:  Support for LD 693: "An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and 
Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to
Shore or in Shallow Water "
 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,
My name is Diana McLaughlin.  My husband and I are year-round residents of 
Wayne and have enjoyed swimming and kayaking on Lovejoy Pond for over 37 
years.  Lovejoy is 379 acres in size and has a maximum depth of 22 feet.  It has 
shoreline in the towns of Wayne, Fayette and Readfield.  In most years, one to two 
pairs of loons nest on the pond.  A small park owned by the Town of Wayne, located 
at the southernmost end of Lovejoy, enables residents of Wayne, Fayette and 
Readfield to enjoy access to this beautiful pond.
I strongly support prohibiting wake boats on lakes and ponds like Lovejoy.  It is 
impossible to operate a large motorized boat such as a wake boat on Lovejoy without 
creating destructive waves that erode the shoreline, threaten wildlife and endanger 
people recreating on the pond.  The deepest point on the pond is only 22 feet and the 
average depth is about seven feet.  There are very few locations on the pond that are 
as far as 500 feet from the shore.
About ten years ago, a sports camp for children operated a large waterski boat with a 
150 hp motor (at least) on our pond for two summers with devastating effects to the 
aquatic plant life, wildlife, shoreline and the quality of life of local residents.  The 
“ski boat”, though not as large as some wake boats, was inappropriate and destructive 
to a small pond.  A wake boat would only be worse.
I sit on the Boards of the 30 Mile River Watershed Association and the Lovejoy Pond 
Improvement Association.  I am very concerned about this issue and hope the 
legislature will take this important action to protect Maine’s thousands of small lakes 
and ponds.  
Thank you for taking the time to read this letter.  Please vote “ought to pass” on LD 
693.
Diana McLaughlin

