Edward and Janice Chiuchiolo 3/20/23
97 Thurston Rd
Norway, ME 04268
To Whom It May Concern,
Subject: Bill LD 693
My wife and I support this bill.  However, we don’t think it goes far enough.  We have been on Lake 
Pennesseewassee for nearly 40 years.  Until recently we had not suffered damage to our dock and boats 
nor have we seen shoreline erosion until the appearance of wake surfing using features to enhance a 
wake.  In addition, we have a personal experience to share.  
We were sitting by the lake one evening when a boat with wake surfing enhancements stopped several 
hundred feet from the shore.  We had watched them wake surfing throughout the day.  We had not 
seen this boat tied or moored on the lake, so we conclude it was a transient boat.  It was evident from 
the boats behavior that they were proceeding to empty their ballast tanks into the lake.  One might 
argue that it was Lake Pennesseewassee water so there was no harm.  However, it being a transient 
boat, it may have previously been on a lake that contained invasive plant species.  These hitchhikers 
could have been small and inside the tank.  This is a disaster waiting to happen to our lake.
The current inspections are very good at detecting external hitchhikers but they have no way to inspect 
internal tanks.
Finally, it should be impressed on all boat owners that, because all inland waterway boats bear Coast 
Guard numbers, that the captain of said boat is responsible for death, injury or damage caused by their 
wake.  At least in Maine, this could be printed on the boat registration.
Sincerely,
Ed and Jan Chiuchiolo
Edward Chiuchiolo
Norway
LD 693
My wife and I support this bill.  However, we don’t think it goes far enough.  We have been on
Lake Pennesseewassee for nearly 40 years.  Until recently we had not suffered damage to 
our dock and boats nor have we seen shoreline erosion until the appearance of wake surfing 
using features to enhance a wake.  In addition, we have a personal experience to share.  
We were sitting by the lake one evening when a boat with wake surfing enhancements 
stopped several hundred feet from the shore.  We had watched them wake surfing throughout
the day.  We had not seen this boat tied or moored on the lake, so we conclude it was a 
transient boat.  It was evident from the boats behavior that they were proceeding to empty 
their ballast tanks into the lake.  One might argue that it was Lake Pennesseewassee water 
so there was no harm.  However, it being a transient boat, it may have previously been on a 
lake that contained invasive plant species.  These hitchhikers could have been small and 
inside the tank.  This is a disaster waiting to happen to our lake.
The current inspections are very good at detecting external hitchhikers but they have no way 
to inspect internal tanks.
Finally, it should be impressed on all boat owners that, because all inland waterway boats 
bear Coast Guard numbers, that the captain of said boat is responsible for death, injury or 
damage caused by their wake.  At least in Maine, this could be printed on the boat 
registration.

