Dear Members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee:  As someone who has spent nearly every summer of my 60 years on Lake Wesserunsett in Madison, I am asking you to support LD 693, a bill that would prohibit large-wake-generating boats from operating within 500 ft of shore and in water less than 20 ft deep.  Because Lake Wesserunsett is a shallow lake—only 24 feet in the deep hole—I am concerned that if these increasingly popular large-wake boats are left unregulated, they will aggravate problems our lake is already experiencing. I’m worried the powerful engines will scour the lake bottom, release phosphorus, and contribute to diminished water quality or even algal blooms.  I am also worried that the large wakes generated by the boats will further erode already eroding shorelines (including the public beach), wash out loon nests, and disturb native plants and other wildlife.   Our lake association has had a successful CBI program for 20 years.  Despite our best efforts, our calculated risk score (DEP statistical model) for infestation is high at 54.  Because wake boats cannot be adequately check for invasive aquatic species, I’m worried that our lake’s vulnerability to infestation will only increase.  Now seems like a good time to get out ahead of potential problems here in Maine.  I support LD 693 as a common-sense solution that will keep large wake-generating boats on the water but direct them to places where they can operate safely.  For 35 years or more, volunteers on Lake Wessrunsett have been working hard to protect the lake’s watershed, water quality, and wildlife.  Our lake’s fragile ecosystems, its threatened loon population, and its borderline water quality cannot withstand what these wake boats can do to lake bottoms and shorelines.  Please vote to support LD 693 as a smart way to assure safe boating opportunities and to safeguard healthy lake ecosystems for everyone on our publicly owned Great Ponds.  Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this crucial bill.  Sincerely,    Elizabeth Payne Seasonal Resident of Lake Wesserunsett in Madison Member & Secretary of Lake Wesserunsett testifying on my own behalf 
Elizabeth Payne
Orono
LD 693
Dear Members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee:
As someone who has spent nearly every summer of my 60 years on Lake Wesserunsett in 
Madison, I am asking you to support LD 693, a bill that would prohibit large-wake-generating 
boats from operating within 500 ft of shore and in water less than 20 ft deep.
Because Lake Wesserunsett is a shallow lake—only 24 feet in the deep hole—I am 
concerned that if these increasingly popular large-wake boats are left unregulated, they will 
aggravate problems our lake is already experiencing. I’m worried the powerful engines will 
scour the lake bottom, release phosphorus, and contribute to diminished water quality or even
algal blooms. I am also worried that the large wakes generated by the boats will further erode 
already eroding shorelines (including the public beach), wash out loon nests, and disturb 
native plants and other wildlife.
Our lake association has had a successful CBI program for 20 years. Despite our best efforts,
our calculated risk score (DEP statistical model) for infestation is high at 54. Because wake 
boats cannot be adequately check for invasive aquatic species, I’m worried that our lake’s 
vulnerability to infestation will only increase.
Now seems like a good time to get out ahead of potential problems here in Maine. I support 
LD 693 as a common-sense solution that will keep large wake-generating boats on the water 
but direct them to places where they can operate safely. For 35 years or more, volunteers on 
Lake Wessrunsett have been working hard to protect the lake’s watershed, water quality, and 
wildlife. Our lake’s fragile ecosystems, its threatened loon population, and its borderline water
quality cannot withstand what these wake boats can do to lake bottoms and shorelines.
Please vote to support LD 693 as a smart way to assure safe boating opportunities and to 
safeguard healthy lake ecosystems for everyone on our publicly owned Great Ponds.
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this crucial bill. Sincerely,
Elizabeth Payne
Seasonal Resident of Lake Wesserunsett in Madison
Member & Secretary of Lake Wesserunsett testifying on my own behalf
 
