MAINE’ AUDUBON 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
% Legislative Information Oﬁice 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
March 22, 2023 
RE: LD 693, An Act to Protect Inland VT/Zzter Quality, Shorelines, VVz'ldlz ﬁ' and Puhlic Safety hy 
Prohz'hz'tz' ng Operation of a I/Vahe Boat to Create an Enhanced VI’ /Elke Close to Shore or in Shallow VWzter 
Dear Chair LaFountain, Chair Landry, and Members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee: 
My name is Francesca Gundrum and I am Maine Audubon’s Policy Advocate. Maine 
Audubon is a wildlife conservation non-proﬁt — we fulfill our mission to “conserve Maine’s wildlife 
and wildlife habitat” by engaging people of all ages in nature through a science-based approach to 
education, conservation, and advocacy. On behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 members and 
supporters, thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 693, An Act to Protect 
Inland I/Iézter Quality, Shorelines, I/Vildlzfe and Public Safety by Pr0hz'bz' tz'n _g Operation of a VVake Boat 
to Create an Enhanced VVa/ce Close to Shore or in Shallow Water. 
Common Loons hold a special place in the hearts and minds of all who see and hear them. 
Their striking plumage, soulful cries, and ability to seemingly vanish under water have inspired legends 
of magic, mysticism, and creation for many centuries. For nearly four decades, Maine Audubon has 
worked to assess the status and safeguard the future of Maine’ s loon population. Through the Maine 
Loon Project we work with residents and partners statewide to promote healthy lakes, clean water, and 
quality habitat for loons and to understand trends in their population over time. We engage lake users 
in efforts to protect loons from threats like boat strikes, nest washouts from boat wakes, and nest site 
disturbance during the vulnerable period of egg incubation. Across Maine, there are roughly 1,500 
loon conservation volunteers that dedicate time and energy to observing and protecting Common 
Loons. Mainers care deeply about this iconic species and are eager to support initiatives — like this bill— 
to help protect Common Loon habitat and health. 
Because loons are heavy and their legs are located at the very back of their bodies, they move 
awkwardly on land. So they can easily slip on and off without being noticed, they typically build their 
nests within a foot of the water’s edge, which leaves nests especially vulnerable to ﬂooding by boat 
wakes (see attached photos). As a result, big boat wakes can wash eggs out of a nest, cause eggs to 
Z0 (..§ilsland. harm Road, I"5al1'nouth. l\'l:1inc ()41vI() ‘3 ' (Z07) 781.-~233() ' maincriudulmnorg
MAINEQ AUDUBON 
become inviable, wash over young chicks, or cause adult loons to abandon the nest altogether. Every 
year, people in Maine report eggs off the nest and ﬂoating in the water and/or large boat wakes easily 
overwhelming small chicks. 
To protect shorelines from erosion, all boaters in Maine are required to travel at headway 
speeds (non-wake-producing speeds) within 200 feet of shore or islands. This law helps protect wildlife 
from disturbance and loon nests from boat wakes. However, to protect water quality and the fragile 
shoreline habitat that Common Loons depend on, it is imperative that we address the impacts of wake 
boats and boats with wake-enhancing equipment on shorefront property and wildlife. 
There are several unintended consequences of boats with enhanced wake-generating 
equipment operating too close to shore and in shallow water, including diminished water quality by 
stirring up sediment, disruption of underwater plant habitat, erosion of shorelines, amongst others. 
Prohibiting boats purposefully generating enhanced wakes for wake sport activities within 500 feet of 
shore and in waters less than 20 feet deep is a sensible measure - based on scientzﬁc data - to assure that 
wake surfers and other wake sport enthusiasts can enjoy their activities in areas of our lakes where there 
are far fewer risks to lake health, shoreline erosion, wildlife habitat, and loon nesting success. From 
trauma caused by boat strikes, climate change impacts, habitat loss, mercury and lead poisoning, etc., 
loons face tremendous obstacles when it comes to hatching and raising chicks on Maine’ s lakes and 
ponds throughout the spring and summer months. The threat of nest washouts from boat wakes— 
particularly enhanced wakes produced by wake boats — is a preventable threat that we can address right 
now and will help mitigate the compounding impacts faced by loons. 
This legislation offers a common-sense policy to protect essential Common Loon habitat, 
fragile shorelines, water quality, lake health, and safe recreational opportunities for everyone. We urge 
the Committee to support this bill. Thank you for your time and I am happy to answer any questions. 
Sincerely, 
?lw~0&~l\» 
Francesca “Ches” Gundrum 
Policy Advocate 
Z0 (CxilSl‘<U'1(.l liarm Road. l:f1lH’1(')L1’('li, l\“li1li"l(? (Ml ()5 ' (207) 781~Z33() ' maincaudul1>on.org
MAINEQ 
AUDUBON 
PHOTOS OF NEST FLOODING FROM LARGE WAKES — The following photos captured by 
Kezar Lake Watershed Association in June of 2020 illustrate the impact of large wakes on an artiﬁcial 
nest (“raft”) deployed to enhance Common Loon nesting success. 
Z0 (l}ilslancl llarrn Road. l"}'il1n0iit'l1\ Maine ()¢-Til(')$ ' (207) ',78l~Z33O ' in iineaudt1l)<vnmtg
MAINEQ 
AUDUBON 
Z0 (.}iis1;11 ‘1d17arxn Road, I~11ln1<>\1th, Mzzinc ()1-'r1()5 ' (207) 781M233() ' maincaudubon.org
