Jacob Lauzier
Waterboro Maine
LD 693
Hello. 
My name is Jacob Lauzier and I am a long time resident on Little Ossipee Pond in 
Waterboro.
My family has been coming to this pond dating back over a century. My mother has 
been raised on our lake since she was a little girl (over 70 years). She grew up 
enjoying all of the wonderful things that the lake has to offer which include a variety 
of water sports. My sister and I were fortunate to be raised the same way as my 
mother and have also grown to love the lake and what many things it has to offer. I 
started wakeboarding when I was very young and quickly developed a life long 
passion for the sport. At age 15 I made it a goal to someday have a “wakeboard boat” 
like all the pros have. After nearly 20 years of diligent saving, my dream came true. I 
purchased my very own wakeboard boat. While I can’t quite wakeboard like I used to 
(the downside of getting older) I have taken up wake-surfing. I have now had the 
great pleasure of teaching and watching my children (now 7 and 9) and our friends 
and their children share in the same sport(s) I am/was so passionate about. There is 
not much greater joy to me than to watch them grow every year on the lake and 
develop the same passion and skill set that made my childhood and teenage years so 
memorable. While the lake provides many opportunities year round, our summers are 
BY FAR what we long for the most.
Having multiple generations of my family grow up on this lake, it is special to me. I 
do understand the importance of preserving it and year after year residents of the lake 
continue to work together to do their part to help preserve the lake as well as its shore 
front. I along with a handful of other residents own “wake boats” on our lake. 
Enacting these proposed laws and regulations suggested in LD 693 would essentially 
deem our boats useless for their intended purpose, on our home lake and place of year
round residence. Our lake does not compare to the mass of a lake like Sebago or 
Moosehead, in overall size and depth. These new laws would limit our usage of 
“wake-surfing mode” to such a small area of our lake that it would be near impossible
to enjoy the sports we love so much to their proper potential. It would force us to pull 
our boats and trailer them to the nearest larger body of water to use them to their 
potential. As an owner of a home on the water, with a dock, and a boat, we would 
essentially be stripped of the ease of ability to enjoy what we have worked so hard in 
this life to achieve…what we are so passionate about…lakefront living and 
wakeboarding/wake-surfing. 
70 years ago the lake was populated by seasonal camps and people waterskied behind 
a 14’ aluminum boat with a Johnson outboard. As times have progressed, camps have 
been converted to full time homes and year round residences. The tow boats are no 
longer 14’ aluminum and fiberglass boats. We have a variety of boats on our lake 
from 75mph fishing boats, wake boats designed sport specific, 25’ pontoon boats with
350hp outboards, the occasional 30’ deep v cabin cruiser, and everything in between. 
I share in the concern in preserving the lake for generations to come. We’ve watched 
our lake get increasingly more busy year after year and quite honestly it has reduced 
our overall boating time for the sake of safety. In my opinion (which is shared by 
many other residents) the amount of uneducated, underaged, and ignorant “day 
trippers” to the lake poses a bigger overall threat then the few hours a week we 
actually get to use our “wake boat” for its intended purpose.
 I ask, as a long time water-sports enthusiast, that you please reconsider this bill. I 
believe it will impact a very small portion of what the greater problem is on our lakes 
today; Uneducated watercraft operators. 
I appreciate the opportunity to voice my opinion/testimony. Thank you.
