James Davenport Testimony 
LD 693 — Wake Surﬁng Setback 
March 2023 
To: The Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
RE: LD 693- An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, 
Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety by Prohibiting 
Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake 
Close to Shore or in Shallow Water 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, my name is James 
Davenport. My father and I own Long Lake Marina, and we 
have two locations in Naples and Bridgton, Maine. We sell 
several lines of boats including Yamaha, Nautique, and Barletta 
Pontoons, and provide marine service, repairs, and indoor heated 
winter storage to over 800 customers a season. 
I ﬁrst want to thank the committee for the opportunity to testify 
today in opposition to LD 693. As a marine business owner, 
restrictive policies like this will absolutely have a negative 
impact on my business and the 31 full time employees who are 
part of the Long Lake Marina family, as well as other businesses 
in the boating industry throughout our state. 
The marine industry as a whole is an integral part of Maine’s 
economy. It is important to highlight the economic impact 
recreational boating has throughout Maine, and vital to injecting 
revenue into more remote parts of the state. Outdoor recreation 
made up 3.6% of Maine’s economy, making Maine one of 
the top five states in the country in the value outdoor 
recreation added to statewide GDP. Furthermore, according 
to data from the National Marine Manufacturer ’s Association 
recreational boating in Maine supported 14,072 Jobs at 592 
businesses and restrictive policies like LD 693 stand to put at 
risk these jobs and businesses. 
From a business standpoint this legislation is akin to a death 
blow if passed, as it will severely reduce access for this 
emerging recreational activity while also hurting consumer
conﬁdence, pushing away potential customers and discouraging 
current owners. These vessels are not only important for Long 
Lake Marine and small boating businesses from a sales 
standpoint, but also offer an important stream of year-round 
revenue due to the associated service and storage. 
The consumers that this industry caters to have made most likely 
made a seven-ﬁgure investment in a waterfront home, a new 
boat, a dock, and paid an oversized share of taxes and fees for 
the right to this access. To arbitrarily restrict access to the lake 
that these individuals have purchased a home on based on the 
desired choice of boat feels short sighted and exclusionary. 
Additionally, if passed there is the concem of how this new 
regulation will be effectively enforced. Law Enforcement 
Ofﬁcers with the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
are already spread thin considering the territory they must cover. 
Do we truly believe this is the best use of our limited water 
safety resources is to police people on their distance from shore 
and depth? Or should it be to focus on potentially life threating 
situations? 
Instead of putting in place overly restrictive and hard to enforce 
policies I encourage the committee and department of inland 
ﬁsheries and wildlife to focus on increasing enforcement 
capacity surrounding existing distance from shore requirements 
while also leading a campaign focused on user education, to 
reinforce the importance proper, respectful, and safe vessel 
operation to recreational boaters. We adhere to the WSIA’s Wake 
Responsibly campaign as part of the educational piece of our on- 
water demonstration for all our customers who purchase a boat 
from Long Lake Marina. This focuses on logical, sensible, and 
reasonable best practices so all people can enjoy our lakes. 
In all, I hope that for the sake of small boating businesses 
throughout Maine, the committee will vote in opposition to LD 
693. Thank you again for your time today and please feel free to 
follow up with any questions or concerns. If you want to get on 
the water and for a ﬁrst-hand experience on how wake surﬁng 
can co-exist with other recreational pursuits, don’t hesitate to 
reach out once the ice melts. Just bring a wetsuit!
