Re: Support for LD 693: "An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife 
and Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced 
Wake Close to Shore or in Shallow Water "  
  
Dear Senator  LaFounta in, Representative Landry, and Distinguished M embers of the 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,  
  
My husband and I are the third generation of our family to own beautiful lakeside 
property on Androscoggin Lake in Wayne, Maine. The lake is already on Maine’s list of 
endangered lakes, and in the last two years, we have been faced with invasive variable -
leaf milfoil and two algal blooms . 
 
And now it seems we are facing another threat in the form of wake boats  when used for 
wakesports . We are concerned for three key reas ons: 
 
1) The harm from large waves near the shore. We are particularly proud of our loon 
raft where loons have been nesting and producing chicks since 1981. One 
reason we built the raft is because Androscoggin’s lake level varies. When the 
water level goes do wn, loons sometimes cannot return to their nests. Hence the 
floating nest s. Large waves could swamp , damage  or be very disruptive  to those 
nests.  Worse, they could push a temporarily unattended egg into the water.  
 
2) Sediment stirred up from the bottom, lead ing to more phosphorus in the water, 
and potentially more and longer -lasting algae blooms.  While Androscoggin Lake 
is a big lake —5 miles from end -to-end—it is also a sh allow lake, averaging 12 
feet deep with only a few  areas below 20 feet, the recommended depth for 
wakesports.  
 
3) Increased potential for spread of invasive plants. We’re already coping  with one 
infestation. The plants are fragile and break easily. Water from one lake can 
enter ballast t anks  and exist in another, risking the transfer  of plant fragments, or 
simply spreading them around the lake  where they re -root themselves quickly.  
  
Without the limits LD 693 places on wake boating, we fear our lake will face much more 
harm and make the actions everyone is taking now to address the algae blooms and 
contain the spread of milfoil  so much m ore difficult.  
  
We feel we are fighting for the very existence of our lake.   Wake boats, if not regulated, 
will make our fight so much more difficult.   Please help us in our efforts to save our lake 
by voting  “ought to pass” on LD 693.  
  
Thank you,  
  
Janet and Victor Bernhards  
46 West Acres Road  
Wayne, Maine  
  
Not used:  
 
 
We feel certain that through the efforts of everyone involved with finding and removing 
the variable milfoil we have restricted its growth to the cove and believe it has not 
spread throughout the lake.   That could change quickly with the destructive wakes these 
boats make,  
 
 
The town of Wayne, along with several local environmental organizations have taken 
aggressive steps to combat both of these problems but, as I’m sure you know, 
addressing  these issues will most likely take years to correct.  
 
