(p$gossEEco~,Q 
/.
. 
_ t1 , 1. 
"-::':':'
:
‘ 
(‘M5 Ass0c\l\ ‘\°$ 
'2‘-‘or the [ova ft/w [aka 
March 22, 2022 
Senator LaF0untain and Representative Landry and Members of the Committee 
My name is John Stanek, l live in West Gardiner and speak today in support of LD 693. It is a privilege to be 
here today. 
My home is on Lake Cobbosseecontee and my seasonal camp is directly across from my home on the south 
side of Horseshoe lsland. Both properties are in an area ofthe lake called Tenney's Narrows, now commonly 
called the Narrows. Because Horseshoe Island protects the Narrows from prevailing winds smooth water is 
found there when other parts of the lake may be rough, making it a very popular place for watersports of all 
kinds. 
I speak as a property owner whose docks and the boats tied to them are constantly harassed by wakes but 
especially by wake boats. I also speak as Vice President of the Cobbosseecontee Lake Association. During the 
2020 boating season CLA began distributing to our members yard signs they could place on their waterfront. 
These signs are intended to remind boat operators that a no wake zone exists within 200' from the shoreline. 
STATE LAW! 
N0 WAKE WITHIN 200' 
FROM SHORE CYC Llkl Association 
These signs have been largely ineffective but we feel better placing them. lt's about all we can do. 
A recent membership wide survey by CLA informed us that large wakes crashing into the shoreline is a primary 
concern of our members. It's at the top of the list along with safe and courteous boat operation in general. 
Also driving our member's concern with wakes is our loon population. CLA participates in the annual Audubon 
loon count and we worry about the data which shows that the count has gone down for the last 3 years:
i 
2020 85 adults 9 chicks 
2021 83 adults. 4 chicks 
2022 73 adults. 2 chicks 
Cobbossee has been home to the largest loon population in Maine second only to Moosehead Lake. One 3’ 
wave is the same as a tsunami to a nesting pair of loons. 
ln terms of erosion, I can again speak from personal experience. My wife and I engaged with the Friends of 
the Cobbossee Watershed to install rip rap and what is called Lake Smart landscaping at our home. We did 
this because we were actually loosing soil from wave action. We thought we had done enough afterwards to 
protect the lake from silting. l will just say that one 3' wave generated by a wake boat even operating beyond 
200' crashes over the top of our shoreline. In the Narrows, being what it is at just over 700' wide and just 
under 1,000’ between my properties, boats of all types operate within the 200' no wake zone. 
The Lake Association leadership has been asked via our member survey four key things. Two of them are 
germane to this legislation. Our members have ﬁrst asked us to Protect Lake Health, in this case diminish 
large wakes from eroding shoreline by getting them at least 500' from the nearest shore and operating in at 
least 20' of water. The second goal is Improving Boating Safety and Courtesy. By requiring wake boats to 
operate 500’ from the shore we are getting them away from swimmers, those using canoes, kayaks, or paddle 
boards and boats that are traveling in a slow fashion just out trying to enjoy the lake. 
Thank you for considering the interest of our 650 Cobbosseecontee Lake Association members by voting to 
present LD 693 to the full membership.
