Jon Waleski
Echo Lake Association
LD 693
Members of the legislature,
I am writing to support passage of LD 693.  I live on Echo Lake in Mount Vernon and am the 
current president of the Echo Lake Association (ELA).  I am an active kayaker, fisherman and
recreational boater.  Members of my family also use paddleboards.  I believe LD 693 is 
required for the reasons I will state below.
Erosion is one major concern this bill is needed.  The town of Fayette has had to use upwards
of 60 yards of rap rock to stabilize Echo Lake Road due to the eroding of land supporting 
Echo Lake Road.  This posed a significant cost to the town of Fayette.  Wake boats operated 
with the current 200’ limit generate waves which contribute to this erosion.  Other areas of the
lake are also being impacted by this as well.
Multiple members of the Echo Lake Association have shared stories about wake boats 
causing damage to their docks (both floating and fixed).  In one case, a wake boat, operated 
within the 200’ no wake zone, caused all her outdoor furniture on her dock to be thrown into 
the lake.  A committee (Boating Safety Committee) not sanctioned by the ELA has also been 
gathering evidence to hold wake boat operators accountable for their actions on Echo Lake.  
The two most consistent wake boat operations on Echo come from Camp Laurel and Camp 
Vega.  In their defense, they have tried to accommodate the concerns they receive when 
those concerns are presented in a reasonable, non-hostile fashion.
I have had two run ins with wake boats, more appropriately with the waves and troughs they 
create.  The first was when I was a passenger on a power boat.  The boat went bow first into 
a trough created by a wake boat that had since passed.  The passengers in the bow were 
nearly thrown out of the boat as it dove into the trough.  The second time was when I was 
fishing in a 12’ aluminum boat and had I not seen the wave coming it would have capsized 
the boat.  I no longer kayak when I see that wake boats are in operation.  The risk is too 
great.  It seems that when wake boats are in use other persons wanting to use the lake are 
put in a situation where it’s just not practical to do so.  Forget about trying to paddle board!  
Another factor is loon nesting.  Wakes generated can destroy nesting sites and or cause 
loons to leave their nests.  
In closing, LD 693 is a good start to rein in the damage wake boats cause.  It can be 
improved by allocating funds to IFW to procure devices like range finders, both laser and 
radar, to enable wardens to enforce it.  Wardens I’ve spoken with indicate the difficulty of 
enforcing the current 200’ limit.  Often, it's just their word verses the errant boaters so no 
conviction results.  A 500’ distance would be even harder to prove without some type of 
verification process.  
Thank you for allowing me to address this bill.  I hope it passes.
Jon Waleski
Echo Lake Association President
Jonwal42462@gmail.com
207-685-9201

