March 21, 2023
Re: In Support of LD 693: "An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety by Prohibi:ng Opera:on of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or in Shallow Water " Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife:
Like many of the lake associations throughout Maine, the Hancock and Sand Ponds Association is deeply concerned about preserving and protecting Maine’s lakes as a treasured natural resource for today and future generations. 
To that end, we support the proposed bill LD 693, which would prohibit boats from wake surﬁng within 500 feet of shore and in waters less than 20 feet deep. 
The prop thrust of wake boats can disturb the lake bottom, churning up phosphates into the body of the lake. The wash of water can spread aquatic invasive plants, and the large surface wakes erode shorelines and threaten loon nests.
Hancock and Sand Ponds are too small and shallow for unregulated operation of wake boats. Hancock Pond has a mean depth of only 17 feet. Sand Pond is even shallower, with a mean depth of 12 feet. Many residents have already expressed concern about shoreline erosion. They have lost beaches, and trees on their shore are threatened by receding a shoreline.
This bill will keep shallow waters safe for families, swimmers, and other boaters. We urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 693.
Sincerely,
Joseph L. Nagy
President
Hancock & Sand Ponds Association
Denmark, Maine
jlnagy48@gmail.com
Joseph Nagy
Hancock & Sand Ponds Association
LD 693
 March 21, 2023
Re: In Support of LD 693: "An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, 
Wildlife and Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an 
Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or in Shallow Water "
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife:
Like many of the lake associations throughout Maine, the Hancock and Sand Ponds 
Association is deeply concerned about preserving and protecting Maine’s lakes as a 
treasured natural resource for today and future generations.
To that end, we support the proposed bill LD 693, which would prohibit boats from 
wake surfing within 500 feet of shore and in waters less than 20 feet deep.
The prop thrust of wake boats can disturb the lake bottom, churning up phosphates 
into the body of the lake. The wash of water can spread aquatic invasive plants, and 
the large surface wakes erode shorelines and threaten loon nests.
Hancock and Sand Ponds are too small and shallow for unregulated operation of wake
boats. Hancock Pond has a mean depth of only 17 feet. Sand Pond is even shallower, 
with a mean depth of 12 feet. Many residents have already expressed concern about 
shoreline erosion. They have lost beaches, and trees on their shore are threatened by 
receding a shoreline.
This bill will keep shallow waters safe for families, swimmers, and other boaters. We 
urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 693.
Sincerely,
Joseph L. Nagy
President
Hancock & Sand Ponds Association Denmark, Maine jlnagy48@gmail.com

