LD 693: An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife, and Public Safety 
by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore 
or in Shallow Water  
 
 
March 19, 2023  
 
Dear Legis lators:  
 
I am a seasonal resident on the shore of Little Ossipee Pond , in Waterboro Maine, and 
have treasured  this lake for over 55  years.  I served on the Little Ossipee Lake 
Associat ion Board of D irectors for over 9 years and  am proud to continue  as an acti ve 
member  and advocate working to  protect and preserve  the lake.  Boats and boating 
activity ha ve changed dramatically  over the years  – bigger, faster, and far too many with 
ballasts full , circling aroun d our pond throwing huge, forceful w aves  upon the shore . 
We’ve see n storms where majestic shoreline pine s, with their massive root system s 
chiseled away by the se wakes , have toppled onto the land (and homes!) . This resul ts in 
large areas of  exposed soil and sand  which then erode  even more rapidly.   
 
We monitor  our s horeline and do our best to prevent erosion, but we are literally 
shoveling against the tide while  wakeboard boats are permitted to operate  here.   
The large waves have damaged our  land, dock and boat. Even wading  has become a 
challenge  for children and older adults  as the wakes become qui te violent , making  it 
unsafe.  
 
In ad dition to being a natural treasure, Little Ossipee is  a tremendous asset  to the Town 
of Waterboro  and its businesses . Please  support this bill to take a step tow ard 
preservation of Little Ossipee Pond and small bodies of water across the state of Maine.  
Thank yo u! 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Karen Cummings  
43 Dean Drive  
N. Waterboro, MA  04061  
 
Little Ossipee Pond , Waterboro Maine  
 
Karen Cummings
N.Waterboro, ME
LD 693
LD 693: An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife, and Public 
Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close 
to Shore or in Shallow Water
March 19, 2023
Dear Legislators:
I am a seasonal resident on the shore of Little Ossipee Pond, in Waterboro Maine, and
have treasured this lake for over 55 years. I served on the Little Ossipee Lake 
Association Board of Directors for over 9 years and am proud to continue as an active
member and advocate working to protect and preserve the lake. Boats and boating 
activity have changed dramatically over the years – bigger, faster, and far too many 
with ballasts full, circling around our pond throwing huge, forceful waves upon the 
shore. We’ve seen storms where majestic shoreline pines, with their massive root 
systems chiseled away by these wakes, have toppled onto the land (and homes!). This 
results in large areas of exposed soil and sand which then erode even more rapidly. 
We monitor our shoreline and do our best to prevent erosion, but we are literally shoveling 
against the tide while wakeboard boats are permitted to operate here. 
The large waves have damaged our land, dock and boat. Even wading has become a 
challenge for children and older adults as the wakes become quite violent, making it unsafe.
In addition to being a natural treasure, Little Ossipee is a tremendous asset to the Town of 
Waterboro and its businesses. Please support this bill to take a step toward preservation of 
Little Ossipee Pond and small bodies of water across the state of Maine.
Thank you!
Sincerely,
Karen Cummings, Little Ossipee Pond, Waterboro Maine
43 Dean Drive
N. Waterboro, MA 04061
