March 22, 2023
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Maine 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, I am Katrin Teel. I ask you to please 
vote no on L.D. 693, An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife 
and Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced 
Wake Close to Shore or in Shallow Water. 
As a resident of Glenburn, I make my home on Pushaw Lake. To be more precise, I 
live 25 feet from the water. I have seen no evidence of harm, either human or 
ecological, as a result of wake surfing. Those of us who live here take issues 
around water quality and public safety very seriously. This is quite literally our 
backyard. Protecting the environment is important to us all, and thankfully 
wildlife abounds. 
Laws in Maine are designed to solve problems and prevent harm. However, this 
particular issue does not present a problem. In short, there is no harm. Curtailing 
the activities of wake surfers (of which I am not), would have little to do with 
public safety, and I suspect, be more about power and control.  
Governmental overreach is beneath our Democracy in Maine. 
Toward that end, I encourage you to vote no on L.D. 693. Thank you for allowing 
me to contribute my testimony. 
Katrin Teel
Glenburn
LD 693
March 22, 2023
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Maine Committee on Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife, I am Katrin Teel. I ask you to please vote no on L.D. 693, An Act to 
Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation 
of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or in Shallow Water. 
As a resident of Glenburn, I make my home on Pushaw Lake. To be more precise, I live 25 
feet from the water. I have seen no evidence of harm, either human or ecological, as a result 
of wake surfing. Those of us who live here take issues around water quality and public safety 
very seriously. This is quite literally our backyard. Protecting the environment is important to 
us all, and thankfully wildlife abounds. 
Laws in Maine are designed to solve problems and prevent harm. However, this particular 
issue does not present a problem. In short, there is no harm. Curtailing the activities of wake 
surfers (of which I am not), would have little to do with public safety, and I suspect, be more 
about power and control.  
Governmental overreach is beneath our Democracy in Maine. 
Toward that end, I encourage you to vote no on L.D. 693. Thank you for allowing me to 
contribute my testimony. 
