 
137 Main St. | PO Box 250 | Belgrade Lakes, ME 04918 | (207) 495 -6039  
www.7lakesalliance.org   
 Testimony In Support of LD  693: An Act To Protect Inland 
Water Quality , Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety By 
Proh ibiting Operation of a Wakeboat to Create an 
Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or In Shallow Water   
 
Submitted by 7 Lakes Alliance, Belgrade  Lakes  to the  
 
Committee  on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife   
 
March 22,  2023  
Dear distinguished members of the  Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife :  
 
7 Lakes Alliance, a non -profit organization whose mission is to conserve the waters and lands 
of the Belgrade Lakes region, urges the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to support  LD 
693: An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality , Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety By 
Proh ibiting Operation of a Wakeboat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or In 
Shallow Water .  
 
7 Lakes works to protect and restore lakes through water quality monitoring and ana lysis in  
collaboration  with Colby College, invasive aquatic plant remediation and prevention, public education 
and erosion control partnerships with landowners t hrough the Youth Conservation Corps, LakeSmart , 
and Clean Water Act Section 319  program . We dedicate significant resources, w orking collaboratively 
with many public and private partners, to protect the waters of a 180 -square mile watershed in 
Central Maine.  We focus on preventing the erosion of soils which can carry phosphorus  into lakes 
and contrib ute significantly  to harmful and costly algal blooms.   
 
We urge the committee to vote ought to pass on LD  693. All boat wakes can cause shoreline 
erosion, depositing more sediment and phosphorus into our lakes and leading to algal blooms. But 
the enhanced wakes produced by boats specially designed for this purpose create waves that require 
more distance for the wave energy to dissipate. The 500 -foot exclusion zone is supported by 
independent scientific research and is expected to mitigate the shoreline impa cts from wakeboats . In 
contrast, the current 200-foot exclusion zone will not mitigate these impacts. 7 Lakes supports 
science -based lake management actions that protect our lakes and prevent further degradation of 
these already fragile ecosystems  and the many v alues they provide to peo ple and wildli fe. We also  
encourage additional study to ensure the effectiveness of measures implemented pursuant to this 
effort to protec t Maine’s lakes.   
  
Thank you for the opportunity to comment  on this important proposal.    
 
Respectfully submitted,   
 
Laura Rose Day  
President &  CEO   
7 Lakes Allianc e 

 
137 Main St. | PO Box 250 | Belgrade Lakes, ME 04918 | (207) 495 -6039  
www.7lakesalliance.org   
