Laura Robinson
320 Danforth Street, Portland
Kezar Lake Watershed Association, Lovell 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,
My name is Laura Robinson and I am a board member of Kezar Lake Watershed Association, in charge of our loon program. I believe that LD363 is a critical piece of legislation to protect Maine’s lakes from bottom-scouring and our shorelines from erosion. These safeguards, in turn, protect our fragile shoreline ecosystems and loon nests. 
Even the loon nests that are situated on our protective ﬂoating platforms are not safe from enhanced wakes. We have trail camera photographs of these wakes hitting a loon platform, posing two separate types of danger. The ﬁrst is rocking the platform to such a degree that the eggs roll out (left), and the second are waves that wash through and over the platform carrying the eggs with them (center and left). While these photos were taken after the nest was empty, the nest on this platform failed earlier that season, when an egg was found at the lake bottom just below the platform, potentially caused by such wave action. 
In addition, I have both experienced and witnessed the sudden and powerful thrust of enhanced wakes threaten small boats and paddle boarders. I worked with the loons for years using a traditional Grand Laker canoe with an electric trolling motor. Three years ago, while working within 200’ of shore, I nearly capsized on two separate occasions due to nearby wake surﬁng. The impact of these high energy waves is sudden, unpredictable, and dangerous. Given that the camera equipment I use to do this work would not survive a capsize, I was forced to retire this classic wooden boat and replace it with a wider gas-powered metal boat, begrudgingly giving in to the arms race of increasing boat size.
LD 363 provides a means of regulating boat traﬃc that allows for safe wake surﬁng, while dramatically reducing damage to the lake bottom, our fragile shorelines, and nesting wildlife. Furthermore, it gives small craft and paddle boarders a zone in which they can safely enjoy their sports, without the threat of enhanced wakes. 
Thank you for examining this critical issue. I encourage you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 363.
Sincerely,
Laura Robinson

