77 Arcadia Cove Road
Belgrade, Maine 04917
22 March 2023
Re: Support for LD 693: "An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and Public 
Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or 
in Shallow Water "
 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the Committee 
on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,
My name is Lenny Reich, and I am currently the President of the McGrath Pond – Salmon Lake 
Association in Oakland and Belgrade. I have lived on the northwest shore of Salmon Lake for 35 
years and know many people around the lake.
About 15 years ago, the two overnight summer camps on the lake acquired wake boats as part 
of their water-sports programs and began using them extensively. (They replaced water-ski 
boats.) Salmon Lake is fairly small at 650 acres and its shape is such that most of the camps’ 
wake-boat activity has taken place closer to the eastern shore at a distance of more than 200’ 
but less than 500’.
As a result, those home and camp owners with docks on the eastern shore began to experience 
significant damage to their docks from the floating equipment tied to them. Most of those 
owners have long since either invested in lifts or removed their boats entirely, because leaving 
them tied to the docks was no longer tenable.
In addition to this property damage, wake boats operating at greater than 200’ but less than 
500’ from shore were, not surprisingly, responsible for significant bank erosion. One property 
owner described to me the “cloud” of suspended sediment coming from the exposed bank he 
found along the shore every afternoon after the wake boats had finished their runs.
I should mention that Salmon Lake suffers declining water clarity over the course of every 
summer and has an algae bloom beginning in October that continues until ice-over. Needless to 
say, the wake-boat activity is a contributing factor.
I can’t say for sure that the wake boats maintaining a minimum distance of 500’ feet from shore 
will solve these problems, but it will certainly help. I ask, therefore, that you support LD693 and 
vote “ought to pass.” Thank you.
With Best Regards,
Lenny Reich
lsreich@colby.edu
(207) 314-2341
