Lydia Landesberg
Waterford
LD 693
March 21, 2023
 
Re: Support for LD 693: "An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and 
Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to
Shore or in Shallow Water "
 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,
 
My name is Lydia Landesberg and I live on Bear Pond in Waterford.  I can be reached at 
Lydia.landesberg@gmail.com.  
I support LD 693 because I am concerned about the impact wake boats have on our 
lakes.  My home lake, Bear Pond is very small lake, only 250 acres.  It is a popular 
destination for people with self-propelled watercraft.  There is a small park on the 
shore that is frequented by local families and serves as an entry point for swimmers, 
paddlers, and fishermen in small boats.  Because the lake is small, it is not unusual to 
see a swimmer traversing its length, usually with a brightly colored safety device for 
visibility.  We have one wake boat on our lake, and when it is out, it affects the whole
lake.  The high position of the bow makes it difficult for the wake boat operator to see
loons, ducks, or even swimmers.  The large waves generated can easily capsize a 
paddle board, canoe or kayak.  
Wake boats are  expensive, often costing over $100,000, and allowing them to operate
without restriction effectively means giving priority access to the lake to those who 
can afford these boats (mostly out-of-state residents) at the expense of those who live 
and work here.  Many summer camps in our area own and operate these boats, and I 
fear that the summer camp across the lake from me will purchase one or more as well.
Again, these cater to the privileged and non-resident sets and restrictions are needed 
to ensure that the local folks who seek more modest forms of recreation on our lakes 
are not adversely affected.  
I am sympathetic to wake boat owners, as most of them probably did not know how 
damaging these boats are at the time of purchase, but that doesn’t change the fact that 
as wake boats proliferate on our lakes they have the potential to destroy them.  Ocean 
sized waves don’t belong in a lake.  I’m sure that others who testify will mention 
shoreline erosion, bottom sediment disruption tied to algae blooms, invasive species 
transport and other well documented effects of wake boat activity.  I want to appeal to
your sense of economic and environmental justice.   Do we really want to allow these 
expensive playthings of the wealthy to dominate and potentially destroy our lakes?  
Do we want to favor these fossil fuel consuming vehicles over the more 
environmentally friendly self-propelled watercraft?   Is allowing the operation of 
wake boats to go unregulated in the best interest of our state?  I think not!
Thank you for taking the time to read this letter. I encourage you to vote “ought to pass” on 
LD 693, and thereby safeguard the abundant free recreation that our lakes provide for all the 
residents of Maine. 
 
Lydia Landesberg

