Martina Witts
Maine Boating Impacts Coalition
LD 693
March 22, 2023
Dear Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee, 
My name is Martina Witts, I live in Naples, ME on Trickey Pond. I volunteer as  
President of our lake association, Trickey Pond Environmental Protection 
Association.  I also serve as a board member for the Lakes Environmental Association
and for the past 18 months have chaired the collaborative meetings of the Maine 
Boating Impacts Coalition (MBIC). I’m here today to speak in support of LD 693 .
I’d like to express my thanks to the bill’s sponsor Representative Riseman of Harrison
and the nine co-sponsors. I am encouraged by the hardy support exemplified by 10 
legislators from across our state that represent a diverse constituency and who share a 
common concern. Clearly the enhanced wakes generated by wake boats is an issue 
that has caught much attention, and it appears that many legislators understand that 
their potential for environmental damage requires a swift and appropriate solution. I 
believe that LD 693 is a step in that direction. 
By their design, wake boats differ from other water craft in that they have the 
capability to produce wakes and waves far larger and more powerful than the typical 
ski boat or runabout that we have all become accustomed to. A recent article in The 
Robb Report reviewing the latest in wake boat technology promises a new design that
will produce a  “wave big enough to make Maui jealous”.  It is clear that these boats 
are unique and that they demand that special considerations be made for their use. For
the past 18 months MBIC has collaborated with and gathered input from engineers, 
studied scientific peer reviewed studies, sought input from wake boat owners and  
property owners across Maine and invited stake holders, including Maine Audubon, 
IF&W and lake associations across the state and a local harbor master to join in our 
conversations to help develop a solution to the environmental and safety concerns 
presented by enhanced wakes, LD 693 is the result of those inclusive collaborative 
discussions. 
Before I became involved with this topic through MBIC I witnessed first-hand what 
the scientific community has now proven – that the enhanced wakes caused by wake 
boats close to shore and in shallow water are incompatible with every ones’ safe use 
of our lakes and ponds. I personally have experienced damage to my docked boats, to 
the docks themselves and to my shoreline all from the intense force of the enhanced 
wakes. Additionally, because my home lake is rather small, at only 311 acres,  I've 
have had to adjust my use of the lake based on when the wake boats are on the water. 
Scientific peer reviewed studies have demonstrated that the current 200 ft safety zone 
law which  attempts to  protect water quality, shorelines, wildlife, and public safety  
cannot offer protection against the new and enhanced technology of wake boats.    
Maine law, in the past, has recognized that as innovations bring us new and enhanced 
technologies new laws must be crafted to mitigate the potential harm they cause. 
Current Maine law offers us two good examples of this.  The special restrictions 
placed on the operation of PWCs, regulating the  time and manner of operation of the 
craft is one example. The “hands free” driving law placing regulations on the use of 
hand held devices on the road ways is another example. In both cases Maine 
legislators wisely recognized the potential for harm and injury presented by new 
technologies and responded with appropriate legislation. 
LD 693 asks only that an enhanced safety zone be created to accommodate the enhanced 
wakes created by these specific water craft.  By prohibiting the operation of Wake Boats in 
Wake Surfing  mode within 500 feet of the shoreline or in waters less than 20 feet of depth 
Maine can continue to protect inland water quality, shorelines, wildlife and public safety. I 
respectfully ask that you vote “ought to pass”. 
Sincerely, 
Martina Witts
Naples, ME
