Maine Youth Camp Association 
Testimony of the Maine Youth Camp Association 
Presented to the 
Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Neither for nor against LD 693, An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and 
Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an 
Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or in Shallow Water 
Representative Walter Riseman 
March 22, 2023 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. My name is Newell Augur. I am a resident of 
Yarmouth and a partner at Pierce Atwood, LLP. I appreciate the opportunity to testify on behalf 
of the Maine Youth Camp Association (“MYCA”), a State wide non-proﬁt organization 
representing the nearly 150 Maine licensed youth camps neither for nor against LD 693, An Act 
to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation 
of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or in Shallow Water. 
Children ’s camps are an important part of the fabric of our state, providing an outdoor 
educational experience for children from Maine, from across the country and around the 
world. Maine is the leader for children ’s camping. The ﬁrst camps were established here more 
than 100 years ago. Today, children ’s camps in Maine serve an estimated 40,000 children 
annually, and about half of all camper days are ﬁlled by Maine children. The member camps of 
the MYCA employ approximately 1,170 year-round employees and 13,500 seasonal employees 
at a combined payroll of over $50 million. They pay nearly $10 million in income, sales and 
property taxes each year. In a normal season, Maine youth camps are responsible for 
approximately $500 million of economic activity. 
We support the broader goals of this legislation. As stewards of Maine’s environment, Maine 
youth camps want to ensure that the activities that take place on the lands and waters that sustain 
our business do not unnecessarily harm the environment. Our success is dependent upon that.
The majority of camps in Maine do not own wake surﬁng boats. There are approximately 
twenty camps that do. As with the operation of any boat at a licensed youth camp - whether it’s 
a kayak, a canoe, a sailboat or motorized craft - the boat is used in a programmatic setting and 
under adult supervision. 
This may be one of the principal reasons, based on our discussions with the sponsor of the bill 
and the stakeholders who support it, that the operation of wake surﬁng boats by licensed Maine 
youth camps is not the source of the issue this bill is intended to solve. Accordingly, in 
recognition of the unique nature of our operations we would propose to the Committee that the 
bill be amended to exempt Maine youth camps licensed by the Department of Health and Human 
Services. Given that the use of any boats at a camp takes place in a supervised, programmatic 
setting, we would support an amendment to the rules that govern the operation of youth camps 
(10-144 CMR 208) to address the broader concerns that the bill is targeting. A new section - 
7.B.5.h. — can be proposed to be added to that rule to make speciﬁed safe-wake training a 
requirement for camps with staff operating motorized watercraft. The Department is opening a 
rulemaking process for this rule later this year. 
This would be consistent with other instances where regulation of the activities of Maine camps 
is achieved through rulemaking speciﬁc to camps, instead of statute. Watercraft safety, which 
this Committee addressed last year, is addressed in Section 7 of Rule 208. Fire safety, which the 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee addressed earlier this year in LD 24, is 
addressed in Section 8 of Rule 208. As part of its oversight, members of DHHS’ Health 
Inspector Program (HIP) make regular inspection visits of Maine Youth Camps to ensure they 
are in compliance with these and other safety codes. 
We would also note that while the purpose of this legislation has been represented to be the 
regulation of wake surﬁng boats 4 as set forth in the recent study by the University of Minnesota 
on which this proposal appears to be based - the bill as written captures boating activity that is 
much broader than that. There are any number of different reasons why a waterfront or boating 
director at a camp might add ballast bags or ballast tanks to a boat used in the normal course of 
waterfront activities that have nothing to do with ‘wake surﬁng.’ 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I’d be happy to answer any questions and will be 
present for the work session.
