Dear Committee Members,
I am writing in support of LD-693, an act to protect our lakes and ponds from the effects of 
wake boat operations.  I do not oppose the sport of wake surfing.  Rather I support this act that 
will put some common-sense restrictions on wake boating that will protect lake shorelines, lake 
bottoms, and water quality.
I am a Mainer who has fished and recreated on Maine waters for over a half century.  I see the 
increasing effects of shoreline erosion from the massive waves created by wake boats.  These 
waves are obviously much higher and stronger that waves created by most small fishing boats 
and pontoon boats.  These waves can even be hazardous for inexperienced canoers and 
kayakers.
It is important that the sport of wake surfing be prevented within 500 feet of the shoreline and 
in waters less than 20 feet deep. This will reduce wake-caused erosion, keep lake water clean, 
protect fragile lakeside habitats, and keep shallow waters safe for families, swimmers, and 
other boaters. 
Maine’s beautiful lakes and ponds are a critical natural resource underpinning Maine’s tourism 
economy.  This act will help maintain water quality and the economy on which it is based.
Thank you for considering this testimony.
Sincerely,
Orrin C. Shane, III
9 Fieldstone Court
Portland, Maine
Orrin Shane
Retired
LD 693
Dear Committee Members,
I am writing in support of LD-693, an act to protect our lakes and ponds from the effects of 
wake boat operations.  I do not oppose the sport of wake surfing.  Rather I support this act 
that will put some common-sense restrictions on wake boating that will protect lake 
shorelines, lake bottoms, and water quality.
I am a Mainer who has fished and recreated on Maine waters for over a half century.  I see 
the increasing effects of shoreline erosion from the massive waves created by wake boats.  
These waves are obviously much higher and stronger that waves created by most small 
fishing boats and pontoon boats.  These waves can even be hazardous for inexperienced 
canoers and kayakers.
It is important that the sport of wake surfing be prevented within 500 feet of the shoreline and 
in waters less than 20 feet deep. This will reduce wake-caused erosion, keep lake water 
clean, protect fragile lakeside habitats, and keep shallow waters safe for families, swimmers, 
and other boaters. 
Maine’s beautiful lakes and ponds are a critical natural resource underpinning Maine’s 
tourism economy.  This act will help maintain water quality and the economy on which it is 
based.
Thank you for considering this testimony.
Sincerely,
Orrin C. Shane, III
9 Fieldstone Court
Portland, Maine
