  
 290 US Route One, PO Box 439, Edgecomb , ME 04556 -0439          
(207) 389 -5150        
midcoastconservancy.org  
 March 15, 2023 Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 693 Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee  Dear Members of the Committee, We are grateful for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 693 – An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or in Shallow Water. Midcoast Conservancy’s mission is to protect vital land and waters on a scale that matters, and our service area includes popular boating locations like Damariscotta Lake.  Damariscotta Lake is home. Home to sparkling water dotted with small islands. Home to a soundtrack of trilling loons. Home to premier fishing and world class iceboating. Home to mission-based outdoor recreation and education camps that have taught thousands of kids and even hosted retreats for 9/11 first responders. Unfortunately, Damariscotta Lake is also home to growing cyanobacteria issues that are impacting our community’s ability to swim, fish, and enjoy the renewing waters of our Lake. These cyanobacteria issues would likely be exacerbated by oversized wakes within the nearshore areas of Damariscotta Lake.  Oversized wakes created by operating wake boats and boats fitted with aftermarket wake-enhancing equipment are harmful in the nearshore area of inland lakes. Wakes created by wake boats and boats with wake-enhancing equipment are significantly larger than wakes created by typical recreation boats when on plane. These wakes can cause permanent damage to lake ecosystems and personal property if operated too close to shore, or in too shallow of water. By accelerating shoreline loss and disturbing sediments on lake bottoms, oversized wakes contribute to increasing phosphorus levels which lead to algae blooms. Wake boats can also pose a danger to other lake users, including wildlife. Oversized wakes can create dangerous conditions for swimmers, paddlers, and small boat users, and can completely swamp loon nests reducing survival of eggs and chicks.  LD 693 is not a ban on wake boat use, but it limits wake boat use to areas where the lake and other users are better protected from harmful oversized wakes. Oversized wakes need a larger distance from shore to dissipate and reduce force, thus the 500 feet from shore provision. They also are more likely to disturbe sediments, which is why limiting their use to areas of a lake greater than 20 feet is essential. The proposed wake boat use zone would not substantially change the area within which boats could operate in wake-surfing mode. In Damariscotta Lake over one third of the lake would still be accessible for wake-surfing mode (see attached map) and 
  
 290 US Route One, PO Box 439, Edgecomb , ME 04556 -0439          
(207) 389 -5150        
midcoastconservancy.org  
 much of the areas within the wake safety zone is already headway speed only. Additionally, due to the large number of coves and islands in Damariscotta Lake it is likely to have a larger wake safety zone than many other lakes. For these reasons, we respectfully request the committee to vote in favor of LD 693 to protect inland lakes.  Sincerely,   Patricia Nease Damariscotta Lake Watershed Manager on behalf of: Midcoast Conservancy 
Proposed	Wake	Boat	ZoneDamariscotta	LakeLegend
Map	By:	Patricia	Nease,	March	2023Sources:	OSM,		MEOGIS,Midcoast	ConservancyProposed	Wake	Boat	Use	Zone
Patricia Nease
Edgecomb
LD 693
Dear Members of the Committee,
We are grateful for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 693 – An Act to 
Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation 
of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or in Shallow Water. Midcoast 
Conservancy’s mission is to protect vital land and waters on a scale that matters, and our 
service area includes popular boating locations like Damariscotta Lake.
Damariscotta Lake is home. Home to sparkling water dotted with small islands. Home to a 
soundtrack of trilling loons. Home to premier fishing and world class iceboating. Home to 
mission-based outdoor recreation and education camps that have taught thousands of kids 
and even hosted retreats for 9/11 first responders. Unfortunately, Damariscotta Lake is also 
home to growing cyanobacteria issues that are impacting our community’s ability to swim, 
fish, and enjoy the renewing waters of our Lake. These cyanobacteria issues would likely be 
exacerbated by oversized wakes within the nearshore areas of Damariscotta Lake.
Oversized wakes created by operating wake boats and boats fitted with aftermarket wake- 
enhancing equipment are harmful in the nearshore area of inland lakes. Wakes created by 
wake boats and boats with wake-enhancing equipment are significantly larger than wakes 
created by typical recreation boats when on plane. These wakes can cause permanent 
damage to lake ecosystems and personal property if operated too close to shore, or in too 
shallow of water. By accelerating shoreline loss and disturbing sediments on lake bottoms, 
oversized wakes contribute to increasing phosphorus levels which lead to algae blooms. 
Wake boats can also pose a danger to other lake users, including wildlife. Oversized wakes 
can create dangerous conditions for swimmers, paddlers, and small boat users, and can 
completely swamp loon nests reducing survival of eggs and chicks.
LD 693 is not a ban on wake boat use, but it limits wake boat use to areas where the lake and
other users are better protected from harmful oversized wakes. Oversized wakes need a 
larger distance from shore to dissipate and reduce force, thus the 500 feet from shore 
provision. They also are more likely to disturbe sediments, which is why limiting their use to 
areas of a lake greater than 20 feet is essential. The proposed wake boat use zone would not
substantially change the area within which boats could operate in wake-surfing mode. In 
Damariscotta Lake over one third of the lake would still be accessible for wake-surfing mode 
(see attached map) and much of the areas within the wake safety zone is already headway 
speed only. Additionally, due to the large number of coves and islands in Damariscotta Lake it
is likely to have a larger wake safety zone than many other lakes.
For these reasons, we respectfully request the committee to vote in favor of LD 693 to protect
inland lakes.
Sincerely,
Patricia Nease
Damariscotta Lake Watershed Manager on behalf of: Midcoast Conservancy
