3-21-23
 
Re: Support for LD 693: "An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and 
Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to 
Shore or in Shallow Water "
 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,
 
My name is Dr. Rebecca Arsenault. I live at 19 Fawn Road in Gray Maine. I have had the 
pleasure and frustration of owning property on Little Sebago Lake since 1982. This property 
is my legal Maine residence. I can be reached at 207-897-8109. The purpose of this letter is 
to share my support for LD 693 which would prohibit operation of a wake boat close to 
shore or in shallow water.
I have observed the evolution of boat traffic and the nature of boats on Little Sebago Lake 
over the past 41 years. I have seen a significant increase in the number of boats, the size of 
boats, the horsepower of motors on boats year-in and year-out over these many years. All 
of these changes have impacted lake quality. I thought I had seen everything until wake 
boats began to appear on the lake approximately four years ago. If you have not seen one 
of these boats at high speed on a lake, I encourage you to do so. 
I am blessed to have lake-front property that has a natural sandy beach that gradually 
slopes into the water. It is a perfect location for swimming. Over the years, I have watched 
my daughter, two grandsons and other family members enjoy this beach. However, my 
beach has dramatically changed over the past few years due to wake boat activity. I can sit 
on my beach, watch wake boats go zooming by and see instant beach erosion caused by the 
wave action of these boats. Sand on the beach is pulled into the water by wave action.
As a long-time lake property owner, I have always been mindful of protecting the lakefront 
by not touching the natural ecology of the bushes and trees along my property. It is so sad 
to see wake boat wave action dig up the natural lake front, causing bushes to be pulled into 
the lake and the roots of trees to be exposed by the wave action. I believe this law will help 
to prevent the devastating impact of wave boats on our beautiful lake. 
 
Thank you for taking the time to read this letter. I encourage you to vote “ought to pass” on 
LD 693.
 
Dr. Rebecca Arsenault
19 Fawn Road
Gray, Maine
Mailing address: 19 Fawn Road Raymond, Maine 04071
