Hello. My name is Sal Girifalco. I live at 8 Mary Lane, Norway, Maine and am the President of the Lakes 
Association of Norway (LAON) and I fully support LD 693 in its efforts to control damaging boat wake. 
LAON works to protect Norway’s four lakes, Lake Pennesseewassee, North Pond, Sand Pond, and Hobbs 
Pond. Like most lakes in Maine, ours have been increasingly battered by ever higher boat wake. 
Unfortunately, wake boats are a game changer. In the past, large wake was mostly caused by boater 
negligence. Wake boat wake is high by design; it is the selling point. Large wake has injured people, 
damaged docks, been dangerous for kayaks and canoes, and has caused significant damage to our 
shorelines. Believe me, I hear complaints about wake from our members every year. We communicate 
wake management to as many people as we can, but each year our lakes are visited by thousands of 
boaters. We only have Courtesy Boat Inspections on one lake, and that lake alone does well over 2,000 
inspections each year.
LAON has been working very hard to control erosion because of the phosphorus laden runoff that it 
brings to our lakes. To that end, we have completed two watershed surveys, and been awarded two EPA 
funded 319 grants that addressed around 70 erosion sites on two lakes, spending well over $100,000 
and utilizing hundreds of volunteer hours and equipment. We have tackled many types of erosion 
issues, and perhaps the most difficult is shoreline erosion. Our solutions follow Best Management 
Practices and are designed to prevent future erosion by eliminating damaging water flow via road or 
driveway design, buffer plantings, and many other solutions. Stabilizing an undercut shoreline is not 
easy, and we have not found good solutions. In fact, anything done to stabilize an eroded shoreline 
doesn’t prevent the damaging water from battering the shoreline, it just tries to slow the erosion. 
Controlling wake seems like the only true preventive measure available. We have found that once 
undercut, a shoreline cannot be restored. Trees and rocks fall into the water, as does the sediment. 
Then the next layer of shoreline is damaged, then the next.
We fully understand that some shoreline erosion is caused by wind, but this body cannot control 
weather, so it is necessary to control what it can. Also, on our lakes wind tends to be predominantly 
from one direction, so most of the time it affects one shore. Wake goes in all directions, crashing against 
shorelines not typically hit by wind generated wake, so on many shorelines, boat wake is the primary 
source of damage. 
I thank you for allowing the public to provide input to such an important topic. Please help us, and all of 
Maine’s lakes by passing legislation to reduce damage caused by boat wake. 
Thank you,
Sal Girifalco – LAON President
