March 2023 
To: The Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
RE: LD 693- An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety by 
Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or in 
Shallow Water 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Committee on Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife, my name is Stacey Keefer, Director for the Maine Marine Trades Association 
(MMTA), and a resident of Union. MMTA represents over 120 Maine businesses and an industry 
comprised of boatyards, boat builders, marinas, boat dealers, marine retailers, and more. 
Please note the value added to Maine's gross domestic product by the recreational boating and 
fishing sector, far surpasses the value added by any other outdoor recreation sector (source 
https:[/www.bea.gov/data/speciaI-topics/outdoor-recreation). The boating industry certainly 
does no want to cause harm to our important natural resources, but we encourage the 
Committee to consider if the details of LD 693 are more than what is necessary to operate any 
and all boats in a responsible manner. 
On behalf of the members of MMTA, I would like to encourage the Committee to work with 
some of our national colleagues from the National Marine Manufacturers Association (NMMA), 
Marine Retailers Association of the Americas (MRAA), and Water Sports Industry Association 
(WSIA) on this topic who have encountered similar proposals in other states and who are more 
familiar with various wake studies. Last year New Hampshire defeated HB 1071 which was only 
trying to increase their no-wake zone to 250 feet, not 500 feet. 
We would also like to point out that the National Association of State Boating Law 
Administrators (NASBLA) has worked in national collaboration with law enforcement on wake 
boat topics. We suggest that Maine look at NASBLA's national policy suggestions on wake 
sports and suggested definition of a wake boat. Please note the language in LD 693 refers toa 
ballasted boat and technically many sailboats are ballasted boats. 
MMTA continues to believe that education and enforcement are both necessary to keep 
boating safer. Without education, awareness, and enforcement it does not matter what the size 
no-wake zone is in statute. Last year we had hoped to schedule one of WS|A's ”Wake 
Responsib|y" events in Maine but will try again this year. MMTA would not be opposed to an 
increase in registration fees to help fund more lake wardens, especially in more popular water 
bodies for wake and towing sports. 
MMTA would like to recognize and appreciate that our lakes associations work extremely hard 
to protect our water resources. They are very organized with their advocacy. We are not aware 
of any wake boat clubs who might help assist those boat owners with awareness about this 
legislation. I can say on behalf of a dealer who sells wake boats, that many of his customers 
could be quite upset if they are suddenly limited to where they can operate a vessel that they
have likely invested over $200,000 and are given new limitations that may or may not be 
necessary. This is why MMTA would prefer to support a study as suggested in LD 379 —An Act 
to Responsibly Regulate Recreational Boats on Maine Lakes. We will submit separate 
testimony on that bill and offer to be a resource for the Committee and the Department to help 
address concerns about wakes and wake boating. 
Respectfully, 
Stacey Keefer 
Maine Marine Trades Association, Executive Director
I 
K§§i€ MARINE TRADES ASSOCIATION
