March 22, 2023 
Re: Support for LD 693: "An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety by 
Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or in Shallow Water" 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the Committee on Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife, 
My name is Steve Lewis, I live in Stoneham, Maine, almost on the Maine, New Hampshire border. I am the 
President of the Kezar Lake Watershed Association with over 400 members which has been involved in 
monitoring and protecting the water bodies in the Kezar Lake watershed for over 50 years. 
https:[/kezarwatershed.org[ 
I have also been a volunteer water quality monitor with the Lake Stewards of Maine for over 25 years, 
taking basic water quality measurements in Horseshoe Pond, part of the Kezar Lake watershed, where my 
residence is. 
You have received a lot of testimony about the problems that large wakes cause with capsizing boats, 
damage to property, severe threats to nesting Loons, and erosion and sedimentation issues. These issues 
are real. I have had many people come up to me pleading to have something done about wake boats as 
they are afraid to go out in their canoes, kayaks, and on stand-up paddleboards anymore; particularly 
older people. One person I know of won't even put their kayak in the lake anymore. This is unacceptable. 
The Kezar Lake Watershed Association has done a lot of work, championed by Don Griggs, to educate 
people in our area about the issues of large wakes and strong prop wash using fliers and posters widely 
distributed to get the word out. We have also worked with, and gained the cooperation of, the local 
marina in making it clear where wake boats should not go. Most users of wake boats are courteous and do 
the right thing. However, there are those that do not, and feel that they do not have to. These are the 
people that make this regulation necessary, at a minimum. I would argue that there should be even more 
limits set, such as allowing only mid-day operations so people know when they can safely_go out in their 
smaller watercraft and not be at risk of capsizing, to name just one. 
Thank you for allowing me to testify. I encourage you to vote "ought to pass" on LD 693. 
Respectfully, 
Stephen Lewis 
President, Kezar Lake Watershed Association 925-8020
