Testimony in SUPPORT of: 
LD 693, An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety by 
Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or in 
Shallow Water 
Submitted to the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee 
March 22, 2023 
Good afternoon, Chair LaFountain, Chair Landry, and Distinguished Members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today 
in support of LD 693. My name is Susan Gallo, and I am the Executive Director of Maine 
Lakes. Our membership organization includes more than 6,000 supporters and volunteers 
as well as over 80 Lake Associations. We are dedicated to our mission of promoting, 
protecting, and enhancing lake water quality and habitat, and of preserving the ecological, 
economic, recreational, and aesthetic benefits of Maine's lakes for all Maine people. 
As you know, Maine's Great Ponds are a public resource, owned by me, by you, and by 
everyone sitting in this room. This committee has the difficult task of balancing sometimes 
conflicting demands from resource users with protective measures that serve to keep 
resources healthy over the long-term. LD 693 is an important protective measure that will 
do just that.o 
LD 693 will add a, critical measure of protection to long—term lake health by reducing 
shoreline erosion, water quality degradation, wildlife habitat destruction, private property 
damage and; risks to human safety, while allowing resource users to continue using lakes 
and -ponds for wakesport activities. ’ It directs those activities away from shore and to 
deeper water, improving the wakesport experience, reducing conflicts with other lake 
users, andi protecting long-term lake health. ' i ‘ ‘
The Maine Boating Impacts Coalition: For the last 18 months, I have participated in 
monthly meetings of the Maine Boating Impacts Coalition. This collaborative group of 
camp owners, lake association members, regional and state watershed organization staff, 
and boat owners came together because of the growing number of complaints about the 
impacts and safety concerns from large boat—generated wakes. The group agreed to be 
guided by sound research and scientific studies about impacts from large boat—generated 
wakes, and to explore a wide range of policy options that could reduce impacts but also 
allow for continued widespread wakesport activities. We invited speakers who helped us 
better understand the issues. We thoroughly read and reviewed existing studies. Members 
participated in a national group of lake partners working on wakesport issues in other 
states. We developed many policy options but agreed to pursue the ones you see before 
you in LD 693 as the ones most grounded in science that allow for the continued 
widespread use of wake boats with the fewest impacts on our public lake resources. We 
thank Rep. Walter Riseman for moving our recommendations into LD 693. 
LD 693, is the result of more thana year of collaborative and deep information-T : 
gathering and review, from :concerne ’d boaters and lake organizations whose missions 
revolve around lake protection: for all types of users, including boaters. ,'
A 
The Water Safety Zone: As you likely know, a 2003 Maine statute designates a "water 
safety zone" that requires boaters maintain headway speed, defined as the minimum speed 
necessary to maintain steerage and control of a moving watercraft, within 200' of shore. 
This statute was established due to concerns both over safety for swimmers and other 
near-shore users and for shoreline erosion issues that result from large wakes. 
Like so many other boating laws on the books, the headway speed rule is not one that is 
regularly enforced yet it is one that provides a valuable measure of protection for Maine's 
lakes and ponds. It is published in the boating rule book. It is included in boater safety 
certification courses. Most people who read the rule, and understand why it's in place, 
maintain headway speed within 200' ofthe shore, protecting our shorelines and waters. 
If 200' was big enough to protect our lakes from the larger wakes created by wake- 
generating boats, we would not need to increase the water safety zone for wake-generating 
activities. But research has shown that the much larger wakes generated by wake- 
enhancing boats take at least 500’ to reduce to a size comparable to wakes generated by 
other recreational boating activity (FMI see "Research on Wake lmpacts" below). In other 
words, wakes generated by wake-enhancing boats 300' or 400' from shore will have much 
greater height and force than wakes from other boating activities at that same distance. 
Adding 300' to the Water Safety Zone for large-wake-generating activities assures that 
all boaters will meet the some established standard for the size of wakes reaching the 
shoreline, a size tdesignedto reduce -erosion and protect property and safety;
2
Large-wake Impacts: Others will provide more details on the existing research around large 
man-made wakes on lake water quality and shorelines, but for an excellent review, please 
see the document "Wake Boats: Concerns and Recommendations Related to Natural 
Resource Management in Michigan Waters" , available at this link and also handed out as 
part of my written testimony for LD 379: https:[[mymlsa.org[wg- 
content/uploads/2022/O9/DNR-Wake-Boat-Report.pdf. 
The main concerns are summarized below: 
o Sediment Resuspension: In addition to greater wave action, many wake-enhancing 
boats are weighted to plow through the water rather than skim “on plane" so the 
propellor faces downward (rather than straight back), stirring up sediments that can 
release phosphorus and feed algae blooms. This is especially true for repeated 
passes in shallow water (see page 4 of Ml report). 
o Invasive Species spread: Microscopic animals like zebra mussel larvae and small 
invasive plant fragments can remain in ballast tanks after they are drained on 
infeasted waters. When these boats come to Maine, they pose a risk as new ballast 
water is added (and then drained) on our lakes (see page 5 of Ml report). 
0 Habitat impacts: Lakeside loon nests are swamped by large wakes, resulting in eggs 
washing away and/or nest destruction. The near-shore Littoral Zone, rich habitat for 
fish and plankton, can be degraded by prop wash and sediment suspension 
generated by any motorized boat, though the configuration of traditional wakeboats 
making repeated passes exacerbates those impacts. 
o Shoreline erosion: Enhanced wakes are able to carry much more energy to the shore 
than wakes generated by other recreational boats or by natural high-winds, 
increasing the likelihood and extent of shoreline degradation and erosion (see p. 4 of 
Ml report). 
v Safety concerns: Anecdotal reports of harm to swimmers and others using near- 
shore areas, including a child who broke their leg after they were washed off a dock 
at Big Island Pond in New Hampshire abound. 
Recent research has documented negative impacts on shoreline stability, shorelineA 
erosion, and sediment suspension, as well as an increased -risk to invasive species 
spread. Habitat impacts from large wakes reaching theshoreline in Maine include 
damage to lakeside loon nests and littoral zone habitat. Though not well documented,'
. 
reports of property damage and personal injury from large enhanced wakes are 
becoming more common and of-greater concem.‘ 
_ ' ''
3
National Wakesport Policies: Groups across the country have been working in recent years 
to bring about common-sense waksport policies that support resource use while reducing 
impacts. Wakesport activities were recently prohibited in a narrow section of the 
Willamette River where excessive wakes resulted in both major erosion events and safety 
issues along the shoreline. A recent rule-making petition by Responsible Wakes for 
Vermont Lakes (www.responsiblewakes.org) to the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources 
(VT ANR) proposed a prohibition on wakesports within 1,000 feet of shore and a ban on 
those activities on lakes smaller than 60 acres. VT AN R, another agency with a similar 
constituency to IFW, has analyzed research relating to wake impacs, and is now proposing 
a modified rule that will prohibit wakeboat activity within 500' of shorelines and on lakes 
smaller than 60 acres. The materials can be found on the Lakes and Ponds rulemaking site 
here: httpszg/decvermont.gov/watershed/lakes-ponds/rulemaking; 
Wakeboats were the fastest growing segment of boat sales during the pandemic, even 
though their pricetag (ranging from $100K to $600K) in part likely helps keep them to an 
overall fairly low segment of boat sales nationally (less than 4% in 2020). As wakeboat 
technology has evolved, the size of waves that can be generated grows, with waves over 6' 
in height touted as coming soon in wakeboat marketing materials (e.g, 
https:[/www.mby.comgear/toy-of-the-month-ggawave-350-gw-x-Iargest-wake-surfing; 
wave-111702). 
Maine Lakes, and many if not all of the organizations supporting LD 693, view boating asa 
vital part of Maine's economy. Boating and fishing contribute proportionally more to 
Maine's $2.8 billion outdoor industry (14.6%) than in any other state, according to a recent 
analysis by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (https:[/www.bea.gov/news/2022/outdoor- 
recreation-satellite-account-us-and-states-2021) Wakesports are an important part of that 
contribution, and we want to see wakesport activities continue as a fun and exciting way 
for families, summer campers, and others to get out on the water and enjoy their time 
together. However, it is essential that wakeboaters do the same thing that we require, by 
law, for other boaters: their wakes in the near-shore zone cannot destroy shorelines, 
degrade water quality, pose issues for human safety, or put other boaters in harms way. 
New is the right timeto increase the water safety Z9l'ie for wake-generating activities. 
As the sport ! grows in p_opulerity, and-as the technology increases the s”ize and length- 
of VVﬂ‘k81 8,, it will only be'come" - 
more difficult to implernent eemmonfsense policy, . 
__ 
Passing sound policy m assures that the wakesport industry in Maine can continue 
to grow and thrive while it also does its part-to protect the health andsafety of1M; aline's 
l-akes,pon ﬁs,an_dr_iv _ ers- . ' 
f ~- _ _ ‘ l
" 
_ @~
4
Thank you for your time and attention today. For more information, please see the attached 
fact sheet, which was generated by the Maine Boating Impacts Coalition. 
I am also happy to provide additional resources, studies, links or other information about 
the background of this policy proposal. Please contact me any time at sga|lo@lakes.me.
5
Su ort LD 693: Protect Water Qualit , Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safet PP Y Y 
Summary: This bill (An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and Public Safety by Prohibiting 
Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to Shore or in Shallow Water) prohibits boats 
purposefully generating enhanced wakes within 500 feet of shorelines and in waters less than 20 feet deep. 
This will reduce wake-caused erosion and sedimentation, keep lake water clean, protect fragile lakeside 
habitat, and keep shallow waters safe for families, swimmers, and other boaters. This is not a ban on wake 
activities and only applies when boats are using wake-enhancing equipment. 
Join fellow lake advocates in supporting this common-sense policy to protect fragile 
shorelines, water quality, lake health and safe recreational opportunities for everyone. 
Speak up at the Public Hearing on Wednesday, March 22nd at 1:00 p.m. 
In person: inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee, Cross Building Room 206 
Via Zoom: Register at www.legisIature.gov (More details at wwwlakesmeladvocacy) 
How are wake boats different? 
Wake boats‘ are specialized boats designed to create large wakes for the purpose of wake sports such as wake 
boarding and wake surfing. 
¢ These powerful boats are equipped with ballast tanks and often mechanical systems designed to 
enhance the size of the boat's wake. 
0 The large wakes created by these boats allow people to surf behind them without tow ropes. 
How do excessive wakes close to shore put our lakes at risk? 
Large wakes erode shorelines and damage fragile wildlife habitat. 
O The large wakes from wake surﬁng activities take 500 feet or more to dissipate to levels typical of 
recreational boats on plane? Large wakes simply need more distances to dissipate. 
0 The current 200-foot boater safety zone is not big enough for boats generating larger wakes. 
O Large wakes hitting the shoreline undercut 
banks and stir up sediment (thereby degrading 
water quality). They also wash over docks, and 
can be a hazard to young swimmers and wake 
nonmotorized boaters 
Wake-surfing boats stir up more sediment than 
other recreational boats. 
¢ Wake-surfing requires the boat to plow water at 
slow speeds versus boats operating on-plane. 
Downward directed propellers can disturb the 
lake bottoms and stir up sediments.
Clean lakes are valuable assets to local community members and recreational users. 
0 University of Maine studies have shown that property values drop with decrease water quality) ‘ 
O Income for local communities depend on clean and healthy lakes for all to use and enjoy. 
Wake surfing is growing in popularity. 
0 The wake surf industry is rapidly growing, with sales in the first quarter up 62% compared to the first 
quarter of 2019.‘ 
O Boat sales in Maine increased dramatically during the pandemic but are now tapering off with the 
exception of Wake Surf boats and pontoon sales 
This bill will protect clean water, human safety, and wildlife habitat by: 
0 Promoting wake-generating activity away from shore, in deeper water where the experience is better for 
the wake surfer“ 
0 Ensuring safe access for all people who enjoy Maine's beautiful lakes and ponds 
0 Reducing shoreline erosion from unnaturally large man-made wakes 
O Minimizing sediment and nutrient resuspension (which causes algal blooms) in near-shore, shallow 
water 
0 Protecting fish spawning beds and loon and waterfowl nesting sites 
Boating is a wonderful way to enjoy Maine's lakes. We want gﬂ boaters to share our public lake 
resources and to boat responsibly to protect shorelines and water quality. For most boats, the 
current 200-foot "boater safety zone" (also known as the "no-wake zone") protects lake health 
and shoreline stability. 
However, for large wake sport activities, 200 feet from shore is not 
enough distance to allow wakes the space they need to dissipate. 
Boaters can better enjoy wake sports, and quality wakes, in deeper water further from shore. 
We need your voice to speak for lake health, wildlife and safety. 
For directions on submitting written testimony and for registering to get a Zoom link to testify before the 
committee, visit www.lakes.rne[advocacy, 
For the most impact, please consider testifying before the committee on Jan. 30"‘ . FMI visit website 
Questions? Reach out to Susan Gallo, Executive Director of Maine Lakes any time at . 
References and Links: 
1 https://communitv.nasbla.orq/viewdocumentipolicyjaosition-on-wake-boats 
2 htt_ps:L/conservancvumn.edu/handle/11299/226190 
https://diqitalcomrnons.library.umaineedu/cqi/viewcontent.coi?artic|e=lO18&context=aes_miscreports 
h§iQ§I[/WWW. ﬁmm§.QlQ[Ql§§§[§f1lQ|§/24Q2§ 
https;j1/www.luxuo.com/cars/vachtinq/whats-the-best-water~depth»for~wake-surfinq.html 
L-E-5 3 
rmmws ofthe I-in COBBOSSEE 35-= jI 
$9? WATER$HED §9..'Y‘.‘ ..'§’ ...*§'!SE’ 
S , 
h"'lon\\i36_        
‘H; _ I                      
