March 22, 2023
To: Chair and members  of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee
From: Terry Lochhead, Brownfield Maine
Re: HB 693 An act to protect inland Water quality, Shorelines, Wildlife, and Public Safety by Prohibiting 
Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close To Shore or in Shallow Water
Good afternoon Committee Chair and Members.
My name is Terry Lochhead. I live at 147 Main Street in Brownfield Maine and I own a camp with my 
brother on Barker Pond in Sebago Maine.
I am testifying today in favor of HB 693.
Barker Pond is about a mile long and half a mile wide. It’s 10-20 feet deep in many places, about 40 feet 
at its deepest. Our house is built on a sandy bluff about 30 feet high.
My first encounter with a wake boat was about ten years ago when the wake from a wake boat knocked 
my seven year old grand daughter out of a kayak. I was outraged at the driver’s carelessness. But soon I 
realized, the boat was supposed to throw out an oversized wake. 
Since then, daily wake boat trips have sent oversized waves crashing against our sandy bluff, tearing 
away the sand at the base of the bluff. Plants growing in the rocks on the shoreline are pounded and 
uprooted so that their ability to hold in the bank is destroyed. The result is that the soil around rocks and 
tree roots on the bank and at the water’s edge is crumbling and sifting away, helping a once stable bank to 
destabilize. What used to occur once in awhile in a storm, now happens multiple times a day in the 
summer. 
I have posted flyers quoting the state law on the 200 ft no-wake zone, and Ive even mailed the flyers to all 
the houses on my side of the lake. It’s had minimal effect because the lake is so small and a big wake 
travels a good distance. Passing HB 693 would at least send a message that the State is looking at this 
problem and is in effect outlawing wake boats on small lakes. That’s what should happen - outlawing 
wake boats on small lakes- so HB 693 is at least a step in the right direction.
