March 22, 2023 
 
Dear Members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee, 
 
My name is Toni Pied. I am a member of the Maine Boating Impacts Coalition (MBIC) and have 
been working on lake protection in Maine for the past 22 years. I am writing to express my 
support for LD 693: An Act To Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and 
Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake 
Close to Shore or in Shallow Water”. This bill would prohibit large wake generating boats 
from operating within 500’ of the shore and in water less than 20’ deep.  
 
The purpose of this bill is NOT to prohibit the use of any watercraft, including wake boats. The 
purpose of this bill is to establish responsible parameters for the use of wake boats, while they 
are creating a large wake. 
 
Large wakes cause erosion on the shoreline, disrupt and damage habitat and wildlife (such as 
loon nesting), damage private property, and pose a threat to public safety. Operating wake 
boats while using enhanced wake equipment in shallow water (less than 20’) also damages 
important aquatic plant habitat (which are also important for limiting erosion) and stirs up 
sediment on the lake bottom. Additionally, although not addressed in this bill, the potential 
transport of invasive aquatic organisms in ballast water is a great concern.  
 
Balancing the competing uses of Maine’s lakes is always a challenge, but maintaining the 
integrity and health of our irreplaceable inland waters is in everyone’s best interest. Without 
healthy lakes, critical habitat for wildlife, and measures protecting public safety, Maine’s 
economy and “Way of Life” are threatened.  
 
I urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 693, and I urge the Committee to consider 
recommendations for measures that would prevent the spread of invasive aquatic organisms via 
ballast water.   
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Toni B. Pied 
 
tonibingelpied@gmail.com  
(207) 446-9811  
