March 21, 2023
 
Re: Support for LD 693: "An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and 
Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to 
Shore or in Shallow Water "
 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife:
 
I am William A. Turner.  I am blessed to have been a resident of Harrison, Maine, for about 
35 years and am very privilaged to live year round very near the East shore of Long Lake.  I 
am a registered Professional Engineer in the Sate of Maine and I am very concerned about 
the health of Maine Lakes as a property owner and a person of Faith.  Prior to moving to 
Maine as a permantent resident in 1985, I had enjoyed the privilage of fishing in Maine for 
much of my growing up years. You can contact me at btair1@airdiagnostics.com.
As many of you may know, motorized water craft use on many of Maine's Lakes has 
increased over the the past 30 years that I have resided in the state, and the craft in general 
have become larger, have more powerful motors, and have evolved to a point of being able 
to create large wakes to enable surfing behind a craft.   The proposed legislation, if 
implimented and followed, will limit some of the damage done to the water quality 
turbidity, the lake bed, and fragile shores during this activity, and may reduce the impact on 
Maine's Loon population. 
I do not see that this proposed legislation will negatively effect the folks enjoying the sport 
or the business community that they support. 
 
Thank you for taking the time to read this letter.
 I encourage you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 693.
 
Willaim A. Turner
William Turner
Harrison, Maine
LD 693
March 21, 2023
 
Re: Support for LD 693: "An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife and 
Public Safety by Prohibiting Operation of a Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close to
Shore or in Shallow Water "
 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife:
 
I am William A. Turner.  I am blessed to have been a resident of Harrison, Maine, for about 35
years and am very privilaged to live year round very near the East shore of Long Lake.  I am 
a registered Professional Engineer in the Sate of Maine and I am very concerned about the 
health of Maine Lakes as a property owner and a person of Faith.  Prior to moving to Maine 
as a permantent resident in 1985, I had enjoyed the privilage of fishing in Maine for much of 
my growing up years. You can contact me at btair1@airdiagnostics.com.
As many of you may know, motorized water craft use on many of Maine's Lakes has 
increased over the the past 30 years that I have resided in the state, and the craft in 
general have become larger, have more powerful motors, and have evolved to a point 
of being able to create large wakes to enable surfing behind a craft.   The proposed 
legislation, if implimented and followed, will limit some of the damage done to the 
water quality turbidity, the lake bed, and fragile shores during this activity, and may 
reduce the impact on Maine's Loon population. 
I do not see that this proposed legislation will negatively effect the folks enjoying the sport or 
the business community that they support. 
 
Thank you for taking the time to read this letter.
 I encourage you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 693.
 
Willaim A. Turner
