Zachary Means
Glenburn
LD 693
March 22, 2023
Dear Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
LD 693:  An Act to Protect Inland Water Quality, Shorelines, Wildlife, and Public 
Safety by Prohibiting Operation of A Wake Boat to Create an Enhanced Wake Close 
to Shore or in Shallow Water
Hello, my name is Zachary Means and I am a full time, year-round resident of Pushaw Lake 
in Penobscot County.  On behalf of my family, Bailey, Wyatt (9) and Evie (7), and other 
property owners, I am writing in opposition of LD 693.
  
We all certainly understand and recognize the importance of recreation on our beautiful lakes 
here in Maine—particularly for those who love to be outside.  Banning wake boats on 
waterbodies like Pushaw would inhibit families like ours from enjoying what we love to do.
On the erosion front, families like ours have lived on the lake for 40+ years.  We have
seen no statistical evidence that wake boating is harming our watershed or others in 
Country.  In fact, it seems that the shallower the body of water, like Pushaw, the less 
likely we are to see an impact due to wave attenuation.  This bill calls out depths of 
20’ and under—which is what most of the depth is on Pushaw Lake, Penobscot 
Counties 6th largest lake.
It’s also worth noting that wake boats have a positive economic impact on local communities. 
Wake boats are often used in conjunction with other water-based activities like fishing, 
swimming, and boating, which can attract tourism and generate revenue for local businesses.
Banning wake boats could have a detrimental effect on these industries, hurting the economy 
and the livelihoods of those who rely on them.
  
Rather than banning wake boats outright, it may be more appropriate to establish regulations 
and guidelines to ensure their safe and responsible use. For example, enforcing speed limits, 
designated no wake zones, and educational programs for proper boat handling and safety 
could mitigate any negative impact while still allowing for the enjoyment of wake boats.  
Overall, wake boats are designed with safety in mind, and many include features specifically 
intended to enhance the safety of riders and other boaters on the water, including slower 
surfing speeds than a typical boat, and the ability to manually adjust speed and wave for the 
purpose of safety for all.
Furthermore, wake boats typically have more safety features than other boats, including 
larger mirrors, and propellors being out of reach.  
In summary, a bill banning the use of wake boats on lakes could have unintended 
consequences on the economy, recreation, and the rights of individuals to engage in a 
beloved activity and the claims of its destruction are simply not based in fact.
 
Thank you for your time and service.
Zachary, Bailey, Wyatt and Evie Means
Undersigned by other residents of Glenburn and homeowners on Pushaw Lake:
JLynn Feero
Nathaniel, Shyla, Molly and Maddy Waring
Gaynor and Kevin Ryan
Ashley and John Gagnon

