_ 
_ HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
5, 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
V AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Sean Paulh“, TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
677 Middle Street 
Bath, ME 04530 
Phone: (207) 751-7760 
Sean.Paul@§@legislaturc.maine.goyj 
April 18, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Sean Paulh us presenting 
LD 87, An Act to Permit Emergency Funding for Food Banks When a State of Emergency Is Declared 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and distinguished members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, I am Sean Paulhus, Representative for House District 50, the city of Bath. I am glad to be here to 
present LD 87, An Act to Permit Emergency Funding for Food Banks When a State of Emergency Is 
Declared. 
This bill authorizes the governor to distribute up to $400,000 from the state’s budget stabilization fund to food 
banks throughout Maine when our state enters a period of civil emergency. We know that the pandemic caused 
such sudden economic devastation and food insecurity that food banks across the state experienced major 
spikes in demand. Even before the pandemic, one in four Mainers reported they would have to borrow money 
or sell something to cover an unexpected expense of just $400.1 One in five Mainers say they would have no 
way to cover that cost at all. That is how we ended up with so many ﬁrst-time visitors to food banks across the 
state. 
Additionally, the nature of the pandemic created logistical challenges with ﬁnancial hurdles that food banks 
had to adapt to. Like the budget of those who rely on them, the budgets of most food banks are extremely 
tight. The Mills administration worked very hard to address these struggles on both the supply and the demand 
side, and it deserves credit for adapting on the ﬂy. We don’t know when the next crisis will arrive or what its 
nature will be. But with the frequency of disasters around the world increasing, it’s not a matter of if it will 
happen - it’s a matter of when. 
In a way, we were very lucky that the 129th Legislature was already in session when COVID-19 found its way 
into Maine. We authorized the governor to take swift action to save lives and access crucial federal funding 
and we passed legislation to protect our residents as they began to face health crises and massive 
unemployment. We need strong tools in place to meet immediate needs. The Legislature won’t always be in 
session or in a position to return to session when future crises make themselves known. LD 87 is a way to 
make sure that people across Maine can take advantage of the experience and expertise of those already best 
equipped to feed others: our network of food banks. It allows any governor to act immediately to ensure that 
those who bear the worst of a disaster will know that a plate of food for them and their children is never too far 
out of reach. 
I appreciate the committee ’s thoughtfulness on an issue I know matters a great deal to all of us, and I would be 
happy to answer any questions. Thank you. 
1 ht-tps: / /www.mecep.0rg/blog/cou1d-you-cover-an-unexpected-400expense-nearly-hal ﬂof-mainers-could-not/ 
District 50 ~ Bath
