1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May 9, 2023 at 1:00pm 
  
LD 1681 – “An Act to Encourage Residential Water Testing by Providing an 
Income Tax Deduction” 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1681, “An Act to 
Encourage Residential Water Testing by Providing an Income Tax Deduction.” 
The bill proposes, for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2023, an 
individual income tax deduction for expenses related to water testing for a 
residence occupied by the taxpayer.   
The bill as written would allow a deduction for both resident and 
nonresident Maine income tax filers.  Based on information included on the Maine 
Department of Health and Human Services, Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention website, more than half of Maine homes use a private well for drinking 
water.  Water testing for a personal residence is not currently a deductible expense 
for federal or state income tax purposes.   
This proposal adds further complexity to Maine’s individual income tax 
return.  Additionally, it is unclear whether the proposed deduction, capped at the 
Maine top marginal tax rate of 7.15%, is significant enough to incentivize an 
individual to have water tested. 
2 
 The Administration notes that water testing can be done through the Maine 
Health and Environmental Laboratory.  An alternative proposal to an income tax 
deduction could be a reduction in testing fees charged by the Laboratory.  This 
would still reduce the fiscal burden of water testing for taxpayers while removing 
the requirement that taxpayers provide documentation supporting the amount paid 
for water testing during the taxable year for purposes of claiming the deduction.  
The Administration also notes the following technical concerns: 
• The bill does not limit the deduction to a Maine residence, nor does it 
limit the deduction to the taxpayer’s primary residence. 
• The bill should be amended to clarify whether “expenses related to water 
testing” include remediation costs and/or other expenses; whether the 
deduction amount is limited and the number of years that the expenses 
can be deducted on an individual’s income tax return; and whether the 
deduction applies to water testing for both private wells and public water 
systems. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is not currently available. 
Estimated administrative costs are being reviewed to determine the extent of 
required computer programming changes and additional staff required to process 
and audit affected returns. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
