Helping communities thrive and prosper in the Greater Portland and Lakes Region
970 Baxter Blvd., Suite 201      Portland, Maine, 04103       Tel. (207) 774-9891       www.gpcog.org 
March 21, 2023
Senator Chip Curry, Senate Chair
Representative Tiffany Roberts, House Chair
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333-0100
Re:  LD 787, An Act to Create the New Maine Resident Service Coordination Program in the Department of 
Economic and Community Development
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Members of the IDEAB Committee;
Please accept this letter from the Greater Portland Council of Governments (GPCOG) in support of LD 787, An 
Act to Create the New Maine Resident Service Coordination Program in the Department of Economic and 
Community Development.
GPCOG serves 25 municipal members in Cumberland County, from Sebago Lake to Casco Bay, as well as Saco, 
Biddeford, Arundel, and Old Orchard Beach through the Portland Area Comprehensive Transportation System 
(PACTS). We deliver transportation, land use, sustainability, and economic development services to our 
members and their communities.
In recent years our member municipalities have asked GPCOG to help with an increasing number of unhoused 
people in need of shelter and services. Since 2019, when the Portland Expo was filled with people arriving in 
our region, we have supported our municipal members, especially Portland and South Portland, as they 
provided extraordinary support to a growing number of unhoused people, including many asylum seekers.
Our entire region is impacted today by the continuing arrival of people in need. Municipal resources have 
been stretched to the breaking point, and beyond. Our members need help. 
LD 787 proposes the creation of a New Maine Resident Service Coordination Program to be housed at DECD. 
The bill aligns well with proposals from many of our member communities, calling on the state to take on a 
greater role in finding housing and providing services to newly arriving people. 
LD 787’s passage would provide essential relief to many municipalities, including many in our region, who 
have done so much to support new arrivals. The bill will also greatly benefit newly arriving people directly with 
consolidated services and shelter options that local communities cannot provide on their own.
For these reasons we urge you to support passage of LD 787. Thank you.
Sincerely,
Kristina Egan
Executive Director
Greater Portland Council of Governments
