March 20, 2023
To the Honorable Members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, 
and Business:
I am providing this written testimony in support of LD 787, An Act to Create the New Maine Resident 
Service Coordination Program in the Department of Economic and Community Development. There is 
an on-going, urgent need for statewide coordination of services for the hundreds of asylum seeker 
families arriving in our Southern Maine communities.
My testimony will focus on the need to connect these new Maine residents with job opportunities. I 
have worked as a human resources and workforce development professional in Maine, Massachusetts, 
and Oregon for thirty-three (33) years. Currently, I work as Director of Human Resources for First 
Atlantic Healthcare which operates nursing homes and assisted living facilities throughout Maine. We 
have literally hundreds of jobs open at any given time, many of which could be perfect first job 
opportunities for these new residents to our state. We have New Mainers among our current workforce, 
today, and we know that the opportunities we have could be better realized if there was workforce 
development coordination and support at the state level that would help us better connect with these 
new arrivals who are looking to go to work. 
I will point to two models that you might wish to consider when developing programs to address the 
needs. And when I say “needs”, I’m not just talking about the needs of these newest residents to our 
state who need jobs; I’m also talking about the needs of many, many employers in Maine who continue 
to have job vacancies due to a lack of workers. 
The first model is the federal Job Corps program. Using this model, a large group of individuals live 
together in a campus environment, residing in dormitories where they eat together as a community in 
cafeterias – many which are staffed by culinary arts students. While learning the skills needed for a new 
job (i.e., C.N.A., welding, culinary arts, business management, etc.), residents are also provided with a 
wide array of social support services, such as English as a Second Language classes, medical and 
counseling services, life-skills training on topics such as learning how to find an apartment and budget 
for living independently. Some Job Corps Centers have on-site daycare centers. In Maine, we have two 
such places: Penobscot Job Corps Center in Bangor, and Loring Job Corps Center in Limestone, Maine. I 
have experience working for both Centers, and I can imagine that a center organized around a large 
group of asylum-seeking families could be one potential solution. Obviously, this would require an 
already existing facility, and while I wish I could point to an available location in Maine, I do not have 
personal knowledge of where this might exist. Thinking on a more practical level (since it is probably 
unlikely that a Job Corps Center could be quickly set up solely to serve Maine’s newest residents), one 
way to support a portion of those in need would be to make sure that those already in the population 
that the Job Corps Program serves are made aware of this opportunity, and that if extra support for 
them could possibly be provided through already existing programs, it might provide some much 
needed immediate relief – especially because the program does provide housing. The Job Corps 
program serves individuals ages 16 to 24 years of age. More information can be found here: 
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/jobcorps
The second model is one that I just became aware of on a recent trip to Las Vegas, where the state of 
Nevada has a Governor’s Office for New Americans. Information from their website states that the 
Office of New Americans seeks to foster opportunities for these populations (immigrants, refugees and 
aspiring Americans) to ascend the economic ladder. One of the programs run by this office is the Skilled 
Immigrant Integration Program which has a mission of helping to create and expand proven and 
promising approaches that support communities in developing immigrant and refugee workforce 
inclusion. More information can be found here: https://ona.nv.gov/
Lastly, I will add that I cannot stress enough how important it is for the state of Maine to take over and 
manage the coordination of all the services needed by this population. I fully support the good work of 
Mufalo Chitham of the Maine Immigrant Rights Coalition, and Kristen Dow, Director of Health and 
Human Services for the City of Portland as they continue their urgent calls for help and support. They 
are on the front lines of this humanitarian crisis, and I urge you to listen and respond to their calls for 
help. I can’t think of any other more pressing issue in our great state that needs more immediate 
attention than this one. Thank you for bringing this bill forward for further consideration. 
Sincerely,
Gina M. Tapp e/s
Gina M. Tapp, SPHR, SHRM-SCP
242 Spurwink Avenue
Cape Elizabeth, ME 04107
