March 20, 2023
I am writing in support of LD 787. As an active member of the broad faith community in and 
around Portland that supports and volunteers efforts to assist asylum seekers through 
organizations such as Greater Portland Family Promise, I have witnessed first-hand the deep 
need for housing assistance and eagerness for work among those seeking asylum. During each 
of my volunteer shifts since just the beginning of March, I have met professionally educated 
asylum seekers –for example, a trained French teacher and a college-educated economist, who 
are so ready and motivated to work now. LD 787 would enable a centralized resource of 
information and connections to facilitate job placement, professional guidance/training, and 
and crucial housing matches. LD 787 helps with an immediate need that helps Maine’s 
economy and wellbeing of those seeking asylum while we all work together to find longer-term 
solutions to our broken asylum and immigration systems.
Kathy Strand
Portland, ME
  
Kathy Strand
Portland
LD 787
March 20, 2023
I am writing in support of LD 787. As an active member of the broad faith community in and 
around Portland that supports and volunteers efforts to assist asylum seekers through 
organizations such as Greater Portland Family Promise, I have witnessed first-hand the deep 
need for housing assistance and eagerness for work among those seeking asylum. During 
each of my volunteer shifts since just the beginning of March, I have met professionally 
educated asylum seekers –for example, a trained French teacher and a college-educated 
economist, who are so ready and motivated to work now. LD 787 would enable a centralized 
resource of information and connections to facilitate job placement, professional 
guidance/training, and and crucial housing matches. LD 787 helps with an immediate need 
that helps Maine’s economy and wellbeing of those seeking asylum while we all work 
together to find longer-term solutions to our broken asylum and immigration systems.

