Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
Neither For Nor Against
LD 787 - An Act to Create the New Maine Resident Service Coordination Program in the Department of 
Economic and Community Development
March 21, 2023
Sen. Curry, Rep. Roberts, and distinguished members of the Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony neither for nor 
against, LD 787, An Act to Create the New Maine Resident Service Coordination Program in the 
Department of Economic and Community Development, on behalf of Maine Municipal Association which 
represents the collective interests of municipal government before the legislature. The positions of the 
Association are determined by our 70 member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), who are elected by 
the selectboards and councils in the 35 Senate districts of Maine, thus represent the widest possible 
experiences of the impact of state policy on municipal government operations. 
Many of the municipal officials who reviewed LD 787 questioned why another layer of 
bureaucracy was necessary. They are currently navigating between multiple non-profit organizations and 
housing organizations to connect “New Mainers” with services in their local communities. They agree 
this is often challenging and communicating with the multiple different entities can be problematic and 
frequently NGO communication leaves out municipal partners in their service delivery. However, they 
are not sure that adding a state layer to this issue, particularly when each community has a different set of 
resources available, will lead to better interagency communication. Municipal staff that are managing 
these service connections currently, could certainly use more investment in additional staff to support 
their work. They are unresourced at the local level.
Some communities have not been included in conversations around the movement of individuals 
from one community to another by state efforts until after the state has negotiated with a housing provider 
and the school system has been made aware of additional student enrollment. These are they types of 
unhelpful assistance that has been the experience of municipal government where state intervention or 
assistance has occurred.
Officials believe centralized information may be helpful, but only if the multiple non-profit and 
community organizations that are involved in the service delivery are held to the same standards as the 
municipalities they service with regard to consistent reporting, municipal coordination and available 
resources. Adding another reporting duty on top of these overworked municipal departments currently 
will not be helpful. To the maximum extent possible, officials ask that if the committee proceeds with LD 
787 that is also direct the department to work with municipal government and shoulder more of the tasks 
that are occurring at the local level rather than create an additional level of bureaucracy for an already 
overwhelmed municipal service.   
