 Testimony to the Committee on Innovation, Development Economic Advancement  
 and Business on LD 787  
 March 21, 2023  
 Xavier Botana, Advocacy Advisor , IntW ork 
 Honorable Chairs Curry and Roberts.  Distinguished members of the Committee On  
 Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business.  Thank you to  
 Representative Bennet for sponsoring this bill and for the opportunity to provide  
 testimony to register my strong support for passage of   LD 787   . 
 My name is Xavier Botana.   I am currently working with IntW ork, a Maine company that  
 specializes in helping employers find and hire qualified, local, diverse professionals —  
 primarily BIPOC, bilingual, & immigrant — candidates.  
 Until recently , I was the superintendent of the Portland Public Schools, the district’ s 
 largest and most diverse school district serving W e 6500 PK-12 students and over 2000  
 adult learners.  The overwhelming majority of those adult learners are recent arrivals in  
 this country as are about a third of the district’ s PK-12 students.  
 I also serve as Co-Chair of Thrive 2027, a collective action collaboration of many  
 businesses, government agencies and non profit organizations in Southern Maine under  
 the umbrella of the United W ay of Southern Maine.  
 As you might imagine from those roles, I’m more informed than the average person on  
 issues af fecting new arrivals.  Over the course of my tenure as superintendent in  
 Portland, I was always taken and dismayed by the lack of a comprehensive system of  
 support for new arrivals from other countries coming into our communities.  
 I want to be clear that there is a great deal of good work that is happening.  More than  
 any other place I’ve worked, there is a true commitment to supporting and leveraging all  
 that immigrants coming to Maine bring.  There is broad recognition that as a State we  
 need these families to thrive by fulfilling their full potential as members of our  
 communities.  
 But as an advocate, I found the patchwork of services confounding, overlapping and  
 above all missing strong leadership and coordination at the state level.  And that’ s me,  
 someone who is relatively well informed and savvy .  Imagine what that is like for  
 someone who is new to the country , speaks limited English and does not have the  
 social capital and networks to navigate the maze.  LD 787 provides you with an  
 opportunity to establish a system to solve that problem.  
 In addition to the roles that I mentioned earlier , I have a very personal connection and  
 understanding of the value of such a system.  My family came as refugees from Cuba to  
 the United States when I was three years old.  At that time, there was a concerted and  
 coordinated ef fort to provide a system of supports.  
 Then, as now , there was a strong belief that we were worth investing in and would add  
 value to our new country .  When we arrived, we were given assistance in finding  
 housing, enrolling in school, getting work.  And that support was critical in helping us to  
 enter the mainstream as a family and fulfill our potential.  That investment in us has  
 been returned many times over in our contributions as a family to the workforce, as  
 citizens and as taxpayers.  
 I see my family in so many of the families that I have had the privilege of interacting with  
 in my time in Maine.  They want to contribute.  They want to fulfill their potential.  They  
 need us to figure out how to create a clear , transparent and well articulated system of  
 support that connects them to housing, healthcare, training and eventually productive  
 employment.  
 Please take this opportunity to act to create the type of system that benefitted my family  
 and so many other refugee families over the years. If approved, I can pledge that   the 
 team at IntW ork --  who collectively bring dozens of years building successful systems  
 to support immigrant inclusion --  would be happy to share our experience and insights  
 to assist in developing reliable processes and systems to help the state of Maine  
 successfully and ef ficiently welcome and incorporate new immigrants  
 Thank you for considering my testimony . 
 Xavier E. Botana  
 15 Brookside Lane  
 Portland, ME 04103  

