Senator Tim Nangle and Representative  Holly Stover   
State and Local Government  Committee  
 
Dear Senator Nangle, Re presentative  Stover and Committee Members , 
 
The American Heart Association (AHA) is the nation’s oldest and largest voluntary organization 
dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke, whose mission is to be a relentless force for a world of 
longer, healthier lives. We are testifying in opposition  to LD 620,” An Act to Promote Free Trade by 
Preventing Municipalities from Prohibiting the Sale of Legal Goods”.  
 
Local governments have developed and implemented innovative solutions to improve their 
communities, and in some cases, that has led to wider adoption of those policies by other communities 
or even the state. We oppose p reemption because it  limits a lower f orm of government from acting  on 
an issue  and believe it hurts local democracy and can perpetuate health disparities. Every community is 
different and needs the ability to develop their own policies to reflect the unique needs and values of 
the people livi ng there. What works for one city or town is not always what works for another town/ city 
in an other area of the state. Local governments are uniquely positioned to meet the needs of the people 
in their communities. They should be able to pass laws that are  proven to promote good health, well -
being, and support the ability for people to reach their full potential. Local governments understand the 
needs and values of their community best. These leaders are people we see every day at the grocery 
store, at scho ol events, walking their dogs in our community – and they can best respond to the 
changing needs of the local area. When states block communities from passing their own laws, it can 
hurt the health and well -being of our families, friends , and neighbors . That is why local government 
exists —to pass laws that most accurately reflect the unique views, values, and needs of the people who 
live there.  
Across the United States, local governments have developed and implemented innovative solutions to 
improve their communities, and in some cases, that has led to wider adoption of those policies by other 
communities or even the state. For example, local governments were the first to pass indoor smoke -free 
laws before states began adopting them. But the ability of loca l governments to pass these kinds of laws 
is now  at risk  with bills like LD620 . When states block communities from passing their own laws, it can 
have the worst impact on communities where the need is the greatest. Policy can and should play an 
important role in promoting equity. Local governments should be able to proactively address disparities 
through smart policy solutions . 
Residents and local leaders know how to solve local problems —because they see them up close. When 
they work together to come up with a solution, the state should help them improve it —not strike it 
down because special interests told them to. We should be listening to communities, not corporations.  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony, we urge you to vote “ought not to pass” on 
LD620. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have about this testimony.  
 
Sincerely,  
Allyson Perron Drag  
American Heart Association/ Stroke Association  

