55 West Wacker Drive , Suite 1150   |  Chicago, IL 60601  |  1 -800-LUNGUSA  |  Lung.org  
  
  
 
 
 
Testimony of the American Lung Association  
In Opposition to LD 620 “An Act to Promote Free Trade by Preventing 
Municipalities from Prohibiting the Sale of Legal Goods”  
In Opposition to LD 662 “An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco 
Bans on State -licensed Tobacco Retailers” and  
In Opposition to LD 894 “An Act to Preserve Heating and Energy Choice by 
Prohibiting a Municipality from Prohibiting a Particular Energy S ystem or 
Energy Distributor”  
 
Good afternoon Chairs  Nangle and Stover and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee  on State and Local Government. My name is Lance  Boucher  and I am the Assistant 
Vice President, State Public Policy for the Ameri can Lung Association working out of our 
Augusta office.   The Lung Association is the nation’s oldest voluntary public health organization 
with a mission  to save lives by improving  lung health and preventing  lung disease. We do this 
through education, advoc acy, and research.    
The American Lung Association appreciates the opportunity to offer comments to you regarding 
three bills scheduled today for public hearing.  We are in opposition to LD 620, LD 662 and LD 
894.  All three measures will undermine local c ontrol and the ability of municipalities to enact 
measures protecting public health and the best interests of their citizens.  The Lung Association 
strongly opposes all forms of preemption language in state law that prevents local communities 
from passing ordinances stronger than state law in a particular area.  We urge you to vote Ought 
Not to Pass on all three measures.  
 
LD 620 & LD 662  
These two bills will prevent local governments from enacting measures to address the youth 
tobacco epidemic that is ramp ant in Maine and the nation.   Indeed, as our recent State of 
Tobacco Control report highlighted, 1 in 3 Maine High School students are using tobacco 
products which demonstrates the need for policies to protect youth from tobacco and nicotine.  
Absent stat ewide action, we have been pleased to support local municipalities across the state as 
they take measures to address what they are seeing first -hand in the communities by enacting 
measures to end the sale of flavored tobacco products.  
LD 620 & LD 662 are a gift to the very industry that caused the tobacco epidemic in the first 
 
 place.  The most important battle in the fight against youth tobacco happens on the front lines, at 
the point of sale in local communities.  The tobacco industry knows this, and they use tactics like 
these bills to make it more difficult for communities to protect people from their aggressive 
marketing campaigns.   
The preemption in this bill would decimate local tobacco control efforts and give the tobacco 
industry free reign to prey upon our young people.  It is imperative that we allow local 
communities to enact comprehensive fact -based policies to protect our you th and families.   The 
American Lung Association opposes all forms of preemption of stronger local tobacco control 
policies.  If these measures become law, local governments will be prohibited from engaging in 
measures to end the sale of flavored tobacco p roducts, allowing Big Tobacco to continue to fuel 
the youth tobacco epidemic and line their pockets at the expense of our children and families.   
We urge your swift and unanimous vote of Ought Not to Pass on LD 620 & LD 662.  
 
LD 894  
The American Lung Asso ciation strongly opposes this bill as it would preempt local control of 
utilities and prevent communities from choosing to protect the health of their families and the 
environment.   
The American Lung Association strongly supports measures to prevent and r educe the 
exacerbation of lung disease. We likewise oppose all forms of preemption of state and local 
authority. We are concerned that LD 894 seeks to curtail the ability of local governmental entities 
to enact policies to protect the health of its citizen s.  
For children living with asthma and allergies the use of natural gas in the home can worsen 
symptoms and result in reduced lung function in children, particularly in the absence of 
ventilation. The American Lung Association believes that protection of lung health and a sound 
U.S. energy policy are compatible goals that require an emphasis on energy conservation, energy 
efficiency, and the use of cleaner energy resources, including a transition from fossil fuels to 
clean, non -combustion alternatives.  
Preempting local public entities from adopting limits on natural gas service in the best interest of 
their communities ignores a community’s right to self -govern and protect health.  Each level of 
government brings its own strengths, with local governments be ing uniquely positioned to meet 
the needs of the people who live in their communities.  States have historically set minimum 
health, safety, workplace and social standards. Cities and counties have been able to localize, and 
when necessary, build on and st rengthen state laws to best meet the needs of their communities.  
Federal, state and local governments all should play a role in the transition to clean, renewable 
energy. Therefore, we ask you to report LD 894 as Ought Not to Pass and instead allow 
governm ent at all levels to implement policies to support healthier communities.   
 
