122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Opposition to : 
LD 620: An Act to Promote Free Trade by Preventing Municipalities from Prohibiting the Sale of Legal 
Goods  
 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government  
Room 214, Cross State Office Building  
Thursday, March 16, 202 3 
 Good afternoon, Senator Nangle , Representative Stover , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government . My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and 
executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  MPHA is the state’s o ldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent 
more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously.  MPHA is in opposition to LD 62 0: “An Act to Promote Free Trade by Preventing Municipalities from 
Prohibiting the Sale of Legal Goods .” This bill would prevent a municipality from prohibiting a business, entity 
or individual from selling any product or of fering any service that is otherwise permitted under state law and 
also prohibits a municipality from restricting the operation or licensure of a business or entity within that municipality based on the type of products or services that the business or ent ity plans to provide unless 
municipalities are provided with the authority to restrict that type of business or entity under state law.  
 This bill would erode  municipalities’ ability to enact polic ies that are more protective of public and 
environmental health than state policies  – policies  such as preventing the use of harmful pesticides on school 
property, ending the use of flame retardants that increase cancer risk, establishing smoke -free policies in 
restaurants and bars, preventing tar sands pipelines , and others. Indeed, it is often the case that local 
governments are leaders in advancing public health protective policies that are then enacted at the state and federal levels.  
 According to the American Public Health Association
 (APHA) , preem ption is a legislative tool whereby a 
“higher l evel” of government (such as the federal government or a state government ) overrides  the authority of 
a “lower level ” of government (such as  a state or municipal government) to act on a particular issue. Preemption 
is not inherently adversarial to public health, equity, or good governance . Indeed, preemption has been used for 
the betterment of public health – such as prohibiting smoking on airplanes . Generally, though, entities seeking 
preemption policies are those that benefit financially.  Indeed, a cross the country, s tate legislatures have 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  preempted local laws related to labor standar ds, civil rights, public health and safety, cannabis, alcohol, tobacco, 
technology, environmental protection, local zoning, and local taxes , among others. 
 
Restricting a lower level of governmen t’s ability to respond to its community ’s public and environmental health 
challenges perpetuates health risks and threatens health equity. Indeed , state, and l ocal governments are often at 
the forefront of public health challenges  and tend to be nimbler and more responsive  to community needs.  
 We believe this bill threatens  public and environmental health, and we respectfully request the committee vote 
LD 6 20 “Ought Not to Pass.” Thank you for considering our testimony. 
 
