, _ STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
_3l;_-ass-ii). HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE _,J “U1 AUGUSTA‘ MAINE 043330002 Ol‘l*iL‘v3I lZ(l7l1S7 —l-1-Hi 
AMY B. ARATA Cell: <20?» 333~lSl7 
ASSISTANT HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADER Fax: (Z07 l 187- l -H‘) 
E — Mail: An1}' .i~\ra\z1:' r:1lcgislaliireinziilit gm 
March 22, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 1022 
“An Act to Allow School Budget Referenda on the Same Day as Primary Elections ” 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Distinguished members of the Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs: 
My name is Amy Arata, I represent New Gloucester and part of Gray, and it's my pleasure to present LD 
1022, "An Act to Allow School Budget Referenda on the Same Day as Primary Elections" . 
This bill was suggested to me by the Maine Municipal Association, and reflects frustrations that l have 
heard from various municipalities. lt would allow, but not require, school budget validation referendum 
elections to be held at the same time as a statewide primary election. Currently, the requirement that 
referenda be held within 30 days of the regional school unit budget meetings often means that a special 
election must be held, resulting in less voter participation and added expense for municipalities. 
In summary, this bill accomplishes the following: 
~ Provides the steps necessary to ensure school budget referendum elections are held on the 
same day as the June primary election, or the second Tuesday in June when a primary election is 
not scheduled; 
o Mitigates the costs associated with providing a separate off-cycle election, removing the 
additional financial burden to the property taxpayers; 
o Reduces the impact on community volunteer pools, effectively assisting municipalities with the 
challenges associated with attracting and retaining volunteers and human capital; and, 
~ Reduces confusion among residents by streamlining elections. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Respectfully, 
Amy Arata 
State Representative
