49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
ms a lmlws Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
Assocmmn W bsite' www msmaweb com PUBLIC EDUCATION ADVOCATES e ' ' ' 
MKIIIESCIIOOISllp( ‘l'IlllBl1I ‘I€Ill5!\§SOCIll\Il)I\ 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 1022 
AN ACT TO ALLOW SCHOOL BUDGET REFERENDA ON THE 
SAME DAY AS PRIMARY ELECTIONS 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee. I am 
Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in opposition to L.D. 1022. 
L.D. l022 ought not to pass because it restricts necessary discretion best left to local ofﬁcials. 
Instead, the ﬁrst sentence of 20-A MRSA §l486, subsection 2, should simply be amended to require the 
budget validation referendum to be held within 45 days, rather than 30 days, of the budget meeting. 
By way of background, the BVR was implemented after extensive studies of the difﬁculties of school budget 
approval in many areas of the state. Sections I485, 1486, and 2307 of Title 20-A implemented a validation 
referendum as a type of “check” or safeguard on the action of the budget meeting, much the same in effect as 
a reconsideration vote. At the same time, the BVR also gave more opportunity to vote for those that could not 
attend the budget meeting or did not wish to do so. As originally enacted, in fact, the validation referendum 
was required to be held no more than three business days after the budget meeting — in other words, with 
almost no opportunity for absentee voting at all. Truly, just a “check” on the budget meeting’s deliberative 
process should that simply be at variance with the community sentiment. 
As a matter of principle, elected school boards of RSUs, MSADs, and CSDs are best positioned to decide 
their budget meeting dates and referendum dates for critical school budgets each year, and it is better that they 
have that ﬂexibility to respond to changing circumstances. Factors such as declining enrollments, higher 
property valuations, lower state subsidy, collective bargaining agreements, and new mandates mean that 
school boards must make difﬁcult and delicate decisions affecting school budgets, student education, 
employment levels, and education services. School boards need time to consider and make these tough 
decisions. Sometimes, more time is needed, which delays the budget meeting. Flexibility as to the dates and 
the period between the budget meeting and BVR is critically important should a budget problem develop fora 
particular year. 
In municipal school units, the municipal officials already select the BVR date because they sign the warrant. 
L.D. 1022 is not needed because throughout the state, local school and municipal officials have already 
navigated these BVR timing issues successfully. MSMA’s polling shows that in 80% of cases, the date of the
\ 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Dircclor MSSA Executive Direclor
BVR aligns with the June referendum date. This demonstrates that the aligmnent decision is best left local, 
. Nothing is really broken for Augusta to ﬁx by mandate that camiot be resolved by those 
local school and municipal ofﬁcials. Again, even in these cases where referendum dates align, should a budget 
problem develop in a particular year, it is better to have ﬂexibility. 
In the remaining 20% of cases where there are separate referendum dates, there are very good reasons to hold 
the BVR earlier — including (i) the need for school administrators to resolve district budgets earlier than June; 
(ii) the need for municipalities, including March town meeting towns and cities (such as Portland) to resolve 
budgets earlier; and (iii) the need where the BVR vote is “No” to have a second BVR before July 1. This 
earlier referendum may be inconvenient for the municipal clerks, but it is a matter best left in the discretion of 
local ofﬁcials to resolve by discussion. If there were not very good reasons for separate referendum dates, the 
alignment of dates would have shifted by now. “Fixing” this by locking school boards into a different 
schedule for the BVR can create a much bigger problem than managing separate referendum dates and 
absentee voting periods. 
In addition, L.D. 1022 is arbitrary and vague in an area — taxation — where courts will strictly scrutinize the 
legislation. For one thing, the term “charters ” is vague and arbitrary as applied to RSUs, MSADs, and CSDs. 
It is also arbitrary as between non-charter and charter municipal school units. Second, the bill has no workable 
mechanism to make the change. How would this change be made by the “participating municipalities ”? Who 
makes this decision and why are they more qualiﬁed than the elected school board? When does that decision 
become effective? How long is the change good for? How is it repealed or suspended when more time is 
needed for the school budget? Is unanimity of the “participating municipalities required, ” and if not, why not? 
As drafted, L.D. 1022 does not answer these questions. Litigation is likely to result — litigation calling into 
question the validity of tax assessments to support education. 
Finally, L.D. 1022 is unnecessary for this reason. Every three years the voters may do away with the BVR if 
they wish. So the answer already lies with the voters as it should. Certain municipal ofﬁcials may think that 
the BVR is too much “process” for a school budget, but we already know that when voters feel this way — that 
the BVR is unnecessary or undesirable — they well know how to eliminate the BVR as they have in many 
instances. 
At most, 20-A MRSA §l486(2) could be amended to require the BVR within 45 days of the budget meeting 
instead of 30 days. With this single change, local ﬂexibility and control would be retained, and in the great 
majority of cases local and school ofﬁcials would be able to resolve all the issues, including the time needed 
to print ballots for both elections, the absentee voting period for both elections, and the referendum date for 
both elections.
\
u
