Hillary Shende
Brunswick
LD 1560
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice
and Public Safety Committee, my name is Hillary Shende, and I am here to testify 
against LD 1560.
Yesterday I came before this committee and listed at least ten different academic 
institutions and scientific journals who have concluded that the addition of firearms to
any situation makes it more likely, not less likely,  that people in that situation will 
experience gun violence. You might FEEL safer with a pistol in your pocket, but the 
science tells us otherwise. And you should trust science over your gut because it 
works. Your car got you here this morning because of science. Your phone can call 
people thousands of miles away and search the entire internet because of science. 
Social scientists study issues using the same scientific method as those hard sciences, 
and if you see that they have conducted their studies using careful methodology, 
controlling for other possible variables, etcetera, then you can and should trust their 
conclusions. I represent the majority of Mainers when I say I want public policies that
are based on scientific facts, not feelings.
So here is the most salient scientific fact about Stand Your Ground laws: States that 
have enacted Stand Your Ground Laws have experienced a statistically significant 
increase in their homicide rates after those laws passed. I don’t think there is a person 
in this room who wants to see that happen in Maine. Our homicides rates are already 
too high, particularly when it comes to domestic violence homicide. While it’s true 
that Maine’s homicide rate is relatively low compared with most U.S. states, the state 
of Maine has a higher homicide rate than nearly every other New England state. 
Maine’s homicide rate is also higher than the homicide rates of a whopping 54 other 
countries, including Jordan, Bhutan, Palestine, Oman, Algeria,  Morocco, Turkey, 
Myanmar, and Bosnia and Herzegovina. We really have no business resting on our 
laurels and saying that Maine is a safe state. It’s not safe enough if you can shot at for 
simply driving down 295, which happened here less than a month ago. We can and 
should be doing a lot better.
So please don’t take us further in the wrong direction. We already have the right to 
use deadly self defense when it’s impossible to retreat from a threat on our lives. We 
don’t need vigilantism, which is what this bill will encourage. Please vote it down.
