From: Janet Lynch, Pownal, representing myself Date of hearing: 8 May 2023 Re:  LD 1560, “An Act to Remove the Duty of an Individual Exercising Self-defense to Safely Retreat or Abstain from Performing Certain Acts upon Demand” Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury, and Members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,  I strongly oppose LD 1560, “An Act to Remove the Duty of an Individual Exercising Self-defense to Safely Retreat or Abstain from Performing Certain Acts upon Demand” and urge the Committee to vote “OUGHT NOT TO PASS” on this bill. This bill, which removes the duty to retreat or abstain from employing deadly force, (essentially a duty to de-escalate) is a “stand your ground” bill which incentivizes persons to use deadly force as a first, rather than last resort. There is no call or need for such a bill in our state, and its supporters are likely influenced by well-funded lobbying groups from outside of the state. Maine should resist these efforts from outside of our state to enact legislation which is not needed and which makes all less Mainers safe. So-called “Stand your ground” laws are extremely dangerous and amount to a license to kill with impunity. Where they have been enacted, violent crime has gone up, as reported by such diverse and respected institutions as the American College of Surgeons, The Rand Corporation, Oxford University and the University of Pennsylvania. In any civilized society, no one should have the right to shoot another on sheer suspicion, and yet, bills such as this one essentially encourage such violence. The result is more murders and fewer murder convictions. If enacted, innocent people will inevitably die and worse, violent perpetrators who shoot first and ask questions later will use the legislation to shield themselves from responsibility. The current requirement to retreat to avoid violence is rational and by de-escalating potentially dangerous situations, saves lives. If anyone can fire on anyone who comes on his or her property for mere suspicion, no one is safe and society disintegrates. Mainers pride ourselves on our community values, yet "stand your ground" bills severely undermine these values, making knocking on a neighbor's door to deliver a piece of mail or borrow a cup of sugar a potentially death-defying act. How many of us have knocked on the wrong door or driven into the wrong driveway? No one should pay for such an innocent mistake with one's life, yet that's exactly what happened recently to an innocent young woman in New York State, and in the same week, a young man who mistakenly rang the wrong doorbell was shot at close range. I also note that removing the duty to de-escalate to avoid potentially deadly outcomes is contrary to standard police training. Although the many recent instances of police brutality from around the nation clearly show that police training to de-escalate situations is sadly insufficient and ineffective, at least most jurisdictions have some policy to encourage officers to de-escalate. Police departments around the country have very far to go in this respect, but removing a duty to de-escalate from ordinary citizens virtually ensures more violent encounters and resulting murders, sometimes tragically for as frivolous a reason as a car pulling into a wrong driveway. Page ! of !12
So-called "stand your ground" bills such as this one encourage hasty, often ill-informed decisions about who lives and who dies. In an instant, a self-appointed vigilante takes on the combined roles of police, prosecutor, judge and jury. When the killer comes before a court of law, they use "stand your ground" laws as a defence, but the victims never get their day in court, because they are dead. Because of this, in states where such laws have been enacted, murder goes up. Persons with a history of violence have used "stand your ground" bills to defend their indefensible actions. Such laws create a shield for the criminally violent, and a declaration of open season on everyone else. "Stand your ground" laws also have a chilling effect on democracy. If you’ve ever canvassed for a political candidate or public policy issue, you know that you have to knock on doors. I would guess that many members of this Committee have relied on volunteer canvassers for your campaigns. I've done this and enjoyed meeting my neighbors and hearing their thoughts on issues of importance to the community. Of course when you knock on doors you expect that not everyone will be receptive. Inevitably, some people will be dismissive and occasionally rude, but doing your civic duty by knocking on doors shouldn't be a death defying activity. If we can't do that for fear of being shot, we don't have a functioning democracy, and it is questionable whether we have a community in any meaningful sense of the word. A functioning society is based on trust, and the most basic element of that trust is a reasonable expectation not to be killed. Laws which encourage, rather than discourage, the use of deadly force without a duty to retreat or de-escalate result in more, not fewer murders. They increase levels of distrust among the citizenry, as some individuals feel empowered to shoot anyone they suspect, while everyone else looks over their shoulders in fear of being shot. This in turn can lead to a breakdown of society itself. The current “duty of a person exercising self-defense in an encounter to, if the person can do so safely, retreat from the encounter or comply with a demand to abstain from performing an act that the person is not obliged to perform before using deadly force” is prudent and reasonable, and it saves lives. In states where the duty to retreat is removed, the murder rate goes up, and innocent people die. Removing the duty to retreat is extremely dangerous and ensures that innocent people will die, and that their killers will use “stand your ground” as a defense to literally get away with murder. Maine must not remove the reasonable and prudent duty to retreat from the books. LD 1560 OUGHT NOT TO PASS.  Sincerely, Janet Lynch, Pownal 
Page ! of !22

Janet Lynch
Pownal
LD 1560
From: Janet Lynch, Pownal, representing myself
Date of hearing: 8 May 2023
Re:  LD 1560, “An Act to Remove the Duty of an Individual Exercising Self-defense 
to Safely Retreat or Abstain from Performing Certain Acts upon Demand”
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury, and Members of the Criminal Justice and
Public Safety Committee, 
I strongly oppose LD 1560, “An Act to Remove the Duty of an Individual Exercising 
Self-defense to Safely Retreat or Abstain from Performing Certain Acts upon 
Demand” and urge the Committee to vote “OUGHT NOT TO PASS” on this bill.
This bill, which removes the duty to retreat or abstain from employing deadly force, 
(essentially a duty to de-escalate) is a “stand your ground” bill which incentivizes 
persons to use deadly force as a first, rather than last resort. There is no call or need 
for such a bill in our state, and its supporters are likely influenced by well-funded 
lobbying groups from outside of the state. Maine should resist these efforts from 
outside of our state to enact legislation which is not needed and which makes all less 
Mainers safe.
So-called “Stand your ground” laws are extremely dangerous and amount to a license 
to kill with impunity. Where they have been enacted, violent crime has gone up, as 
reported by such diverse and respected institutions as the American College of 
Surgeons, The Rand Corporation, Oxford University and the University of 
Pennsylvania. In any civilized society, no one should have the right to shoot another 
on sheer suspicion, and yet, bills such as this one essentially encourage such violence.
The result is more murders and fewer murder convictions. If enacted, innocent people 
will inevitably die and worse, violent perpetrators who shoot first and ask questions 
later will use the legislation to shield themselves from responsibility. The current 
requirement to retreat to avoid violence is rational and by de-escalating potentially 
dangerous situations, saves lives.
If anyone can fire on anyone who comes on his or her property for mere suspicion, no
one is safe and society disintegrates. Mainers pride ourselves on our community 
values, yet "stand your ground" bills severely undermine these values, making 
knocking on a neighbor's door to deliver a piece of mail or borrow a cup of sugar a 
potentially death-defying act. How many of us have knocked on the wrong door or 
driven into the wrong driveway? No one should pay for such an innocent mistake 
with one's life, yet that's exactly what happened recently to an innocent young woman
in New York State, and in the same week, a young man who mistakenly rang the 
wrong doorbell was shot at close range.
I also note that removing the duty to de-escalate to avoid potentially deadly outcomes 
is contrary to standard police training. Although the many recent instances of police 
brutality from around the nation clearly show that police training to de-escalate 
situations is sadly insufficient and ineffective, at least most jurisdictions have some 
policy to encourage officers to de-escalate. Police departments around the country 
have very far to go in this respect, but removing a duty to de-escalate from ordinary 
citizens virtually ensures more violent encounters and resulting murders, sometimes 
tragically for as frivolous a reason as a car pulling into a wrong driveway.
So-called "stand your ground" bills such as this one encourage hasty, often 
ill-informed decisions about who lives and who dies. In an instant, a self-appointed 
vigilante takes on the combined roles of police, prosecutor, judge and jury. When the 
killer comes before a court of law, they use "stand your ground" laws as a defence, 
but the victims never get their day in court, because they are dead. Because of this, in 
states where such laws have been enacted, murder goes up. Persons with a history of 
violence have used "stand your ground" bills to defend their indefensible actions. 
Such laws create a shield for the criminally violent, and a declaration of open season 
on everyone else.
"Stand your ground" laws also have a chilling effect on democracy. If you’ve ever 
canvassed for a political candidate or public policy issue, you know that you have to 
knock on doors. I would guess that many members of this Committee have relied on 
volunteer canvassers for your campaigns. I've done this and enjoyed meeting my 
neighbors and hearing their thoughts on issues of importance to the community. Of 
course when you knock on doors you expect that not everyone will be receptive. 
Inevitably, some people will be dismissive and occasionally rude, but doing your 
civic duty by knocking on doors shouldn't be a death defying activity. If we can't do 
that for fear of being shot, we don't have a functioning democracy, and it is 
questionable whether we have a community in any meaningful sense of the word.
A functioning society is based on trust, and the most basic element of that trust is a 
reasonable expectation not to be killed. Laws which encourage, rather than 
discourage, the use of deadly force without a duty to retreat or de-escalate result in 
more, not fewer murders. They increase levels of distrust among the citizenry, as 
some individuals feel empowered to shoot anyone they suspect, while everyone else 
looks over their shoulders in fear of being shot. This in turn can lead to a breakdown 
of society itself.
The current “duty of a person exercising self-defense in an encounter to, if the person 
can do so safely, retreat from the encounter or comply with a demand to abstain from 
performing an act that the person is not obliged to perform before using deadly force” 
is prudent and reasonable, and it saves lives. In states where the duty to retreat is 
removed, the murder rate goes up, and innocent people die. Removing the duty to 
retreat is extremely dangerous and ensures that innocent people will die, and that their
killers will use “stand your ground” as a defense to literally get away with murder. 
Maine must not remove the reasonable and prudent duty to retreat from the books. LD
1560 OUGHT NOT TO PASS.
Sincerely,
Janet Lynch, Pownal

