 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1560 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1560, An Act to Remove the Du ty of an I ndividual Exercising Self -defense  to Safely 
Retreat or Abstain from Performing Certain Acts upon Demand  
 
DA: May 9, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1560.    
 
 Under current Maine law, deadly force is  justified (legal) in certain situations to defend 
oneself  or others .  These include protecting oneself or another from the imminent use of unlawful 
deadly force, kidnapping, robbery, or gro ss sexual assault  involving compulsion , or protecting 
oneself or another from b odily injury about to be inflicted by a person who has entered or 
surreptitiously rem ained in a dwelling without the right to do so.   There is an objecti ve standard 
built into the law, as it is premised on a person ’s “reasonable belief s” about the ot her person ’s 
actions and the necessity of using deadly  force.  17-A M.R.S. § 108(2) (A),(B).    (Deadly force is 
also justified in certain cir cumstances in defense of premises.   See 17 -A M.R.S. § 104.  Section 104  
would not be amended by LD 1560. ) 
 However, a s relevant to this bill, and u nder current  law, a person is not justifi ed in using  
deadly force if that person (or the third party being protected) can, with complete safety, retreat 
from an encounter , or refrain from doing some act that he/she is  not required to do.  17-A M.R.S.    
§ 108(2)(C) (3)(a),(c).  This duty to retreat is not required if a person is in one’s own home and is 
not the initial aggressor.  17-A M.R.S. § 108(2)(C) (3)(a).  LD 1560  would eliminate  the requirement 
that a person must  retreat if it is safe t o do so , and would  eliminate  the obligation  to refrain from 
doing something that a person  is not legally obligated to do .  People  would  thus be authorized to use 
deadly force  to defend  themselves or others  instead of retreating s afely or refraining from doing 
some act .    
 Maine ’s current s elf-defen se law repres ents a long-standing policy embraced by the Maine 
Legislature that  it is better for a person to safely retreat  or refrain from doing some other act when 
possible  rather than to use deadly force against another human being .   When a p erson can safely 
retreat, the rationale for using deadly force —that a person must kill to avoid  being killed or 
seriousl y injured ---is not present.    CLAC  members believe  that the current duty to retreat  or refrain 
is limited  and reflects an  appropri ate balance , and that altering it as proposed would make Maine rs 
less safe.   
   
 
 
   
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
