Gary McGrane
Jay
LD 1773
May 9, 2023 
RE: L.D. 1773
Good afternoon Sen. Rafferty, Rep. Brennan and other distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. My name is Gary and I live in Jay.
As the Immediate Past President of the Maine Education Association - Retired I am 
here representing 5,436 retired Maine educators. I am here today to testify in favor of 
L.D. 1773 An Act to Increase the State’s Share of the Cost of Health Insurance for 
retired teachers. I have testified on other pieces of legislation that would positively 
impact our retired educators. L.D. 70 proposed to increase the Maine Public 
Employees Retirement System This Cost of living Adjustment received unanimous 
support from the Labor and Housing Committee, however the cost seems 
insurmountable under the present biannual budget. Yet we try and try again to have 
all Maine Public Employees Retirement System to be made whole by increasing their 
buying power to match inflationary cost so our members do not fall behind 
financially.
I realize that this issue is not on your agenda for your consideration today, but I 
wanted to let you know that your committee can make a difference in an educator’s 
cost of living. Passage of this legislation will help to alleviate some of the burden of 
having to choose between food, rent, doctor’s visits or life-saving prescriptions. Less 
money spent on health insurance cost will go a long way in alleviating some of these 
inflationary expenses. This will not fulfill the promise made to our fellow retirees by 
the State of Maine to take care of all their health care needs upon retirement, but it 
would help. Once our educators have devoted 20, 25, or 30 years of dedicated service 
their expectation was that if they took less in salaries while teaching the government 
would take care of them after retirement. That has not happened. To make matters 
worse, many of our retirees’ benefits have been reduced because of federal 
legislation. Particularly, the Windfall Elimination    Protection and the Government 
Pension Offset. Repeal of this legislation can help our members pay for their medical 
coverage. That has not happened. As much as they would like to retire in dignity and 
with respect they cannot do so financially, so they must find other suitable 
employment to supplement their meager retirement benefits. Those benefits have not 
kept up with inflation. Their retirement income is being eroded by inflation. You can 
help by passing LD 1773.
It will not solve the problem, but it would put a finger in the dike until a more final 
solution is rendered to make our members whole.
Thank you for a positive consideration in this matter.
Gary McGrane
Immediate Past President Maine Education Association - Retired

