QM
" 
~:‘ ,- ,../=f="'R'~ 4} 
ll 
K- '>if:,_:..-.»2:! ‘=.;» 
Eric Brakey 131*‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
A 
Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 1872, An Act to Restore Balanced Emergency Powers 
Before the State and Local Government Committee 
Friday, May 12, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on State and Local Government, I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of 
Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Thank you for your attention and 
consideration today as l present L.D. 1872, An Act to Restore Balanced Emergency 
Powers. 
What happened in the recent state of emergency was nothing new. It is a tale as old as 
Western civilization. 
ln the Roman Republic, the model our government is based upon, the Senate would in 
times of perceived emergency, imbue the full authority of the state into one person with 
the unified power to make and enforce the law. The title of office given to the individual 
was the “dictator. ” The periods of time Rome was ruled by someone in this fashion were 
referred to as “dictatorships." 
For the republic, this was always a dangerous prospect. The dictator could literally 
command the state to do anything by mandate with no checks or balances. Power like 
that was prone to abuse. Some sought that power by creating their own emergencies. 
Once the emergency powers of dictatorship were granted, it was hard to ensure the 
dictator would relinquish that power. The republic itself ended when one dictator, Julius 
Caesar, extended his emergency powers multiple times, finally establishing himself as 
dictator for life. 
That word, “dictatorship, ” carries many connotations today. lt is a word that justifiably 
makes us uncomfortable, but I believe it is important to acknowledge that we recently 
lived under one. The Romans at least would have referred to the period from March 
2020 to June 2021 as the “Dictatorship of Mills.” And while l appreciate that she did
eventually relinquish her emergency powers, what has happened before will happen 
again. 
When the Legislature voted to grant these emergency powers with no limits on scope or 
time, we opened the door to dictatorship. A precedent was established. Future 
governors will take advantage of it. A bell, once rung, cannot be unrung. 
That is why now is the time, with the state of emergency passed but fresh in our 
memories, for prudent consideration on emergency power reform to safeguard the 
checks and balances of our constitutional system. 
Today, l am presenting a proposed framework for such reform. l believe it is essentially 
identical to legislation also presented today by Representative White. l also want to 
acknowledge the proposal from Representative Lee, which has major differences, but is 
a welcomed addition to the conversation on reform. 
L.D. 1872 seeks to bring a more balanced approach to how we deal with states of 
emergency by ensuring checks and balances remain within the three branches of our 
government. 
First, the legislation would put an end to indeﬁnite grants of emergency powers, 
establishing a 30 day limit that is subject to renewal by the Legislature. Like all matters 
dealing with emergencies, renewals of emergency powers would require support from 
tvvo-thirds of both legislative chambers. 
Second, the legislation requires that any exercises of emergency power that curtail the 
rights of the people must be narrowly tailored to serve a public health or safety purpose. 
Further, it would ensure that only the Governor can issue orders that directly curtail 
constitutional rights (those rights specifically named in the U.S. Constitution or the 
Maine Constitution). No unelected body, unaccountable to the ballot box, should be able 
to use the cover of emergency to curtail our constitutional rights. 
Third, with respect to the Judicial branch, a court of the State would have the ability to 
hear a case challenging the legality of an emergency order and shall do so 
expeditiously. - 1~ 
When it comes to a state of emergency, there is a fine balance to strike between 
preserving liberty and protecting health and safety. This legislation aims to achieve that 
balance by retaining the checks and balances of our constitutional system. 
With history as our teacher, we should jealously guard our liberties against the 
temptations of power. Thank you for your time and consideration. I will gladly take 
questions.
