1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Opposition to L.D. 1247,  
Resolve, to Study Training in Racial Issues, Racial Justice and Social Issues 
at the Maine Criminal Justice Academy and Study Additional Requirements 
for Law Enforcement Officers and Candidates 
April 20, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
distinguished Committee on Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey. I am the 
Chief of the Cumberland Police Department, and President of the Maine Chiefs 
of Police Association. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine Chiefs 
of Police Association in opposition to LD 1247.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary, 
This  bill  establishes  the  17-member  Law  Enforcement  Training  and  
Qualifications Study Committee to review law enforcement officer training.  
The committee is authorized to  meet  6  times  and  is  required  to  report  
its  recommendations  for  training  for  law enforcement  officers  in  racial  
issues,  racial  justice  and  social  issues  and  for  additional requirements 
for law enforcement officers and candidates by January 3, 2024.  The Joint 
Standing Committee  on  Criminal  Justice  and  Public  Safety  is  authorized  
to  submit legislation relating to the report to the Second Regular Session of 
the 131st Legislature.  
The Maine Chiefs oppose LD 1247 because it is duplicative of the work that is 
already done by the Board of Trustees for the Academy. Title 25, section 2802 of 
the Maine Revised Statutes already establishes a Board of Trustees which is 
empowered to establish training and certification standards for law enforcement 
officers and corrections officers, among other duties and responsibilities. The make 
up of the Board is established by statute, and includes ex officio members as well 
as members appointed by the Governor, including a county sheriff, chief of a 
municipal department, 2 officers of municipal departments who are not chiefs, an 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 educator, a prosecutor, a federal law enforcement representative, 3 citizen 
representatives, a municipal official such as a town or city manager, and a member 
recommended to the Governor by the Wabanaki tribal governments. Gubernatorial 
appointments are for 3 years, ensuring fair and democratic representation. 
The proposed legislation would effectively create a committee to do work that the 
Board of Trustees is already doing. The Board’s meetings are public meetings, and 
any member of the public are able and welcome to approach the Board with ideas 
and concerns regarding training topics at any time.  
The Board of Trustees is responsible for the establishment of mandatory training 
topics for every law enforcement officer in the state, and in fact, in the past few 
years has required that officers receive training in the Law Enforcement Approach 
to Substance Abuse Disorders, Implicit Bias, De-escalation, and Response to 
Mental Health Calls. Curricula for these classes are developed with input from 
subject matter experts. The work which the bill seeks to ensure is already 
happening. 
Additionally, the Maine Criminal Justice Academy is currently working with an 
outside vendor to complete a job and task analysis and to create a strategic plan for 
the Academy’s future operation. This process should be able to be completed prior 
to any legislatively mandated review or study process. 
The Maine Chiefs of Police Association works closely with the Department of 
Public Safety and specifically with the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to ensure 
that training offered by the Academy is high-quality, topical and ensures that our 
officers are able to engage in best-practice policing. Another oversight organization 
is duplicative and unnecessary. 
For these reasons, we would ask you to oppose LD 1247 and vote ought not to 
pass on this bill. On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want 
to thank the committee members for your work on this Committee.  
