 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  
 
 
April 20, 2023   
 
Senator Pinny H. Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety  
State House, Room 436  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: L.D. 1247, Resolve, to Study Training in Racial Issues, Racial Justice and  
Social Issues at the Maine Criminal Justice Academy and Study  
Additional Requirements for Law Enforcement Officers and  
Candidates  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety:  
 
My name is Mary Bonauto and I am the Senior Director of Civil Rights at GLBTQ Legal 
Advocates & Defenders (GLAD), a litigation and policy organization addressing issues affecting 
the LGBTQ people across communities in N ew England and nationally. Together with 
EqualityMaine, MaineTransNet, and OUT Maine , we support this important Resolve.  
 
Police and law enforcement are part of our communities.  In addition to law enforcement 
work on roads and highways and responding to c oncerns about crime, police and law 
enforcement are on our streets, in many schools, and are often the first to respond to a person in 
mental health crisis, to conduct a welfare check, and to address complaints, including about 
trespassing, noise, unhoused  people , and people struggling with behavioral health issues.  
 
Given the extent of contact between law enforcement and communities (including 
through community policing practices), those engagements are more likely to be safe  and 
productive when p olice share some deeper understanding of the communities they serve.  To that 
end, the Academy has brought in NAMI Maine, for example, to teach about people with 
developmental disabilities, including those diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, which for 
some may sometimes involve behaviors concerning to others  and which trigger a call to law 
enforcement.   
 
LD 1247 asks for a rigorous study of how our State trains its law enforcement officers 
with respect to credentialing of board and staff, the c urriculum and the challenges of reliance of 
volunteers to provide education and training,  analysis of the differences between policing in 
rural and urban areas, and any necessary adjustments, recruiting strategies to bring diverse 
communities into law enf orcement, and to “compile recommendations for improving the training 
of law enforcement officers through community and education partnerships, including by 
addressing statewide recruitment needs, racial justice and social issues, mental health and 
substanc e use disorder issues, and an identified needs for additional requirements for law 
enforcement officers and candidates.”  LD 1247, sec. 6 (7).   
2 
 
 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  This Resolve takes a holistic view of Academy curriculum, training and resources with 
the goal of seeking analy sis and recommendations to strengthen this foundational part of law 
enforcement.  That is something that should appeal broadly.  Both law enforcement and 
communities will benefit from this effort.  
 
With respect to racial justice and racial and social issu es, these, too, are and should be 
treated as a core aspect of police training. As is true for any person, more information about the 
communities and experiences of people’s lives, especially when they are experienced as different 
from us or are a community  with which we have had little experience, changes the quality of 
interactions and reduces misunderstandings. As we all know, when misunderstanding results 
from assumptions about people or their behavior because of race, or mental health issues, the 
stakes  are high, and may be a matter of life and death.  While this is more than enough reason for 
the Resolve to pass, as the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering & Medicine explained in 
a recent report, Reducing Racial Inequality in Crime and Justice:  Sc ience, Practice and Policy 
(2022), there are also stark facts which compel interrogation, analysis, and action in Maine and 
nationally.  As the Report asserted on its first page:  
 
A vast body of research has documented large racial disparities at each stat e of the 
criminal justice process.  Black Americans, Hispanics, and Native American have all 
been found to experience relatively high rates of arrest, pretrial detention, incarceration, 
and community supervision compared to White Americans.” 1 
 
This Resol ve is a chance to allow the Academy to better ful fill its traini ng and other functions 
and to examine and engage in recommenations for addressing racial disparities at each stage of 
the criminal justice process. Please vote ought to pass on this bill.  
 
Sincerely,  
Mary Bonauto, Sr. Director Civil Rights GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders  
 
On behalf of GLAD  
EqualityMaine  
MaineTransNet  
OUT Maine  
                       
 
 
1  National Academies Press, Reducing Racial Inequality in Crime and Justice:  Science, 
Practice and Policy  (2022), at 1 -1, available for download at 
http://nap.nationalacademies.org/26705   Chapter 8 of the same Report addresses reforms to 
reduce racial i nequities.    
   
