 
  
 
 
 
LD 1247, Resolve, to Study Training in Racial Issues, Racial Justice and Social Issues at the Maine 
Criminal Justice Academy and Study Additional Requirements for Law Enforcement Officers 
and Candidates 
 
April 20, 2023 
 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in qualified support of LD 1247. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
We support the intent of LD 1247.  LD 1247 establishes a 17-member Law Enforcement Training and 
Qualifications Study Committee to review law enforcement officer training. The Committee is authorized to 
meet six times, and is required to report its recommendations for training for law enforcement officers and 
candidates in racial justice and social issues to the Legislature by January 3, 2024. The goal of LD 1247 is very 
important – ensuring that law enforcement officials, including those at the county level, have adequate training 
on issues such as racial equity, and that candidates have adequate access to opportunities for obtaining 
credentials, continuing education, and sources for financial aid. 
 
Recommended amendment: Include a representative of county commissioners on the Committee.  This 
bill currently includes a representative of a statewide association of municipalities, appointed by the President of 
the Senate, partly in recognition of the fact that municipalities employ local police officers trained by the Maine 
Criminal Justice Academy. County commissioners occupy a position similar to municipal officials in that 
counties, through the county sheriff, hire law enforcement officers trained by MCJA. Having a county 
representative serve on this Committee would bring to the Committee the important perspective of county 
policymaking and governance, similar to the municipal governance perspective brought by the representative of 
a statewide association of municipalities on the Committee. 
 
If the Legislature does decide to move forward with the formation of such Committee, we would ask that the 
MCCA be provided a representative to serve on the Committee to ensure that the perspective of county 
government is reflected in this important discussion.  
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1247 
April 20, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
 
 
 
