O 
Mcxineis 
Public
. 
_ Universities 
UNIVERSITY OF MAINE SYSTEM 
Testimony from the University of Maine System 
Presented by UMS Board of Trustees Chair Trish Riley 
In Opposition to LD 897, An Act Regarding the University of Maine System Hiring Practices 
March 15, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs: I am Trish Riley, chair of the Universityof Maine System 
Board of Trustees (BOT), here today in opposition to LD 897, An Act Regarding the University of 
Maine System Hiring Practices. 
We have had the opportunity to meet with Representative Collings and appreciated our very 
productive conversation. We share his interest in ensuring university employment searches are 
transparent in seeking highly qualified, diverse candidates and stakeholder input, while assuring the 
opportunity — with clear, consistent criteria - to accommodate the sensitive nature of some searches 
Last July, in consultation with the Chancellor and senior System staff, I asked the Board's Human 
Resources and Labor Relations (HR/LR) Committee to work with the UMS Human Resources to 
review our personnel policies - including those pertaining to hiring and promotion — and assure 
they adequately provide fair, transparent, and effective processes that include accountability and 
oversight. A first draft of that analysis has been completed and just reviewed by our Board HR/LR 
Committee, and System staff are now incorporating the revisions we discussed. l expect a final 
report by our May full BOT meeting, with any recommendations for policy revisions at the Board 
level to follow. We believe this Board oversight and the System's responsibilities as an Equal 
Opportunity Employer as well as to our collective bargaining agreements negotiated with six labor 
units,>which often detail the process for appointment andreappointment, provide the oversight 
sought in Section 3 of LD 897.' 
In this personnel policy review, we are striving to advance consistency across different types of 
positions within and between the System office and at each university but we also recognize the 
need for some flexibility, particularly given the profile of our public universities and workforce 
challenges today's demographics and economy pose to all employers. LD 897 would belie our 
ability to meet those challenges by imposing a one size fits all approach. 
Let me provide a couple of examples. While we value consistency, applying the same standards to 
all positions within the university, as required in Section 2 of this bill, could increase the time and 
cost of searches. Today we may conduct additional reference checks for employees working in 
campus childcare centers or those handling sensitive financial records. If LD 897 were law, we 
could forgo those additional checks, which would be unwise, or apply them to all applicants, which 
would be unnecessary. 
Similarly, the use of non-disclosure agreements ‘ may, from time to time, be important to assure that 
potential applicants feel free to apply without fear of public disclosure that could jeopardize their 
current employment. What if a high-level position became available in the Chancellor's Office and 
two provosts or two presidents applied from different UMS universities? ln our review with the HR 
team, we are explicit in our expectation that policy is clear and transparent. How such a waiver 
from rules can be approved and by whom needs to be crystal clear, as does the process to assure 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent- University of 
Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque Isle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
a comprehensive review by key stakeholders, particularly in searches for administrative positions, 
like provosts and presidents. 
The Legislature's Education and Cultural Affairs Committee reviews every appointee to the Board 
of Trustees and makes a judgement on our ability to perform the tasks you entrusted to us in 
statute, before determining whether or not to advance us for full Senate conﬁrmation. Directly, and 
through the leaders we in-turn appoint, you vest in us the authority to regularly review and set UMS 
policy and programs. 
We take those responsibilities seriously. Our Board of Trustees and UMS staff are at work toy 
review, update and clarifyour personnel policies — an effort that we think addresses the intent of 
LD 897. We will certainly share a copy of that review with you when it is completed, and if we 
believe there is a need for any legislative action, will let you know. 
We know UMS is only as strong and capable as its employees and efforts underway will assure our 
personnel policies are up to the task to recruit and retain the faculty, staff and administrators our 
students and our state deserve. 
We value this Committee ’s commitment to UMS. I especially want to thank you for your strong 
recommendations earlier this month to your colleagues on the Appropriations Committee for 
increased investment in UMS education and research. 
I'd be pleased to answer any questions you may have. 
Page 2 of2
