1 
  
MAINE  CHIEFS  OF POLICE   
ASSOCIATION  
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
  Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com  
Statement of Support to L.D. 1362,  
An Act to Ensure the Rights of Survivors of Sexual Assault 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the distinguished 
Committee on Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey. I am the Chief of the 
Cumberland Police Department, and President of the Maine Chiefs of Police 
Association. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police 
Association in support of the amendment to LD 1362.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
 
This bill specifies that a sexual assault survivor has the right to consult with 
a sexual assault counselor during any physical examination and has the right 
to have a sexual assault counselor or support person of the survivor’s 
choosing present during any interview by a law enforcement officer, 
prosecutor or defense attorney. A survivor retains this right even if the 
survivor has waived the right in a previous examination or interview. The 
bill also prohibits evidence gathered during a sexual assault forensic 
examination from being used to prosecute a survivor for any Class D or 
Class E crime or for any crime under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 17-
A, chapter 45. Evidence gathered during a sexual assault forensic 
examination may also not be used as a basis to search for further evidence 
of any unrelated Class D or Class E crime or for any crime under Title 17-
A, chapter 45 that may have been committed by the survivor.  
 
The Maine Chiefs have been working with the Maine Coalition Against Sexual 
Assault (MECASA), Maine Prosecutor’s Association, and Department of Public 
Safety to draft an amendment for the Representative Gramlich that would ensure 
OFFICERS
President
Chief Charles Rumsey
Cumberland Police Dept.
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth Police Dept.
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn Police Dept.
Sergeant-at-Arms
Chief Scott Stewart 
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer
Chief John Kilbride
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary
Chief Michael Tracy
Oakland Police Dept.
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 
 all of our support of this necessary protection for survivors. Because of that work, 
I can say that on behalf of the Maine Chiefs that we support LD 1362 as amended.  
 
We appreciate the collaborative approach that everyone took to drafting this 
amendment and to listening to our concerns. For example, we wanted to be sure 
that the language immunizing individuals from prosecution from certain crimes 
specifically included survivors only and could not be misconstrued to give 
immunity to a suspect. Also, we encouraged the inclusion of liquor law violations, 
misdemeanor bail and probation violations, and operating under the influence in 
the list of excluded offenses. We believe that these changes make the bill stronger 
and remove potential perceived obstacles a survivor might have to reporting a 
sexual assault and cooperating with law enforcement. 
 
The amendment does several things to make sure that the intent of the bill, to protect 
the survivors of sexual assault, is honored. These individuals have experienced 
unimaginable harm and so they deserve these statutory changes to make sure that 
they feel more protected.  
We want to thank the sponsor for bringing forward this bill and being 
amendable to the amendments. And we would ask you to support the 
amendment to LD 1362 and vote ought to pass as amended on this bill to 
support survivors of sexual assault. On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police 
Association, we want to thank the committee members for your work on this 
Committee.  
 
