Sabrina Sivert 
 
Thank you Chairman and committee members for your time today. I am here to testify on behalf 
of LD 1362. 
 
It’s been eight years since I came forward about my sexual assault but I can still remember 
every detail like it was yesterday. I was 18 and was scared, hurt, confused, and feeling so 
alone. I was threatened into silence for almost a year. My abuser would threaten my future, my 
family, and the worst of all my life. He would repeatedly tell me no one would believe me and if I 
came forward I would always be the girl who was raped. He used his power of authority to 
sexually, physically, verbally, mentally, and emotionally abuse me over and over again. He was 
my instructor in the fire science program I was in during high school and also a member of the 
local fire department. I finally worked up the courage to speak up.  
 
I thought my life would go back to the way it was before but it never did and never will. I 
remember giving my first statement sitting in a room at my high school at a table filled with 
strangers, my abuser’s coworkers, school counselors, the school resource officer, and the 
school board. I had all eyes on me as I shared the details of the worst days of my life. I was 
feeling alone, embarrassed, scared, and doubted. These were all people who were supposed to 
protect me but failed me and then questioned the abuse I went through. School is supposed to 
be a safe environment but it was my worst nightmare. This was the first of many statements I 
would give and write. I would then go on to give my statement to the local police department, 
then the county took the case and I had to give it again to those officers, then state, and then 
throughout court.  
 
It was a small town and the news got out fast. For months I was bullied, laughed at, doubted, 
pulled out of classes, told I was a threat, and dragged all over for court dates and appointments. 
I began to realize why victims never come forward. My whole world was crashing down and I 
was more alone than ever. I hated who I was and this life I was living.  
 
Through all this time I was never offered a sexual assault counselor. I was constantly giving my 
statement to people who worked alongside him, people who wore a similar uniform as him, 
people who viewed my abuser as a brother. So many of these things triggered me. The more I 
gave it the more I felt alone. I was never asked if I was okay, never asked what I needed, never 
able to do things on my time, and was in a constant state of fear. I was living in a nightmare. I 
felt like I was the one being punished for so long.  
 
If I would’ve been offered just one person who was on my side, one person who cared, one 
person who didn’t work with or know my abuser, one person to ask if I was okay, one person 
who would have listened and not judged or doubted me, one person I could’ve gone to when I 
felt the most alone, one person who could’ve just been there when my world was crashing 
down. I think my experience coming forward about my sexual assault would’ve been less 
traumatic and I would’ve felt less alone. I’ll never forget the hurtful words, jokes, and questions I 
was asked.  
 
So today I speak in front of you all sharing my story and fighting for the right to have a sexual 
assault counselor present so a victim coming forward doesn’t endure the pain and loneliness 
that I did. By passing LD 1362 it will allow a survivor the right to a sexual assault counselor and 
every victim of sexual assault deserves to have that right.  
   
 
 
 
 
