v gh. 
.,
U Ira.-"~.=1i 
i 
*1"/¥%. ’:_i-@' 
JanetT Mills 
Gover or 
Michael J. Sauschuck 
Commissioner STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
MAINE STATE POLICE 45 Commerce Drive - Suite1 
Augusta, Maine 04333 COL. Bill G. Ross 
Chief 
LTC. Brian P. Scott 
Deputy Chief 
. 
Testimony of Major Scott A. Gosselin 
Maine State Police 
Sl.lIEP_QRLLD_13_62 
An Act to Ensure the Rights of Survivors of Sexual Assault 
Sponsored by Representative Gramlich 
Joint Standing Committee on judiciary 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and other distinguished members of the joint standing committee 
on Judiciary. My name is Major Scott Gosselin and I am here representing the Maine State Police and the 
Department of Public Safety and to testify in Support of LD 1362 as amended. 
This bill seeks to protect, preserve, and codify certain rights of survivors of Sexual Assault. In my career, I 
have had the responsibility of investigating these tragic cases as a detective and then years later assigning 
these cases for investigation as a supervisor. I have also had the duty of trying to coordinate testing on 
sexual assault kits ﬁrst as a sergeant at the Crime Lab and then later as the Director of the Crime Lab. 
These are cases that effect people and families for generations and are the scourge of society. In most cases, 
sexual assault is about power and control. This bill as amended seeks to keep the survivor in control of how 
they report their assault and helps them retain that control as they potentially move through the forensic 
evidence collection process. 
Speciﬁcally, this bill as amended speciﬁes that a sexual assault survivor has the right to consult witha 
sexual assault counselor during any physical examination and has the right to have a sexual assault 
cotmselor present during any interview by a law enforcement officer, prosecutor or defense attorney. In my 
experience, having this kind of support person available during the interview adds a layer of security to both 
the survivor and the individual conducting the interview. These are difficult conversations about very 
private and offensive behavior. The conversation is often uncomfortable by its very natme and addinga 
trained sexual assault COLlI'lS €101‘ as a support for the survivor would help to recognize when it was time to 
take a break or to explain procedural expectations and processes. 
My only concern with this part of the bill was related to a possible delay in having a cotmselor available ina 
timely manner. Many of these investigations can be time sensitive and it would be important for the ofﬁcer 
to explain to the survivor the pros and cons of waiting for the counselor if it was a time sensitive case and 
there was expected to be an extended delay. I do not have any doubt that a trained investigator would be 
able to explain those pros and cons of waiting and allowing the survivor to retain that control and make that 
decision to wait or to move ahead with the interview without delay. 
INTEGRITY FAIRNESS COMPASSION EXCELLENCE
p 1;, 
k STATE or MAINE 
Department of Public Safety [4-." ~.»I~‘* 
MAINE STATE POLICE Jag:',:;:i[:l|s 45 Commerce Drive - Suite 1 COL‘ R°ss 
Augusta, Maine 04333 ‘° 
Michael J. Sauschuck L']‘C_ Brian P_ Scott 
Commissioner Deputy chief 
This bill as amended also prohibits evidence gathered during a sexual assault forensic examination from 
being used to prosecute a survivor for certain criminal behavior related to drug offenses, alcohol offenses, 
OU1, pre-conviction/post- conviction bail, or violation of conditions of release. The goal here is to eliminate 
the fear of prosecution for any of those offenses that might keep a survivor from moving forward and 
reporting the more egregious crime of sexual assault and getting to a hospital to get a kit completed ina 
timely manner. y 
During our review of this bill as it was originally written, we had some concerns and worked with Chief 
Rumsey of the Maine Chiefs of Police as well as representatives from IVLECASA to ameliorate our issues and 
collaborate on the draft amendment you see before you today. We also expect to be present during work 
session to assist working through any additional concern there might be for language changes as necessary. 
It is for these reasons that we support LD 1362. 
INTEGRITY FAIRNESS COMPASSION EXCELLENCE
