TESTIMONY OF 
CHASE HEWITT, STAFF ATTORNEY FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: April 1], 2023 
LD 1225 — “An Act to Protect Housing by Increasing the Property Tax Fairness 
Credit”p 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Chase Hewitt, Staff Attorney for Tax 
Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am testifying 
at the request of the Administration in Support of LD 1225, “An Act to Protect 
Housing by Increasing the Properly Tax Fairness Credit.” 
For tax years beginning on or after January l, 2023, the bill proposes to 
increase the maximum refundable property tax fairness credit (“PTFC”) to $1,500 
for resident individuals under 65 years of age and to $2,000 for resident individuals 
65 years of age and older. The credit cap amounts are doubled for veterans who 
are 100% permanently and totally disabled. 
The PTFC has been revised several times since it was enacted in 2013. For 
tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2022, the refundable PTF C may be 
claimed by Maine residents who owned or rented a home in Maine during any part 
of the tax year, lived in that home during the year as a primary residence, and paid 
property tax on the residence in Maine during the tax year in an amount greater 
than 4% (or paid rent greater than 26.67%) of their total income. The current 
credit cap amount is $1,000, $1,500 if 65 years of age or older, and doubled for 
veterans who are 100% permanently and totally disabled. Note that the PTFC is an 
income tax credit that uses property tax as a basis for calculation.
1
The Administration supports this proposal as part of a broader solution to 
address the ﬁscal and design problems of the Property Tax Stabilization Program 
(LD 290) enacted in the 130"‘ session.
0 
On a technical drafting point, the Administration notes that Section 2 of the 
bill should be amended to strike the reference to “subsection 2-D” in 36 M.R.S.§ 
5219-KK, sub-§2-E as the additional credit for qualiﬁed veterans only applies to 
tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2023, and the amended subsection 2-D 
would only apply to 2022. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is a revenue loss of approximately 
$8 million per year. _ 
The estimated administrative costs are nominal and can be absorbed within 
current budgetary allotments. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS Will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
