Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Support  
LD 1225: An Act to Protect Housing by Increasing the Property Tax Fairness Credit   
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Taxation Committee  
April  11, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Taxation Committee,  
 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him)  and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state an d faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.  
 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in support  of LD 1225, An Act to Protect Housing by 
Increasing the Property Tax Fairness Credit.   
 
I have alrea dy testified before this Committee about the reliance on property taxes to support local 
public schools, and concerns we have regarding property tax increases and their impact on low -income 
Mainers.  Programs such as the Homestead Exemption and the Propert y Tax Fairness Credit are critical 
for helping low -income Mainers and are necessary to balance out the reliance on property taxes with the 
struggles of low -income Maine homeowners.   
 
I often mention the Picus study on the school funding formula conducted a decade ago.  That study was 
an exhaustive review of our state’s school funding formula and provide d key recommendations for the 
state to consider as it relates to school funding and property taxes.  The study found that programs such 
as the Property Tax Fairness Credit, formerly known as the property tax “circuit breaker,” can be 
especially beneficial for High Property Wealth/Low Household Income (HPW/LHI) communities.1  
These communities are often deemed “minimum receivers” in our school funding formula  and receive 
little state aid and must rely on local property taxes to fund local schools.  Such reliance creates concerns 
as many of these communities may have high property values due to lakeside or coastal properties, but 
may often have year -round, low -income families who may struggle with property tax increases.  
  
Another highlight from the Picus study was the inequity created when the state relies on property taxes 
to fund public schools.  Every year, as part of the school funding formula and the stat e budget process, 
the state establishes the “minimum mil rate expectation” for public schools.  This is the minimum  
 
1 Please see, An Independent Review of Maine’s Essential Programs and Services Funding Act, Part 2, found here:  
5397 (maine.gov)  
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
amount schools must raise locally in order to receive state aid.  But the greatest inequity in our school 
funding model is that some tow ns and communities are able to raise well above the minimum, while 
other cities and towns struggle to pay the minimum rate expected.  The towns and communities able to 
raise more are able to offer higher teacher salaries and hourly wages for school support  staff.  They are 
able to offer more programs and services to students.  The greatest inequities in our public education 
system is due to the local ability in some communities to raise more to support schools, educators and 
students.   
 
Increasing the Prop erty Tax Fairness Credit, as called for in LD 1225, helps address this inequity.  It 
won’t solve the problem, but it will help.  Passing LD 1225 would allow towns to raise property taxes 
while providing greater assistance to low income homeowners.  LD 1225  will not close the gap between 
the “haves” and “have nots,” but it can help narrow that gap with an overall goal of providing the 
funding needed to make sure all students have the chance to thrive in a public school.   
 
Thank you for your time and your se rvice to the people of Maine.   
 
