l. 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Margaret O>Neﬂ TTY: Maine Relay 711 
21 Sheila Circle 
Saco, ME 04072 
Phone: (207) 590-1679 
Mai garet.ONei1@le,qislature.mainegov 
April 11, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Maggie O’Neil presenting 
LD 1225, An Act to Protect Housing by Increasing the Property Tax 
Fairness Credit 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Taxation Committee, I 
am Representative Maggie O’Neil. I represent House District 129, pait of Saco. Thank you for 
the opportunity to present LD 1225, An Act to Protect Housing by Increasing the Property 
Tax Fairness Credit. 
Housing is increasingly unaffordable, both for renters and for homeowners on ﬁxed incomes. 
Many older adults own their homes, have lower incomes, and pay more than 30% of their budget 
on housing. ‘ Increased energy costs and inflationary pressures have stretched household budgets 
thin? Working Mainers’ incomes have not kept pace with the cost of housing. HUD’s Fair 
Market Rent for a 2-bedroom is unaffordable for the average renter household in all areas of 
Maine, and rental home costs are expected to continue to rise in 2023.3 Renters already tend to 
have lower incomes than homeowners and often face additional pressures, such as the costs of 
raising children and paying student loansf‘ Further, pandemic-era programs including the 
Emergency Rental Assistance Programs and augmented SNAP beneﬁts have expired.6 Support 
available to struggling households has become scarce, and Mainers urgently need relief. 
1 
Housing in Maine: An Overview. 2022. https://legislaturemaine.gov/doc/8866 
2 Ia’. 
3 MaineHousing Outlook 2023. https://legislatureanaine.gov/doc/9580 
4 Small single parent and older adult renters face the greatest housing challenges and greatest need. Housing in 
Maine: An Overview, supra, n. 1. 
5 The federal pandemic Emergency Rental Assistance (ERA) Program funded over $290 million in rent payments 
and utility payments in Maine during an 18-month period in 2021 and 2022. The program paid back rent for more 
than 34,000 households. Meant as a temporary program for those facing pandemic-related ﬁnancial hardships, 
demand for this one~time federal resource never abated, highlighting the pre-pandemic nature and ongoing need for 
housing and rental assistance in Maine. MaineHousing Outlook, supra, n. 2. 
“ Expired March 1, 2023. As with regular SNAP beneﬁts, the amount individuals and households received depended 
on family size and income. At a minimum, all those getting the extra amount experienced a $95 monthly decrease in 
District 129: Saco (part)
This bill arose from a desire to make it easier for the most vulnerable Maine households to make 
ends meet and maintain housing stability. As l worked with housing experts and renter advocates 
to develop a proposal that would help Mainers who are struggling, it quickly became clear that 
we already have an effective tax credit to help both homeowners and renters with the cost of 
housing: the Property Tax Fairness Credit. The problem is that the PTF C doesn’t go far enough, 
especially as costs have risen dramatically in recent years. 
LD 1225 would boost the impact of the PTFC by increasing the maximum credit amount for 
those who are already eligible to claim it. For Mainers under 65, it would increase the maximum 
credit from the current $1,000 to $1,500. For those 65 and older, it would increase from $1,500 
to $2,000. 
As members of the committee know, the Legislature and administration have focused efforts 
over the last two years on expanding the availability of affordable rental housing. This is the 
right strategy and has greatly increased the number of units under development. However, supply 
chain issues, increased construction costs, and workforce shortages are delaying completion of 
many projects.7 Mainers facing housing insecurity cannot afford to wait for these new units to 
become available. We need to act in the meantime. 
Increasing the impact of the PTF C will help both renters and homeowners who need it most, 
without delay and without the administrative burden of creating a new program. In Tax Year 
2021, more than 87,000 Maine households benefited from the PTFC. That number gives an 
indication of how many Mainers need assistance as they face extreme ﬁnancial pressure. The 
committee may wish to consider whether we should also expand eligibility for the tax credit, but 
at the very least, we should make sure that those who are currently eligible are getting enough 
support to truly help them afford to stay in their homes. 
As the cost of renting or owning a home rises, it is up to us as legislators to make sure the PTFC 
is keeping pace. LD 1225 would ensure the tax credit continues to have its intended effect of 
keeping Maine families in their homes. Without this increase, for too many people, the beneﬁt of 
the PTF C will be too little, too late. 
Thank you for your consideration. I know there are housing experts here today who can speak in 
more detail to this proposal, but I am happy to answer any questions you may have for me. 
March. In Maine, the average extra amount per person was $109 in 2022. A study estimated that emergency SNAP 
allotments kept 4.2 million Americans above the poverty line in the last quarter of 202 l, reducing poverty by l0% 
and child poverty by 14%. See Laura Wlieaton and Danielle Kwon, “Effect of the Reevaluated Thrifty Food Plan 
and Emergency Allotments on Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Benefits and Poverty, ” Urban Institute, 
August 2022, https://www.urban.org/research/publication/effect-reevaluated~tliriftv-food-plan-and-emergency; 
allotments-supplemental. 
7 
MaineHousing Outlook 2023. https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9580 
District l29: Saco (part)
