Jason Constantine
Back Cove Yachts, Rockland, ME
LD 217
While the intent of the legislation is commendable, the proposal as written is not 
achievable for boatbuilders in the State of Maine, nor will it help to achieve the 
ultimate goals of this act.  
Our current inventory of parts and materials at Back Cove Yachts alone exceeds over 
8,500 unique items sourced from over 200 individual vendors with locations spread 
around the globe.  Many of the parts procured from these vendors, such as engines, air
conditioners, generators, electrical components, etc. have their own unique 
subassemblies with hundreds, if not thousands, of their own component parts sourced 
from an entirely different vendor group within the overall supply chain.  Expecting 
Maine boatbuilding companies of any size, whether calculated by staffing numbers or 
revenue, to be able to comply with the requirements of this legislation is not realistic 
as we will not be able to access the information that would be needed from our 
vendors and their suppliers to comply with these regulations.  
Furthermore, and more importantly, I do not believe that the burden imparted on both 
the manufacturer and Department of Environmental Protection to abide by these 
requirements would result in fewer PFAS in our local soils and groundwater.  Maine 
boatbuilders produce what are considered durable goods, products with life spans 
measured in years and decades, not days or weeks.  These products are not 
responsible for the PFAS currently being found in our wastewater systems, our soils, 
and our groundwater.  
Again, we do appreciate the intent of this legislation and desire to protect the health 
and well-being of our residents and children, but that legislative effort must be 
directed at the manufacturers of PFAS, and not the end users.  This can best be 
summed up through the following analogy:  The existing legislation is aiming to solve
this problem by constructing individual dams at each of the hundreds of tributaries of 
the river to stop the flow of PFAS into our state.  In order to successfully resolve the 
problem, we need to shift that focus toward the source of those PFAS, and 
constructing a single dam at the headwaters of the river.
