GUILFORD -- SANGEIRVILLE SANITARY Dis"rRicT 
22 Dean Road, P.0. Box 370, Guilford, Maine, 04443 / Tel: 207-876-4598 Fax: 207-876-4598! gssd@myfairpoint.net 
Date: 4/20/2023 
Subject: Benefits of a Combined Utilities District 
To whom it may concern, 
The Guilford-Sangerville Sanitary District (GSSD) would like to thank you for your time in 
considering this act to create the Guilford — Sangerville Utilities District (GSUD). GSSD believes there are 
many benefits to a combined utilities district between the Guilford — Sangerville Water District (GSWD) 
and GSSD. The idea ofa utilities district in Guilford and Sangerville is not a new one, over the years it has 
been discussed in one form or another. We believe with today's economic hardships, now is the time to 
act and make this discussion a reality, to make one stronger and more efficient district. 
The benefits of GSUD would Include: 
0 Savings in manpower, with consolidation of the districts they could be operated with a 3-man 
crew (one superintendent and two operators) instead of each district having a superintendent 
and an operator (four total). In the office, bookkeeping could be reduced to one full—time 40- 
hour a week position with a part-time helper. Instead of two full-time 32-hour a week positions 
the districts currently have. The districts are running at this crew level already. It has been 
working quite well and has already led to savings. 
0 Consolidating would also lead to a greater amount of time saved for employees. Tasks/jobs 
both districts individually do, would now be combined, and streamlined together. Leading to 
faster completion times. 
0 There would be more manpower in combining. When sewer or water has a problem within 
their system instead of having two workers to fix an issue, they will now have three workers. 
~ There are cost savings in computer programs, insurance, memberships, and subscriptions 
where currently each district pays them individually. These would turn into a single shared cost. 
0 There would also be savings in buying new tools and equipment, costs could be split for one 
tool / piece of equipment. Instead of both districts buying one of their own and bearing the full 
cost.- 
0 Another benefit of GSUD is more crew to be on call. As of right now GSSD has two employees on 
call. This would be increased to three employees on call for both facilities. 
v GSUD would have a better opportunity to gain more outside funding for projects. This will bea 
greater need in the future as our infrastructure ages. GSSD’s System is 35+ years old and is to 
the point where upgrades and modernization are needed. GSWD still has a lot of older water 
mains in operation, some even from the 1920's. 
v Combining would make a stronger district that could better withstand a large hit to revenues 
with a mill closure in town. Standing as one instead of two different districts.
GUILFORD -- SANGERVILLE SANITARY DISTRICT 
22 Dean Road, P.0. Box 370, Gui/ford, Maine, 04443 / Tel: 207-876~4598 Fax: 207-876-4598] gssd@myfairpoint.net 
Overall GSSD feels like it would be most beneficial to the towns for GSWD and us to consolidate into 
one stronger and more efficient district. The cost savings of this act would help keep sewer and water 
user rates lower for the townspeople on our systems. Leaving them to use those savings elsewhere in 
their home budgets. One of GSSD’s ultimate goals over our years of operation has been to provide a 
great service to our users at the lowest cost possible. GSSD feels like the best way to achieve that with 
today's economic climate is to dissolve into the Guilford - Sangerville Utilities District. 
Thank you. 
Guilford Sangerville Sanitary District
.»
