.;t Iilsuln j GSUILFCJRD/SANGERVILLE 
WATER DISTRICT 
P.O. Box ‘Z46 Guilford, Maine 04443 
I want to thank this committee for hearing us comment positively on L.D. 1692, An Act 
to create the Guilford — Sangerville Utilities District. 
My name is Jeff Libby and I represent the Guilford - Sangerville Water District also 
know as (GSWD). My Title on the board of 6 directors is Chairman of the board. I’m here today 
in full support of combining the two districts into a joint utility district to be known as Guilford— 
Sangerville Utilities District. I stand here knowing we have full support from both Guilford & 
Sangerville Town Select Boards and both Districts Boards of Directors. All have summited 
letters of support to combine. 
We have two major reasons for seeking the passage of this legislation to combine GS SD 
and GSWD into a joint utility. 
First and foremost is protecting the rate payers of both communities. The climate in our 
service area is changing. This has resulted in less revenues coming into the system. A major user 
has recently scaled operation way back and moved major equipment to Canada and is up for sale. 
Our communities have seen a steady reduction in residents over the past years leaving us no 
choice to raise rates to support operations. Should we lose this major user it will have a dramatic 
effect on both Districts. By combining both districts it will put us in a good place to stabilize 
rates. We have looked at similar districts but the big eye opener was when we hired Maine Rural 
Water to do a study on both operations. The saving were $l()0,000+ yearly. Two other items 
affecting the Districts and ratepayers are increasing mandates that may materialize in the future 
and our aging infrastructure, which we continue to work on to modernize. Prices of materials and 
labor / engineering have sky rocked over the past three years. 
The second part of combining is our employees. Our employees are the backbone of our 
operations. Without these key people our cost would be higher and our service to the ratepayers 
would be poor. No employees will lose their jobs in this merge. Our employees are with us on 
merging into a joint utility district. Merging will allow us to place more resources on problem 
areas. A lot of the redundancies ’ of two separate utilities will go away with a joint utility. This 
will save money and time. We will be able to build our employees knowledge of both districts 
not just water or sanitary. By cross training our employees they will be able to respond to most 
problems. This will give all our employees the ability to make a better wage or branch out to 
another district. We want our employees to be ﬂexible, valuable and happy. 
In closing I’d like to say I believe as a member of both GSWD & GSSD that combining 
districts is a positive move. The rate payers, the Towns of Guilford/ Sangerville and the 
employees will positively beneﬁt. 
Respectfully Guilford/Sangerville Water Board (Chair) 
.l.L. Libby
