:> 
Stacey K. Guerin 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 4 Augusta, Maine 04333‘ 
TILE l\/IAINE SENATE 
» 
13 lst Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Stacey Guerin 
Presenting L.D. 1692, An Act to Create the Guilford-Sangerville Utilities District 
Before the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee 
April 26, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology: I am Senator Stacey Guerin and I represent District 4, which 
includes all of Piscataquis County and ll communities in Penobscot County. I am before you 
today to present L.D. 1692, An Act to Create the Guilford-Sangerville Utilities District. 
In 1935, the Maine Legislature passed a bill to incorporate two separate water districts, Guilford 
and Sangerville, into one water district known as the Guilford and Sangerville Water District. 
On May 11, 1972, the Guilford-Sangerville Sanitary District was created by way of a certiﬁcate 
from the State of Maine’s Environmental Improvement Commission. 
Fast forward to the present — costs have increased and these two utility districts have seen a slow 
reduction in customers. Determining efﬁciencies to provide these important services, creating 
cost-savings for their customers, and increasing capacity for the utility is prudent. That is exactly 
what this legislation aims to do as it would combine the two utility districts in statute, creating 
the Guilford-Sangerville Utilities District, pending a voter referendum. 
Since the submission of this legislation, it has been brought to my attention that there are seven 
customers in the Town of Abbot that would not be included in the legislation if left as is. 
Therefore, I am proposing the bill be amended in Section l to state: 
“The inhabitants and territory within the Town of Guilford and the Town of Sangerville, 
and existing customers of the Guilford-Sangerville Water District in the Towns of 
Parkman and Abbot, in the County of Piscataquis, constitute a public municipal 
corporation under the name of "Guilford Sangerville Utilities District," referred to in this 
Act as "the district," for the purpose of supplying the inhabitants of the district with pure 
water for domestic, sanitary, manufacturing and municipal purposes and to construct, 
maintain, operate and provide the sewers with all their appurtenances. ” 
I would appreciate your support of this legislation as its passage would be beneficial for my 
constituents in the towns of Guilford, Sangerville, Parkman, and Abbot. 
Thank you.
