FIKIVIE FINANCE AUTHORITY 0F MAINE 
Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
In Support of L.D. 32 
An Act to Update the Maine State Grant Program 
February 14, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement, and Business 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Advancement, Economic Advancement, and Business: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am here to 
testify in support of L.D. 32, An Act to Update the Maine State Grant Program. 
First, I wish to thank Senator Daughtry for sponsoring this bill on FAME’s behalf. 
FAME’s mission is to provide financial solutions that help Maine people achieve 
their business and higher education goals. One of the ways we do this is by administering 
the Maine State Grant Program. As many of you know, the program provides annual 
need-based grants to approximately 15,000 Maine undergraduate students at Maine-based 
public and private institutions. 
Thanks to generous support by the Legislature and Governor, in recent years we 
have been able to increase full-time student awards to $2,500 per year or $1,250 per year 
for part-time students. Also, a provision in Governor Mills’s proposed biennial budget, 
L.D. 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General F and 
and Other F ands for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
F iscal Years Ending Jane 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and Jane 30, 2025, would provide 
$10 million in additional funding to increase the grant further for full-time students to 
$3,000 per year. We are excited about this proposal and hope you will be able to support 
1t. 
Students apply for the grant by using the Free Application for Federal Student 
Aid (FAFSA®). Following enactment of federal legislation by Congress in December of 
2020 related to FAFSA simplification, the governing program statute needs to be updated
1
to reﬂect usage of term “SAI” (Student Aid Index) instead of “EFC” (Expected Family 
Contribution). 
The FAFSA Simplification Act made significant changes to federal student aid, 
including the FAFSA form, need analysis, and many policies and procedures for schools 
that participate in federal student aid programs. In addition to greatly simplifying the 
form (e.g. reducing the number of questions from 108 to now just 36), the act replaced 
the term “Expected Family Contribution ” (EFC) with the “Student Aid Index” (SAI) 
starting in the 2024-25 award year. The act retains need analysis formulas that establish 
an indicator of what a student’s family is expected to pay for higher education based on 
information provided on the FAFSA. The act amends the indicator ’s name from EFC to 
SAI. The SAI has fewer formula factors than the EFC, requires fewer questions on the 
FAFSA, and permits a higher share of FAFSA responses to be imported from a federal 
income tax return. Students and families will see a different measure of their ability to 
pay for college, and they will experience a change in the methodology used to determine 
aid. The new need analysis formula removes the number of family members in college 
from the calculation, allows a minimum SAI of -$1,500, and implements separate 
eligibility determination criteria for Federal Pell Grants. These changes are required to be 
implemented by July l, 2024. 
We are simply asking you to update our current Maine State Grant Program 
statute, which references EFC in various parts, with the new federal term SAI. We do not 
expect our work and analysis determining Maine State Grant recipients to change--we 
still will focus awards based on the most need—-but do need to maintain consistency with 
the federal term and form. 
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony. I will be happy to answer any 
questions you have.
2
