 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙ University of 
Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
DATE:   Feb. 14, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                       samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   Support for LD 32, An Act to Update the Maine State Grant Program  
 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: I write on behalf of the University 
of Maine System (UMS) in support of LD 32, An Act to Update t he Maine State Grant Program . 
In the most recent academic year for which data are available (2021 -22), nearly 6,900 students were 
able to attend Maine’s public universities in part due to the financial support provided by the 
need -based Maine State Grant  ($13.4 million total).  
Beyond  meaningfully  increasing  the direct  State  appropriation for our public universities and 
community colleges, UMS  knows investing in the Maine State Grant is the next best way for legislators 
to make door-opening postsecondary ed ucation and workforce training  accessible to all Mainers.  
On behalf of the students our institutions  proudly serve , we commend the 130th Maine Legislature 
and Gov . Mills for increasing Maine State Grant awards from $1,500 to $2,500 , a long -overdue 
and transformational investment in Maine’s people and our future . Because of this increase and our 
System ’s own increased investment in institutional aid and commitment to holding  in-state tuition 
flat for eight of the past 1 2 years , UMS has been able to decrease our students’ reliance on 
borrowing and thus their debt . Not only has the total amount borrowed annually by UMS students 
declined over the last five years by 22.6%, but the number of students who borrow and their ave rage 
loan package ha ve also gone down.  
Despite this , other college -related costs we cannot control continue to climb . We urge you to support 
the additional $500  state grant award increase proposed in Gov. Mills ’ FY24 -25 biennial budget  (LD 
258), and to regularly  raise appropriation s to allow the Finance Authority of Maine to  grow  grant  
award amounts  in the future , as Congress typically does annually for need-based Pell grants .  
We agree the technical changes proposed by LD 32 are necessary to ensure consistency  with 
recently enacted federal law , championed  by Maine’s Congressional Delegation, to simpl ify the Free 
Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA)  so that it is more accessible for students and families . 
Our UMS universities are already making similar  language  changes in our various financ ial aid related 
materials  and processes.  
It should be noted that  UMS has previously recommended to the Legislature making  FAFSA 
completion mandatory for Maine high school students . This could  better ensure  students and their 
families are fully informe d about their options for a ffording  postsecondary education and do not forego 
financial aid for which they are likely eligible. This policy has been adopted in other states including 
Alabama, California, Illinois, Louisiana and Texas and is even more reali stic with the streamlined 
FAFSA  expected later this year from the U.S. Department of Education .  
The postsecondary degrees and credentials that the state grant can help Mainers  attain have never 
been more important to  Mainers’ social mobility and our economy  and communities . Thank you for 
ongoing support of the Maine State Grant , Maine students  and M aine’s public  universities.    
