 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Testimony of Beth Pearce  on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
March 22, 2023  
 
Supporting:  
LD 1026 , “Resolve, To Direct the University of Maine System to Establish a  
Dental Therapy Degree Program ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative  Mastraccio  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs, I am Beth Pearce , Oral Health Program Manager  at Maine Primary Care Association 
(MPCA).  
 
MPCA is a membership organization that includ es all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medi cal, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
 
Oral health care access remains a priority for MPCA and our Community Health Center Network in 
Maine. As an organization, we are focused on supporting CHCs with the expansion of MaineCare’s 
comprehensive adult dental benefit. This includes providing workfo rce trainings, addressing health 
equity needs, and ensuring that CHC voices are included at relevant state -level meetings.  
 
Maine is experiencing workforce shortages in many heath care professions, and dental providers are no 
exception. Rural areas, in pa rticular, are experiencing critical challenges with access to care. As more 
adults have access to the expanded dental benefits, the health centers’ patient population and the 
complexity of the patient needs have increased. CHCs are doing everything they ca n to ensure that 
patients receive the quality treatment they deserve, but waitlists continue to be long across the state.  
 
Dental therapists are mid -level providers that can perform restorative procedures  and some extraction 
procedures . Their work in a den tal practice can allevia te the many  demands on general dentist s, allowing 
them to focus on the more complex procedures . This leads  to each provider type working to the highest 
scope of their licensure.   
 
The first and only dental therapist in Maine is working at a Community Health Center  under the 
supervision of staff dentists. This new staff member has become so important that the h ealth center 
plans to onl y hire new  general  dentists who support this staffing model.   
 
Dental therapists have proven very valuable in improving access to care . An example is the Alaska Dental 
Therapy Program  that began in 2004 in  response to a need for re gular oral health care in the Alaska Tribal 
Health System . More than 40,000 rural Alaskans now have regular access to dental care from a dental 
therapist.1 
 
 
1 Alaska Dental Therapy Program  
 
 
 
 mepca.org  Unfortunately, one  of the barriers to getting more dental therapists  in Maine is a lack of access to 
education . There are no programs in our state  or neighboring state s to provide this training . If Maine is to 
truly overcome the oral health workforce challenges,  we need to provide educational opportunities like 
those found in Alaska . 
 
When looking at medical schools, we know that the majority of individuals who completed residency 
training are practicing in the state where they did their training. Nationally, from 2012 through 2021, this 
was 55.2% of individuals ; in Maine , the rate was even higher at 57%.2 We believe h aving a dental therapy 
program established in  Maine would also encourage students to remain in the state and practice where 
they learne d.  
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for conside ring our comments. Please do 
not hesitate to contact me directly at  bpearce@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
 
Beth Pearce  
Oral Health Program  Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
 
2 AAMC Report on Residents   
 
