Testimony of Courtney Vannah, Program Manager, Oral Health Initiatives, MCD Global Health 
for LD 1026 : Resolve, To Direct the University of Maine System to Establish a Dental Therapy 
Degree Program.  
Before the  Education and Cultural Affairs Committee  
Public Hearing: Wednesday March 2 2, 2022  
 
Senator  Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed  members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee , I am pleased to offer testimony in support of LD 1026 . I am the 
Program Manager of Oral Health Initiatives at MCD Global Health , a dental hygienist, and a 
lifelong resident of rural Maine. I am submi tting testimony to encourage the Committee  support 
this bill to direct the University of Maine System to establish a dental therapy degree.  
The statistics in Maine show a dire need for dental workforce expansion. Far too many of 
Maine’s residents  go without dental services  of any kind, and even fewer have access to 
restorative dental care. To increase the dentist workforce number s to a level adequate enough to 
support the oral health needs of all Mainers  it would  mean essentially doubling the current  
number of practicing dentists , which is wholly un realistic to expect at this juncture in time. 
While m any efforts have attempted to alleviate the burden on the existing dentist com munity , 
one of the most promising efforts was stopped short of its full potential to impact access to care.  
Nearly a decade ago, the distinguished m embers  of the State of Maine Legislature moved  to 
allow a new provider type  to join the dental workforce in Maine , the dental therapist. In other 
states, t his provider type has proven  its potential to expand the restorative dental workforce and 
make a significant impact on access to care issues by alleviating  the burden on exi sting dental 
providers. Sadly, almost a decade has passed,  and Maine has  still not provided the training 
program necessary to support those wishing to pursue  this model of care delivery . Almost 
weekly, professional partners ask me about hiring a dental therapist, and I am embarrassed to 
tell them that even after this many years, there still is no training program, and therefore no 
active pool of applicants for these positions.  
It is very important that we support this bill to finally move forward and finish what was started 
so many years ago. Thank you for your consideration of my testimony on this important issue.  
Sincerely,  
 
 
Courtney E. Vannah, IPDH, MS, MPH  
Program Manager, Oral Health Initiatives  
MCD Global Health  

