The National Coalition of Dentists for Health Equity is a national organization of accomplished dentists 
dedicated to assuring that everyone has an equitable opportunity to access high quality, affordable 
dental care. Board Members
Leon Assael, DMD
Terry Batliner, DDS, 
MPA
Frank Catalanotto, DMD 
– Vice President
Caswell Evans, Jr., DDS, 
MPH – Vice President
Todd Hartsfield, DDS
Lawrence F. Hill DDS, 
MPH – President
Rachael Hogan, DDS
Ana Karina Mascarenhas, 
BDS, MPH, DRPH
Ronald Romero, DDS, 
MPH
Robert Russell, DDS, 
MPH, MPA, CPM, 
FACD, FICD
Karl Self, DDS, MBA
Dear Members of the Maine Legislature - Education & Cultural Affairs 
Committee
I am writing to you today on behalf of the National Coalition of Dentists 
for Health Equity (NCDHE) to again congratulate the Maine legislature for 
its inciteful passage of the bill nearly 10 years ago that recognized and 
established dental therapists as a high quality, safe and cost-effective 
addition to Maine’s dental care team.  The dental therapist model has 
been demonstrated to improve equity and reduce disparities in oral 
health. Passage of the legislation recognized the significant barriers to oral 
care that exist for certain segments of Maine’s population and the success 
of the dental therapist model. NCDHE is now encouraging the legislature 
to approve LD 1026 DT Education. 
NCDHE membership includes highly respected members of the dental 
profession, including 7 past dental school deans, two past chief dental 
officers of the United States Public Health Service, the chief editor of the 
surgeon general’s report on oral health and 2 past presidents of the 
American Public Health Association. While other organizations of dentists 
address a multitude of issues, NCDHE is the only professional organization 
of dentists solely dedicated to the principle of equity and justice in oral 
health. We rely on the evidence before making any recommendations. 
There is sound evidence that where dental therapists are practicing, more 
children are receiving dental disease prevention, less general anesthesia is 
necessary, fewer extractions are needed, waiting times for appointments 
have been shortened and transportation barriers have been decreased. 
There are 14 states, including Maine which have passed legislation and 
are at various stages of implementation or education and training 
program development.
  
There continues to be a growing body of evidence that supports the 
relationship of oral health and general health and well-being. Studies have 
shown that poor oral health can be associated with increased risks of diabetes, 
heart disease, poor pregnancy outcomes and others. Late detection of 
precancerous and cancerous lesions in the oral cavity can have devastating 
results, including death. Yet by increasing the reach of dentists with dental 
therapists, these risks can be reduced.
The National Coalition of Dentists for Health Equity is a national organization of accomplished dentists 
dedicated to assuring that everyone has an equitable opportunity to access high quality, affordable 
dental care. Passing a dental therapist bill is only the beginning of the process. Once a bill is 
passed, a training and education program becomes critical to advancing the 
model. Although Maine has reciprocity for dental therapists educated in other 
states, most states want to hold on to the small number of dental therapists 
being trained in this early stage of the dental therapist profession. They are not 
enthusiastic about training folks in their state to address their problems and then 
see those folks move on to another state. In fact, one of the advantages of the 
dental therapy model is that candidates can be recruited from their own 
communities of need and return to their own communities. All this leads to the 
conclusion that Maine needs a dental therapist education and training program 
if it is to maximize the benefit of the dental therapist model.
For the above stated reasons, the National Coalition of Dentists for Health Equity 
strongly encourages the legislature to pass LD 1026 Dental Therapy Education 
Bill.
Sincerely,
Lawrence F. Hill DDS MPH
President, National Coalition of Dentists for Health Equity
513-544-8844
larryhill66@icloud.com
dentistsforhe althequity.org
            
