Dianne Smallidge
York
LD 1026
To: Members of Maine’s Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
From: Dianne Smallidge, RDH, EdD, and Professor/Dean Forsyth School of Dental 
Hygiene/MCPHS  
Date: March 22, 2023
Subject: LD 1026
I had hoped to speak to you in person today, however my schedule did not allow me to attend
the hearing during the afternoon. I have been a licensed DH in Maine for over 35 years. For 
23 of those years, I have had the privilege to teach dental hygiene students. I began teaching 
at UNE, my alma mater, in 1999, and in 2008 I left UNE to become a full time faculty member 
at the Forsyth School of Dental Hygiene in Boston. Currently I serve as the Dean at Forsyth, 
but still reside here in York, Maine. During my tenure in higher education, I have learned a lot 
about the access to care issues that underserved populations have faced in our region, and 
this has led to my work in the development of ideas on how educators can play a role in 
addressing this issue. In fact, I conducted research and published a study in 2018 about the 
interest and readiness of DHs in Maine to enter a program and step into the role of dental 
therapist. https://jdh.adha.org/content/92/3/6.full
My focus with this testimony is not to share facts about issues surrounding access to oral 
health care in our state. Many of you, and many of your predecessors already demonstrated 
your knowledge and wisdom about this issue, and this is how the previous legislation enacted
the dental therapy provider into being in Maine. Instead, I’m here submitting this testimony to 
let you know that there is no reason why a higher educational institution in our state cannot 
move forward and provide training for dental therapists. My study from 2018 revealed dental 
hygienists are more than ready to begin their dental therapy education and become license 
dental therapists. The only barrier has been finding an institution to step up and open a 
program.
Last week I attended the American Dental Education Association’s annual session in 
Portland, OR. The subject of Dental Therapy was discussed frequently, and many of my 
colleagues, particularly those from Minnesota, said to me, “Dianne, why aren’t there any 
schools in Maine willing to train dental therapists”? My answer, “That’s a great question. I 
don’t know why there isn’t an institution in Maine willing to move forward with a dental therapy
program.”  
One argument I have heard is that it costs too much to open a program. I disagree. There are
resources already in place at our institutions, FQHCs and other clinical sites that could 
support a dental therapy program. A new clinic or classroom setting doesn’t need to be built.
I’ve also heard the argument that creating a curriculum would be costly and time consuming.  
I worked on a project where we created a dental therapy curriculum designed to allow 
practicing DHs to continue working while going to school, and becoming a DT in just 2 years. 
Yes, the accreditation process can be lengthy, up to 2 years in length, but this shouldn’t be a 
barrier to starting the process. If you would like to learn more about the curriculum I 
developed with my fellow DH educators at Forsyth I would be glad to discuss this with you.    
I should also note that it’s not just dental hygiene educators who would like to see dental 
therapy move forward. A vast majority of dental school faculty are ready and willing to move 
forward with dental therapy programs. In fact, I had a conversation with the Dean of the 
Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Dr. Will Giannobile, just last week, and he asked me 
where we are with dental therapy. Leaders in dental education want to see dental therapy 
programs move forward.
Can you answer the question I was asked over and over again last week? Can you think of a 
reason that we should not open a dental therapy school in the State of Maine? We as dental 
educators stand ready, and have been standing ready, to open dental therapy programs, and 
are ready to challenge any arguments we have heard regarding why we shouldn’t move 
forward with a dental therapy program here in Maine. Let’s finish the job started by Maine 
legislators and find a way to train the providers we know can address the access to oral 
health care issues in our state. Thank you for your time, and please don’t hesitate to call on 
me if I can assist further in providing information in support of this legislation.              

