                                                  105 2nd St Suite 2A
Hallowell, ME 04347
MOHC@mcdph.org
www.maineoralhealthcoalition.org
Testimony of the Maine Oral Health Coalition 
Neither for Nor Against LD 1026, 
Resolve, To Direct the University of Maine System to Establish a
Dental Therapy Degree Program
March 22, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, this testimony is submitted on behalf of the Maine Oral Health 
Coalition. Founded 25 years ago as the Maine Dental Access Coalition, we have functioned as a 
broad network, and maintain a close interest in policy and systems changes that can improve 
access to services and oral health status in Maine. 
The Coalition has been consistently supportive of legislative proposals that come forward with 
the intent to increase access to oral health services throughout Maine. LD 1026 demonstrates 
that intent by proposing that the State of Maine establish an accredited dental therapy degree 
program.  We all should do all that we can to encourage interested and motivated individuals 
to pursue dental professional education, and dental therapists make an important and 
increasingly significant contribution to the “family” of dental care providers, especially in a 
large rural state that has experienced chronic challenges in access to oral health care. Dental 
therapists are not new. The educational model has been tested and evaluated, and dental 
therapists provide safe, consistent, and quality care. 
LD 1026 represents a measurable potential benefit for the State. However, we are not in a 
position to evaluate the capacity of the University of Maine at Augusta to develop, establish, 
and sustain a dental therapy degree program. Requesting accreditation from the American 
Dental Association Commission on Dental Accreditation is not a simple process and requires 
significant preparation and planning. It’s because of what we don’t know that we take the 
NFNA position at this time. 
We urge the Committee to consider the positive potential of LD 1026 for helping to relieve the 
severe and persistent workforce challenges that limit access to oral health care.  
Thank you.
Judith Feinstein, MSPH, Coordinator
jafme52@gmail.comMOHC Steering 
Committee
Wendy Alpaugh, DMD
General Practice 
Dentist, Stonington
Kalie Hess, MPH
Partnership for 
Children’s Oral Health
Beth Pearce
Maine Primary Care 
Association
Bonnie Vaughan, 
IPDH, MEd, MBA 
Kennebec Valley 
Family Dentistry 
Center and Maine 
Dental Hygienists’ 
Association
Judith Feinstein, MSPH
Coordinator 
The Maine Oral Health 
Coalition represents a 
statewide group of 
organizations and 
individuals who work 
together as a network 
to support each other 
in raising awareness 
and promoting oral 
health and dental 
disease prevention 
activities, through 
community education 
and advocacy, with 
the vision that oral 
health is valued as a 
vital element of 
wellness for all Maine 
residents.
