 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 Sewall Street  
Augusta, Maine 04330 -6822 
TTY/Voice: (207) 626 -7058 
www. maineequaljustice.org    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kathy Kilrain del Rio  
Advocacy & Programs Director  
kkilraindelrio @mejp.org  
 
  
MEJ Testimony in Support of  LD 1026, Resolve, To Direct the University of Maine System to 
Establish a Dental Therapy Degree Program  
 
March 2 2, 2023  
 
Good morning , Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs . My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio, I use she/her pronouns, and 
I’m the Advocacy and Programs Director for Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider 
working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. I am 
speaking today in support of  LD 10 26. 
 
I have the honor of serving as chair of the MaineCare Ad visory Committee (MAC) and also i ts Dental 
Subcommittee. Th e subcommittee formed in 2021 due to m any oral health needs being experien ced 
by Ma ineCare members – both children and adults. That same year, the legislature passed with 
strong bipartisan support a comprehen sive dental benefit for adults with MaineCare coverage. 
Children with MaineCare already had a dental benefit. Throughout the effort to pass that legislation, 
we heard from many low -income people about the importance of dental c are for their overall health 
and wellb eing as well  as fo r social interactions and employment . Dental care is indeed health care 
and is vital for us all. Beginni ng in August  2021, the MAC Dental Subcommittee worked closely with 
the Office o f MaineCare Services (OMS) to ensure we created a strong dental benefit for adults, 
made positive improvements to the benefit for children, and support ed OMS in crafting new rates 
for dental care.  
 
I sha re this background because in the past few years  I have unexpectedly become well versed in 
the oppo rtunities and challenges our oral health system faces i n Maine. The  overwhelming  issue we 
hear both at Maine Equal Justice and at the MAC Dental Subc ommittee is that we need to grow our 
oral health care workforce at every le vel to meet the needs of all Mainers. Dental  therapists can play 
a key role in meeting these needs. Unfortunately , due to the lack of degree program s in Maine, we 
have very few dental therapist s working in our st ate. Creating a degree program at the University 
of Maine at A ugusta would grow the number of professionals who can provide dental care and also 
create another car eer option in the oral health workfo rce. It ’s a win for indiv iduals seeking a strong 
career op portunity and a win for Mainers who too of ten struggle to find oral health providers.  
 
For all these reasons, Maine Equal Justice support LD 1026 and urge you to vote Ought to Pass. 
Thank  you for your attention on this issue.  
