\
" 
\. i\ ,»":i-1 1" .1 f~> 
) 1'#‘:' ._::‘l' t.ir 
J/ Urf.-"=./<s¢>~;'si;*sé:;=*:& 
UNlVERSlTY OF MAlNE SYSTEM 
Testimony from the University of Maine System 
Presented by UMS Director of Government & Community Relations Samantha Warren 
Regarding LD 1026, Resolve, To Direct the University of Maine System 
to Establish a Dental Therapy Degree Program, March 22, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs: My name is Samantha Warren and l am the Director of 
Government Relations for the University of Maine System (UMS). 
The University of Maine at Augusta (UMA) currently offers three allied dental-related degree 
programs: 
- A three-year Associate of Science Dental Hygiene degree with the option to complete one 
additional year to earn a Bachelor of Science in Dental Hygiene; 
~ Maine’s only Commission on Dental Accreditation (CODA) accredited dental assisting 
program, through which students earn a three-semester certificate or two-year Associate ’s 
Degree and are prepared to sit for the Dental Assisting National Board Certified Dental 
Assisting exam immediately upon successful completion of the certificate program; 
0 and an Expanded Functions Dental Assisting program, typically a two-semester pathway to 
allow individuals who already have at least one year of clinical dental experience and holda 
dental assisting or dental hygiene credential to gain further skills, abilities, and employment 
and earning opportunity. 
These programs are delivered at UMA's Bangor campus and Lewiston Center (located within the 
University of Southern Maine’s Lewiston Auburn Campus). They include extensive hands-on clinical 
components through which our students prepare for the workforce and provide free and low-cost 
preventive and restorative services to community members including Veterans, members of the 
Maine National Guard and at-risk children without adequate access to dental care or lack of a dental 
home. 
UMA’s dental programs leaders are dynamic, closely connected to the field, and ever evolving and 
enhancing our offerings to meet the needs of Mainers and the practicing professionals who provide 
them dental care. For example, UMS successful secured $750,000 in Congressionally Directed 
Spending supported by Sens. Susan Collins and Angus King so UMA could bring dental education 
and community care services to Aroostook County through a partnership with the University of Maine 
at Presque Isle. 
LD 1026 would direct UMA to establish Maine’s ﬁrst dental therapy program. There is much history 
here, including past pushback when UMA previously considered establishing such a program and the 
closure after less than ﬁve years of New England's only dental therapy program, which had been 
offered through Vermont’s State College System. 
The establishment of new university degree programs is the authority of legislatively confirmed UMS 
Trustees, in collaboration with university administrators and faculty, and with input from stakeholders. 
Additionally, it is important for you to know that UMA’s existing dental programs are extremely costly 
to operate due to low student-to-faculty ratios (typically 5:1 ), cost of supplies and equipment, and 
clinical facilities maintenance — as required by the rigorous CODA standards. While we do chargea 
differential tuition for these programs to help offset these expenses, given our commitment to student 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent - 
University of 
Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque lsle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
access and affordability, our dental hygiene program is still less than half the tuition cost charged by 
the only private program in the state and has operating losses of approximately $700,000 annually. 
For these reasons, UMS cannot support LD 1026 as printed. However, we greatly appreciate 
Representative Mastraccio ’s support of UMA’s dental education programs and her commitment, and 
that of her bipartisan cosponsors, to investing to expand their impact. And we share their desire to 
ensure our dental education programs continue to grow and evolve to meet Maine’s dire need for 
more dental professionals, especially with the recent expansion of adult MaineCare beneﬁts to cover 
most dental services. 
If this Resolve was amended to instead direct UMA to study the feasibility of establishing a dental 
therapy program and make recommendations back to the Legislature, it would have our full support. 
This approach would leverage our existing efforts to strategically and sustainably expand UMA’s 
dental education offerings and allow us to thoughtfully and creatively consider fiscally responsible 
approaches to strengthen Maine’s dental workforce, including what internal and external resources 
and partnerships would be necessary to successfully implement new degree programs. 
Thank you for your ongoing support of the University of Maine System. I welcome your questions. 
Page 2 of2
