 Morgan Rielly 
 16 Blue Spruce Farm Road, Apt #6 
 Westbrook, ME 04092 
 Phone: (207) 228-5767 
 Morgan.Rielly@legislature.maine.gov  H  OUSE OF   R  EPRESENT ATIVES  
 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
 AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
 (207) 287-1400 
 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 April 1 1, 2023  
 Testimony of Repr esentative Mor gan Rielly pr esenting  
 LD 1260, “  Resolve, to Study Expansion of Civics Education   and Engagement  
 Through the Secr etary of State”  
 Befor e the Joint Standing Committee on State & Local Government  
 Good   afternoon   Senator   Nangle,   Representative   Stover   and  distinguished   members   of  the  Joint  
 Standing   Committee   on  State   &  Local   Government.   My  name   is  Morgan  Rielly ,  and  I  represent  
 House   District   127,  which   includes   part  of  Westbrook.   I  am  here  today   to  present   LD  1260,  
 “Resolve,   to  Study   Expansion   of  Civics   Education   and  Engagement   Through   the  Secretary  
 of State”   . 
 This  bill  directs   the  Secretary   of  State’ s  office  to  study   moving   Volunteer   Maine,   our  state’ s 
 service   commission,   under   their  office  in  addition   to  studying   the  feasibility   of  establishing   a 
 Deputy of Secretary of State focused on supporting civics education and engagement.  
 To  give  a  brief   background   of  Volunteer   Maine,   the  commission   was  established   in  1994   in  the 
 State   Planning   Office  before   being   closed   down   in  2011,  which   led  Volunteer   Maine   to  be  moved  
 under   the  Department   of  Education.   Our  state  service   commission   and  the  Department   of 
 Education   missions   have   little  overlap   when   it  comes   to  duties   and  federal   regulations.   Since  
 1994,   Volunteer   Maine’ s  oversight   committee   has  been   the  Committee   on  State   and  Local  
 Government   (SLG).   In  2011  oversight   was  split  from   budget   review   because   finances   were  
 folded   into  the  Department   of  Education   and  went   through   the  Committee   of  Education   and 
 Cultural Af fairs.  
 My  bill,  LD  1260,   reunites   the  budget   and  oversight   of  the  Commission   under   SLG,   which   is 
 also  the  oversight   committee   for  the  Secretary   of  State.   Moving   the  commission   will  not  change  
 its  relationship   with  the  Governor ,  who  will  still  make   appointments   to  the  Commission.  
 Volunteer   Maine’ s  mission   also  aligns   with  the  Secretary   of  State’ s  due  to  its  responsibilities   for 
 other   aspects   of  civic   engagement.   And  moving   Volunteer   Maine   under   the  Secretary   of  State’ s 
 District 127: Westbrook 
 1 

 Morgan Rielly 
 16 Blue Spruce Farm Road, Apt #6 
 Westbrook, ME 04092 
 Phone: (207) 228-5767 
 Morgan.Rielly@legislature.maine.gov  H  OUSE OF   R  EPRESENT ATIVES  
 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
 AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
 (207) 287-1400 
 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 office  will  also  eliminate   any  potential   conflict   of  interest   regarding   the  Department   of 
 Education’ s  eligibility   to  apply   for  AmeriCorps   funding,   which   from   my  understanding,   they 
 want to do.  
 My  resolve   can  also  be  folded   into  the  current   work   the  Commission   and  the  Secretary   of  State’ s 
 office  have   undertaken   with  the  Department   of  Education   for  a  possible   move   of  Volunteer  
 Maine.  
 The  second   part  of  LD  1260   directs   the  Secretary   of  State’ s  office  to  study   creating   a  new  deputy  
 position   to  help  coordinate   civic   engagement   and  education.   This  would   pair  well  with  the  move  
 of  Volunteer   Maine,   our  state  service   commission,   and  the  Secretary’ s  current   oversight   of 
 elections   and  the  state  archives.   They   also  have   many   ongoing   civic   education   and  engagement  
 programming   with  organizing   student   mock   elections,   providing   voter   registration   materials   to 
 high school students, and other student focused programming.  
 Everyone   can  agree   on  the  importance   of  promoting   civic   education.   We  need   civic   minded   and 
 engaged   citizens   for  a  healthy   democracy .  An  additional   deputy   would   allow   the  Secretary   of 
 State’ s  office  to  expand   existing   civic   engagement   work   and  serve   as  a  liaison   to  schools   and 
 Maine’ s broader civil society . 
 Thank   you  very  much   for  your  time  and  consideration.   I  would   be  happy   to  answer   any  questions  
 or to provide you with any information for your upcoming work session.  
 District 127: Westbrook 
 2 

