 
 
  97 Main Street, Belfast, ME 04915                    207.338.6575                              mainefarmlandtrust.org  
 
 
 
Written t estimony of Abby Farnham, Senior Policy and Research Associate, Maine Farmland 
Trust, to the 131st Legislature’s  Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry  
February 27, 2023  
 
Good afternoon Senator Ingwerson, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. My name is Abby Farnham and I am 
submitting testimony on behalf of Maine Farmland Trust (MFT) in support of L D 568,  An Act to 
Provide Funding for the Fund to Address Food Insecurity and Provide Nutrition Incentive s. 
 
MFT is a member -powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support 
farmers, and advance the future of farming. Since our foundin g in 1999, MFT has helped to 
permanently protect more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. 
In 2022 alone, MFT supported 48 farm businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and 
grants – delivering over 680 hours of techni cal assistance and $309,000 in business and seed 
grants to help businesses grow their profitability. Our main program areas are Farmland 
Protection, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm Business Planning, PFAS Support, Climate 
Resilience, and Policy and Rese arch. MFT believes that to support Maine’s rural economic 
development, farms must be economically viable.  
 
Nutrition incentive programs like Maine Harvest Bucks and Farm Fresh Rewards contribute to 
the economic success of farms and local food businesses b y helping them gain new customers, 
build sales, and keep more dollars in Maine’s food economy. MFT first launched the Farm Fresh 
Rewards nutrition incentive program in 2016 and collaborated extensively over the years with 
partner organizations operating th e Maine Harvest Bucks program to support the growth and 
reach of these programs across the state. We were thrilled to partner with Good Shepherd Food 
Bank to transition the Farm Fresh Rewards program to Good Shepherd in 2022.  
 
MFT understands that althoug h the tremendous growth in participation in Maine’s nutrition 
incentive programs over the past several years is a win for low -income community members, 
farmers, and the state’s local food economy, because available federal funding requires a dollar -
for-dollar match, as participation in the program grows, so does the need to secure matching 
funds from non -federal sources. State funding for nutrition incentive programs would therefore 
not only provide a consistent source of support for the continued growth an d expansion of 
nutrition incentive programs across the state, but would also allow these programs to leverage 
more federal dollars in support of Maine’s local food economy.  
 
We hope that you will support this bill and help strengthen food security in the s tate while 
simultaneously supporting Maine’s food and farming businesses.  
