 
Sen. Sen. Henry Ingwersen , Rep. Bill Pluecker, House Chair  and Committee Members on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry.  
 
The American Heart Association (AHA) is the nation’s oldest and largest voluntary 
organization dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke, whose mission is to be a 
relentless force for a world of longer, healthier lives. We are testifying in support of  LD 
568 "An Act to Provide Funding for the Fund to Address Food Insecurity and Provide 
Nutrition Incentives" .  We applaud  this legi slation for incr easing the funding  to 
$600,000 but we  believe  that f or a successful healthy incentive program Maine should 
be at least  investing  $1 million.  
 
The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) offers nutrition assistance to 
millions of eligible, low -income individuals and families and provides economic benefits 
to communities. SNAP is the largest program in the hunger safety net and the benefits 
are 100% federally funde d.  In Ma ine, SNAP serves over 52,000 Mainer workers  
in households that participated in the Food Supplement Program . Because most 
households redeem their monthly SNAP benefits quickly, SNAP is one of the most 
effective forms of economic stimulus during a d ownturn.  
 
Nearly one in seven American households experience food insecurity, lacking the 
resources for consistent and dependable access to food. The SNAP program benefits 
more than 15 million children who are in one of every two households receiving 
benefits.  SNAP benefits support vulnerable populations including children, people with 
disabilities and older Americans, as well as an increasing number of low -income 
working families.  SNAP plays an important role in reducing poverty and food 
insecurity. SNAP benefits lifted at least 4.7 million people out of poverty in 2014, 
including 2.1 million children.  SNAP’s positive effects extend across the lifespan. SNAP 
benefits for expectant mothers can reduce the incidence of low birth -weight babies  
between five and 23 percent. Receiving SNAP benefits as a child can increase the 
likelihood  of completing high school by up to 18 percent. SNAP benefits can also lead 
to overall health and economic self -sufficiency among women. Although essential in 
addressin g food insecurity and nutrition, current SNAP benefit levels are not sufficient 
to sustain many families through the end of the month. More than half of SNAP 
households report experiencing food insecurity. Research has shown that exhaustion of 
SNAP benefit s by the end of the month can also decrease test scores and increase 
disciplinary events among school -aged children. Insufficiency of benefits can cause 
serious health problems related to diabetes and can lead to costly and avoidable 
hospitalizations.  
 
SNA P improves health outcomes and reduces healthcare costs.  When compared with 
demographically similar people without SNAP, research confirms that children who 
receive SNAP have lower risk of obesity, lower risk of poor health, fewer hospital 
admissions for failure to thrive, and less likelihood of developing metabolic syndrome 
such as high blood pressure, heart disease, and diabetes as adults.  Children who 
receive SNAP are also more likely to have better academic performance, increased high 

school completio n rates, and increased economic self -sufficiency and earnings as 
adults.1  Similar health outcomes are seen in adults who receive benefits. Adults who 
receive SNAP have better self -reported health, fewer hospitalizations, lower risk of high 
blood pressure , and lower risk of diabetes.2   
 
Many communities are poised to benefit from additional SNAP dollars by way of a 
boost in local economic activity, improved health outcomes, lower healthcare costs 
and hunger prevention.  Thank you for your time, attention,  and consideration of our 
comments. If you have any questions or need further information, please contact me 
via email at allyson.perron@heart.org or by phone at 867 -540-9686.  
 
Sincerely,  
Allyson Perron  Drag  
American Heart Association/ Stroke Association  
Government Relations Director , Senior Regional Lead  
 
 
2 Deborah Frank, M.D., S. Ettinger de Cuba, M.Sandel, and M. Black, “SNAP cuts will harm children in the USA,” The Lancet, vol 
382, no 9899, (2013), pp.1155 -6 ; Executive Office of the P resident of the United States, “LongTerm Benefits of the Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program,” December 2015, 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/documents/SNAP_report_final_nonembargo.pdf, pp.24 -8. 
2 “Long -Term Benefits of the Supp lemental Nutrition Assistance Program,” Ibid, pp. 23 -4. 
