Members of the Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry Committee,
I am submitting testimony in support of LD 568, “An Act to Provide Funding for the Fund to 
Address Food Insecurity and Provide Nutrition Incentives.” I am a board member and vendor at 
the Houlton Community Market and have been involved in the market since it began in 2009. In 
2016, with grant funding through the Maine Federation of Farmers Markets (MFFM), Houlton 
Community Market began accepting SNAP benefits and participating in a corresponding grant 
program that offered vouchers for fresh fruits and vegetables, known as Maine Harvest Bucks 
(MHB). Since then, the market has expanded its customer base within the community and both 
programs grow each year. For a general comparison, in 2019 Houlton Community Market had 
$2,557 in SNAP sales and $2,279 MHB vouchers redeemed. 2022 saw $6,049 in SNAP sales 
and $4,465 vouchers redeemed. This valuable program not only provides fresh and local produce 
to those members of our community who are in need but also supports the market gardeners and 
bakers at the market, strengthening the market as a whole. MFFM has been supportive of this 
program in Houlton and has been creative in finding ways to assist the market in paying for a 
staffed information booth, which provides a central location for any customer to go to for 
information or card processing. Houlton Community Market also combines nutrition education 
activities that are targeted to children, establishing a connection between farmers markets and 
fresh produce from an early age. More importantly, going to a farmers market tends to be a 
family affair and relationships are built between vendor and customer - whether that is a senior, 
young parent or child. 
Past surveys at Houlton Community Market have indicated SNAP shoppers who would not be 
able to purchase at the farmers market, or would have to reduce those purchases, without SNAP 
and MHB programs. As a vendor who is at the Houlton Community Market each Saturday 
during the summer and fall months, I’ve gotten to know many of our SNAP customers and know 
that each of their stories are different. Many families who began coming to market using their 
SNAP benefits are now in a position that they are no longer in the program while others, many of 
them seniors, rely on the program each year. I cannot stress how valuable the SNAP and MHB 
programs are to Houlton Community Market and the Southern Aroostook community, and it is 
my hope that the committee will recommend continuous funding. In a time of division over so 
many issues, this is a program that really brings a community together with one thing in 
common: spending a Saturday morning shopping at the local farmers market. 
Angela Wotton
Houlton Community Market
amwotton@earthlink.net
