Testimony in Support of LD 568: An Act to Pr ovide Funding for  the Fund to Addr ess Food
Insecurity and Pr ovide Nutrition Incentives
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker , and other esteemed members of the Joint Standing
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry ,
The Somali Bantu Community Association (SBCA) would like to express our support of LD 568
- An Act to Provide Funding for the Fund to Address Food Insecurity and Provide Nutrition
Incentives. SBCA  believes that funding nutrition incentives is essential in order to support our
local farmers and food access for our community .
SBCA ’s mission is to provide
vital transitional services,
advocacy ,
and food production that
empowers members of the refugee community to uphold cultural identity and economic
well-being to thrive in their new life here in Maine. One of our major programs is Liberation
Farms, a community farming program that provides new American farmers access to, and
culturally-appropriate resources for , the means of sustainable food production for themselves,
their families, and their communities. This investment in growing nourishes body and soul as
farmers meaningfully utilize their agricultural roots as they build new homes here in Maine.
LD 568 supports Liberation Farms in our food justice in action model. Liberation Farms
addresses issues of hunger and accessibility in our region, subsidizing produce prices to
high-needs schools and institutions. This provides supplemental income and food to our farmers,
nearly all of whom qualify for SNAP . We engage in “farm to low-income consumer” markets by
selling at farmers markets that accept SNAP , WIC, and Maine Harvest Bucks. We also accept
Maine Harvest Bucks at the
Suuq, our farm stand located
at our farm in Wales.
We continue to
build relationships and pathways to distribute our food in ways that advance food justice in our
state and community and nutrition incentives are an important part of our model.
We love being
able to accept SNAP  benefits and of fering Maine Harvest Bucks to incentivize people using
SNAP  to shop local. An investment in these nutrition incentives would allow us to continue to
participate in these vital programs and match SNAP  dollars 1 to 1 instead of a 50% match, which
would encourage shoppers to buy local even more.
The Somali Bantu Community Association also serves the particular daily needs of
approximately 2,000 Somali Bantu refugees in downtown Lewiston, Maine.
Nutrition incentives
like Maine Harvest Bucks, support people in our community , many of whom access SNAP
benefits. Nutrition incentives allow our community to further their SNAP  dollars, and prioritize
healthy , local food that our own community grows.
LD 568 would support our community as farmers, improving the viability of our food justice in
action model and it would support our community as consumers, increasing access to local food
for people using SNAP  benefits. Please support this bill.
