PARTNERING TO END HUNGER 
Good Shepherd 
FOOD BANK OF MAlNE 
February 27, 2023 
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
in support of LD 568, An Act to Provide Funding for the Fund to Address Food insecurity and Provide Nutrition 
incentives. 
To Chairperson lngwersen, Chairperson Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry , 
My name is Courtney Kennedy, and lam the Director of Nutrition for Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine.I 
am here today to express our support, and ask for your support, of LD 568, An Act to Provide Funding for the 
Fund to Address Food Insecurity and Provide Nutrition incentives. 
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access to nutritious 
food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the public in the fight to end 
hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 600 organizations to help distribute food 
to community members in need. Our network of partner agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior 
centers, school programs, and healthcare facilities. in our work centering equity, we are increasingly working 
with communities of color to address food security in a culturally responsive way. 
In addition to our traditional partner network, Good Shepherd Food Bank collaborates with small grocers and 
food retailer to oversee Farm Fresh Rewards. With Farm Fresh Rewards, shoppers using SNAP/EBT earn 
bonus dollars for Maine-grown fruit and vegetables. Incentives programs such as Maine Harvest Bucks and 
Farm Fresh Rewards encourages shoppers to spend their SNAP dollars on healthy product by providing 
ﬁnancial incentives on fruits and vegetables. SNAP incentives not only improve healthy food access and 
nutrition among SNAP participants, they also support farmers and small businesses, and stimulate the local 
economy. Since the inception of Farm Fresh Rewards in Maine, over $500,000 of incentives have been 
redeemed on Maine local product by SNAP shoppers — showing growth year over year. Good Shepherd Food 
Bank feels strongly about the positive impacts this program has on the wellness of food insecure Mainers. 
Our Farm Fresh Rewards stores are deeply embedded in their communities and have shared the impact that 
this program has had on SNAP shoppers. Families can prioritize eating local. As a food strategy for Maine we 
recognize the sustainable impact this program has on not only our farmers, but also our environment and our 
communities. Farm Fresh Rewards store include Belfast Co-op, Berry Fruit Farm, Blue Hill Co-op, Food Share 
Co-op, Gardner Co-op, Ginny's Natural Corner, Good Turn Co-op, Jordan's Farm, Machias Marketplace, Marsh 
River Co~op, Portland Co—op, Rising Tide Co-op, Rosemont —Munjoy Hill, Royal River Natural Foods, Sheepscot 
General Store and Spice and Grain. 
l want to share with you a little about Virginia Jewel or as her community knows her as Ginny of Ginny's 
Natural Corner. Ginny not only takes the time to engage her Farm Fresh Rewards shoppers, but she is even 
PO Box 1807 - 
3121 Hotel Road - 
Auburn, ME 04211 - Tel: 207-782-3554 - Fax: 207-782-9893 - feedingmaineorg 
r"\E>"lBEROF§; 
FEEDING‘ 
AMER|CA
PARTNERING TO END HUNGER 
Good Shepherd 
FOOD BANK OF MAlNE 
willing to meet them at the Farmers’ Market to share with them ways that they can shop not only at her 
store in Skowhegan but also take advantage of the nutrient full local fruits and vegetables at the Sl<0whegan 
Farmers’ Market. 
Another example is the team at the Portland Coop who are interested in responding to the ever-growing 
diverse shoppers they are seeing in their store. By making sure that they have culturally relevant local 
produce and partnering with local farms to simulate opportunity for both the shoppers and the farmers find 
beneficial. Building on the impact of supporting more diverse farms and building access to foods that are 
familiar to many shoppers who now call Maine home. 
SNAP/EBT shoppers share over and over that they get to prioritize local for their families, allowing them to 
contribute to a strong and healthy community. I have spoken to program users who are thankful that they 
do not have to choose between purchasing foods that are nutrient void because they cost less, but that they 
can purchase and extend their food dollars on local, healthy produce for their families. Extra funds for 
SNAP/EBT shoppers to purchase fruits and vegetables means that more fruits and vegetables are consumed; 
this results in improved health, and decreased diet related diseases in program users. 
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in lvlaine. Working in partnership with the state 
legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make Maine a stronger, better 
place to work and live. Because only partial funding for Farm Fresh Rewards is awarded through Gus 
Schumackers Incentive Program (GusNlP) which requires a non-profit or government agencies to apply and 
GusNlP requires a dollar-for-dollar match for programming. We ask you for your support in ensuring that 
Maine food insecure families have access to fresh, local and nutritious foods! 
Sincerely, 
Courtney Kennedy 
Director of Nutrition 
207-232-1975 
ckennedy@gsfb.org 
PO Box 1807 - 
3121 Hotel Road - 
Auburn, ME 04211 - 
Tel: 207-782-3554 - Fax: 207-782-9893 - feedingmaineorg 
2~lE.\ll3E:R OF 3‘;
u 
FEED|NG* 
AMERICA
