Testimony of Erica Emery of Farmington before the 131“ Legislature's Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Good afternoon members of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and 
Forestry. 
My name is Erica Emery, l am a resident of Farmington, and l am here today as a farmer to 
express my support of LD 5688 - An Act to Provide Funding for the Fund to Address Food 
Insecurity and Provide Nutrition Incentives. 
My farm, Rustic Roots Farm, has been a vendor at the Farmington Farmers Market for 10 
years. Our market has had a Maine Harvest Bucks nutrition incentive program since 2018. This 
program has been a huge success in getting more fresh, local produce to low income shoppers 
who might otherwise not have shopped at the market. Our market runs the Maine Harvest 
Bucks program in a way that is similar to other markets across the state. We have an info booth 
at our market where SNAP shoppers pick up a shopping sheet from a paid staff person, they 
circulate the market to select their groceries, they swipe their SNAP card at the info booth at the 
end of their shopping trip, and they earn Maine Harvest Bucks as an incentive for spending their 
SNAP budget at the market. This increases the buying power for low income shoppers and 
translates to more sales for farmers. 
For 2023, our market ﬁnds ourselves with a $5,000 budget gap to continue to run the program. 
The primary expenses for this program are staff time for our info booth to administer 
transactions and a portion of the Maine Han/est Bucks incentive that the Maine Federation of 
Farmers Markets can't cover this year. Our market is rallying with some donated time from 
farmer vendors to try and keep our Maine Han/est Bucks program up and running. If this bill was 
funded, not only would the Maine Harvest Bucks program be continued but farmers could 
re-focus on what they do best, growing food for their communities, instead of fundraising during 
our busy spring season. . 
I love having the Maine Han/est Bucks program at our market because it meets an important 
need in our community, it allows our market to serve all members including low income 
shoppers. The majority of people that I see using this beneﬁt are not only families trying to 
stretch their food dollars but also senior citizens living on a ﬁxed income. As a farmer, l know 
that many of my products are more expensive than what you might find in groceiy stores. Maine 
Harvest Bucks helps reduce the cost barrier for accessing fresh, local foods so we can truly 
serve all members of our community. I believe there is a lot of dignity in being able to choose 
between purchasing lettuce grown on the West Coast or purchasing lettuce grown by a farmer 
in your community, and to not have to feel a financial burden in making that choice. l have found 
that folks using their Maine Harvest Bucks at our farm stall are always excited to shop, eat local, 
and learn about how they can cook with some of our veggies. Maine Han/est Bucks also helps 
keep money local because when any shoppers spends money at the market or with our farm, 
those funds are reinvested locally through labor on farms and goods bought in our community.
About 19% of our farm’s yearly market sales come from shoppers using SNAP and Maine 
Harvest Bucks to purchase vegetables. Our farm would be in a very tough spot if we lost this 
sector of our market shoppers. 
Funding this bill would ensure that markets across the state can continue to feed folks at all 
income levels and give SNAP shoppers choice in deciding how they want to spend their food 
budgets. Funding this program would reduce the burden on farmers who organize their local 
markets and are now being put in the position this year to not only feed their communities but 
raise funds to do so. There is also so much potential for even more fresh, local produce to get 
on the plates and in the bellies of low income shoppers. Our market saw 79 new SNAP shoppers this year who had never shopped at the market before. Funding this bill allows for 
continued marketing and outreach to get more shoppers to market to get fresh, local, and 
nutritious food. Lastly, the Maine Harvest Bucks program is a very efficient use of resources. 
Funding an info booth at a market allows for shoppers at the Fannington Farmers’ Market 
access to 12 different farm and food businesses all available in one spot at the same time. We would love to see you in person at the Farmington Farmers’ Market on Saturday mornings and at the very least we hope that you are shopping at your local farmers’ market. Thank you for 
your time.
