Testimony of Marybeth Stocking of Springvale, ME before the 131st Legislature’s Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry.
Good afternoon members of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. 
My name is Marybeth Stocking and I co-own Two Toad Farm in Springvale, ME, and am the volunteer 
manager of the Sanford Farmers’ Market, celebrating its 14th year feeding our community.  
The Sanford Market’s success relies heavily on its customers’ access to both the SNAP program, and the 
Maine Harvest Bucks incentive program.  In our summer season last year, we saw just under $10,000 in 
SNAP get spent on our locally-produced fruits, vegetables, and foods at our market.  Because of the 
Maine Harvest Buck incentive program, our farmers and food producers were able to see another 
$4,000 spent by these same customers at our market.  These programs give the market a significant 
boost in sales, support our small businesses, and provide fresh, local food to a portion of our community 
that would likely be excluded from access to these products by financial constraints.  In a lower-income 
neighborhood like Sanford, this program ensures the town can continue to host a vibrant farmers’ 
market, as farmers and food producers can make a decent living by selling there, rather than travelling 
across the county to wealthier towns’ markets.  Without this program, farmers’ markets in towns like 
Sanford would not survive, and only markets in rich towns like Kennebunk will survive.  We ALL need to 
eat!!!  We ALL also deserve access to fresh, healthy, and locally-sourced foods.
The ongoing funding of these programs that LD 568 would provide is vital for the success of both 
farmers’ markets and food producers in low-income towns, and the continued access for low-income 
residents to fresh, locally-produced foods.  
Marybeth Stocking
Sanford Farmers' Market
LD 568
Testimony of Marybeth Stocking of Springvale, ME before the 131st Legislature’s Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry.
Good afternoon members of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and 
Forestry. My name is Marybeth Stocking and I co-own Two Toad Farm in Springvale, ME, 
and am the volunteer manager of the Sanford Farmers’ Market, celebrating its 14th year 
feeding our community.  
The Sanford Market’s success relies heavily on its customers’ access to both the SNAP 
program, and the Maine Harvest Bucks incentive program.  In our summer season last year, 
we saw just under $10,000 in SNAP get spent on our locally-produced fruits, vegetables, and 
foods at our market.  Because of the Maine Harvest Buck incentive program, our farmers and 
food producers were able to see another $4,000 spent by these same customers at our 
market.  These programs give the market a significant boost in sales, support our small 
businesses, and provide fresh, local food to a portion of our community that would likely be 
excluded from access to these products by financial constraints.  In a lower-income 
neighborhood like Sanford, this program ensures the town can continue to host a vibrant 
farmers’ market, as farmers and food producers can make a decent living by selling there, 
rather than travelling across the county to wealthier towns’ markets.  Without this program, 
farmers’ markets in towns like Sanford would not survive, and only markets in rich towns like 
Kennebunk will survive.  We ALL need to eat!!!  We ALL also deserve access to fresh, 
healthy, and locally-sourced foods.
The ongoing funding of these programs that LD 568 would provide is vital for the success of 
both farmers’ markets and food producers in low-income towns, and the continued access for 
low-income residents to fresh, locally-produced foods.  

