. 
.5 i 
6. 
lle 
; ».i¢. '=-nu 
Matthgw G_ _pQu1iQ_t SENATE _ 
_ 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 15 ' 
13.1st Legislature ~ 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
3 
TESTIMONY OF SENATOR MATTHEW POULIOT 
Sponsor of LD 568 
“An Act to Provide Funding for the Fund to Address Food Insecurity and Provide 
_‘ - 
Nutrition Incentives. ” " '‘ 
3. , _ Public Hearing: February 27th V4 
_1 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture Conservation and Forestry. I am Senator Matt Pouliot’ and Irepresent Senate District 
15, which includes the towns of Augusta, Belgrade, China, Mount‘Vernon, Sidney and 
Vassalboro. I am here to present my bill LD 568, “An Act to Provide Funding for the Fund to 
Address Food Insecurity and Provide Nutrition Incentives. ” 
This bill will support the Fund To Address Food Insecurity and Provide Nutrition Incentives 
O This establishes an ongoing armual general fund appropriation of $600,000 
o This appropriation was included in the Governor ’s budget 
O However the G0vernor ’s budget has this as a one-time allocation and we are 
advocating for this committee to support an annual appropriation 
O These funds are necessary to ﬁll a new funding gap created in a change at the 
federal level. This does not close the gap completely, but makes the remaining 
balance much more manageable for the organizations involved (MFFM, MOFGA, 
GSFB, etc). 
I These funds will be distributed among the organizations operating 
nutrition incentive programs based on their program size and need 
0 This bill also removes the $5 0,000 limit on matching contributions from the fund criteria 
Nutrition incentive programs in Maine, like Maine Harvest Bucks and P arm Fresh Rewards, help 
Mainers who use SNAP buy more fruits and vegetables produced in Maine. These programs 
increase the purchasing power of SNAP dollars when used at farmers’ markets, farm stands, 
CSA’s, and small retail locations. SNAP shoppers either get a discount when they’re buying 
local fruits and vegetables, or they earn bonus bucks when they spend their SNAP dollars on 
Sfafe House: (207) 287-1505 * Fax.‘ (207) 287-I527 * Toll Free: 1-800-423-6900 * TTY: 711 
Maff.P0uIi0f@legislm ‘ure.mai11e.g0v * Web Sire." legislature.n1aiI1e.g0v/senate
local foods. Either way, they’re incentivized to spend their SNAP on Maine-grown food, and 
they get extra funds when they do so to buy healthy fruits and vegetables. 
This appropriation is a direct investment for communities in all 16 counties, as it leads to more 
sales for local farms and food producers. It also turns farmers’ markets, farm stands, and small 
stores into food access points, where people with limited food budgets can afford to buy extra 
food thanks to these nutrition incentive programs. Nutrition incentive programs achieve public 
health goals while stimulating local economies. 
These state funds will leverage federal matching dollars in two ways. First, the federal grants that 
help support these programs require l to 1 matching. Secondly, the federal SNAP dollars that 
people use to buy food will be redirected to local producers, rather than food produced out of 
state or out of the country. Thus, for every $1 the state puts in, We get $2 from the federal 
govermnent. 
This Fund was originally established in the 130th legislature thanks to the leadership of Rep. 
Pleucker and others. However, the ultimate funding allocation was a one~time funding allocation 
at $25,000, which was an amount that was insufficient to support the good work that this bill 
seeks to support. 
In the last 2 years, the participating outlets have had more than $2.3 million in sales thanks to 
Maine Harvest Bucks and Farm Fresh Rewards. That’s direct sales of local food to farmers or 
small retail stores. As the program grows, so have the funding needs. Federal grant support has 
been the backbone for these programs since 2015. Many states across the country have 
established funds to boost the sustainability of these programs and help grow their impact. With 
a recent change in federal grants, the organizations that run nutrition incentive programs facea 
funding gap of more than $600,000 annually. This gap is stretching organizational resources and 
is resulting in farmers having to fundraise during winter months to keep their programs aﬂoat. 
This ﬁmd will substantially close the funding gap and allow the partner organizations to reach 
serve communities, improving their health and food access and further bolstering the local food 
economy across Maine. 
Coming up, you will hear from community partners, farmers, and people experiencing food 
insecurity on the reasons why this funding is so important and the ways in which the funds will 
be spent. Thank you for your time and I am happy to answer any questions.
