& at
. 
ﬁr 
22 STATE HoUsE STATION >-.-ex. .» jg STATE or MAINE 
. 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, CoNsERvATIoN & FORESTRY 
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER 
1‘-.;r.%='v1 xv, 
JANETT 
GOVERNQR COMMISSIONER 
AUGUSTA . MILLS 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 568 
An Act to Provide Funding for the Fund to Address Food Insecurity and Provide Nutrition . 
Incentives 
February 27, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Michelle Webb and I am the Agriculture 
Resource Development Director within the Bureau of Agriculture, Food & Rural Resources. I 
am speaking on behalf of the Department of Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry in support of 
LD 568, An Act to Provide Funding for the Fund to Address Food Insecurity and Provide 
Nutrition Incentives. 
Two years ago, the Department came before you in support of LD 691, the bill that established 
Maine’s Fund to Address Food Insecurity and Provide Nutrition Incentives. We are pleased to be 
back supporting LD 568, which would put signiﬁcant resources into that fl.1I1Cl. We note thata 
parallel request for $600,000 per year for the upcoming biennium has also been included in the. 
Governor ’s budget. 
The Bureau of Agriculture, Food, and Rural Resources has several important constituencies. 
Chief among them are farmers, whom we serve with technical assistance, food safety resources, 
ﬁnancial tools, grantrprograms, market development support, and more. Another is Maine 
people experiencing food insecurity. These are the people we serve with programs like Maine 
Senior FarmShare, the Emergency Food Assistance Program, Hunters for the Hungry, and 
others. 
LD 568 is about maintaining and supporting programs that are textbook “win-win” situations for 
these two important constituencies. They create additional markets for Maine growers, and they 
lower barriers to healthy food for Maine families. These funds will provide needed matching 
funds to draw in federal funds. 
Programs exist both within private philanthropy and within the USDA that fund efforts to 
encourage people who use nutrition beneﬁts like SNAP and WIC to spend their beneﬁts on local 
HARLOW BUILDING _ I Z"‘“.‘“:|’iIt°’ PHONE! (207)287-3200 gric ure _ 
18 ELKINS LANE I12.a.1.H € conservation FAX. (207) 287-2400 
MAINE . e 
&Fm,est|-y WEB: WWW.MAINE GOV/DACF AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
AMANDA E BEAL
foods. For over a dozen years, Maine organizations have been successful in leveraging these 
resources to create incentive programs like Farm Fresh Rewards, which incentivizes purchases at 
retail outlets, and Maine Harvest Bucks, which incentivizes purchases in direct-to-consumer 
settings like CSAs and farmers’ markets. In 2022, together these programs generated over $1 
million in high-value sales for Maine fanns. Programs that encourage Maine SNAP recipients — 
who are overwhelmingly comprised of seniors, the disabled, and working families with 
children —~to spend more of their beneﬁts on healthy, local food will have immense, positive 
impacts on our farms and our communities. We are supportive of the State partnering in these 
efforts. 
In addition to the economic beneﬁt for farmers and the health beneﬁts for consmners, there is 
another important reason to support initiatives that increase the consumption of local produce. 
The Maine Climate Action Plan, under Strategy D “Grow Maine’s Clean-Energy Economy and 
Protect Our Natural-Resource Industries, ” includes action item Dl .3: “Increase the amount of 
food consumed in Maine from state food producers from 10% to 20% by 2025 and 30% by 2030 
through local food system development. ” Right now, the overwhelming majority of food 
purchased with federal food beneﬁts is not grown in Maine. In addition to its other positive 
impacts, We view LD 568 as providing a boost to the state’s broader efforts to increase local food 
consumption, as Well as enhance access to Maine-grown foods through various market channels. 
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions at a work session in the future.
