February 27, 2023
Dear Members of the Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry Committee, 
My name is Reeve Wood and I’m a resident of Bowdoinham, where I operate Counterpoint 
Bread, a small bakery specializing in sourdough breads and croissants.  I’m testifying in support 
of LD 568 – An Act to Provide Funding for the Fund to Address Food Insecurity and Provide 
Nutrition Incentives.  I offer this testimony in my capacity as a small business owner and as a 
citizen who is concerned about the difficulties facing many of my fellow community members 
around adequate access to affordable, healthy food.  
SNAP is necessary, but insufficient, to keep thousands of Mainers from going hungry.  
As I’m sure you’re aware, Mainers depend heavily on the SNAP program to meet their basic 
nutritional needs.  According to the DHHS, even before the pandemic 12 percent of Maine 
households were food insecure, higher than the national average of 11 percent.  Data collected in 
2021 showed that “13 percent of children in Maine weren’t eating enough because the household 
couldn’t afford sufficient food.”  According to Feeding America, Maine was sixth in the nation 
for projected food insecurity in 2021.1  Beginning March 1, 2023, expanded SNAP benefits 
provided by the federal government will end in Maine, meaning that vulnerable families will 
have less money for food.  
Incentives help support vulnerable families and local food producers.  
Incentive programs like Maine Harvest bucks are an important means of helping Mainers who 
receive SNAP benefits try to fill the gaps in their food budgets and source healthy, locally-
produced food.  This obviously also benefits the Maine food businesses that they patronize, 
including mine.  While Maine Harvest Bucks can’t be used to purchase my bread products, they 
serve to incentivize SNAP recipients to shop at the farmers’ markets where I am a vendor.  And 
since these customers are able to use market incentives for fruits and vegetables, they are more 
likely to have money to put toward a loaf or two of bread for the week.  This helps my business 
directly, together with Maine Grains and the other Maine-based suppliers from whom I purchase 
ingredients.  This dynamic helps federal and state funds invested in these programs stick to 
Maine communities and bolster our local economy.  
SNAP is not a snap to administer at Farmers’ Markets.  
Accepting SNAP benefits at a farmers’ market is not easy.  SNAP benefits are generally 
conveyed through specific EBT processing equipment as opposed to the normal credit-card 
readers that market vendors are almost all equipped with now.  While some vendors have their 
own EBT equipment, the burden of being approved to accept SNAP/EBT transactions means that 
1 https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/blog/maine-dhhs-extends-nutrition-support-88000-households-2021-08-02
it generally falls to the market to deal with EBT transactions and administer a token or voucher 
system to account for transactions with individual vendors.  This takes people and time. 
  
I am a vendor at the Bowdoinham Farmers’ Market, the Yarmouth Farmers’ Market, and the 
Brunswick Winter Market.  Each of these markets has a different approach to serving SNAP 
recipients, and all depend, in whole or in part, on volunteers to administer the collection of 
SNAP funds or, in the case of the Yarmouth Market, the administration of a market-specific 
voucher program that operates in place of accepting SNAP.  While we have been blessed with a 
dedicated group of volunteers at the markets I attend, reliance on volunteers makes 
administration of these programs vulnerable to staffing shortages.  
Investment is needed to facilitate the use of SNAP and to bolster incentive programs at 
farmers’ markets.  
A broad trend is clear at all of the markets at which I sell:  the more effort that goes into 
publicizing and effectively administering the use of SNAP benefits and associated incentive 
programs like Maine Harvest Bucks, the more money is spent at the market that wouldn’t 
otherwise be spent there.  The proposed legislation will provide ongoing funding for incentive 
programs like Maine Harvest Bucks, and will help with the burdens of staffing and equipment 
necessary to accept SNAP benefits at farmers’ markets as well as the education and promotion 
necessary to let people know they can use SNAP at their local market.  With food insecurity on 
the increase in Maine, it is imperative that the legislature facilitate reliable support for efforts to 
support Maine families, and in doing so, also benefit our local food producers.  
Thank you all for your work and your consideration of this important issue. 
Sincerely, 
Reeve Wood
Counterpoint Bread
Bowdoinham, Maine
