BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director
55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.org
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to homelessness and 
hunger
Hello Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry,
 My name is Taylor Cray, and I am writing to you today in support of LD568: An Act to 
Provide Funding for the Fund to Address Food Insecurity and Provide Nutrition Incentives. 
I currently work as a Team Leader with Preble Street Advocacy, a role that includes 
working with the Maine Hunger Initiative. The Maine Hunger Initiative works to ensure 
that folks in Southern Maine, and across the State of Maine, have access to nourishing 
food that is culturally appropriate and available when they need it. 
Within the Maine Hunger Initiative, we have recently launched a group called the Food 
Justice Coalition, which is a group of individuals with lived experience who discuss the 
work being done by Preble Street Food Programs, along with larger issues that impact 
folks across the state. Much of our early conversation has centered around the end of 
SNAP EA benefits, and the ways that families and individuals can supplement their 
lowered SNAP benefits. Programs like Maine Harvest Bucks and Farm Fresh Rewards 
critically assist individuals and families with the purchase of fresh and local produce, and 
empower households by offering more freedom in food choice. While this may seem like 
a small thing, the element of choice often becomes a rare luxury for folks struggling with 
poverty and food insecurity. With the end of SNAP EA benefits, fresh fruits and vegetables 
may be the first things to be removed from a family’s diet due to limited income. These 
items are often more costly, and more perishable, than shelf-stable alternatives that may 
be less nourishing. 
The ability to access healthy and nourishing food is a necessity for the health and well-
being of all individuals, regardless of their income level. Nutritional incentive programs 
like Maine Harvest Bucks and Farm Fresh Rewards help to bridge the gaps that exist in 
food access for those folks who are unsure whether they will be able to stretch their food 
budgets to include a trip to the farmer’s market or who are choosing between 
nourishment and quantity of meals. Funding these programs helps to ensure that healthy 
food is available to everyone living in Maine, not only to those who have the financial 
resources to access it. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, and for your work to continue ensuring the 
health and wellness of all Mainers. Please vote in support of LD568. 
Sincerely, 
Taylor Cray
Team Leader, Homeless Voices for Justice
Preble Street

