TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 441 
"An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Recreational Freshwater 
Fishing with Respect to a Portion of Middle River in Marshfield and 
Machias" 
SPONSORED BY: Representative Davis of East Machias 
CO-SPONSORED BY: Representative STROUT of Harrington 
DATE OF HEARING: March 8, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Francis Brautigam, Fisheries Director at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in 
opposition to L.D. 441. 
A 1‘/2 mile section of Middle River between the bridge at Marshfielcl Flats Road down- 
stream to the mouth of Smelt Brook, is managed under special regulation by the 
Department for youth fishing, this special regulation includes those holding 
complimentary fishing licenses. Management in this special section is also supported by 
a brook trout stocking program and a two trout bag limit. There are multiple landowners 
abutting the river section that is managed for youth fishing. The nearby river section 
above the special youth area is also stocked and can be fished by anglers of all ages, 
including nearby property owners. 
This bill proposes to enact an exemption for landowners and their family members to 
create special fishing privileges for select adults that conflicts with Department 
management objectives to create positive experiences for less skilled youth anglers 
learning to fish, as well as people with physical and cognitive disabilities. Furthermore, 
the creation of additional exemptions increases the complexity in the fishing laws which 
has been a subject of great public interest and concern and has taken significant effort 
by the Department to simplify fishing laws so as not to create barriers for the publicto
fish. Another concern is the challenge warden service will face to enforce this 
exemption when trying to determine who are eligible landowners and family members. 
When the creation of youth fishing opportunities is associated with private lands, such 
as the case in this location, the Department only creates and maintains those 
opportunities with support from the private landowners. If there is no longer 
landowner support to maintain the youth fishing opportunity on this section of Middle 
River, the Department would prefer to modify or remove the special youth fishing 
regulations rather than creating a unique exemption in law that is inconsistent with the 
intent of this youth angler development program. if this is no longer a youth fishing 
water, the hatchery stocking program in this location may also be suspended. 
I would also like to offer that water specific changes as outlined in this bill are normally 
managed by the Department through its rule making authority consistent with the 
Administrative Procedures Act (APA). The rule making process allows the Department 
to integrate its publicly derived species goals and objectives with water specific angler 
and fish data to achieve the best outcome for the fisheries resource and the angling 
public. In the past, moving regulations for individual waters from rule into statute has 
proved cumbersome and created a fragmented and less effective approach to managing 
the fisheries resource. 
The rulemaking process provides a venue more familiar to the public, is supported by 
broader outreach for increased public awareness and input during the traditional 30-day 
comment period. Agency public hearings are also convened at times more conducive to 
public participation. The Department also provides additional information on each 
proposal. Any changes advanced through the APA review process can also be aligned 
with printing of new law books.g 
l would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
