February 24, 2023 
Senator LaFontaine and Representative Landry 
Chairs of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee: 
I was advised today of the public hearing on March 8*“ and unfortunately, I am unable to 
speak with you in person today because of a pre-planned trip and I will be on a ﬂight during this 
public hearing. Therefore, I am writing my testimony on behalf of bill LD44l (An Act of Amend 
the Laws Goveming Recreational Freshwater Fishing with Respect to a Portion of Middle River in 
Marshﬁeld and Machias). 
I am writing to you on behalf of my parents, Joseph and Marian Ingemi and our family, 
which own land in Marshﬁeld along both sides of the Middle River. A couple of years after they 
bought 35 acres (map 3, lot 31) which runs along the Marshﬁeld Flats Road and partially along 
Route 192, the State of Maine took the ﬁshing rights away from our family by making this portion 
of the Middle River only available for ﬁshing for kids 15 year old and younger. My parents and the 
other landowners were never asked about this law change or approached about concerns of 
trespassing and littering. The most common area the kids’ ﬁsh is accessible via my parents’ 
property. At the time of the law change, my father which, lives in New Jersey, was going to post 
the land but I talked him out of it because my kids at the time, could at least enjoy the ﬁshing on 
their grandparents ’ property with their friends, and we live a few houses up the road. Our family 
enjoys having the kids ﬁsh off of the property even though there are times we complain about the 
trash we have to pick up that is left behind. My father and our family are not happy that he and his 
family can't ﬁsh on his property and feels that this is taking away from the enjoyment of owning 
river front property and taking away from the property value although they still pay taxes for 
waterfront property that they are unable use themselves. One landowner has already posted their 
land and my dad has asked me to do the same on several occasions, where he has me as the 
caretaker of his property. I have spoken to several Game Wardens over the years about this issue 
and in 2016 I was told to speak with the local ﬁsheries biologist in Jonesboro which directed me to 
write to Commissioner Chandler Woodcock. In 2016 I did write to Commissioner Woodcock 
asking for a rule change before I posted the property and spoke to my local legislators. At that time 
Warden Rick LaFlamme wrote to me and advised me that there would not be a rule change to the 
Middle River and apologized for any inconvenience this caused to our family. He also stated thata 
professor from Washington Academy was spoken to and would have his class clean up the trash. I 
was familiar with this professor that he spoke about and unfortunately that trash clean up has never 
taken place. Warden LaFlamme closed his letter with “we have concluded the importance of this to 
remain a special regulation area for kids only. At this time, we will not be moving a rule change 
forward. ” 
I can say that I think this is a great place for kids to ﬁsh, but our family feels this is an 
injustice to our rights as landowners to ﬁsh from our own property. It should be noted that onlya 
small portion of the Middle River is posted with this restriction. I certainly understand that this 
river is stocked at times, but many other waterways are also stocked without this restriction. I have 
also seen that most waterways that are restricted in this way are not owned by numerous private 
property owners, and some are only restricted for some of the ﬁshing season.
In closing, we think that it would be appropriate for landowners and their families, to include 
children and grandchildren, to be exempt from this restriction and would urge you to pass this bill 
as written. 
Thanks for taking the time to hear me and my family on this issue. I appreciate your service 
to our great State. 
Sincerely, 
Jeffreq P‘ Ivrqevni 
Jeffrey D. Ingemi 
Marshﬁeld, Maine
