< m .a._»."' ""-“e ae 
f§3.E»~=,.@;:~4'~t»,= €§ ~,
l 
Brad Farrin 131“ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 3 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Brad Farrin 
Presenting L.D. 410, An Act Regarding the Nuisance of Cannabis 
Plants and Smoke in Residential Areas 
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
April 5, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs: I am Senator Brad Farrin and I have the honor of representing the 
people of District 3, which includes towns in Kennebec, Somerset and Penobscot counties. I am 
before you today to present L.D. 410, An Act Regarding the Nuisance of Cannabis Plants and 
Smoke in Residential Areas. 
Since the legalization of adult-use marijuana in the State of Maine, I have heard from many 
constituents, particularly in Somerset County, that have complained to me about the odor that 
comes from cannabis plants and smoke. The constituent I submitted this legislation for shared 
with me that he and his wife cannot enjoy their back porch many days without inhaling cannabis 
odors from nearby neighbors. While I recognize that We have legalized adult-use marijuana, I 
believe it’s important that individuals are able to maintain a certain quality of life in their home 
or on their property. I also understand that the odors may impact one’s ability to sell their home 
if an interested buyer is deterred by the smell. 
This bill, which was submitted as a concept draft, has been amended to identify offensive 
C8.Il1'18.blS odor as a public nuisance subject to civil violation. If an individual who resides or owns 
a business located within 100 yards of the source of odor ﬁles a complaint with law enforcement 
and the officer veriﬁes the odor, the individual causing the nuisance would be subject to a ﬁne. 
As proposed, the ﬁnes are in line with Maine safety belt violation fees: $50 for the ﬁrst offense, 
$125 for the second, and $250 for the third. .. 
I recognize that individuals and businesses have gone through the process of becoming licensed 
under the medical and adult-use programs, and I want to make clear that license holders would 
not be subject to this legislation. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
