Jordan Smith
Pownal
LD 410
Greetings, My name is Jordan Smith. I have been a cannabis user and advocate for 
over 25 years and a medical cannabis caregiver for 13 years. The smell and sight of 
cannabis is still vilified by many such as one of the sponsors of this bill Scott Cyrway 
who have spent their careers ostracizing and jailing individuals for choosing to use 
cannabis. A lot has changed since the days when he was the director of the DARE 
program which we now know caused more drug use than it ever prevented. He has 
called caregivers drug dealers in a public hearing and more recently in another 
hearing claimed that people who’s use cannabis are more likely to abuse their pets 
which is entirely untrue and is fear mongering. Years ago this rhetoric would fit right 
into public opinion but today this is inflammatory and wildly inappropriate.
      I understand it must be difficult for people who believed so strongly that this plant
was such a threat to public safety that people needed to be jailed for even possessing a
small amount of it to see it be legalized. This especially applies to the law 
enforcement and prosecutor community who have destroyed so many lives because of
this belief. Admitting they were wrong in all of these actions and living with that guilt
is harder than holding on to these antiquated beliefs and still fighting cannabis at 
every turn. 
       I felt it necessary to preface my statement with this because it is at the heart of 
this bill. 
Maine is a hard working state with many smells both from Industry large and small, 
home businesses, hobbies, farms, barbecues, campfires, fishing boats, paper mills, gas
stations, the list goes on and on. I recall living on a farm where the farmer who tended
the fields for hay would spread chicken manure periodically to provide nutrients to 
the fields. It smelled terrible, like dead bodies. Our dogs would roll in it and then 
come in the house and make the house smell terrible. The entire town would smell 
like this for weeks as he would tend many fields all over town. This is a nuisance 
smell but its also part of living in Maine. And cannabis is now a part of living in 
Maine as well. Whether you enjoy the smell or not.  
      Some people do not like the smell of burning wood in campfires or in the wood 
stoves that people rely on to stay warm in the winter, some people don’t like the smell
of cooking meat in a barbecue or on a grill, some people don’t like the smell of fish 
on the waterfront. Nobody likes the smell of paper mills or many other manufacturing
facilities. A lot of people don’t like the “visual nuisance” of many of these things 
either but they are all a part of this great states heritage, livelihood and identity. 
        Many “residential” areas are intermingled or at least within view or smelling 
distance of Industry and or home businesses that produce visual or olfactory 
“nuisances” so it’s going to be very difficult to define what a residential area is in 
regards to a nuisance smell. As we all know smell travels easily throughout the air 
and does not adhere to zoning requirements. If we are going to ban the smell or 
appearance of cannabis because it is a nuisance than we need to ban everything that 
anyone feels is a nuisance to them. If you were to present 1000 people with the smell 
of rotting fish or cannabis 900 are going to prefer the cannabis the other 100 just 
dislike cannabis for whatever reason. If you were to show 1000 people a picture of a 
paper mill or a cannabis plant again people would generally rather see the cannabis 
plant. 
     Lastly it should be mentioned that outside of the medical and adult use cannabis 
program we also have a hemp program. There is far less regulation on where it can be
grown, how much can be grown and zero regulation on how much it can smell. For 
that reason alone this bill is completely pointless since anyone could grow hemp 
anywhere and it will look and smell exactly the same as its psychoactive counterpart. 
This bill could pass and have zero impact on the “nuisance” of the smell and sight of 
cannabis. 
       Thank you so much for taking the time to read and consider my testimony on this 
matter.
My very best regards,
Jordan A Smith
