Written Testimony of Steven N. Robinson 
With regard to  
LD410 
 
My name is Steven Robinson and I am the founder of Robinsons of 
Maine, a medical caregiver farm with an outdoor grow located in 
Albion, Maine.  Our grow is located in the middle of our farm, at least 
four hundred yards from the nearest road or neighbor, so I believe it is 
unlikely that an odors emanating from our grow would cause any 
concern to our neighbors and we have good relationships with our 
neighbors.  I am concerned, however, that our barn where we do 
processing of our harvest is within 100 yards of China Road and as such, 
could fall within the proposed restrictions of LD410.  We have never 
had any complaints or concerns from our neighbors, but depending on 
the scope of LD410’s coverage, anyone driving down China Road (which 
is US 202 for those of you not from Albion) could express concern about 
odors that may emanate from our barn during the curing process.   
 
Let’s keep in mind that Maine is also home to a vibrant dairy industry, a 
struggling paper industry and a tradition of lobstering and fishing. As 
Representative Cyrway is all too familiar, dairy farmers spread manure 
in fields, including right across the road from Representative Cyrway’s 
home.  While to many of us, the smell of a freshly dressed field is a 
reminder of the good traditions around the farm, objectively, the smell 
of manure is farm more pervasive in our town than the smell of 
growing or harvested cannabis.  People downwind from paper plants, 
or next door to a lobster shack have to live with the smell of their 
neighbors’ odors. 
 
There is no legitimate legislative reason to discriminate against the 
smell of cannabis rather than any of the other odors common around 
Maine.  We face enough legitimate regulatory challenges while trying 
to earn a living and provide a valuable service to our patients.  Please 
concentrate on issues that affect Maine’s people, not a pet issue for a 
vocal minority.  There are far more important issues facing the people 
of Maine than whether someone can smell a cannabis plant growing 
from 100 yards.  Thank you. 
