April 5, 2023 OPPOSED LD410 Meehan, Susan 207-861-1945 
Senator Craig Hickman, Representative Supica, and honorable members of the VLA Committee. My name is 
Susan Meehan, and I live in Sweden, Maine. I am a board member of the Maine Cannabis Coalition anda 
founding member of the Cannabis Council of Maine. I testify strongly opposed to this bill LD 410 today. 
This bill has the potential to destroy an industry based upon a "neighborly" complaint within 100 yards - that is 
about 300 feet. There are many properties in Maine that do not even have 300 feet of frontage or a 300 foot 
border. How shall people stay 100 yards from other people in Portland Maine for example? We heard a bill last 
week whose sponsor I believe has honest and good intentions to prevent young adults from the horrors of 
addiction. l am struggling to understand the good intentions with the presented language. This bill stinks. 
One day, heading to Cyndimae ’s Boston-located neurologist one day, in bumper to bumper traffic ona 
Massachusetts highway, Cyndimae started a seizure that required administration of her cannabis rescue 
formulation. As my driver pulled over, so I could safely administer her rescue formulation, a Massachusetts 
State Police ofﬁcer pulled in behind us. He came to the vehicle window and clearly smelled cannabis. He 
asked if we needed emergency services as the seizure was resolving. He was pretty stunned how fast her 
seizure resolved, and even though he smelled cannabis, and he probably knew that Massachusetts was nota 
reciprocal state, he helped us get our vehicle back into traffic to continue to Cyndimae ’s doctor. This bill even 
targets patient oral consumption. To this day, my nieces and nephews will smell cannabis and with happy 
memories for the life this plant gave her, they exclaim, “l smell Cyndimae ’s medicine!" 
What other stinky companies shall we regulate out of business today? 
Paper mills, pig farms, cow/dairy farms, farms in general, tobacco smoke, deodorant, liquor/alcohol, gas 
stations - gasoline stinksll The Old Port in Portland smells like a swampy ocean. Can we please do something 
about this? Wearing perfume and cologne in public spaces. We can ask, but we (currently) do not legislate this 
matter. Passing gas in public — we need a law to prevent this as well please. I think England such a law existed 
in renaissance England. Skunks — shall we hunt skunks to extinction? Stink bugs - well, I too wish that they 
had not been imported from Asia, but how do we eliminate them without eliminating our beneficial insects like 
honey bees? When people cook fish in my friend’s apartment buildings, it stinks. Shall we legislate cooking 
fish, and where that should be legal? Sometimes we just have to take the perceived negative with the bonafide 
good, and let the honey bees live and let nature's olfactory adjustment remedy this. 
This program assists about 10% of the voting population of Maine coming in at 106,000 patients strong. Stop 
harassing our patients. This bill demonstrates why It is long overdue time that we establish boundaries that 
provide for consumption in social clubs, or in outside bounded areas much like we establish tobacco 
consumption areas. Perhaps a smoking area should be a smoking area. Maine currently sells and taxes 
product to our many tourists providing no legal location where they can consume said product. Enforcement of 
this stench would be impossible. Please kill this waste-of-time-and-money bill deeming it ought not to pass. 
Thank you.
