SILXTE OF T\IAIT\*E Ygeeé’ A , \ 
,; 1-rriixr or REPRE7\"ET\ ”I.~\TI\‘Ii.\ 
H<>L.<i- , REPL'BLIL ‘A\' ()FFlL'l§ 
AL‘oL‘sT.-x. .\l.-\I,\ ”E (H333-rrouj 
.. . (1: , t_n" ,_\" ,2 \ i:~li:’r\‘.:\!\:\ ’: 
Ls‘ _ —r v 
BlLL\ P>( >8 FAL‘l,l\'l\t[iHA.\l F__,'\' . 
‘J,- l H\- __ 
'1 \‘ ~'.' : 5‘l P» . ll. I‘ QUE R i_\§h_ “ I j g‘ 
April 20, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 1444 
"An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Eligibility Restrictions for Commercial Menhaden 
Fishing Licenses" 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Committee on Marine Resources. I 
am Representative Billy Bob Faulkingham and I am here to present LD 1444, "An Act to 
Amend the Laws Governing Eligibility Restrictions for Commercial Menhaden Fishing 
Licenses" . 
In the 129th Legislature we created the menhaden license. Before that a menhaden license did 
not exist. That’s how new this license is, although the ﬁshery has been around mostly on and off 
in our waters. Before 3-4 years ago, we hadn’t even seen pogies in Down East Maine since the 
mid 9O’s. By the way, pogie is the common vernacular for the menhaden species. 
In the 130th Legislature we moved the menhaden ﬁshery from an open ﬁshery to a closed 
ﬁshery. I was on this committee for those processes. In the end, the bill that was passed allowed 
people with experience and landings to keep their licenses going forward. We allowed people to 
get their landings in the following 2022 season, but some of the license history requirements 
were retroactive. This meant that some of the ﬁshermen who had made very large investments 
and legally ﬁshed and landed menhaden in 2022 were able to fulﬁll the landing part of the 
requirements, but not meet the license history part of the requirement. 
This bill changes one of the requirements for eligibility for a commercial menhaden ﬁshing 
license to provide that an individual must have possessed a license to ﬁsh commercially for 
menhaden in at least 2 of the following 4 years. 
By adding this year of eligibility for people who have the history of a catch, it will allow these 
ﬁshennen to remain in an industry they have already participated in the previous two years. 
Getting into this ﬁshery is a huge expense and people who ﬁshed in 2021 and 2022 should be 
able to qualify. 
The quota the state receives from ASMFC recently increased. This ﬁshery provides an 
opportunity for ﬁshennen to diversify and in turn helps provide the lobster ﬁshing industry with 
bait which has been drastically needed over the last few years. These ﬁsh are caught and sold to 
ﬁshermen at reasonable prices. The Menhaden provide a more cost effective bait usedby
lobstennen on the boat and many of the local lobster ﬁshermen prefer to buy this bait off of 
other ﬁshermen that are local. It is a win-win for the ﬁshermen involved. 
This menhaden ﬁshery is a small boat industry. These licenses are small businesses and 
provide support to local workers and families. This bill will beneﬁt a small number of 
ﬁshermen who have license and landings history who have already made large investments. I 
believe the department will testify, or be able to provide accurate numbers on that pool of 
ﬁshennen. This bill is a fair and equitable tweak to our very new menhaden ﬁshery license law. 
I also want to bring to the attention of the committee that since this industry has closed, it has 
closed opportunities to younger ﬁshermen. Fisherman that were still in school did not have an 
opportunity to meet the licensee history or landing’s requirements. This is always a problem that 
happens when a ﬁshery is closed. I hope that the committee will take this group into 
consideration. I understand the concerns of the department and some in the industry pertaining 
to license levels, but also hope that the future generation of ﬁshermen is considered and given 
access to the ﬁshery. Perhaps there should be an entry program considered or maybe an 
extension period for some of the younger ﬁshermen that couldn’t meet requirements just 
because they didn’t have the opportunity based on their age. 
Also I’d like to add a clariﬁcation to the language. The intent of this bill is to only include 
landings that are already recorded by the Department of Marine Resources that took place in the 
2022 season or earlier. It is not the intent of myself to extend the reporting period for the 
purpose of this bill. If the language of the bill needs to be adjusted to reﬂect that, I would defer 
to the department on the proper language to meet that intent. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, I would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have. 
Respectfully, 
Billy Bob Faulkingham 
State Representative
