Douglas McLennan
SpruceHead
LD 1444
Members of the Marine Resources Committee
      I attended the public hearing today, but had to leave before every one got to speak.
I understand the entire committee is new this year, and these amended bills can be 
hard to understand.Also, people who do not speak in public sometimes have a hard 
time speaking to a panel, and trying to explain things that is understandable to 
everyone.I have been doing this for 20 something years, and still it never turns out the
way I think it should. 
    I would like to thank all the members for listening to all of us fishermen , who 
aren't the best speakers, but know what we are dealing with. I would like to ry to 
explain myself a bit better than I could in person. The point I was trying to get 
members to understand was that if LD 1908 was put forward, and had passed as 
written, it would have just stopped the license issuance at that point, no more from 
this point on. This left the fishermen from  Down East feeling they had been left out, 
which I agree, it did. So, an amended version was put forth, and passed.But, an 
unforeseen problem occurred when you try to please and include everyone. People 
who had met the criteria of LD 1908, and had fished in 2021, would not qualify or a 
license in 2023, but could fish 2022. The fishery was wide open in 2021, with no 
restriction mentioned. This was the first year of a dedicated menhaden license. I know
Tad had said the check boxes cost money, but the license for Menhaden was a box 
checked on the Anadromous/ Pelagic license, not a separate Menhaden,like in 2021. 
So the amended version of 1908, decided to jump back to the years 2018 , 2019, 2020
was left out because of covid , and  2021 landings were allowed to be used to fill that 
requirement.This amendment took 24 peoples licenses, that had met the current 
criteria, and gave 99 licenses the 2022 to get  the landings, that there was no way for 
them to get, as the time had passed. Its very confusing to say the least. My problem is 
the fact that some people had their license taken away, who had in food faith been 
fishing, had the landings, and would have been fine under the un amended 1908. The 
end result was that people who had no landings had another year to get the landings, 
or false report them, and secure a license. The people knew it was their last chance to 
go, and it brought out people who had never fished, and shot up the amount of 
licenses, and participation in 2021. The small amount of 24 or so people that were 
stripped their license should be issued a license, just as all the people that got one 
under the amended 1908 bill.In prior years regulators use a control date to stop the 
effort in a fishery. History shows they use a current level of participation at a certain 
date, and control the effort from that date. Going back two or three years and actually 
taking someones license has never been a common practice. I believe the vote  was 
very close last year on this amendment, and none of the committee members are here 
today. I believe they did a huge disservice to the people who lost their right to 
fish.They took from a few , to redistribute to another group.These people deserve  
what they have earned, a license to harvest menhaden.   Thank you all for being on 
the Marine Resources Committee and taking the time to try and understand what we 
go thru in the commercial fishing business. We , as fishermen have to make the laws 
that come out of Augusta work for us to make a living. Sometimes it can be very 
challenging, that is why you have to advocate for you interest. 
   I know people are asked to say a little about themselves at a hearing, but I never do. 
My ancestor Arthur Beal,came to York, Maine in 1690, and fished the Isle of Shoals 
His Grandson , Manwaring Beal moved east  and settled on Beals Island in 1774.The 
Beal family has been on Beals island and fishing since.The decedents have spread 
around the coast since, and my Family makes generation, 11, my sons 12, and their 
sons 13..Not that it means any thing, thats on my mothers side, and my fathers side 
are Billings from Deer Isle, Stonington. I do not have the extent of genealogy for that 
side, but they were fishing a while.   
      Thank You all, and call me if I can ever help answering any questions.  Doug 
McLennan
