April 20,2023 
Dear Chairperson Reny, Chairperson Hepler and to all of the esteemed members of the Marine 
Resources Committee I would like to thank you for allowing me to testify in opposition to LD 
1444 todav. 
I would like to start by saying that although it is hard for me to testify against creating 
opportunities for other fishermen to partake in the commercial Menhaden fishery, I feel it is the 
right thing to do as I’ve seen this fishery grow over the years to a point that I feel its fully 
utilized at the current level of quota that’s available to this State. It is not easy to testify against 
fellow fishermen and friends who are looking to gain access, I don’t blame them for wanting 
access. Even though we have received much larger quota share from ASFMC. It still reflects 
about what the fishery has been operating at as far as quota is concerned for the last few years 
with an ever increasing number of participants and after awhile that becomes a burden on the 
fishery and the participants that are taking part in the fishery. I don’t remember what year 
exactly that I started fishing for Menhaden, maybe 2017 l’m not sure. I was the only one in my 
harbor doing it for a few years, as of last year we had at least twelve boats participating 
regularly as well as a few other personal use boats going in just our harbor and the same thing 
has happened in the harbors on either side of mine. On top of that it’s not unusual tor a good 
portion of these boats to travel two to three hours one way to pursue fish as the season wears 
on. So as you can see there is a fair amount of pressure being exerted on the resource already. 
I think the most alarming thing to me is the fact that by voting to approve this bill sends the 
wrong message about how we choose to manage our fisheries, the same as we have done in 
the past. Take for example the State scallop fishery, that fishery was closed in 2008 and was 
supposed to have the licenses frozen to those that had purchased a license the previous year. 
The Marine Resources Committee/ Legislature decided to extend the entry past the control 
date due to pressure from people who did not qualify, which resulted in a large number of 
people buying licenses, some had never even held a license before and some were kids at the 
time, but it allowed them to qualify into the fishery, while not taking into consideration others 
that had taken part in the fishery in the past. That’s been a problem for the scallop fishery ever 
since in terms of management strategies. At that time I had purchased a scallop license off and 
on over the years, but I never heard any of the ongoing discussions at the time over scallop 
licensing, so I and others around here missed out simply because we didn’t know what was 
going on. 
Mv point is that no matter where vou draw the line there’s alwavs going to be winners and 
losers, draw one line and keep it. There’s two ways to manage fisheries as far as I’m 
concerned, you either let economics dictate and open the fisheries to everyone that chooses to 
participate, or you manage it and accept the hard decisions that you’re goino to have to make 
in order to do so. When I came into fishing it was economics dictated and as much as l’d like 
to see that be the case now, I believe it would be the wrong choice, though sometimes I really 
wonder about that! We made a choice as a State quite a few years ago to manage our fisheries 
and as I said with that comes the hard decisions of who’s in and who’s out. By allowing this bill 
to move forward you are doing a disservice to all the people that couId’ve qualified for the 
fishery but didn’t pursue it. as the State had made it well publicized that 2022 would not be 
counted as a qualifying year, everyone in the fishery knew that and decided based on that how 
they would proceed. Some people invested time and energy in the fishery anyways, while 
some based on that knowledge decided not to even though they had a license to do so. 
I‘ve heard some rumbling around the tact that eastern Maine hasn’t had access to Menhaden 
until the last few years and I sympathize with that. The same could be said for the scallop 
industry, there was a time when there were many scallop license holders in Western Maine. Yet,
the majority of the resource is in Eastern Maine and that’s why most of the licenses reside in 
Eastern Maine. That’s no ones fault it’s iust the way the resource is distributed 
The fishery is still not a closed fishery to those that don’t qualify, as they can carry on in the 
personal use category and access three barrels of bait, seven days a week if they choose to. 
That will give them more than enough bait to support their needs as far as baiting their own 
traps. My stepson whom used to go seining for Menhaden with me for years has chosen to get 
his own bait by gill netting the last few years and has been very successful doing that and he 
can go on his own schedule not mine. Another point is that the personal use fishery would 
make a great stepping stone as a pool of fishermen to eventually qualify into the commercial 
fishery should they choose to do so. lt’s a fact that the industry is aging and l can see in the 
near future there will be a steady flow of people retiring out of all the fisheries which will create 
opportunities for entry for others coming up through the fisheries. 
The last thing l’d like to mention is that, based on history, Menhaden has always been a cyclic 
fishery in Maine. There are two points |’d like to bring up regarding that, one is that a few years 
ago I was talking to a fisherman whom I believe to be extremely well versed in this 
conversation, his name is Dale Prentice. His observations were that he believed that we could 
have a consistent fishery for Menhaden in Maine if the stocks in the Mid—Atlantic were 
managed better. He said in order to get the fish here, they have to have a chance to reach 
maturity and l think he may have a point. The big fish are always what we see first and more or 
less through our whole season. The second thing l’d like to touch on is that undoubtedly things 
in the Gulf of Maine are changing and with this change I don’t think that it’s unreasonable to 
believe that Menhaden could continue to be regular visitors to the Maine Coast into the future if 
managed properly throughout the range of the resource including Maine. l want to thank you 
for taking the time to consider my comments. 
Respectfully submitted by, 
lra “Tad” Miller
