Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, Members of the Marine Resources 
Committee 
My name is Jim Wotton l'm a sixth generation commercial fisherman from 
Friendship, l participate in several Maine fisheries and hold many Maine 
commercial harvester licenses, including Menhaden. l have experience in the 
menhaden fishery going back into the early 90s and as a kid going with with 
my family as early as the 70s. 
l'm here in opposition to LD 1444, for a couple reasons. 
The first reason is the issue of fairness. Last year this body passed LD 1908— 
An Act To Limit Eligibility for Commercial Menhaden Licenses . lt put forth 
limitations on who would be eligible to purchase a menhaden license. 
Fishermen looked at those requirements and were under the assumption 
that they would be ineligible for a commercial license after 2022 and were 
put in the position of having to decide between a commercial and non 
commercial license in 2022. Many chose a non—commercial instead ofa 
commercial. My son included. For that reason they weren't able to reach the 
25k pound landing requirement. Had they known that this bill was coming 
they would have made different choices. 
Changing the rules after the game is over isn't fair to anyone. This bill 
changes the rules after the game is over. lf you choose to change the rules 
after the game has ended make sure to consider the players who thought 
they were playing by the rules too. Not just the sore losers that didn't like the 
outcome. 
My other objection to this bill is based on the dynamics of the fishery.
l'm sure your going to hear from supporters of this bill that this bill is needed 
to right a wrong or undo an injustice. How they've made investments into the 
fishery and how because of soaring bait prices they need access. Let me tell 
you about the investments l and a handful of guys like me made into this 
fishery. ln 2017 the fish and the quota were at a point where it becamea 
viable fishery again. l began looking for used gear, it had been 20 years since 
there had been any fish around and all the gear I could find was unfit. Sol 
started ordering gear and building what l needed. 32k dollars for a seine, 15k 
for a powerblock, 7k for a purse winch and 10k to rework hydraulics and 
gear. Hired 3 boats and captains to carry fish. ln 2018 l was ready to go, it 
went well. There was roughly 14 million pounds landed in 2018 and we 
caught about 1.2 million of them, the season lasted into October and we 
almost fully utilized the quota. We sold bait at $100 a barrel and everyone 
was happy. There was weeks that we had everyone local filled up and had 
the ability to take them further up the coast but lobstermen didn't want them 
because they had plenty of herring available. I even had one fisherman tell 
me he'd "stay home before I use them things" . Getting ready for 2019l 
purchased a boat to carry fish that would help us get better quality to 
market. Another 100k dollars. 
Then comes 2019 and the collapse of the herring fishery. The herring catch 
dropped to 13 million pounds from 62 million in 2018, driving up demand and 
prices, which in turn made the menhaden fishery more appealing. The 
increasing fleet caught the quota quickly and we transitioned into the small 
scale fishery for the first time.( requiring another smaller seine for $18k). 
With reduced daily and weekly limits we rigged a second boat to try keep as 
many markets a supplied as possible but we still had to drop a couple of 
wharfs. We also had to up the price per barrel to 135 to offset the reduction 
in catch. We ended up catching about 2/3 of what we did in 2018 with double 
the effort on our part.
2020 brought more boats to the fishery and even further reductions to the 
daily and weekly quotas forcing me to drop more wharfs from my customer 
list and up the price to 150. ln 2018 l supplied 11 wharfs in 8 Harbors with 
bait,(at least 125 lobsterboats) by the end of 2020 l was down to 2 wharfs 
and one of them picked up another boat to help get what they needed. 
2021 effort levels were similar to 2020 but even further drops in herring 
catch made for tight bait conditions. Due to the larger established boats not 
being able to provide enough bait, more smaller guys that would rather have 
bought bait were forced into the fishery. 
Effort in 2022 increased again for couple reason, the main factor being low 
lobster prices. lt seemed to be more profitable to catch bait than to catch 
lobsters, so that's what everyone did, even the guys that got into it only get 
their own bait AND they drove the price up in the process.... 
Trucks were bringing barreled bait for $175 —$200 so the seiners thought 
they should get the same. In order to keep getting fish from boats dealers 
had to pay a lot more, putting the barreled price up to almost $300 in places. 
ln 2018 there were 3 seiners in Friendship, 2 that would be called small 
scale( doing it by hand) and my outfit. ln 2022 there was 18 total. 
The point of all that was that more licenses doesn't equal more bait or lower 
prices. l'd even suggest it has the opposite effect. l've got a boat that will 
carry 200 barrels and l have the equipment and crew to easily catch that 
daily. The regulations allow me 51 barrel a week, it takes me a month to doa 
days work. The quota Maine is allotted is the same wether 50 boats catch it 
or 500 catch it. 
l’d also like to point out that Maine's share of the quota is based on landings
in. years 2018, 2019 and 2021. Landings that were primarily caught bya 
handful of boats that are now being pushed out of the fishery by smaller 
landings limits caused by increasing license numbers. l\/lany of those guys 
don't have lobster licenses to fall back on. Perhaps the supporters of this bill 
would like to level the playing field by letting them have lobster licenses. 
lf this body still believes something needs to be done, I suggest that you kill 
or table this bill vvhile you work on a plan, or use this bill to totally revamp the 
license structure for this fishery, including the non commercial license, toa 
tiered system that truly reflects historical participation and includes an entry 
plan. 
We are trying to fill a 50 million pound hole left by the collapse of the herring 
stock with 25 million pounds of pogies. Let's not put the bait dealers and the 
larger bait boats out of business in the process. We still need them and we're 
going to need them in the future. 
l’m also in opposition to changing the deadline for submission of landings. 
July 1st 2023 is ludicrous. Period. 
Thank you for your time, l’d be glad to try and answer any questions you 
might have.
