Good afternoon, my name is Hannah Barry. I want to thank the committee, Senator Baldacci, and 
Representative Meyer for being here today. I will be speaking in support of LD 906 to help reduce 
false negative tick—borne illness results. 
Practically speaking, what does that mean? It means giving doctors the raw data——which means more 
information, rather than less information--to catch the false negative results so patients can get more 
concise, appropriate diagnosis and treatment. This requires zero extra effort on the lab's part and 
merely asks the lab to send physicians the raw data that is already being compiled. With a reliable, 
informative, and efficient diagnosis patients will suffer less. 
I like to think of this as a safety net for patients. Currently, there is no safety net for patients ——so what 
does that mean? 
I was bit by a tick in 2012 at the age of 23. I received a negative test result. 
However, my symptoms persisted and got worse over time. 
In 2014 I lost the majority of mobility in my legs. 
Also in 2014, I had my first seizure--I would later learn that the Lyme disease bacteria had crossed the 
blood-brain barrier and become a neurological disease. 
During these 2 years, I received 2 more negative results for Lyme and related tick—borne diseases. 
I was called crazy, I was gaslit, and II was sent to countless other medical professionals. Some of 
whom took advantage of my fragile state in unspeakably harmful ways. 
It wasn't until 2015 when I was 25, that I finally got my positive test result. I had to see a Lyme- 
literate doctor in New Hampshire to make this happen. Once the results came back, accompanied by 
the raw data and interpreted by my doctor, I had a positive result for not only Lyme disease but also 
Bartonella, Babesia, Mycoplasma, Parvo Virus, and Epstein—Barr Virus. 
Due to delayed diagnosis, my condition ultimately began to deteriorate rapidly in 2017. I was dying. In 
2018 at 28, I had to go to Germany for life-saving treatment. 
That is what it means to not have a safety net. 
Today I stand before you, still sick, and still without a safety net. On behalf of every patient who has 
suffered and will continue to suffer, I support LD 906. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
