An Act to Ensure Physicians Receive Full Diagnostic Test Data Concerning Tick-borne 
Diseases 
From: Aaron Bolster, Realtor <aboIster@alliedrealty.net> 
Sent: Wed, Mar 22, 2023 at 9:52 am 
To: Aaron Bolster, Realtor 
November 2020 my life went from being a completely normal, healthy 19 year old to in about a matter of of several 
weeks becoming a living nightmare that I never knew could exist. As having no prior serous medical conditions I wasn't 
prepared for the amount of change I was going to experience. My symptoms within a few short weeks turned into 
excruciating body pain that was systemic. It affected the muscle and the joint, and it felt like I was permanently stuck 
with the ﬂu but worse. Along with pain came the stiffness and the weakness; it felt like I had exercised every muscle in 
my body to the point where it felt so sore and weak it was a struggle to even shower. The mental affects were just as 
bad as the physical pain in my opinion. It created an alarm system in my body; it felt like it always ringing and never 
could relax, almost like I didn't have correct access card to be able shut off the alarm. I also experienced cardiac 
symptoms that increased my heart rate and cause palpitations that would make me feel veiy uncomfortable . It was the 
first time I've ever fully been uncomfortable in my own body in every aspect and had no control; ifI could have I would 
have run away from myself and my own body that would be the time. The first few months of my symptoms a lot with 
the physical symptoms made it hard to sleep as my body was not in state of relaxation so for awhile I was only 
obtaining 1-3 hours of sleep a night. As months went by with out real answers things got slightly better and then worse 
again. Throughout this time it has negatively affected my life in numerous ways, but one thing it causes for a lot of 
people and myself personally is major depression and hopelessness. This diagnosis and disease caused me to view the 
world in a completely different manner. I am fortunate through time and available resources of my parents I have been 
able to try different treatments. Typical Lyme protocol is antibiotics that maybe could have saved me through years of 
agonizing pain but due to testing negative 3 times using a standard western blot it has created chronic issues. Spring of 
2022 is when I was ﬁnally was diagnosed with Lyme and coinfection of bartonella. I currently am trying treatment 
beyond antibiotics which is timely due to getting it done in NH and costly. Most Lyme treatments are not covered by 
insurance and has taken alot of personal resources to get the healthcare I need. Typical doctors had no idea I had 
Lyme because the testing is ﬂawed. This is creating so many false negatives that are allowing people stait experiencing 
symptoms without a cause. That is probably the most frustrating part is experiencing something that you don't even 
know is happening to you and not even multiple health professional can give you a right answer. A lot of the times to 
even get doctored to believe something is wrong with you at all is a struggle without a clear deﬁnite diagnosis . It's 
scary at any age but being so young and previously healthy it was very scaly time and is challenging due to my peers 
never experiencing it. I have to take care of myself and take medication and alot of people my age in college don't have 
to be so conscious about how they take care of themselves so that can be frustrating that I can't be like even/body else 
like I used to be. I am currently doing a new treatment and am hopeful for success, but if I could help any one avoid 
this type of pain I would and getting steps to reform the way doctors read the test is going to positively impact SO 
MANY patients lives. Lyme is something that if treated initially can have decreased long term affects and would have 
saved me. 
Logan G. Bolster 
58 Bolster Way 
Norridgewock, ME
An Act to Ensure Physicians Receive Full Diagnostic Test Data Concerning Tick—b0rne 
Diseases LD 906 
From: Aaron Bolster; Realtor <abolster@alliedrealty.net> 
Sent: Wed, Mar 22, 2023 at 10:05 am, 
To: Aaron Bolster, Realtor 
It was fall of 2020 and my wife and I was emptying our daughter's apartment 
of her belongings, moving her back to our Norridgewock home. This meant 
Logan had officially taken a leaving of absence from Husson University. At the 
age of 19 years old, she had no energy, was in chronic pain all the time and 
could not focus on her secondary educational goals. Over the long winter and 
for many months thereafter, I witnessed my daughter's bright energetic 
personality go into deep depression. She slept all the time, cried, and was 
miserable. As a parent, it was a devesating time to experinace a loved one in 
search of medical answers to find no results explaining the agony. My name is 
Aaron Bolster and lyme disease has negatively impacted not only my daughter, 
but my entire family! 
The three main reasons why I support LD 906 and why it should have 
passage: 
1. Unnecessary wild goose chase, Logan was tested for lyme disease three 
timess and she was told the results were negative every time. Therefore, you 
just keep testing, searching for answers, wasting already over worked medical 
facilitie's energy. . 
2. Cost-Not only did Logan's length of time it took to actually determine she 
had lyme disease, it was an expense venture. Our family has spent in excess 
of $25,000 regarding this subjet matter. She had many test procedures, such 
as a colonoscopy and endoscopy just to name a few that were unnecessary. 
All the energy, frustration and money was exacerbated! She now has medical 
injections every 6 weeks in the state of NH because of the damage this 
disease did to her body being undiagnosed for so long. 
3. Passion for humanity-If this piece of legislation allows just one person to 
skip over the most devastating period my family has experienced, it would be 
a win! This bill would be worth allowing the medial professionals to have all 
the data to determine if lyme or other tick borne diseases were present in the 
patient's body or not. . . 
Thank you for time and consideration, 
Aaron Bolster 
58 Bolster Way 
Norridgewock, ME 
207-399-9005
