 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 2 2, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 906 - An Act to Ensure Physicians Receive Full Diagnostic Test Data Concerning Tick -
borne Dis eases  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Committee  on Health and 
Human Services : 
 
This l etter is to provide information about LD  906, An Act to Ensure Physicians Receive Full 
Diagnostic Test Data Concerning Tick -borne Diseases , and the potential impact of the proposed 
legislation , if enacted.  
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC) has concerns with  this bill  
and offers the following information for your consideration . 
 
LD 906 requires a medical laboratory that reports the results of a diagnostic test for a tick -borne 
disease, including Lyme disease, babesiosis, anaplasmosis and ehrlichiosis, to report all 
information gathered in the process of producing the test result, including the specific data used 
to determine the result . 
 
Commercially available human clinical diagno stic laboratory tests , also known as in vitro 
diagnostic tests,  are regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Laboratory 
developed tests (LDT s) are a type of in vitro diagnostic test that is designed, manufactured, and 
used within a single laboratory. Both commercially available tests and LDTs are regulated by the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in the U.S. through the Clinical Laboratory 
Improvement Amendments of 1988 (CLIA). Both the FDA and CLIA regulate the description 
and narrative of the laboratory result. Laboratories using a commercial test may not  modify  the 
description or narrative of the laboratory result  without first contacting and submitting a request 
to the FDA . Laboratories utilizing LDTs are not required to submit requests to FDA  to modify 
the description and/or narrative of their results, but still must follow FDA and CLIA regulation s. 
 
Laboratory test  report s are designed to pr ovide  the most medically important  information in an 
easily under standable format so that medical providers can understand the result s and discuss the 
results with their patients . Additional information may cause confusion as to the true result , 
potentially impacting clinical management of the patient .    
 
 
 Test methods , including sample management , reference ranges, personnel, and equipment, are 
not consistent across all laboratories . Therefore, patient results may not be directly compar able 
between  laboratories whether using different test methods or even the same test method s. 
Instead,  all laboratory results must be individually evaluated by a medical provider in 
combination  with other medically relevant information specific to the patient.  
 
Extraneous information , other than the actual laboratory test result , is not relevant to medical 
decision s and patient management. This ‘other information’ is used by laboratories to monitor 
test quality and may be used for academic  research purposes.    
 
The bill language is broad ; as written , reporting facilities could have an infinite number of 
requirements. This additional burden is an undue cost to the laboratories responsible for 
reporting these additional data. Meeting t hese requirements would likely require personnel and 
informatics costs that would need to be passed on to consumers and patients.   
 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends this bill  ought not to pass. Providing all 
laboratory data related to report ing tick-borne disease results  would cause  a significant workload 
increase  resulting in increased costs to the laboratory and patient s. All medically important 
information is already required to be reported  and the inclusion of  all non -medically pertinent 
data may cause confusion related to the results . 
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 
 
 

