March 22, 2023
LD 906
Sarah Cotnoir Testimony
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee. My name is Sarah Cotnoir and I would like to share my personal experience 
with tick-borne testing. Thank you for taking the time to hear my testimony. I have chronic Lyme, 
Bartonella, Babesia and Anaplasmosis. My youngest daughter has chronic Lyme, Babesia, Brucella, 
Bartonella and Anaplasmosis. My oldest daughter has chronic Lyme, Babesia, Bartonella and 
Anaplasmosis which was passed to her in utero, though we did not know it until she was just recently 
diagnosed this year, at age 18. 
My youngest daughter was bitten by a tick and presented with a fever and bullseye rash 
at the age of 2. I had heard of Lyme briefly but knew virtually nothing about it at the time. She was given 
a blood test by her pediatrician and it came back positive for Lyme. She was put on a 3-5 day antibiotic 
and sent home. Little did we know what would be in store years down the road. At 8 years old her body 
started failing her. Her pancreas couldn’t regulate her blood sugars, she was spiking fevers, always 
complaining of being tired, having joint and muscle pain, her liver started to shut down, she would 
intermittently loose her eye sight for hours at a time, neurologically she was so impaired that on bad 
days she couldn’t add simple numbers such as 2+3, many days she couldn’t walk and would need to be 
carried, she had horrific seizures…amongst many other things. We had brought her into the doctors for 
another Lyme test but it came back negative. We did not receive the test results. Only the lab saying 
“negative”. And so, they sent us different directions trying to diagnose her. They thought she might have 
diabetes, then they thought Lupus, one after another we saw specialist after specialist and she just kept 
getting more and more sick. We knew something wasn’t right and we fought with her pediatrician over 
the fact that she was severely ill, likely fatally if nothing was done. Finally, we went to get a second 
opinion at a different doctor. Her bloodwork was re-done and we were given a positive result for both 
Lyme and Bartonella. The doctor used a more comprehensive test with a lab out of state.  Because of 
this new information, paired with my daughters symptoms, she was able to make a diagnosis. This was 
the beginning of her journey towards healing. 
My story is quite similar. I began getting severely ill with symptom onset coming out of 
seemingly nowhere that only continued to get increasingly worse. I went to see my doctor and was 
tested for Lyme multiple different times. Every time it came back “negative” but we did not receive any 
lab results. So, my doctor looked for answers elsewhere. Over the next year I saw many specialists. I 
received proposed “diagnoses” of lymphoma, multiple sclerosis, autoimmune disorders, fibromyalgia, 
etc. The list goes on. By this point I had suffered from daily fevers of 102-104 for over a year. I was 
barely able to walk and often needed a cane and on other days was bedridden. I was having problems 
with my heart, liver, kidneys, stomach and digestive system. When my digestive system began to shut 
down, I was no longer able to eat solid food. I got down to 85 pounds and was losing 1-2 pounds per 
week. My doctor wanted to send me to the Barbara Bush hospital as he had exhausted everything he 
could think of here in Maine. I went to a different doctor, for a second opinion and was diagnosed with 
the above tick borne illnesses. 1 year later, after receiving correct treatment, I am completely well, 
healthy and thriving. Had the test results been made available to my doctor, at the very beginning, when 
we tested for Lyme, he may have come to a different conclusion and I may have been able to get the 
help I needed faster, which would have prevented all the bodily damage to my organs that I incurred. No 
one should have to suffer that horrifically simply because of lack of medical information. 
This bill is imperative to the health of patients suffering from chronic Lyme and/or other 
tick-borne co-infections. Because chronic Lyme has a higher percentage of coming back as a negative, it 
is crucial for doctors to have the ability to compare the comprehensive lab results against the patients’ 
symptoms to get a truly accurate picture of their overall state of health in order to arrive at an accurate 
diagnosis and treatment plan. Had the full results of the lab work been available to me and my 
daughters, our lives could have been spared a lot of pain and suffering, time spent chasing down 
diagnoses that were dead ends, financial burden from unnecessary medical bills, and also taking up 
precious time and energy from specialists who didn’t need to see us could have been avoided. I think it’s 
important to note that not having raw data from lab tests results is a strain on the medical system at 
large. It is not fair to the patient nor the providers, as it takes specialist’s time and attention away from 
patients who really do need them. My doctor told me that if I hadn’t received the care I did, when I did, I 
would have “suffered loss of life”. My organs were shutting down and Lyme would have claimed my life 
in less than a year. I am very thankful to be here today, I am also very concerned for other individuals 
who are where I was 2 years ago- searching for a diagnosis – and I am deeply grieved at the stories I see 
where people have lost their lives because of something that could be so easily rectified. This bill has the 
potential to save lives, at the very least to significantly improve them. Every patient has the right to the 
raw data that was tested on their body. Every doctor has the right to that data so they can discuss and 
come to an accurate treatment plan together with and for their patient. Refusal to release this data to 
doctors and patients leads to the question, why? Why wouldn’t you share this?? 
Thank you for taking the time to hear a small piece of my story and that of my children. 
Sincerely, 
               Sarah Cotnoir
