HQ, 
S?l'\/lai ne 
Priina1"y Care 
Association 
_»_ 
State of Maine I 131st Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Testimony of Emily Ferry on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association 
April 6, 2023 
Supporting: 
LD 904, "An Act Supporting the Rural Health Care Workforce in Maine" 
Sponsored by Representative Osher 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services, I am Emily Ferry, Director of Workforce Initiatives at Maine Primary Care 
Association (MPCA). 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers 
(CHCs), also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs). Maine's CHCs make up the 
largest independent primary care network in the state, providing high quality and equitable primary 
and preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in6 
Mainers) at more than 70 service delivery sites in all 16 Maine counties. 
Maine's 20 CHCs have long felt the impacts of primary care workforce shortages? Rural areas, in 
particular, are experiencing critical challenges with access to care. Some commonly identified issues 
specific to our CHCs are increased retirements due to an aging workforce; difficulty hiring, recruiting, 
and retaining clinical staff and support staff (such as MAs and community health workers); a dire 
need for more primary care physicians, RNs, and behavioral health clinicians (such as LCSWs); wage 
inflation and competition; and a lack of high-quality training that prepares clinical support staff for 
employment at a CHC. 
Hosting residents is of interest tomany CHCs who understand the impact these opportunities could 
have on long-term pathways for MDs and DOs. When looking at medical schools, we know that the 
majority of individuals who completed residency training are practicing in the state where they did 
their training. Nationally, from 2012 through 2021, this was 55.2% of individuals; in Maine, the rate 
was even higher at 57%.’ 
Despite the desire to invest in staff, the capacity to provide training is a major challenge given 
workforce shortages that expand into both clinical and non-clinical roles. We encourage the 
Committee to ensure that this funding is flexible enough to support expanding the workforce; 
training and rotations, incentives, and placement programs should be available to support 
1 
A recent survey from the National Association of Community Health Centers found that 68% of health centers 
lost between five and twenty-five percent of their workforce in early 2022, with a majority citing financial 
opportunities at a large health care organization as the main reason for departure: 
https://wwvv.nachc.org/current-state-of-the-health~center-workforce/ 
2 Association of American Medical Colleges Report on Residents: https://www.aamc.org/data-reports/students — 
residents/data/report-residents/2022/table —c6-physician-retention~state-residency~training-state
l lug, 
§%l\/iaine 
Primary (lane 
!\;ssociat1o:x 
M ‘<‘”~’}m 
pharmacy staff, nursing staff, medical assistants, and community health workers, in addition to 
physician training. 
Additionally, we would strongly encourage the Committee to consider increasing the funding 
allocated to this effort. The current amount is only a drop in the bucket of what is needed by host 
sites as they build out the necessary infrastructure to support students. 
On behalf of Maine's Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please 
do not hesitate to contact me directly at eferry@mepca.org with any follow up questions. 
Emily Ferry, MSW 
Director of Workforce Initiatives 
Maine Primary Care Association
