northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 904 An Act Supporting the Rural Health Care Workforce in Maine 
 
Testimony in Support 
April 6, 2023  
 
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Dr. James Jarvis M.D.  I am the Medical Director of 
Clinical Education at Northern Light Eastern Maine Medical Center, and   I am here 
today providing testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member 
organizations speaking in support of this bill.  Northern Light Health member 
organizations include 10 hospitals located in southern, central, eastern and northern 
Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction 
treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty care practices and a state-wide home care 
and hospice program.  Ninety three percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern 
Light Health service area.  Northern Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s 
largest employers with over 12,000 employees statewide. 
 
This bill establishes the Maine Rural Health Care Education Workforce Fund and 
provides $500,000 to support primary care and health professions workforce 
development in rural parts of the State.  
 
Despite the work being done at EMMC and other health centers and systems across the 
state to train the next generation of physicians, the current physician workforce 
shortage is only going to become worse unless some fundamental changes are made for 
the availability of medical school and residency opportunities to Mainers interested in 
pursuing medicine as a career.  According to a 2018 report from the Center for Health 
Workforce Studies, nearly 43% of Maine’s physicians were over the age of 55.  That 
number rises to over 50% in our most rural counties. 
 
According to the Graham Center and the American Medical Association, we know that 
more than half of practicing physicians work within 100 miles of where they trained 
either in medical school or residency.  Under a grant from the Maine Department of 
Health and Human Services, a collaboration between Maine Medical Center, Central 
Maine Medical Center, and the Maine-Dartmouth Family Medicine Residency Program 
was created with a mission to increase the number of clinical rotations in rural Maine 
communities for residents and fellows in accredited graduate medical education 
programs.  While this work is just beginning, we have already built the framework for 
five new sites, create training programs for faculty at these and future sites, and expand 
education in social determinants of health and inclusion.  This collaborative will serve as 
a model for future initiatives, but only if funding is available to sustain and grow such 
opportunities. 
 
 This bill also supports the long-term sustainability of rural clinical preceptor programs to 
support students in graduate and undergraduate nursing programs.  Northern Light 
Health rural hospitals work collaboratively with Maine’s nursing education programs 
providing clinical preceptors to support students to complete their clinical education in 
local communities leading to employment in rural locations when licensed as a 
Registered Nurse. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support of this important legislation.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
