Biddeford Campus 
11 Hills Beach Road 
NEW ENGLAND B*d*i@i°id~l"E@ ‘*°°5 
U.S.A. 
INNOVATION FORAHEALTHIER PLANET <2°7>283"°171 
Portiand Campus 
716 Stevens Avenue 
Portland, ME 04103 
Testimony in Support of LD 904 An Act Supporting the Rural Health Care U-SA 
Workforce in Maine (207) 797'7261 
Tangier Campus 
Rue Abi Chouaib Doukkali 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Tangliggfoigg 
_ _ +212 os as so 2400 
Services Committee: 
www.une.edu 
My name is Jane Carreiro, I am the Dean of the College of Osteopathic Medicine at the University of 
New England (UNE COM) and a family doctor by training. The University of New England is submitting 
testimony in support of LD 904, and we thank Representative Osher for bringing the bill forward. 
Maine is facing a lack of healthcare professionals, specifically physicians and nurses, practicing in rural 
and underserved areas. As you probably know, Maine's population is the oldest in the nation and is tied 
with Vermont as being the most rural state. Our healthcare workers are also among the oldest in the 
country, with many practitioners approaching, or even practicing beyond, retirement age. At 39.3%, 
Maine ranks first in the nation for the percentage of active physicians who are age 60 or older.1 in 9 of 
16 Maine counties, 50% or more of physicians are 55 or older? 
For many years, UNE has been working with Northern Light, MaineHealth, MaineGenera|, Central Maine 
Healthcare, the Maine Hospital Association, and the Maine Primary Care Association to address our 
physician shortage. As a result, UNE’s College of Osteopathic Medicine is the number one provider of 
physicians for the state of Maine. Our graduates make up the majority of physicians in every health care 
1 
Association of American Medical Colleges. (2019). Maine physician workforce profile. 
https://www.aamc.org/media/37931/download 
2 
Skillman, S. M., & Stover, B. (2014). Maine's physician, nurse practitioner and physician assistant workforce in 2014. 
Seattle, WA: WWAMI Center for Health Workforce Studies, University of Washington. 
https://www.familymedicine.uw.edu/chws/wp- 
content/uploads/sites/5/2018/O8/maines_physicians_nps_and_pas __2018.pdf 
BIDDEFORD AND PORTLAND, MAINE, U.S.A. l TAl\lGlER,MOROCCO | ONLlNE
lirN”E"i§1i%°L\rD 
ll\ll\lO\/.ATlOl\l FOR A HEALTHIER PLANET 
system in Maine, with 67% of them practicing primary care. Progress is being made, but there is still 
much work to be done. 
Years ago, I had a busy family practice in Waterville, which l loved. When I first went into practice, l 
became very busy, very quickly. l was astonished that some of my patients were driving 60-90 minutes 
to see me because l was the only doctor with an open practice. This was the early 19905, and our 
neighbors in rural areas were already dealing with a physician shortage. Since then, it has only 
worsened. I decided l could help more patients by training medical students to practice in rural areas, 
and so l took a position at UNE. Almost 30 years later I am now dean of a medical school, and still 
working on this problem. In those 30 years l have learned some things and l would like to share with 
you. 
Two of the best predictors of where a physician will practice is where they do their clinical training, 
(years 3 and 4 of medical school and their residency), and where their partners are from. After two 
years of classroom training, medical students do 2 years of clinical training, then graduate from medical 
school and enter a residency program. Doing one's student training in community and rural-based 
hospitals increases the likelihood that physician will return to that community to practice. From 2012 to 
2018, up to 53% of UNE COM’s graduates who completed third year training in Maine community 
hospitals returned to practice in those communities later, regardless of where they did their 
residency or where they were from. 
Likewise, medical school graduates who complete their residencies in rural and community-based 
settings are more likely to practice in those settings. Between 75% and 80% of UNE COM graduates 
who complete their residency in Maine, stay in Maine to practice. 
What does this tell us? It tells us that we should ensure that Maine has ample clinical training 
opportunities for medical students and residents, so that the students we're training can become 
embedded in Maine communities and return to practice here upon completing their program. 
BlDDEFORD AND PORTl_AND,lVlAll\lE,U.S.A. l TAl\lGlER,l\/lOROCCO l ONLINE
UNIVERSITY OF 
NEW ENGLAND 
INNOVATION FOR A HE/\LTHlER PLANET 
Unfortunately, Maine has a dearth of training opportunities for both third- and fourth-year medical 
students and for medical residents. 
Each year there are 223 second-year medical students training in Maine (178 at UNE COM and 45 in the 
Maine Tufts program). When they become third-year students, 108 of them must leave the state to get 
their clinical training. Currently, our state's healthcare system can train 115 third-year medical students 
(70 from UNE's medical school and 45 from the Tufts Maine track program). Thus, each year, Maine 
effectively loses the opportunity to retain 108 physicians. 
The second bottle neck is the limited number of primary care residency positions in Maine, especially in 
the central and northern regions. Embedded training in a rural or community-based residency program 
engages physicians with their communities and prepares graduates to practice in those environments. 
ln the entire State of Maine, considering all hospitals and programs, we can only graduate 65 primary 
care physicians each year: 4 obstetricians, 7 pediatricians, 31 family doctors, 4 psychiatrists, 13 internal 
medicine, and 4 combined internal medicine-pediatrics. Each year 223 medical students graduate from 
Maine based medical programs, but only 65 of them can complete primary care residencies in Maine. 
What limits capacity of hospitals and clinics to train students and residents? Medical students and 
residents need to be trained by physicians, and Maine has a physician shortage. Training medical 
students and residents results in decreased productivity by approximately 25%, meaning if a doctor can 
typically see 4 patients in an hour without a medical student, they can only see 3 patients witha 
student in tow. Our hospitals, especially our community hospitals, are struggling to keep up with patient 
loads and expenses. They do not have the personnel or financial resources to take on more students 
and residents without support from federal and state sources. 
As federal funding has remained fairly stagnant for decades, states have taken on a larger role in 
funding clinical training for medical students in residents. Maine recently used a small portion of its 
BIDDEFORD AND PORTLAND, l\/lAll\lE,U.S.A. I TAl\lGlER,l\/IOROCCO l ONLll\lE
UNIVERSITYOF 
J NEW ENGLAND l:\ll\lO\/ATION FOR A HEALTHJER PLANET 
American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funds to expand clinical training opportunities. LD 904 would allow 
the State to continue along that path. 
Maine has been facing a growing physician shortage since I left my practice 30 years ago to help tackle 
this issue. Since that time, I have learned that many of the factors preventing us from addressing this 
shortage are in plain sight and within our control. The funding included in this bill will begin to address 
some of the bottlenecks facing our state when it comes to increasing our healthcare workforce. 
Increasing the number of opportunities available for students to train in rural and community settings, 
and growing our primary care residency programs will bring us one step closer to solving this problem. 
Thank you. 
BlDDEFORD AND PORTLAND, MAINE, USA. I T/\l\lGlER. MOROCCO I ONLINE
