 
 
MNPA.org  
PO BOX 135 Woolwich, ME 04579  
207-621-0313  
mainenpassociation@gmail.com  
mnpa.org  
       25+ Years of Independent Practice  as Healthcare Providers for the People of Maine  
 Committee on Health & Human Services  
LD 904/HP0560 An Act Supporting the Rural Health Care Workforce in Maine  
April 6, 2023  
Dear Senator Baldacci & Representative Meyer & members of the Committee on Health & 
Human Services,  
       I am a Family Nurse Pracitioner from Stetson who works in Bangor. I am a co -chair of the 
Maine Nurse Practitioners Association (MNPA) legislative committee writing to you today on 
behalf of MNPA, to urge you to support LD 904,  An Act Supporting the  Rural Health Care 
Workforce in Maine with the inclusion of Nurse Practitioners.  
      As you probably already know and may have experienced, there is a shortage of health care 
providers in our state (Maine CDC/Maine Policy Institute). This bill would allo w funding to assist 
in the education/clinical training/retention of providers including nurses and medical students. 
There are limited placements/preceptors and education is costly.  
      Maine has the oldest median age population in the United States and require more health 
care so this bill would aid to educate/retain healthcare providers. There are limited providers, 
especially in the rural areas of our state. More providers/nurses would increase access to care 
that our citizens deserve and can decrease delay in care which can improve outcomes and 
decrease costly complications from delay in care.  
      Nurse Practitioners provide quality care and this bill could aid for more educational 
opportunities and workforce development/retention in rural Maine for Nurse Practitioners to 
provide primary care if included. We support this bill to increase access to care and well -trained 
providers/nurses that we desperately need. Hospitals & other facilities/agencies are still using 
travelers (per diem)  for staffing wh ich is costly and they are only here for a limited time and 
then move on to their next assignment. Providing educational opportunites here in Maine can 
increase retention which increases ‘buy in’ and invested health care providers.  
        We urge you to s upport this bill and please feel free to contact me if any questions.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
Kathleen Forti -Gallant DNP  
PO Box 7 Stetson, Maine 04488  
Telephone # 207 -852-8403  
MNPA telephone # 207 -621-0313  
 
 
MNPA.org  
PO BOX 135 Woolwich, ME 04579  
207-621-0313  
mainenpassociation@gmail.com  
mnpa.org  
       25+ Years of Independent Practice  as Healthcare Providers for the People of Maine  
  
 
 
