€<l \/‘t/inthrop Street * Augusta, ME 04350 
1-800%-99-0229 * Fax 20?/~62t~O5 ’)9 ‘ Vit.TCOP@?vtaineOmbui§srn9r org 
at' 
,~ .~.§»':-:_' t~ 
()[ \"I\t§ﬁl§SMl AN Pr 
TESTIMONY 
In Support of 
LD 904 An Act Supporting the Rural Health Care Workforce in Maine 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 6, 2023 
Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. 
My name is Laura Harper. l am a Senior Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. l am here today 
to present testimony in support of this legislation on behalf of the Maine Long-Term Care 
Ombudsman Program. 
The Ombudsman Program is a nonprofit agency that provides statewide advocacy for older and 
disabled residents of nursing homes, assisted housing, assisted living and for recipients of 
home care services. Additionally, the program serves patients in hospitals who experience 
barriers in accessing the long-term services and supports they need when they are ready for 
discharge. 
This legislation requires the establishment of the Maine Rural Health Care Education Workforce 
Fund to support rural primary care and health professional workforce development asa 
dedicated non-lapsing account within the department. Funds would be used to support 
expanding rural longitudinal primary care clinical rotations for third year medical students, 
expanding rural primary care for 4"‘ year medical students, expanding rural primary care clinical 
residency, supporting the long-term sustainability of rural clinical preceptorship programs for 
students in undergraduate and graduate nursing programs.
This initiative is a very good idea and would provide an opportunity to encourage both 
physicians and nurses to seek employment in underserved rural areas. Older and disabled 
adults who need nursing services provided in their homes contact the Ombudsman Program 
often for assistance because nurses cannot be found to provide the care that is needed. This is 
particularly true in rural areas. 
Nursing homes in rural areas are challenged to find Medical Directors. The nursing homes that 
have closed in rural areas in recent years were also challenged by the inability to find nursing 
staff. 
This initiative may be very helpful in beginning to address the shortage of physicians and nurses 
in rural areas of the state. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
www rnaineombudsrnanorg
