_, STATE or MAINE <3 
v_ , GovERNoI< ’s ()I1I1IcI2 or Poucv INNovAIIoN AND "run FUTURL 
-'1' -A'?Y?=T- ..i 
*‘**.T§7 I81 STATE Housr STATION 
1 AUGUSTA, MAINE 
"»"'@..,» Y’ 
04333-0181 
Testimony in Support Of 
L.D. 651, An Act to Amend the Standards for Manufactured Housing to Comply with 
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Standards 
April 06, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Ryan Fecteau, Senior Advisor 
on Community Development & Strategic Initiatives in the Governor ’s Ofﬁce of Policy 
Innovation and the Future. I am here today to offer testimony in support of L.D. 651— 
An Act to Amend the Standards for Manufactured Housing to Comply with 
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Standards 
sponsored by President Troy Jackson. 
The Mills Administration is committed to addressing the challenges too many Mainers 
face to find safe, adequate, and affordable housing. There are numerous housing types 
that developers and ordinary citizens will need to deploy to boost the availability of 
housing in all 16 counties. These housing types range from accessory dwelling units to 
tiny homes to single-family site-built homes to multi-family site-built homes. Indeed, 
another key housing type is manufactured housing, described in this bill, built to the so- 
called “HUD code”. 
This bill is a straightforward proposal. It brings the statutory language in Title 30-A 
§4358 regarding land use regulation of manufactured housing into alignment with the 
rules adopted under Title 1o §9o64 related to the manufactured housing act. The rule 
states, “HUD-code homes, which are those units constructed after June 15, 1976 that the 
manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the HUD standard, meaning 
structures, transportable in one or more sections that, in the traveling mode, are 8 body 
feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, are 
320 or more square feet...” 
By bringing consistency to state law, industry, prospective homeowners, and prospective 
renters are provided with certainty that these homes meet the necessary requirements of 
the law. 
Thank you for your consideration and please do not hesitate to reach out with any 
questions.
