BICYCLE 
COALITION 
Q? 
March 23, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 730 
An Act to Provide Traffic Safety Education in Schools 
Good Afternoon Chairs Rafferty and Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Committee. 
My name is Jean Sideris and I am the Executive Director of the Bicycle Coalition of Maine (BCM). 
Our mission is to make Maine better for bicycling and walking. On behalf of our more than 20,000 
members and supporters, I am testifying today to urge you to vote in SUPPORT of LD 730, the Traffic 
Safety Education Act. 
There is a compelling need for this legislation. The last several years have seen record numbers of 
pedestrians and bicycle riders injured and killed on Maine roadways. Already this year, 3 people 
have died from crashes while walking on Maine's roads. According to the MaineDOT, 17 people died 
last year, 16 in 2021. And beyond fatalities, hundreds of Mainers have suffered life changing injuries 
by being hit over these same years. 
Many of these crashes have ignorance or misunderstanding of basic trafﬁc rules as a contributing 
factor. At the Coalition, we hear regularly about drivers who are speeding or distracted, about 
pedestrians walking without consideration of their personal safety, and about people on bikes riding 
unpredictably or in violation of Maine laws. Education can reduce such risky behaviors, and ensure 
more Maine residents know the "Rules of the Road.” 
The BCM has administered MaineDOT's statewide bicycle and pedestrian safety education program 
for nearly 20 years, so we can say with certainty that the way in which we are currently providing 
traffic safety education in schools is just not reaching enough people. The current system depends 
upon teachers knowing about the program and requesting safety presentations. It is a great 
program, and we hear all the time about how the info provided has kept kids safe while walking or 
bicycling. But under the current system, we reach between 8000-10,000 students annually, which is 
not even 10% of the student population. It's really not surprising that people behave so erratically at 
all ages on the road, because most people are not getting any education about what the rules 
actually are.l 
This bill will help address these problems. lf this bill becomes a law: 
Every Maine student in Grades 2-12 will receive one class period of ”age-appropriate" 
traffic safety education every year. Elementary students will focus on pedestrian safety, 
middle school students will learn more about riding bicycles, and high school students will 
get some tips on driving safely near people walking or bicycling. For this session's version of 
the bill, the education content can also include information on ”micromobility," which 
38 Diamond Street I Portland, Maine 04101 
207-623-45ii| www.hikemaine.0rg
BICYCLE 
COALITION 
includes how to safely use powered and unpowered skateboards, scooters and other 
devices. 
Students will learn the same basic rules. This bill will ensure that consistent information on 
roadway safety is being delivered in a systematic fashion that reaches all school children. 
This information will help keep children safe on roads immediately, but will also lay the 
foundation for proper usage of the public ways as they grow into adulthood. 
Local schools and teachers will have control over how the law is implemented. Using the 
Bicycle Coalition's trafﬁc safety curriculum, teachers can easily prepare and provide their 
own one-hour lesson on road safety. Or schools can opt to have one of Maine's many bicycle 
and pedestrian safety educators come and make a presentation. For some schools, a 
school-wide assembly may work better than individual classroom presentations. The 
curriculum was designed to be ﬂekible so that teachers and local administrators can ﬁnd an 
approach that works best for them. 
lt should be noted that this kind of trafﬁc safety information conforms to Maine Learning Results: 
Health Education and Physical Education Standards (updated 2022) category of "Health Promotion 
and Risk Reduction." Traffic safety education is already content that teachers could be--but 
generally are not--teaching. This bill simply requires that when preparing to teach 
already-mandated Health content, trafﬁc safety is one hour per year of the content they present. 
lf we fail to pass this bill, everyone in this room will bear a burden going forward. Every time we see 
a young pedestrian walking in dark clothing with their back to trafﬁc, or a child riding their bike on 
the wrong side of the road without a helmet, or a car cutting off a bicycle rider, we will have to ask 
ourselves if we did enough this session to improve the behavior of people on Maine's roads. And 
every time another pedestrian is killed as a result of an error in behavior that education could have 
prevented, we will ask ourselves if we could have done more in this legislative session. 
We understand the burden our teachers bear, and we are reluctant to add another one. But isn't 
saving a life--or dozens of lives--worth one hour per year? 
LD 730 is a well-conceived bill that will do positive things for Maine roadway safety. This bill is 
needed, will be effective, and will not be burdensome to schools and teachers. It is good public 
policy, and we ask you to support LD 730. 
Jean Sideris 
Bicycle Coalition of Maine 
38 Diamond Street I Portland, Maine 04101 
207-623-45ll| www.bikemaine.org
