John Brooking
Westbrook
LD 730
I am writing to convey my support for bill LD 730, "An Act to Provide Traffic Safety 
Education in Schools".
I have bicycled to work, an 11-mile round trip, most workdays for over 20 years. I 
have been a traffic safety educator with the Bicycle Coalition of Maine for almost half
that time, and I spent a few years volunteering once a month to speak about driving 
around bicyclists at a local driving school here in Westbrook.
All of this experience has shown me first-hand how spotty traffic safety education is 
when it comes to safe bicycling and walking on and near roadways. As all of you 
probably observe regularly, the number of bicyclists of all ages who ride around with 
no predictable behavior, no communication to other road users around them, and no 
lights at night is discouraging. Our culture does not convey to bicyclists that they are 
valid part of traffic, and as a consequence, they do not act like it. They have no 
comprehension of the benefits that using the same rules and communicating would 
give to them, and they are scared that acting "like a car" will only make motorists 
mad, as it sadly sometimes does. This speaks to the need for more education on the 
part of all road users.
I am sure that the testimony of others will provide you with the statistics of crash data 
and fatalities of recent years. Pedestrian fatalities in general are significantly up since 
the pandemic. While the available data suggest that legal fault for these numbers may 
lie more with motorists than pedestrians, it seems clear to me that having more 
pedestrians who are more educated in how to guard themselves against motorist 
mistakes would help a lot. As with many things which were negatively affected by the
pandemic, I feel that traffic safety education has suffered as well, as many driving 
school classes and on-request grade school presentations were unable to be conducted
for a period of time, and I'm not sure are back up yet to pre-pandemic levels.
But even before the pandemic, as I said above, such education was spotty. It needs to 
be more institutionalized and regular. Many advocates in this country would love to 
see the kind of bicycle infrastructure that is more common in some European 
countries. But it is also true that many of these same countries have a regular 
curriculum of traffic safety taught to their children in school, to compliment the 
infrastructure. I think we would do well to have that here, to provide a baseline level 
of education that we would know all children have received.
Please consider the testimony of many of us with experience in this education, and 
vote to "Ought to Pass" on LD 730.
