TESTIMONY OF ATTORNEY LAURI BOXER- MACOMBER  
 
LD 730 – Ought to Pass 
An Act to Provide Traffic Safety Ed ucation in Schools 
Committee on Education and Cultural Aff airs 
Thursday, March 23 , 2023, 1:00 p.m. 
      
  Good afternoon, Senator  Rafferty,  Representative Brennan , and Members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Aff airs: 
 
My name is Lauri Boxer- Macomber. I am a resident of Portland, Maine, an active transpor tation 
advocate, and  an attorney who has represented  victims of traffic crashes and traffic trauma throughout the 
State of Maine for nearly two decades . I am part of the National Bike Law Network, the chair of  Kelly, 
Remmel & Zimmerman ’s Bicycle and P edestrian Law Group, and a director on the Board of Directors of the 
Bicycle Coali tion of Maine. I am also a past  president of the Maine Trial Lawyers Association,  a former 
board member  of an early chil dhood education inst itutio n, and the par ent of two children who attended 
Maine pu blic schools from kindergarten through high school graduation.  I t is with this background and 
experience that  I offer this testimony  in support of LD 730. 
  
The Public Health Crisis  on Our Roadways 
  To fully appreciate the importance of LD 730, this Committee must first  understand the gravity of 
the public health crisis on our roadways. Last year, the Centers  for Disease C ontrol and Prevention report ed 
that traffic deaths were  the leading cause of death in the United States for people ages 1-54.
1  Of those 
deaths, many involved bicyclists, pedestrian s, and other vulnerable road users. In fact, in the first nine 
months of 2022, the National Highway Traffic Sa fety Administration  shared that national pedestrian fatalit y 
numbers were up by 2% and national bic yclist fa talities were up by 8%.2 
  Here in M aine, we are not immune from t he repercussions of th is epidem ic on our roadways. 
Traffic crashes are occurring with increased frequency, and they are taking, destroying, and impacting many 
Mainers ’ lives  every single day .  According to the MDOT , there were 33,914 traffic cr ashes  in 2022, which 
is a significant jum p from 28,722 in 2020.
3  Similarly, the Portland Press Herald recently reported that traffic 
deaths  in Maine have hit the highest number in f ifteen  years .4 Also consistent with  national trends, Mai ne is 
seeing increases in  traffic  deaths and injuries involving bicyclists,  pedestrians, and other vulnerable road 
 
1 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  WISQARS — Web -based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting 
System . Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control; 2022. 
2 United States Department of Transportation, NHTSA Estimates for First Nin e Months of 2022 Suggest Roadway 
Fatalities Beginn ing to L evel O ff After Two Years of Dram atic In creases January 9, 2023 located at 
https://www.nhtsa.gov/press- releases/nhtsa- estimates- traffic -deaths-2022- third -quarter  
 
3 See State of Maine, MaineDOT  Maine Public Crash Quer y Tool located at: 
https://mdotapps.maine.gov/MaineCrashPublic/PublicQueryStats   
 
4 Gray, Megan, Tra ffic deaths in Maine hit highest number in 15 years, Portland Press Herald , December 28, 2022, 
located at  https://www.pressherald.com/2022/12/28/its-just-horrendous-highway- fatalities -top-170- in-maine/  
 
users.5  Among those being hurt and killed  in Maine traffic crashes are peo ple jogging, walking their dogs, 
recreating on Maine ’s public ways , commuting by bicycle for financial, hea lth or environmental reasons, and  
traveling by foot to school, grocer y stor es and work. Further, when Mainers are involved in traffic trauma, it 
is not just t heir own lives that are forever lost or disrupted by the event . Traffic crashes  often have negative 
financial  and other harmful r ipple effects on  victims ’ families, employers, businesses , colleagues , classmates , 
and communities. 
  
The Questions We Need to Be Asking  
  With so many children, adults, law enforcement officers, neighbors, friends , co-workers, and 
family members  killed , maimed , seriously injured, and involved in traffic  crashes , we all must ask ourselves 
questions like these: 
• What are the best ways  to address this  public health crisis  on roadways? 
• How can we st op (or at least slow) the  increasing numbers of pedestrian, bicyclist, and motor vehicle 
operator deaths  on Maine public ways? 
• How do we change social  habits and cultural  norms surrounding distracted and inattentive driving? 
• How do we build empathy among the various types of road users (i.e., bicyclists, walkers, drivers) long before people sta rt driving  cars, trucks , and other motor vehicles? 
• Is it responsible to be pro moting walking, biking, and active transportation without also  ensuring that 
people of all ages  are taught and  understand Maine’s traffic safety statutes and rules of the road? 
• What are traffic  crashes costing our State—not just in terms of  the regrettable lives  lost, but also in 
terms of health care costs, employer  and business l osses,  public benefit  program dollars, state and 
municipal services , and  other expenses?  
 
Early Education is a Critical Part of the Solution  
After  approximately  two decades of litigating traffic  cases , interacting with  law enforcement agencies  
throughout the state, and working with  representatives of all three branches of government toward s just 
outcomes for victims and their families , I have come to the conclusion that if we really  want to address the 
public health crisis on our roadways, we need t o start working re gularly wit h Maine’s youngest generation. 
Put simply, kindergarteners may just be our best hope for ending distracted driving and other unsafe practices on our roadways.  
While we shouldn’t give up on the adults who seem to believe that  traffic deaths and injuries are just “ the 
price we pay for  the convenience of driving,” if  we are t o effectuate real change on Maine’s roadways over 
time, we need to  tackle  the epidemic on our roadw ays in Maine schools.   
We need  educate children on the rules of the road from early ages and get  buy- in from them to do better 
than their parents. 
 
 
 
5 Bangor Daily News , Maine sets another grim record for pedestrian deaths , January 11, 2023 located at: 
https://www.bangordailynews.com/2023/01/11/opinion/editorials/maine -pedestrian -deaths -2022/  
Inclusivity / Traffic Safety Education for All  
A key aspect of LD 730 is that it is inclusive , non-partisan , and addresses the behavior of all road 
users . The bill ensures that consistent informatio n on road safety is taught in a way that is accessible to all 
students, regardless of zip code. As Representative Daughtry  has pointed out, not all children in Maine grow 
up in homes with parents who know the Rul es of the Road and can effectively teach them to their 
children. Further, there are language and socio-cultural barriers that prevent many Maine children and 
families from simply learning how to safely navigate Maine’s public ways on their own. As a result , children 
walking, riding their bikes, and driving don’t always make the best decisions and can sometimes put themselves and other road users at risk of injury or harm. 
 
Children Are Agents of Change 
LD 730 is also an important piece of legislation because it  recognizes the value of children as 
advocates.  As we  have learned with other issues such as gun control, if the State of Maine succeeds  at 
teaching school children why traffic safety matters to them and their communities, they will likely “teach up” 
and speak out against deadly practices on our roadways such as distracted driving, speeding, and operating under the influence. Likewise, when children are exposed to safe biking and walking practices at school, they are likely to bring those lessons home to their parents, grandparents, neighbors, peers, and siblings, all of 
whom are also likely to be drivers on our roadways, but not all of whom have had the benefit of driver 
education programs. 
 
Driver’s E ducation Programs Do  Not Reach Many Mainers  
In considering the importance of LD 730, it important to note that the State of Maine does not require 
all drivers to go through a driver education course to obtain their drivers’ licenses . Therefore,  we cannot 
assume that Maine residents  will be taught what they need to know about traffic safety in those programs. In 
addition, regardless of whether students are getting traffic safety education in driver education programs, traffic safety education needs to begin at an early age.   We canno t wait until students are fifteen or sixteen to 
start teaching them the Rules of the Road. This is particularly true where many children  in Maine need to  
understand the rules of the road to safely walk and bike to school, bus stops, sports practices, work, stores , 
and other locatio ns. 
 
Viabilit y 
Incorporating traffic safety lessons into existing curricula is easy. Age-specific and age-appropriate 
curriculum has already been developed by teachers for teachers and is readily available to teachers, schools , 
and districts through the Bicycle Coalition of Maine.  LD 730 was developed with an understanding that 
traffic safety education is already taking place in many Maine schools through programming funded by the Department of Transportation and delivered by the Bicycle Coalition. The time commitments r equired of 
school districts are minimal, and the returns are anticipated to be significant.  
 
Retained School District Autonomy  
Importantly, the proposed legislation leaves room for school district autonomy. If teachers prefer not 
to deliver traffic safety programmin g, they can request presenters to deliver the curriculum. Likewise, if 
teachers wish to weave the traffic safety programming into other pre-existing curriculum the district can do 
that too. 
In sum, I urge your support of LD 730 and thank the visionaries behind this traffic safety education 
legislation, including Senator Daughtry, Senator Carney , Representative An keles , and Representative Arford 
and Representative Bell . I hope that you w ill join them in  prioritiz ing safety on our roadways through  traffic 
safety  education in our schools.  
Thank you for your time and service . If you have any questions for me, please do not hesitate  to reach 
out.  
 
      Best regards,  
       /s/ Lauri Boxer- Macomber  
       Lauri Boxer- Macomber  
      LBoxer@krz .com  
