122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
        
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association in Support of:  
LD 730: An Act to Provide Traffic Safety Education in Schools  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Room 208, Cross State Office Building Thursday, March  23, 2023 
 Dear  Senator Rafferty , Representative Brenner , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously. 
 MPHA is in support of LD 730: “An Act to Provide Traffic Safety Education in Schools,” which would require schools to annually provide age -appropriate traffic safety education to students in grades 2 to 12. 
 I hold a PhD from Tufts University, and my area of research is obesity prevention. I teach a  course at Tufts 
about equitable community design that promotes physical activity (e.g., crosswalks, signage, sidewalks and  
ramps). With increased investments in community design, which are paramount for encouraging more physical 
activity, we need concurrent increased investment in education about being active – safely. I imagine if I were 
to ask you to recall your earliest, fondest memory of being physically active as a  child, it would likely entail 
riding bikes, or playing street games like 4- Square or Red Rover with friends. From a physical activity and 
social development perspective, we want kids to keep playing those games. Unfortunately, times have changed, and fewer kids are playing outside with friends, independent of adult supervision. In part, it’s because more parents are worried about their kids’ safety – and they have a reason to be concerned: more people are driving 
(and walking!) distracted, and fewer kids a re aware of how to play safely outside. 
 
LD 730 invests in preventing the behaviors that concern parents about their kids being active outside. By educating youth, as they age, about traffic safety, we are giving them the tools they need to be active and a ware. 
Youth are current technology users, so teaching them about the dangers of walking and looking at their phone, 
while seemingly obvious, is important. They are also future drivers, so knowing the safety rules of the road, 
including – again – not using your phone while moving, means a generation of Maine kids will know how to be 
responsible user s of the road. 
 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  Some children grow up in homes where traffic safety isn’t taught and given the changes in social norms around 
active outdoor play and technology use , they may never learn the “rules of the road.” Schools are an appropriate 
place for them to learn – reaching across races, genders, and socio- economic statuses. We want our children to 
grow up healthy, and safely. We  respectfully request  you to vote LD 730 “Ought to Pass.” Thank you for 
considering our testimony. 
