I 
49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I 
“M95 Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBLIC EDUCATION ADX-‘QC/\TES ebS1te' Www'msmaweb'c0m “I 
I-lnineS:honl Sup2rintnndcnLiAsou'aticn 
TESTIMONY IN OPPQSTION TO 
L.D. 1567 
AN ACT TO CREATE A TRAINING PROGRAM FOR SCHOOL BOARD MEMBERS 
AND ESTABLISH SCHOOL BOARD MEETING STANDARDS 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in opposition to L.D. 1567. 
The intent of L.D. 1567 is positive. However, both MSBA and MSSA are testifying in opposition to this 
proposed bill. There are several reasons. 
By way of 20-A, §l00l, sub-§20, all school boards are to provide a time during full meetings of the school 
board a public comment period, where they can establish reasonable standards for the public comment period, 
including time limits and conduct standards. In addition, school boards have adopted Policy BCA, Board 
Code of Ethics, which provides a code of conduct that school board members are to follow both during school 
board meetings and out of meetings, during their term of ofﬁce. Boards are encouraged to revisit this policy 
annually and make a commitment to each other as well as to their communities regarding their conduct asa 
school board member. 
No votes are allowed in executive session. All votes must occur in public session. Were this L.D. to be 
approved, the vote to remove a school member(s) would be one that members of the public would want to 
witness and have the right to observe. 
In addition, the only current means of removing a school committee member from ofﬁce is by Way of recall. 
Recalls allowed are through Title 30-A, §2505, where the elected ofﬁcial would have had to have committed a 
crime during the term being sewed, with the crime being against the municipality where they were elected. 
The other means for recall of a school board member is if that provision has been approved Within a town 
charter, where the procedures Within the town/city need to be followed to determine if the recall effort is 
successful. A third means of replacing a school board member would be at the election at the end of their term 
— were a candidate to run a successful campaign and defeat the incumbent school board member at the ballot 
box. 
Training for school boards is critically important. This is a key service provided by Maine School 
Management Association for the school boards of Maine. A table of contents of such a training is attached to 
the testimony. School boards can access this training in Boardsmanship in a variety of Ways. It is offered at 
the MSMA Fall Conference in late October, via a Boardsmanship webinar offered free to members in 
December after the November elections, or through a school board speciﬁc training at the home site of the 
school board. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
53 such individual board workshops have occurred since July l, 2022, and an additional 47 were conducted 
during the 2021-2022 school year. These workshops are at the invitation of the school board 
chair/superintendent at a time and date convenient for the school board. A map showing the districts/towns 
where these workshops have been conducted is also attached to the testimony. 
Primary topics covered within workshops include: 
o Authority of school board members — state statutes and Constitution; oath of office 
~ Roles and responsibilities of school board members; only have authority when meeting in an 
ofﬁcially called meeting 
Code of Ethics 
School board/superintendent roles and relationship 
Role of the Chair 
Why culture of the school board is important 
Communication and F OAA 
Executive Session (When, Why, how, conﬁdentiality) 
Conﬁdential Records 
Public Comment, Policy BEDH 
Complaints and Concerns of the Public, Policy KE 
School Board Self-Evaluation — goal setting 
Topics of interest or concern, as presented by the individual school board, are also addressed during these 
workshops. 
Important aspects of training include the oath of office as required by all school board members to uphold the 
Constitution and the laws of the state. Also included Within school board workshops is the letter from 
Assistant Attorney General Sarah Forster regarding who school boards are responsible to. This letter is 
attached to the testimony. 
MSMA is much more adept in creating and delivering this type of training to the members of MSBA and 
MS SA than the Maine Department of Education. The Maine School Boards Association Executive Director 
and the Maine School Superintendents Association Executive Director serve as the Executive Director and 
Deputy Executive Director of MSMA. They meet with the state executive directors of each of the other states 
on a number of occasions throughout the year where training and workshop content and strategies are shared. 
In addition, I am connected with the National Federation of School Board Trainers through my role. This 
work is an ongoing opportunity to bring to our local school boards the best of Boardsmanship training to each 
of the local school board members. 
Given all that is being done and will continue to be offered, we again state that this effort would be redundant 
and not necessary. We urge the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs to vote ONTP on L.D. 1567.
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA Code: BCA 
BOARD MEMBER CODE OF ETHICS 
Having accepted the challenge of service on this School Board, I accept the principles set 
forth in the following code of ethics to guide me in helping to provide free public 
education to all the children of my school unit within the State of Maine. 
A. I will view service on the School Board as an opportunity to serve my 
community, state, and nation because I believe public education is the best 
means to promote the welfare of our people and to preserve our democratic 
way of life. 
B. I will at all times think of children ﬁrst and base my decisions on how they 
will affect children, their education, and their training. 
C. I will make no disparaging remarks, in or out of the Board meetings, about 
other members of the Board or their opinions. 
D. I will remember at all times that as an individual I have no legal authority 
outside the meetings of the Board, and that I will conduct my relationship 
with the school staff, the local citizenry, and all media of communications 
on the basis of this fact. 
E. I will recognize that my responsibility is not to operate the schools but to 
see that they are well operated. 
F. I will seek to provide education for all children in the community 
commensurate with their needs and abilities.t 
G. I will listen to all citizens but will refer all complaints to the proper 
authorities, and will discuss such complaints only at a regular meeting after 
failure of administrative solution. 
H. I will support a decision made by the majority of the Board graciously. 
I. I will not criticize employees publicly, but will make such criticism to the 
Superintendent for investigation and action, if necessary. 
J. I will make decisions openly after all facts bearing on a question have been 
presented and discussed. 
Page l of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION 
NEPN/N SBA Code: BCA
K. I will refuse to make promises as to howl will vote on a matter that should 
properly come before the Board as a Whole. 
L. I will not discuss the conﬁdential business of the Board in my home, on the 
street, or in my ofﬁce, the place for such discussion being the School Board 
meeting. 
M. I will conﬁne my Board action to policy making, planning, and appraisal, 
leaving the administration of the schools to the Superintendent. 
N. I will welcome and encourage cooperation and participation by teachers, 
administrators, and other personnel in developing policies that affect their 
welfare and that of the children they serve. 
O. I will endeavor at all times to see that schools have adequate ﬁnancial 
support within the capabilities of the community and state, in order that 
every child may receive the best possible education. 
P. I will resist every temptation and outside pressure to use my position asa 
School Board member to beneﬁt myself or any individual or agency apart 
from the total interest of the school unit. 
Q. I will endeavor to attend every regular and special Board meeting 
recognizing that my presence means representation for my town or city. If 
I ﬁnd that this is not possible for an extended length of time, I will give 
consideration to resigning from my position on the Board. 
R. I will recognize at all times that the School Board of which I am a member 
is an agent of the state, and as such, I will abide by the laws of the state and 
the regulations formulated by the Maine Department of Education and by 
the State Board of Education. 
Adopted: 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect ofﬁcial Association 
policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a starting point fora 
board's policy development on speciﬁc topics. Rarely does one board's policy sen/e exactly to address the concerns 
and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and 
a thorough consideration of the application and suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are not 
intended as a substitute for the advice of a board's own legal counsel. 
Page 2 of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
New Board Member Boardsmanship 101 A 
December 13, 2021 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Handout Handout # 
School Board Powers and Duties 1 
School Board Powers and Responsibilities 2 
MSMA Sample Policy BBA 
Memo of Assistant Attorney General 3 
Board/Superintendent Roles & Responsibilities-Quiz 4 
Board-Superintendent Relationship: 5 
MSMA Sample Policy BDD 
Board/Superintendent Roles 6 
Communications Agreement 7 
School Board Member Code of Ethics 8 
MSMA Sample Policy BCA 
Code of Ethics/Robert's Rules Placemat 9 
-Adapted from North Carolina School Boards Association 
Why Board Culture Matters 10 
-MSBA Handbook 
School Board Use of Electronic Mail 11 
MSMA Sample Policy BEA 
School Boards in the Digital Age 12 
- National School Boards Association 
Social Media Reference Guide 13 
-New York State School Boards Association
Board Member Use of Social Media 
MSMA Sample Policy BEB 
School Unit Records Designated as Conﬁdential 
Under Maine Law — Appendix F 
Maine Statutes Authorizing Executive Sessions for 
Maine School Units - Appendix E 
Public Concerns and Complaints 
MSMA Sample Policy KE 
Public Participation at Board Meetings 
MSMA Sample Policy BEDH 
School Board Opening Statement 
Board Chair Statement for Public Comment 
School Board Self-Evaluation 
MSMA Sample Policy BBAB 
Ten ways that superintendents and school boards can 
undermine each other 
-School Law Advisory, Drummond Woodsum
Q
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA Code: BEDH 
[NOTE: School Boards are required by current law to provide an opportunity for 
public comment, limited to school and education matters, at full meetings of the 
Board (20-A MRSA § 1001(20). Boards may impose reasonable time, place and 
manner restrictions on expressive activity during the public comment period to 
ensure that the Board’s business meeting is not disrupted and to ensure compliance 
with conﬁdentiality and privacy laws. 
Boards should check other related policies (such as those pertaining to agenda 
preparation, Board meetings, agenda format, etc.) to ensure that there are no 
inconsistencies with revisions to this policy, and update those policies and all cross 
references as necessary.] 
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AT SCHOOL BOARD MEETINGS 
The primary purpose of School Board meetings is to conduct the business of the Board 
related to Board policies, programs, and operations. The Board encourages residents to 
attend Board meetings so that they may become acquainted with the operations and 
programs of the schools. 
The Board also recognizes the value of public comments on school and educational 
matters. To permit fair and orderly expression of public comments at Board business 
meetings while still allowing the Board to conduct its business efﬁciently, the Board has 
established the procedure below for regular business meetings. 
At special, emergency, or workshop meetings, public comments will be limited to the 
topic(s) of the particular meeting. 
[NOTE: The public comment law simply refers to “full meetings of the board,” 
without making a distinction between the various kinds of meetings that are 
typically held. MSMA/DWM believe that it is acceptable to limit public comment at 
special, emergency, and workshop meetings to the topic(s) for which the meeting is 
held. Boards may delete the above sentence if they wish to allow general comments. 
The law makes it clear that public comment is not required at subcommittee 
meetings.] 
In addition to speaking during the designated public comment portion of the agenda at 
Board meetings, members of the public are welcome to submit written comments on 
school and educational matters to the Board and Superintendent, or to submit requests to 
have items placed on a Board agenda, in accordance with applicable Board policies. 
[NOTE: The law does not specify where the public comment period should be 
placed on the agenda or how much public comment should be allowed. For 
efficiency, it may make sense to place the public comment early in the agenda. 
Page l of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: BEDH 
1. The Board will include a public comment period, not to exceed 30 minutes [Or:_ minutes] on the agenda of its regular business meetings. Comments by individuals are 
limited to a maximum of three (3) minutes [OR: ___ minutes] at a meeting. Individuals 
may not relinquish a portion of their allotted time to another speaker. The time limits in 
this paragraph may be modiﬁed at a particular meeting at the discretion of the Board. 
[NOTE: Boards have the option of prioritizing comments from residents of the 
school unit. There are two options below that Boards may wish to consider. 
MSMA/DW suggest having a sign-in form for individuals to speak, which includes 
the individual ’s name and town/city of residence. Boards may also choose not to 
have a sign-in form, or only to use one in circumstances where there are many 
individuals wishing to speak at a regular meeting.] 
2.[OPTION 1] Individuals who wish to speak during the public comment period are 
required to ﬁll out the sign-in form available at each Board meeting, prior to the 
beginning of the public comment period, and to review a copy of this policy. Each 
individual will be required to state their name and town/city of residence before 
beginning their remarks. 
[OPTION 2] The Board will hear public comments from residents of the school unit 
ﬁrst. If there is time remaining in the public comment period once all residents have had 
the opportunity to speak, the Board will permit comments from non-residents. Individuals 
who wish to speak are required to ﬁll out the sign-in form available at each Board 
meeting, prior to the begimiing of the public comment period, and review a copy of this 
policy Each individual will be required to state their name and town/city of residence 
before beginning their remarks. 
3 .The Board Chair is responsible for ensuring the orderly conduct of Board meetings and 
for ensuring compliance with this policy, including the following rules of order: 
a. Speakers will be recognized by the Board Chair, and comments should be 
addressed to the Board Chair. Requests for information or concerns that require 
further research may be referred to the superintendent for further action, if 
necessary; 
b. Speakers are expected to follow rules of common etiquette and decorum, 
including refraining from using vulgar and/or obscene language, yelling, 
threatening others using words or by other actions, making defamatory 
comments, or otherwise engaging in any activity that disrupts orderly meeting 
progress. Examples of disruptive conduct include, but are not limited to, 
exceeding the allotted time limits, talking over or interrupting others, offering 
repetitive comments, and offering comment on matters unrelated to the school 
unit’s programs, policies, or operations. 
Page 2 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT AS SOCATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: BEDH 
c. Discussion of personnel matters is not pennitted during the public comment 
period due to the privacy, conﬁdentiality and due process rights of school unit 
employees. For purposes of this policy, “discussion of a personnel matter” 
means any discussion of job performance or conduct of a school unit 
employee, including complaints about them. 
d. Discussion of matters involving individual students are also not permitted 
during the public comment period due to the privacy, conﬁdentiality, and due 
process rights of the school unit’s students. 
e. Any concerns about personnel matters and/or student matters should be 
directed to the Superintendent or another appropriate administrator outside of 
Board meetings so that they can be addressed through an altemative channel 
and in a manner consistent With privacy, conﬁdentiality, and due process rights 
of the individuals involved. 
f. The Board Chair will stop any public comment that is contrary to these rules. 
g. Individuals Who disrupt a Board meeting may be asked to leave in order to 
allow the Board to conduct its business in an orderly manner. The Board Chair 
may request the assistance of law enforcement if necessary to address disruptions 
or safety concems. 
Legal Reference: 20-A MRSA § l00l(20) 
20-A MRSA § 6101 
1 MRSA § 405 
Cross Reference: BE — School Board Meetings 
BEDB — Agenda 
BEDB-R — Agenda Format 
BEC — Executive Sessions 
KE —~ Public Concerns and Complaints 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect ofﬁcial Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a starting point for a board's policy development on 
speciﬁc topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and suitability 
to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are not intended asa 
substitute for the advice of a board's own legal counsel. 
Page 3 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
C*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA Code: KE 
PUBLIC CONCERNS AND COMPLAINTS 
Parents, students or other citizens with complaints or concems regarding any aspect of 
the [School Unit Name] or an employee thereof shall be encouraged to seek a resolution 
at the lowest possible level. The only exceptions are complaints that concern School 
Board actions or operations. Such complaints should be addressed to the Board Chair. 
If the complaint cannot be resolved at the lowest level, the person initiating the complaint 
may appeal the decision to the next level (i.e., Supervisor of Buildings, Grounds & 
Transportation, Principal, Special Education Director, Assistant Superintendent). 
If the complaint cannot be resolved at any lower level, it may be appealed to the 
Superintendent. If the complaint remains unresolved at the Superintendent ’s level, the 
person making the complaint may request that the matter be placed on the agenda of the 
next regular School Board meeting. The Superintendent/Board Chair shall determine 
whether the complaint should be placed on the agenda. 
At all levels of the complaint process, school employees are required to inform the person 
making the complaint of his/her right to appeal the decision to the next level. 
This policy shall not be utilized by employees for matters or grievances relating to any 
term or condition of their employment. Such matters shall be addressed through 
established channels for grievances. 
Cross Reference: BEDB — Agenda Preparation and Dissemination 
Adopted: 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reﬂect official 
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used asa 
starting point for a board’s policy development on speciﬁc topics. Rarely does one board’s policy serve 
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful 
analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and 
suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and 
are not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board’s own legal counsel. 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
6 State House Station FAX’ 287-3145 
OFFICE OF THE Augusta, ME 0,4333-0006 email: 
ATTQRNEY GENERAL Ph°“°‘ 6~26'880° 
Memorandum 
TO: A. Ponder M.-akin, Commissioner 
Maine Department of Education 
FROM: Sarah Forster, Assistant Attorney General 
DATE: January 3, 2020 
SUBJECT: School Boards 
Senator Millett and Representative Komﬁeld sent you a letter on April 9, 2019 requesting 
that “the Department, in consultation with the Attorney General’s Ofﬁce, develop guidance and 
provide direction to school boards on current state law and the responsiveness of school boards 
to the public.” I understand that this request comes from a concern about training materials 
developed by the Maine School Boards Association and the law ﬁrm of DrummondWoodsum 
and speciﬁcally how they address school boards’ “responsibilities for, and responsiveness to, 
their respective communities. ” After reviewing materials from Drummondlll/oodsum, I am not 
sure that any additional guidance or direction from you is needed. 
The Maine Constitution affords control over education to the Maine Legislature; School 
boards are creatures of statute, with their duties and responsibilities described therein. The nexus 
of the concern about school boards’ “responsibilities for, and responsiveness to, their respective 
communities ” appears to be the statement, contained in a decision of Maine’s Law Court that 
. . . the [school] committee acts as a public board. It in no sense represents the 
town. Its members are chosen by the voters of the town, but after election, they 
are public officers. deriving their authority from the law and responsible to the 
state for the good faith and rectitude of their acts. 
Shaw v. Small, 124 Me. 36, 4l (1924). Shaw’s instruction that a school board is responsible for 
faithfully applying the law, as opposed to considering the fairness of the law to their 
municipality ‘ remains good law, and is not limited, as some have suggested, to its facts or to its 
' 
In Shaw, the issue was the right of an orphan to attend school in the town where his guardian resided. The school 
committee denied him access to school because, among other things, they felt that too many wards of the state were 
being placed in their town, which was an “unequal burden that the town should not be obligated to bear.“ The Law  
time. As explained by Attorney Donald Kopp in a 2006 article, unlike a representative body that 
is charged with legislative ﬁmctions, a school board is an executive body with the collective 
responsibility of executing the laws enacted by the Legislature and governing the school 
administrative unit over which they are responsible. Thus, once elected, members of a school 
board function not as a representative of the town or ward that elected them, in the way thata 
member of the Legislature acts as a representative of his or her district, but as a member of an 
executive body that oversees a system of public education. The training materials provided to 
school boards appear to be consistent with that view: they prepare school board members to 
govern school administrative units in accordance with the governing law. 
With respect to a related issue, public participation at school board meetings, the recent 
enactment of Chapter 293, An Act to Encourage Public Participation in School Board Meetings, 
puts to rest any concerns about the requirement that school boards receive public comment at 
their meetings. I have reviewed the model policy drafted by MSMA and believe that it fully 
complies with the public comment requirement. 
SAF/pc 
Court, in ordering the student be admitted to school, held that the school committee was obligated to follow the law 
with respect to residency, not their views about the fairness of the law to their town.
