 
53 Baxter  Boulevard,  Suite  202 | Portland,  
ME 04101  
Phone:  866-554-5380  | Fax: 207-775-5727  | 
TTY:  877-434-7598  
aarp.org/me  | me@aarp.org  | twitter: 
@aarpmaine  facebook.com/aarpmaine  | 
instagram.com/aarpme  
March 23, 2023  
 
L.D. 987, An Act to Promote Electricity Price Stability for Standard Offer Service  
 
BEFORE THE ENERGY,  UTILITIES,  AND  TECHNOLOGY  COMMITTEE  
 
TESTIMONY  OF AARP  MAINE:  NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  
 
Chairs  Lawrence  and Zeigler, a nd the Joint  Standing  Committee  on Energy,  Utilities,  and 
Technology:  
 
Good afternoon , my name is Alf Anderson , and I am an Advocacy and Outreach 
Director with  AARP Maine. AARP Maine is a non -partisan, non -profit organization with 
more than  200,000 members statewide. I am  here today to testify on how to make 
standard offer serv ice better although we take no position on LD 987.  
 
AARP supports efforts to ensure that the Standard Offer Service purchased in the wholesale 
market for over 90% of Maine’s residential customers served by CMP and Versant Power is 
stable  and affordable .  Indeed, the overall intent of this proposed bill appears to reflect that 
policy.  We have several ide as that could be crafted as amendments to the bill as described 
below.  
 
First,  AARP supports a longer -term portfolio  for Standard Offer.  We also oppose to purchase 
100% of ou r generation supply at one point in time for a one -year fixed price contract.   
 
Before  this policy change, the Commission purchased Standard Offer in laddered contracts, 
namely 1/3 of the load for a three -year fixed price contract purchased annually.  As a result, 
this policy meant that Maine’s residential customers did not see volatile and dramatic swings 
in prices for this essential product, either up or down.   
 
Had this policy been in effect, we would have experienced higher generation supply prices bu t 
not at the level that has occurred in the last two years (49% for CMP customers and 41% for 
Versant Power customers) because a portion of our supply would have been protected by the 
lower prices in effect prior to 2021 .   
 
However, the bill , as proposed , lacks certain necessary consumer protections and policies 
(such a s those  documented in the Office of Public Advocate’s report and recommendations on 
the Standard Offer ) that are typical of Standard Offer in other restructuring states.   
 
AARP Maine participated in the Office of Public Advocate’s evaluation of the Standard Offer 
procu rement policies and endorse the overall Report’s recommendation to require a portfolio 
of contract lengths and terms designed to provide price stability to Maine’s residential 
consumers.  This overall objective can be met with a directive to the Commissi on to purchase a 
portfolio with laddered contract terms that is typical of other restructuring states.  
Alternatively, this objective could be met with the proposal as reflected in this bill to anoint a 
portfolio manager that would develop and obtain appro val of a longer -term generation supply 
portfolio and procurement schedule, such as exists in Illinois.  However, whether either 
approach is directed by the Legislature, AARP Maine recommends that the following consumer 
protections be included in the statut ory directive for this vital and essential electricity service:  
 
o State policymakers should make standard offer service the default for residential 
customers. It should be stable , predictable, and affordable.  
 
o Standard offer service should be offered to al l residential customers at rates that 
have been approved by regulators and are cost -based, just, and reasonable.  
 
o Standard offer service should include the same consumer protections that 
historically have been provided by traditional gas or electric utilit y service to 
these customers prior to restructuring.  
 
o Policymakers should reject proposals to eliminate standard offer service and 
force consumers to choose a supplier.  
 
o Policymakers should reject proposals to offer variable standard offer service 
linked to short -term wholesale market prices or other volatile pricing strategies.  
 
In summary, we urge the abovementioned reforms to the standard offer service to enhance its 
effectiveness.   We would be happy to suggest appropriate language as amendments to th e 
current bill.  
 
Thank  you,  
 
Alf Anderson  
Advoca cy and Outreach  
 AARP  Maine  
 
 
