Neither For NorAgainst LD 987, An Act to Promote Electricity Price Stability for Standard-offer Service 
March 23, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and members of the Joint Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology. l am Jeff Jones of Bangor and l run Maine Power, the Standard Offer 
Service ("SOS") Provider for Large Commercial and industrial customers for most of the state. l have 
been dealing with electric power supply for almost ﬁfty years. I am testifying neither for nor against LD 
987 and hope that you will consider three issues that will affect the success of such legislation. 
fi it, the Maine PUC already has the power to do this. They have done this in the past, though not for 
ten years. They did ﬁve-year small SOS for Maine Public Service at least once. They also responded to the 
desire for price stability with a three-year laddering program for Central Maine Power (”CMP") and 
Bangor Hydro Electric Company (now Versant Power), where one-third went out to competitive bid each 
year for three years. The price laddering worked for price stability but had the unintended consequence 
of encouraging bad behavior by some suppliers in the competitive market for the small class of 
customers. 
The basic problem with stabilizing the energy portion of electric supply is that electric energy isa 
commodity, just like gasoline, diesel, and heating oil. We don't try to stabilize those prices. Commodity 
prices ﬂuctuate and you can only ﬁx future prices by paying someone a premium to take the risk for you. 
That risk premium is exponentially greater for longer periods of time. For example, the Maine PUC 
currently ﬁxes prices for SOS for a year for small and medium customers. Even ﬁxing prices for one year 
has historically resulted in higher costs to consumers. For example, over the last ﬁve years that we have 
provided large SOS for CMP, small and medium customers paid 8.4 cents per kWh when our prices that 
were based on actual costs, paid 7.7 cents. That's a 10% premium that customers have paid. That's just 
for ﬁxing prices for one year. Make that a longer term and the premium goes up and probably more than 
10% for every year you do it. Again, we don't expect to buy gasoline, diesel, or heating oil that way. 
Second, this bill may not have the intended effect in that we are already using long term contracts of 
twenty years from the MPUC's annual auctions and Net Energy Billing programs to moderate price 
swings. Although these currently are not part of the supply portion of a customer's bill, they still ﬂow 
directly through to customers. These are basically hidden supply contracts. 
Egg, this bill may be premature in that last month's Retail Electricity Supply Study Report from the 
Public Advocate has many suggestions and one is to do away with competition for the small class of 
customers. It said that the: "average CEP rate was approximately 70 percent higher than the standard 
offer rates in 2021" and ”Much of the additional $20 million that CEP-served Maine households spend 
for electricity likely ﬂows out of Maine's economy." if we do away with competition for small electricity 
customers as that study suggests, we would not need Standard Offer Sen/ice, but that is what we are 
talking about here. This bill it may be a de facto move away from competition by creating a new quasi» 
utility to sign ten-year contracts. Rather than eliminate retail competition, we could reform it by looking 
to our other New England states with retail competition, taking their best practices and applying them
here in Maine. I believe that doing away with competition should be a discussion for this committee for 
another day after considering other recommendations from the OPA's report. 
I urge you to consider these issues in your work sessions on this bill. Thank you. 
Jeffrey Jones, P.E. 
Managing Member 
Maine Power, LLC 
40 Harlow St, Ste3 
Bangor, ME 04401
