Testimony of New Brunswick Energy Marketing Corporation , 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
March 23, 2023 
LD 987, An Act to Promote Electricity Price Stability for Standard-ojfer Service 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology: 
With great respect for this bill’s sponsors, New Brunswick Energy Marketing Corporation 
(NBEM) offers this testimony in opposition to LD 987 as printed. 
NBEM is an energy supplier that manages a diversiﬁed energy portfolio consisting of primarily 
clean energy resources, including nuclear, hydro and wind generation solidiﬁed by reliable thermal 
generation. That portfolio also includes the rights to reliable ﬁrm transmission in Atlantic Canada that is 
connected to Maine, Quebec, PEI, and Nova Scotia. This unique position enables NBEM to buy, sell, 
and shape reliable power deliveries to its customers. v 
_Of particular relevance to this bill, NBEM is a standard-offer service provider. Today, NBEM is 
the standard offer service provider for most Maine electricity customers. This is because NBEM has 
competed in and won PUC-run solicitations seeking standard offer service providers, based on PUC 
selection criteria that prioritize the lowest-cost bid. Drawing on NBEM’s "experience in wholesale 
energy markets across New England and Atlantic Canada as well as its service as the PUC-selected 
standard offer provider, NBEM offers the Committee the following observations about LD 987. 
First, part of what this bill would do is already in Maine law. The PUC already has power to 
“establish various standard-offer service contract lengths and terms” with respect to residential and 
small commercial standard-offer service, and to set the price for standard-offer service on a periodic 
basis. Similarly, designated standard-offer service providers are already responsible for purchasing the 
supply of electricity needed to provide standard-offer service to customers located in the service 
territories of investor-owned transmission and distribution utilities. 
More fundamentally, it isn’t clear how the remaining elements of the bill could work in practice, 
and this could come with risks including fewer bidders, less competition, and higher prices. Today,a 
bidder’s pricing for the upcoming contract year plays an important role in the PUC’s selection process. 
Under the bill as printed, the PUC would select one or more providers, for a term of up to 10 years, to 
provide standard-offer service at prices that can change periodically but must always provide sufﬁcient 
revenue for the standard-offer service provider or providers to recover their costs.
In general, bidders can have greater certainty about one-year terms than they can about longer 
tenns like ten years. This uncertainty principle applies to the sources of wholesale supply needed to 
serve load and their cost — how much will electricity cost in 5 or l0 years? Particularly for standard-offer 
service, this uncertainty also applies to load — how much electricity will any given T&D’s standard-offer 
service customers consume in 2028 or 2033? When considering this risk as applied to any future year, 
we need to consider not only how much electricity society will be using in general (including changes 
from heat pump and electric vehicle adoption), but also what fraction of customers will choose to 
exercise their right to leave standard-offer service for competitive service — and how many might switch 
back to standard-offer service. This is because Maine law provides generally that all consumers of 
electricity have the right to choose whether to purchase generation services directly from competitive 
electricity providers or to take standard-offer service — and can even switch back and forth between 
standard-offer and competitive supply. 
Given these uncertainties, we have questions about how the structure envisioned by this bill 
could work, including: 
0 On what basis would the PUC select a provider for a term longer than one year? 
0 If this law were enacted, what showing would the provider be required to make to exercise its 
right to recover its costs? 
0 How would this mechanism relate to promoting electricity price stability? 
0 What if the PUC selects a provider for a longer term, but thereby misses the opportunity to 
select a different bidder who could have provided service for a lower price? 
Given the uncertainties surrounding how this bill could possibly be implemented, we see -concern 
that its enactment would expose Maine consumers to risks including fewer bidders, less competition, 
and higher prices.T 
Instead, we see opportunities for the PUC to alter its standard-offer service procurement and 
contracting processes — such as by conducting the bidding for such standard offer service in the second 
calendar quarter of each year, keeping the selection date of such service as conﬁdential (requiring each 
bidder to enter into a nondisclosure agreement prior" to knowing the bid selection date), and providing 
for annual levelized rates for all classes of customers — and thereby to achieve meaningful reductions in 
ratepayer cost, cost volatility, and related risks. These measures offer Maine tangible solutions to 
improve its standard-offer service program. 
l’m happy to answer any questions from the committee.
