Testimony for the Health and Human Services Committee  
April 5, 2023  
LD 838– An Act to Identify the State’s Unidentified 
Human Remains 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify about LD 838, An 
Act to Identify the State’s Unidentified Human Remains. 
My name is David Mittelman, I’m the CEO of Othram, the 
first private laboratory built to apply the power of 
modern parallel sequencing to forensic evidence. We 
help investigators break through previously impenetrable 
forensic DNA barriers and close previously unsolvable 
cases using a type of DNA testing referred to as Forensic 
Genetic Genealogy (FGG).  
 
FGG combines traditional genealogy research with 
advanced forensic DNA analysis, so law enforcement can 
develop investigative leads to identify perpetrators of 
violent crime or unidentified victims of a violent crime 
when traditional DNA testing methods like CODIS fail to 
provide an investigative lead. 
 
The legislation before the committee would require the 
use of FGG DNA testing on unidentified human remains 
when traditional investigative methods have failed. This 
legislation recognizes how FGG technology is uniquely 
suited to clear the backlog of unidentified human 
remains cases. 
 
Traditional DNA testing, often referred to as CODIS, 
compares the victims’ DNA to a database of convicted 
felons, or in some cases arrestees.  
 
As you might imagine, the vast majority of unidentified 
human remains cases involve victims, not convicted 
felons, so therefore rarely in these cases does law 
enforcement get a match or “hit” in CODIS.  
 
Unlike legacy DNA testing methods, FGG technology 
builds DNA profiles with hundreds of thousands of DNA 
markers, allowing longer distance relationships to be 
identified in publicly available databases consented for 
law enforcement, thereby providing investigative leads 
when traditional DNA testing methods come up short.  
 
It was such an investigative lead recently in Maine that 
led to the arrest of Jason Follet for a 1996 sexual assault 
in Hancock County. Mr. Follet has been linked to multiple 
sexual attacks in Maine in the 1990’s. This was the first 
time Maine had used FGG technology in a sexual assault 
case. 
 
I have seen the power of this technology firsthand clear 
out backlogs. For example, thanks to the generous 
donation of a philanthropist in Mississippi covering the 
cost of FGG DNA testing, the backlog of unidentified 
human remains cases in that state is nearly cleared out.   
 
Whether in Mississippi or New England, when 
unidentified human remains cases are tested using FGG 
technology, the results are compelling. Recently 
Massachusetts solved “the lady of the dunes” case, an 
unidentified homicide victim dating back to 1974, and 
“Granby Jane Doe”, an unidentified homicide victim 
discovered in 1978.  
 
According to the latest statistics from the Department of 
Justice, the US has at least 40,000 unidentified human 
remains cases and over 100,000 active missing persons 
cases. The National Institute of Justice (NIJ) refers to this 
backlog as the “nation’s silent mass disaster.”  
 
The bill before the committee today directly addresses 
this silent mass disaster and sets a model for the nation 
to follow. A model where families, who have often 
waited decades, will get answers about loved ones, and 
oftentimes justice. 
 
For the above reasons, I ask the committee to report the 
bill favorably.  
  
