HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
»@@,» (207) 287-1440 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
David Boyer 
l 12 Verrill Road 
Poland, ME 04274 
Ofﬁce: (207) 287-1440 
Cell: (207) 274-4633 
David Boyer@legislature.maine.g0v 
April 4, 2023 
Testimony of Represenative David Boyer 
Presenting L.D. 838, An Act to Identify the State's Unidenti ﬁed Human 
Remains 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Sen/ices, my name is Representative 
David Boyer and I proud to present L.D. 838 An Act to Identify the State's 
Unidenti ﬁed Human Remains. I am grateful for the bipartisan lawmakers 
that have signed onto to the bill. 
DNA and reverse genealogy technology can now be used in way to allow 
law enforcement and medical examiners to identify remains or DNA 
evidence. It has helped create new leads for law enforcement to catch 
suspects and has brought closure to families who have lost a sibling ora 
child. 
It has been used in Maine with great success. In 2022, The Maine State 
Police used advanced DNA testing and forensic genetic genealogy to 
identify an unknown serial predator. Investigative leads were sent back to 
MSP detectives, and they were able to conﬁrm that 56-year-old Jason 
F ollette as the suspect in a 1996 sexual assault case and further suspected of 
assaulting multiple other women since. This is the ﬁrst sexual assault case 
solved in Maine using this kind of technology. 
In 2014, a landlord discovered a tenant passed away in his apartment in 
Oakland. For 4 years, authorities struggled to identify him and locate his 
family. In 2018, Maine’s Ofﬁce of Chief Medical Examiner contacted the 
non-proﬁt DNA Doe Project to help with the identiﬁcation. In just 5 weeks, 
volunteers at DDP were able to identify the deceased. 
District 87 Mechanic Falls and Poland (part)
Currently, there are over 20 unidenti ﬁed human remains that the state of 
Maine is in possession of. According to the National Missing and 
Unidenti ﬁed Persons System there are 140 open cases of missing persons in 
Maine. 
My bill would require Maine’s Chief Medical Examiner to use this type of 
testing on the unidenti ﬁed human remains that the state is in possession of. It 
would also make this a formal policy for new remains, if there has not been 
in a positive ID within 45 days. 
DNA tests cost between $3,000-$5,000 a kit but there are discounts for bulk 
services. The Chief Medical Examiner ’s ofﬁce estimates it would cost about 
$100,000 to test the backlog of remains and then roughly $10,000 -$15,000 a 
year going forward, depending on how many remains the state becomes in 
possession of. 
After talking with the Chief Medical Examiner, it’s clear that they cannot 
absorb these costs, and this would have to be added to their budget. In my 
humble opinion, this is a small cost to the state and would mean a lot to the 
families affected. 
Consider the cost to store these remains. Consider the costs of law 
enforcement going out on a weekend looking for a missing person, renting 
ground penetrating radar and thermal drones. The CME’s office things there 
is a strong chance that there is crossover between Maine’s missing and the 
unidenti ﬁed remains. Perhaps the state will save tax dollars by not looking 
for someone that simply has not been identiﬁed yet. 
I hope you also consider the closure this could bring to families in Maine 
who have been looking for their loved ones for years. Families like the 
Moreau’s, who have been looking for Kim Moreau since I986. To this day, 
her father Richard continues to search for his daughter, putting up missing 
posters on light poles in Jay. 
I hope you consider making it a policy of the state to do everything possible 
to identify the deceased. I appreciate your time and consideration on this 
important matter. Thank you. 
District 87 Mechanic Falls and Poland (part)
