1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May 10, 2023 
  
LD 1538 – An Act to Provide Tax Benefits to Persons Constructing Accessory 
Dwelling Units 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good morning, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1538 – An Act to 
Provide Tax Benefits to Persons Constructing Accessory Dwelling Units. 
This bill creates a program of  State reimbursement to property tax taxpayers 
of a percentage of property taxes paid for up to ten years due to an increase in the 
taxes because of the construction of an accessory dwelling unit (ADU).  The bill 
defines ADU’s  as an attached or detached dwelling unit on the same lot or parcel 
as an existing or proposed single-family or multifamily residence that allows for 
independent living for one or more persons and contains kitchen and bathroom 
facilities and sleeping accommodations. 
First, as the bill is currently worded – with references to both “an existing or 
proposed single-family or multifamily residence” and the definition of “eligible 
property” – it is unclear whether the intent of the bill is to incentivize wholly new 
construction, or to incentivize current homeowners to add ADUs to their existing 
properties.  If it is the latter, the bill should require the residence on a lot with an 
ADU to be an existing homestead as defined by 36 M.R.S. § 681(2).  The bill 
2 
 should also clarify whether there is a limit on the number of ADUs on a particular 
parcel that may qualify for reimbursement. 
Further, the newly created section 6912(3) refers to the “assessed market 
value” of an ADU.  “Assessed value” and “market value” are different terms with 
different meanings.  Property taxes are based on “assessed value;” we recommend 
the use of that term throughout the bill.  This section should also be amended to 
clarify whether the $200,000 reimbursement limit applies per taxpayer, per parcel, 
or per ADU.     
Administration of this bill would require a significant amount of State 
resources to verify information and to undergo property inspections for eligible 
new construction.  Perhaps if the issues listed above could be addressed, this 
proposal could be part of a comprehensive housing bill; as a standalone bill, it adds 
another property tax relief program to an already-long list of existing programs 
administered by MRS.   
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
