Testimony: An Act to Provide Tax Benefits to Persons Constructing Accessory Dwelling 
Units  
May 10, 2023 at 10:00am 
My name is Phil Kaplan. My company, BrightBuilt Home, has been designing energy efficient, 
attainable homes that are initially constructed offsite for over 10 years. For our initial offering, 
called the BrightBuilt Barn which was an 800 square foot single bedroom living pod - effectively 
an accessory dwelling unit before the designation was coined - we offered the plans for free 
download online. The original structure was constructed in Rockport, Maine in 2008 and within 
the first 2 years, the. plans were downloaded over five-thousand times. The demand for this 
type of modest accessory unit has proven to be extremely high. 
Since 2013, we have designed and constructed over 200 similarly designed homes, most of 
which are in Maine. We also do much work in the affordable multifamily housing arena, and are 
aware of the tremendous demand for housing in the state. Due to regulatory structures and 
processes which are in place for good reason, our state is continually in need of more housing. 
We are currently down over 2,000 units of housing according to the Maine Affordable Housing 
Coalition. Many Mainers in rural and semi-rural regions have a substantial opportunity afforded 
to them - additional room on their properties to construct an accessory dwelling unit.  
Recent bills have allowed for additional density on such sites. What we see every day is that 
although the demand is high, the need is clear, and the regulations are in place, the financials 
still do not add up for many Mainers. We desperately need to provide more incentives to help 
more Mainers, old and new, find a bed to sleep in at night. More levers for Mainers in non-
urban settings which may in turn increase property values, could do just that. It would be a 
complete win-win for both the state and its residents with virtually no downside. This bill 
attempts to put in place more incentives that will close this critical financing gap by providing 
incremental tax breaks. I do hope that you will support this measure. This legislature has made 
excellent progress in this arena and we are oh-so-close to reducing our housing shortfall. Thank 
you.  
 
