David  A. Donovan , in support of LD 1597  and representing  AVA 
(Aroostook Veterans Alliance).  I am a resident of Fort Fairfield.   I am  
thankful that the long -suffered  plight of Army National Guardsm en will 
be given some  attention  and consideration.  I served 12 years as a 
Guardsman and attended 8, 2-week  train ing periods in Gagetown, 
Canada.   
 
Training in Gagetown, Canada was indeed  a great idea , no doubt saving 
many dollars as opposed to the 3-day journey to Fort Drum, New York . 
But the tru e price tag was p laced on  the backs of those who worked , 
slept,  and ate  in a toxic  agent orange environment . 
 
I witnessed and wondered about the dead and dying  small animals in 
and around the dead foliage  areas we were working in. I myself have 
had two death possible c ancers : prostrate and malignant melanoma . 
Guess there might have been something to the strange looking dust 
that constantly covered us. I was one  (so far) of the lucky ones, 33 we 
know of was not, leaving behind  grieving, cash short and struggling 
families.  
 
We in the Guard  signed the papers, pledged to serve, protect and 
defend  just as our full-service  counterparts did . But when that toxic 
environment reared its ugly head  – we had nowhere  to turn but our 
own resources . 
 
I have been out  of the Guard since 1989 , as I begin to contact those I 
served  with to ask for their support of LD  1597 , 8 calls and 8 cancer 
deaths , only sadness  and tears and questions as to why if Canada 
recognized the problem, why had not our own  Countr y and State. 
Flashbacks of Vietnam Veterans struggle  flooded  my mind. Can it be 
that history  will never teach us. Must the Agent Orange wheel be  
reinvented every time .  Must there be an  expiration  date on support 
and caring.  
 
Than k you, President Jackson,  and supporting Sponsors , your timely 
action o n LD 1597 is so  critical. Lives truly han g in the balance . 
David A Donovan
 AVA - Aroostook Veterans Alliance
LD 1597
See David ~ Gagetown.pdf
