ﬁe», 
‘ii _~ '<'- .- 
§ ‘!. 
_ 5; 
\: Q“ ‘1 _-‘ 
Administrative Office of the Courts 
P.O. Box 4820, Portland, Maine 04112-4820 
Tel: (207)822-0792 FAX: (207) 822-0781 TTY: (207) 822-0701 
Julia Finn, Esq. Tel: (207) 822-0767 
Legislative Analyst‘ 
|u|ia.ﬁnn@courts.maine.gov 
Judicial Branch testimony neither for nor against LD 1646, An Act to Vacate 
or Adjust Sentences and Expunge Arrests, Convictions, and Adjudications for 
Cannabis-related Offenses: 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Julie Finn and I represent the Judicial Branch. I would like to provide 
testimony and comments regarding this bill. 
The Judicial Branch does not take a position on the policy considerations raised by this 
bill but would like to make a few comments. 
§2332(l) says that all arrests, convictions, and adjudications for possession of cannabis 
are deemed vacated and the records must be expunged. This suggests that with no need fora 
request for a review of an underlying case or conviction, there should be an automatic vacating 
and expunging with no discretion. Speciﬁcally, §23 32(3) indicates that when the Court is 
notiﬁed of an expungement of records related to an arrest, conviction, or adjudication the Court 
"shall vacate" all convictions or adjudications of crime or civil violation for possession of 
cannabis. The "shall" language indicates a requirement, with no discretion by the Court into the 
facts and circumstances of the underlying offenses and nature and characteristics of the 
individual who had been convicted. 
The language permitting "arrests" for possession of cannabis to be vacated and records 
expunged indicates that pending charges for possession of cannabis offenses need to be 
dismissed, but there is no language outlining who is reviewing those cases and whose 
responsibility it is to dismiss those charges, and whether a dismissal would be with or without 
prejudice. A dismissal of these charges would also require the vacating of any bail orders when 
these are the singular charges an individual faces, and a reevaluation of bail status for those that 
have a cannabis possession charge pending as part of a case involving other charges. Complaints 
and Indictments would also have to be amended if a cannabis possession offense was included on 
a charging instrument with other crimes or civil violations. 
4/27/23
Next, §2333 indicates that if people are serving a sentence or under supervision fora 
cannabis related offenses (which includes the possession offenses seemingly automatically 
vacated under §23 32), the list of persons shall be given to the Court, and the Court must engage 
in a petition and hearing process to determine if a resentencing should occur. §§(3)(F) also gives 
a "shall" directive to the court regarding resentencing after a hearing and is speciﬁc about what 
the sentencing should be under certain circumstances, With no discretion to the Court, and no 
ability to engage in the sentencing analysis required by statute and case law. 
The automatic nature of the vacating arrests, convictions or adjudications requires a 
signiﬁcant amount of clerical and IT resources to research all persons whose cases ﬁt within this 
category. While records searches can be done for §2331(2)(A) offenses in a timely yet 
straightforward fashion, the offenses suggested in §233 l(2)(B) potentially will need a more 
manual approach to ﬁnding convictions of these included offenses. 
Finally, While there are provisions in the bill that provide reimbursement for costs 
associated with compliance with this bill, the additional time needed to undertake these new 
processes may necessitate the hiring of additional Judicial Branch personnel. 
Thank you for your time. 
4/27/23
