‘ji , PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
cg. 
, (207) 774-5444
’ 'K
i 
www.ac|umaine org 
AMERICAN Glllll LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine' 
_ TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
. Ought to Pass - LD 1536 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Amend the Governor ’s Power to Reprieve, Pardon and 
Commute Sentences and Remit Penalties 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede, and I am Policy Counsel at the 
ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and 
civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, We urge 
you to support this constitutional amendment because it would make the relatively opaque pardon 
process more transparent. 
The governor ’s pardon power is one of the few constitutional relief valves in a criminal 
legal system that has grown to unprecedented proportions, often the last remaining option for 
people who have been wrongfully convicted or received an overly harsh sentence. This power 
comes from Article Five, Part First, Section Eleven of Maine’s Constitution, which provides: 
The Governor shall have power to remit after conviction all forfeitures and penalties, and 
to grant reprieves, commutations and pardons, except in cases of impeachment, upon such 
conditions, and with such restrictions and limitations as may be deemed proper, subject to 
such regulations as may be provided by law, relative to the manner of applying for pardons. 
Such power to grant reprieves, commutations and pardons shall include offenses ofjuvenile 
delinquency. 
Under this language, the legislature has only the power to regulate “the manner of applying for 
pardons. ” If the legislature wants to know how many people applied for pardons in a given year, 
or how many received pardons, or why any pardons were granted or not granted, then it must resort 
to the same channels available to the public: letters, phone calls, emails, and Freedom of Access 
Act requests. This proposed constitutional amendment would replace the above-quoted language 
with much more expansive language that requires, among other things, the governor to report the
results of every pardon application to the legislature each session. Without this requirement, there 
is no automatic method for the legislature to be informed about the inner-Workings of the current 
pardon process, leaving lawmakers and the public dependent on the whims of the governor. 
Given the importance of the pardon process, given that it is from the effects of criminal 
laws enacted by the legislature that gubernatorial pardons provide relief, the constitutional 
amendment proposed by this resolution is reasonable and necessary. We urge you to vote ought to 
pass.
