/ Maine Medical .. 
1 1 ‘=2. /3%: 5 1 .1 '11’ '2 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President i Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect l R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
Andrew B. Mactean, JD, CEO i Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
Q SUPPORT Maine Physicians Q ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine v PROMOTE the health of all Maine people 
TO: Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
FROM: Dan Morin, Director, Communications and Government Affairs 
DATE: May 2, 2023 
RE: SUPPORT — LD 796, An Act Concerning Prior Authorizations for Health Care 
Provider Services 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine's largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. 
Health plans are increasingly requiring physicians to obtain prior authorization before providing 
medical services and prescription drugs. 
Prior authorization not only requires the practice to expend significant clinical and administrative 
resources, but more importantly can interrupt, delay, and even prevent patient care. 
Obtaining prior authorization is often manually completed by the practice using the phone, fax, 
mail, or via a health plan proprietary web portal. 
Further complicating the process, health plans typically have different medical necessity 
requirements, and the authorization submission and appeals process varies across payers. 
According to the Medical Group management Association, 89 percent of practices nationwide 
report having hired or redistributed staff to work on prior authorizations due to the increased 
requests. Nearly half have hired full-time staff for prior authorizations, nearly 1 in 3 redistribute 
existing staff, and 11 percent have hired part-time staff.r 
0 89 percent report challenges with delays 
0 75 percent report inconsistent payer payment policies 
0 73 percent report requests for routinely approved items and services. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, sewing more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
o 95 percent report delays and denials for medically necessary care due to prior 
authorization 
Since prior authorization requirements are disruptive and burdensome for physician practices 
and their patients, the Maine Medical Association is urging you to vote LD 796 Ought to Pass. 
Thank you for considering our comments. 
Attachments: 
0 Compilation of MMA member examples 
0 American Medical Association Issue Brief 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
LD 796 — An Act Concerning Prior Authorizations for Health Care Provider Services 
Summary of sponsor’s amendment 
Definitions: Creates definitions of "closely related service" , "course of treatment" , "prior authorization" , and 
"urgent health care service" would be created. The definition of "emergency services" would be amended to 
include prehospital care transportation services. The definition of "utilization review" would be amended to 
include prior authorization, and concurrent review would be amended to include payment will be made for that 
sen/ice. 
Adding ‘noncertification ’: A nonceitification means that a proposed course of treatment is not medically 
necessary. 
Insurer would have to ensure that a physician issuing a ‘noncertification ’ is, 
o Currently licensed in the State in the same specialty as the doctor providing the health care services in 
the request and 
0 Has experience treating patients with the identified medical condition. The noncertification would be 
issued under the clinical direction of one of the insurer's medical directors. Notice would be required to 
covered person if an insurer was questioning medical necessity, and the provider would be allowed to 
speak with the doctor performing the utilization review determination. 
Utilization Review (UR): insurers or utilization review organizations (URO) would be required to evaluate clinical 
review at least annually, previously was periodically. An insurer's clinical review would have to meet five specified 
criteria. 
UR list of health care services: An insurer would maintain a list of health care services for which utilization 
review is required. 
UR based on type of health care: Prospective and concurrent utilization review determinations are required to 
be communicated within three business days after receiving necessary information. Utilization review 
determination would be made as follows after obtaining all necessary information. 
o Within 48 hours for non-urgent health care services, 
0 Not later than 24 hours for urgent health care services, and 
- Within 60 minutes of receiving a request for emergency services that require immediate post-evaluation 
or post-stabilization senlices. lt would specify further requirements for utilization review of emergency 
services. 
Additional information request: Specifies the information an insurer must communicate to a provider when 
requesting additional information for a utilization review. An insurer would be required to adjudicate any claim 
subject to a request for additional information to process a claim under prompt pay act. 
UR determination notifications: An insurer would be required to make a concurrent review determination within 
24 hours of obtaining all necessary information. An insurer who fails to make a determination within the applicable 
time frame would be deemed to have approved the request. 
Retrospective denial: An insurer could not revoke, limit, condition, or restrict a utilization review determination 
pursuant to a utilization review within 45 business days from the date the provider received the determination 
unless any of the exceptions apply. 
Notice of noncertification and appeal: Awritten notification of noncertification would be required to 
include the name and medical specialty of all medical doctors involved in the noncertification. All appeals would 
be reviewed by a physician who meets specified criteria. The physician must consider all known clinical aspects 
of the health care sen/ice under review.
Disclosure for review and statistics: Requires an insurer to post on its website current utilization review 
requirements in an easily understandable language, and the website must be updated with any changes. 
Written notice of the new or amended requirements would be provided to contracted providers no less than 60 
days prior to implementation. insurers would make utilization review statistics regarding approvals and 
noncertifications available on their website for specified categories. 
Utilization review determination validity: A utilization review determination would be valid for the 
entire duration of the approved course of treatment and effectiveness regardless of any changes in dosage for 
a prescription drug. 
Continuity of care: The following would apply to ensure continuity of care: 
o Requires an insurer to honor a utilization review determination granted to the covered person froma 
previous insurer with certain parameters, 
o A change in coverage or approval criteria for a previously authorized healthcare sen/ice will not affecta 
covered person who received a utilization review determination before the effective date of the change 
for the remainder of the covered person’s health benefit plan year, 
0 Requires coverage of a sen/ice previously granted under a utilization review if a covered person changes 
under the same insurer, with certain provisions, 
0 lf a provider performs a health care service closely related to the sen/ice for which approval has already 
been granted, an insurer may not deny a claim for the closely related service for failure of the provider to 
seek or obtain a utilization review if the provider meets notification requirements; and 
0 Prohibits an insurer from restricting specified benefits related to childbirth. 
Exemptions: A utilization review is not required if, within the past 12 months, the insurer has issued certifications 
to the provider for no less than 80% percent of the utilization review requests for that health care service, then 
an insurer may not require the provider to request a utilization review. 
~ Once every 12 months, this exemption would be evaluated by the insurer. A provider would not be 
required to request an exemption, and an insurer may only revoke an exemption under certain 
circumstances. 
- A provider who doesn't receive an exemption would be able to request evidence of why from the insurer. 
~ A time frame would be specified for how long an exemption remains in place past an insurer’s decision 
to revoke the exemption. 
0 Decisions on exemptions would be made by providers licensed in the State with the same or similar 
specialty as the provider being considered for the exemption and with experience in providing the sen/ices 
for which the potential exception applies. 
o An insurer who receives an exemption would be provided specified notice. An insurer could not deny or 
reduce payment for a health care service exempted from utilization review requirement unless certain 
circumstances occur. 
Deemed approval: Any failure to comply by an insurer would result in health care services subject to review 
automatically being deemed authorized by the insurer.
Maine Medical 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
v SUPPORT Maine Physicians v ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine 0 PROMOTE the health of all Maine people 
RE: LD 796, An Act Concerning Prior Authorizations for Health Care Provider Services 
Maine Medical Association Examples 
I am writing because as both of you know, prior authorizations are slowly destroying our primary 
care offices and have gone so far as to cause direct harm to patients. I heard through the weekly 
email MMA updates that there is a bill, as I understand a concept draft, to help reform the prior 
authorization process. 
I have a patient case thatjust happened this last week that I think perfectly and emotionally sums 
up the issues with prior auths in current practice. I am also happy to lend a boots on the ground 
viewpoint, as everyone in my office literally jumped with joy when they heard someone is trying 
to work to make this system better. 
Here is my patient case: 
My patient is a young woman who just delivered a baby. She unfortunately needed an 
emergency C-section, but this resulted in the delivery of a beautiful healthy baby boy. A week 
after delivery she then contracted COVID, and subsequently had an acute bilateral pulmonaiy 
embolism. She was hospitalized due to the severity of the blood clot, a heartbreaking experience 
for a brand-new mother to be separated from her newborn. 
Luckily things went well and she was discharged home, healthy and reunited with her baby. The 
hospital and a hematology consult determined that Lovenox, a blood thinner that was FDA 
approved over 22 years ago, was the first line treatment for her as she is actively breastfeeding. 
Her insurance gave her difficulty covering her 7 day script to bridge to my office visit. At my office 
visit I clearly documented her diagnosis and reasons for choosing Lovenox, and sent in the script 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
for the 6 months of lovenox needed. Of course a prior authorization was requested. 
This prior authorization was denied due to "quantity limit." They would only cover 24 syringes 
out of a 65 day supply, which equates to approximately 15 days of treatment (hematology 
recommended 180 days of treatment). Over the course of 10 days our office submitted two 
emergency prior authorization requests, spent hours on the phone with the pharmacy and with 
her insurance company trying to find a way to appeal their decision. 
Ultimately after much contradictory information we were given a new form to override the 
"quantity limit," a 5 page form that only the physician was allowed to fill out. This was finally 
accepted today, 10 days after my original prescription, and my patient can finally receive her old, 
inexpensive, first line, life saving medication. 
Of note, at one point she was quoted a $300 out of pocket price from the pharmacist, which she 
would have been forced to pay for her health should we not have gotten this covered today, as 
the emergency scripts the pharmacist kept authorizing had just run out. We do not understand 
why prior auths, a concept originally designed to control costs and help doctors choose cheaper 
safer alternatives, is now being used to avoid paying for even inexpensive life saving 
medication. 
l would also like to note that my patient is a social worker, and has a passing interest in 
healthcare advocacy. She gave me permission to share her story today, and if it would help she 
is willing to bring her story public and testify, especially if it has a chance of stopping insurance 
companies from hurting other patients in this manner. She and I acknowledge that she had the 
financial means to pay $300 out of pocket if worse came to worse, but many patients do not 
have the means or the knowledge to navigate a system like the one above, and likely would not 
have been able to get this medication covered. 
Thank you for your time, and let me and my patient know if we can help change the prior 
authorization crisis in the state of Maine. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
A patient of mine had unexplained neck / back pains that persisted and worsened over several 
months. An MRI was ordered, as she had failed to improve with PT and had a history of cancer 
>15 years ago. 
After 2 weeks of waiting the MRI was ultimately denied with the option of a peer to peer appeal. 
Due to staffing issues and an incredibly busy office this then delayed the MRI another month, as 
it is very difficult to find the time for a peer to peer, especially for an MRI that should have been 
approved in the first place. 
Two months after the original MRI order and continued refusals from her insurance company, 
she finally presented to the ED recently and was found to have metastatic cancer to multiple 
bones, which was the cause of her pain. 
This is an insurance company delaying the diagnosis of cancer by over 2 months, which could 
make the difference between life and death for this patient. 
I really do feel we need to dismantle the whole prior authorization structure. Simply enforcing 
new guidelines to follow, like easier documentation or transparent reasons, will not actually stop 
the for-profit systems trying to deny claims to make a profit. 
Mass automatic denials will continue to happen as long as we permit a system that allows an 
insurance company to unilaterally deny the decision made by a physician and a patient. The 
proof of denial should be on the insurance company, not on the provider or the patient. 
I am a medical assistant. I once had an older patient who needed a new oxygen supply. In order 
to accommodate the PA, she needed to have an oxygen reading below 90%. 
She had to take her oxygen tank off and walk in circles around the clinic with an ox meter on her 
finger until we got the reading we needed. It was hanging at 90% and I just wouldn't go down 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
that 1% we needed. We walked and walked until she was gasping for air and could not go one 
more step. lt was right at that point of giving up that the meter finally read 89% and I could 
document that it was under 90%. 
l feel like the PA process led me to do harm, which none of us should have to do. 
l am emailing in response to the request for prior authorization request stories. 
l recently shared this with our office manager and thought that it may be helpful to this situation 
as well. 
l originally sent this to her last week and today when l came in there was a 4th denial reviewed 
by the same physician at NIA that denied a request for testing. 
The most frustrating thing for me is the fact that the wording of the denial letter makes it sound 
like they did not receive clinical information to review in order to make an educated well informed 
decision which is very much so not the case as you can see by the attached examples. 
The denial letters are mailed out to the patients in a deceiving way to take away confidence in 
their physician and staff, it is very sad. I hope that this is useful. 
l will preface this by saying that l have watched insurance companies steadily engage in more 
and more denials but it has become absolutely unbelievable over the past 12 months. 
The most challenging offenders definitely seem to be the Medicare Advantage plans for some 
reason. 
A few recent examples from my own patient panel: 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
1. I had a patient recently present with a 50 pound weight loss over the past year. He was quite 
weak and sick. Subsequent work-up with xray and chest CT revealed a mass in his lung that is 
almost certainly lung cancer. I ordered a PET scan to better characterize and stage the 
suspected cancer which is absolutely the standard of care. His insurance company denied the 
PET scan and we are currently engaging in an appeal process. We cannot get a biopsy to define 
the cancer or start treating the cancer until the PET scan is done. 
His care and his treatment for his cancer is absolutely being delayed which could result in 
shortening his life span. 
2. I had a patient present with a cough ongoing for several months, chest x-ray was negative. I 
ordered blood work and a CAT scan of his chest. When the blood work came back it showed 
that he had abnormalities in his liver function tests and abnormalities indicating potential 
inflammation/infection. 
In order to expedite the work-up I ordered a CAT scan of his abdomen and pelvis to be done 
along with a CAT scan of his chest. His chest CAT scan was approved but the CAT scan of his 
abdomen and pelvis was denied because I was told to get an ultrasound first as this is a less 
expensive test. 
I ordered the requested liver ultrasound and the patient's liver function tests continue to increase 
making me quite concerned that there was an abdominal issue ongoing. 
When the ultrasound came back negative, I then ordered the CAT scan of his abdomen and 
pelvis but it was denied because there had been a denial within the past 60 days, even though 
the test was totally indicated at this point. 
I ended up having to order an MRI of his liver because that was the only test I could order without 
waiting 2 months. 
In this case the denial resulted in more expensive care and a big delay in care. 
3. I recently had a patient who had a subcutaneous mass on his shoulder. Ultrasound was 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. 
ordered which is entirely appropriate. The ultrasound showed either a cyst versus possible 
malignancy and the radiologist recommended a CAT scan or MRI. I ordered a CAT scan but it 
was denied stating that I needed to get an x-ray first. 
There is absolutely no way an x-ray is indicated in this situation, the mass was subcutaneous 
and not in the joint space or in the bone. I called to do a "peer to peer" and discussed the 
situation with a physician representative at the patient's insurance company. The physician 
refused to approve a CT scan or MRI stating that the x-ray was the best test, flagrantly untrue. I 
have since ordered the x-ray which did not show any new findings and has recommended getting 
a CAT scan or MRI which we are in the process of obtaining. Again this patient could very well 
have a malignancy and his care has been delayed by weeks through this process. Plus he had 
the unnecessary expense and time of getting an x-ray that was not indicated. 
The amount of time that both my staff and I have spent on these issues alone adds up to hours 
and hours. Every single provider has multiple examples just like this. It is a giant waste of 
medical resources as well as an enormous contributor to provider burnout having to do all of 
this. 
Happy to provide more information if needed. 
I manage our Endocrinology & Diabetes and Rheumatology practices, both spend significant 
amount time managing medication prior authorizations. 
Example 1— 
The RN spent over 5.5 hours last week submitting prior auths and filing appeals for biologics to 
manage patients with a wide array of connective tissue/rheumatoid diseases. She started to 
build a spreadsheet (see attached) listing by drug class, and the step therapy required by various 
insurance company. Her initial thought was to gather all this information in one spreadsheet so 
the provider could easily choose the right medication for their patient's treatment plan. It would 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
also streamline the process for the RN and MA to submit the prior auth. What our RN discovered 
is that the insurance companies change their criteria and formularies throughout the year and 
it's difficult to keep up with the changes. 
We have a patient with severe Systemic sclerosis who needs a lifesaving infusion drug. It took 
13 business days to get an approval, from the initial submission to the appeal and finally a peer 
to peer. Fortunately the patient reports less pain after starting the infusions. Unfortunately this 
is not the only patient in our practice on a similar path. 
Example 2— 
On 3/2/2023 an MA started a medication prior auth for a patient with polycystic ovarian 
syndrome. The prior auth was denied with formulary alternatives. The MA started the new prior 
auth for the alternative and that was denied. The provider decided to put the patient back ona 
medication that was working but has to be injected daily, which was the reason for choosing one 
of the previous medications. Again the MA put in a prior auth for the medication that the patient 
has been on and now we have to do an appeal. lt’s now 4/25/23 and the patient has not started 
her treatment and continues to experience severe symptoms due to her POCS. l’ve attached 
ships from the denial letters showing where the insurance directs the provider to order a different 
drug and then denies that one too. 
One MA in endocrinology spends 40% of her time processing medication prior auths and 
paperwork needed to approve insulin pumps and continuous glucose monitoring devices. 
l have spent over 23 years sen/ing patients in Maine and have many examples of increased 
administrative burden directly impacting physician wellness and patient care. 
Recently a patient was seen in my office for cervical and facial pain with a reported history of 
Migraine Headache. She, on exam, was noted to have exquisite tenderness and Tinel’s signs 
directly over the greater occipital nerves and the left lesser occipital nerve. This responded 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
100% to nerve block. She is diagnosed with Occipital neuralgia (traumatic since a remote MVA) 
without mention of her migraine history in her assessment, which may or may not be related to 
the ON. 
Anthem BC/BS chose information recounted by the patient in the HPI which was her migraine 
history rather than her assessed diagnosis of Occipital neuralgia to deny her claim. 
In addition to ignoring the diagnosis provided, they required me twice to be ready for a peer to 
peer review with a family practitioner who is NOT a peer to a peripheral nerve surgeon ora 
plastic surgeon. I helped train the chairman of Harvard Plastic surgery at Mass General, Dr. 
William Austen, in the surgery for Occipital Neuralgia, and sit with him on the board and 
executive committee for the Migraine Surgeiy Society. He has no issues with denials for this 
sen/ice. 
l would at least expect a real peer if l am to set aside unremunerated time in my day to advocate 
for their insured. Also, I expect them to vet my diagnosis rather than information the patient 
provided in the history before denying a claim with no basis for the denial. It was a worthless 
hurdle for me tojump over for the patient's sake and a delay in her care, despite Anthem’s efforts 
to avoid paying for it. This “non peer to peer" review process should be eliminated. It is a part of 
what is driving physician suicide since 2019 to be the highest of any profession in the nation- 
even higher than the military. This specific example is just one of many. 
My staff spends hours on the phone obtaining prior authorizations only to get incorrect 
information. We have had to implement a second check on prior authorizations to insure we are 
receiving correct information from the insurance companies. This process alone addsa 
significant financial burden to my private practice. However, if this is not done, it creates 
countless staff hours appealing denials and often months of delay in payment. 
Acquiring pre-determinations on surgery is the only way to ensure coverage of CPT codes prior 
to surgery, but this process can takes weeks which, again, significantly delays patient care. 
Anthem, particularly, but many insurance companies go out of their way to make out-of-network 
physicians struggle with communications as there is no line for OON physicians to use. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
Anthem, particularly, will send the physician payment to the patient, creating hardship and 
confusion for both patient and physician. 
The absolute worst problem that has led to the near extinction of private medicine and to 
physicians leading the nation for the last 5 years in suicide (the hospitals and the media like to 
avoid that term and just say “burnout”) is , I'm afraid, not fixable on the state level. 
Anthem, Cigna and United all prefer their networks to utilize the big hospital setting and whatever 
physician might have arrived there, rather than realize significant savings and better outcomes 
by admitting lower cost, higher quality-of-care physicians to their network. This is because of 
the MLR provision in the ACA which assures insurance companies will choose higher cost over 
better quality, since they ultimately get 20%, no more, of the total premiums collected. 
The proof of this practice lies in this negotiation anecdote: When negotiating witha 
private insurance company, I presented paid EOBs from patients showing the 
tremendous cost of their in-network care at Northern Light compared to the costs for me 
to provide the same care in a different setting. They did not dispute the savings of $20 to 
$30K per surgery, nor did they dispute the significantly lower infection, overall 
complication, and lower re-admission rates where I operate. When asked why they 
declined to admit me to their network for a relatively small increase in professional fees, 
they stated REPETITIVELY AS IF ONLY PERMITTED TO SAY ONE THING, “We’re 
sorry but we cannot pay one physician more than another." It was so maddening thatI 
eventually threatened to tell large local self-insured companies what this company was 
doing — negotiating for the highest cost of care. regardless of higher complication 
rates. This created a tremendous uproar from them over the conference call, but 
ultimately resulted in this company giving into our every demand. I had pointed a finger 
directly at their ACA-legislated business model which they preferred to keep under wraps. 
Broadly speaking, this most critical issue facing physicians is, essentially, the discreditation of 
our expertise, the devaluation of our sen/ices and the commoditization of our profession in order 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
to escalate the costs, of which they are assured to get 20%. 
The way things are now, it doesn't matter to them whether a surgeon has 23 years’ experience, 
a low complication rate, or a high patient satisfaction rate — we are all to be paid the same— 
even if the surgeon is just starting or already has an abysmal record. This favoring of costs over 
quality is what is contributing to the tolerance of maddening inefficiencies for employed 
physicians whose complaints are most often ignored. 
I am happy to speak about this and would welcome the opportunity to provide my insight in 
Augusta. 
I hope this is helpful. Please let me know if you want to speak more and I would be happy to 
connect. 
~ I had a patient who was experiencing severe debilitating migraines but had a history of ischemic 
strokes. They found some improvement with sumatriptan, but this cannot be used as a |ong-term 
med in patients who have a history of stroke. I attempted to order an alternative, but it required 
prior authorization. It took >30 days for me to get notification that another medication wasa 
preferred agent and that their prior authorization as not approved. Meanwhile they were 
experiencing multiple episodes of severe migraine symptoms. 
- I had a patient who has been experiencing external ear symptoms related to otitis externa. It did 
not respond to the first line therapy, and I sent a second line therapy, but this required a prior 
authorization. I completed the prior authorization, but it took over a week and still was not 
approved. 
I tried sending multiple alternatives without success. We decided to try the first line treatment in 
the interim as some treatment was felt better than none. This same patient needed a new 
glucometer for poorly controlled diabetes and injected insulin. Their glucometer was broken. I 
sent a new prescription for the preferred glucometer, but it was no longer available and was on 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
back order. l ordered an alternative glucometer system and submitted a prior authorization, but 
they still had not received their glucometer for over 65 days despite active discussion with their 
insurance company. 
This is particularly dangerous as they need to inject insulin and is therefore at risk of fatal 
complications if they cannot get his glucometer. Given the limitations of supply chains, insurance 
companies should adjust their policies to improve access. 
Thank you for your help! 
Last week, I received a 4th denial reviewed by the same physician that denied a request for 
testing. 
The most frustrating thing for me is the fact that the wording of the denial letter makes it sound 
like they did not receive clinical information to review in order to make an educated well-informed 
decision which is very much so not the case as you can see by the attached examples. 
The denial letters are mailed out to the patients in a deceiving way to take away confidence in 
their physician and staff, it is very sad. I hope that this is useful. 
l'm very unhappy with a client's health p|an...l don't know if it's other HPs as well....or indication 
of the future for all insurances. 
The RX part was contracted with P0int32. No person-person contact, even when l pressed the 
representative---was put on hold for 40mins....l gave up...also thinking that maybe that way to 
get rid of me. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.l
i
1
l
l
l
l
l rx'd Vyvanse (new for the client). Was denied, required PA, denied the PA, never notified my 
office, requires office notes. It's now been 2 weeks since I rx'd it! 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, sewing more _ than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
It is time to fix prior authorization 
Prior authorization is hurting patients
O
O
O
O 
O 93% of physicians report care delays as a result of prior authorizations. 
82% of physicians report that prior authorization can lead to treatment abandonment. 
34% of physician reported that prior authorization has led to a serious adverse event for their patients. 
24% of physicians reported that prior authorization has led to a patient’s hospitalization. 
18% of physicians reported life-threatening event or intervention to prevent permanent impairment or 
damage. 
o 51% of physicians treating patients in the workforce report that prior authorization has interfered witha 
patient’s ability to perform their job responsibilities. 
Prior authorization is costly 
o Physicians and their staff spend more than 13 hours/week (nearly two business days) on prior authorizations. 
o Physicians complete an average of 41 prior authorizations per week. 
o 40% of physicians have staff who work exclusively on prior authorizations. 
o 88% of physicians describe the prior authorization burden as high or extremely high. 
What can be done? 
As a start to fixing prior authorization, policymakers and other stakeholders should consider how the volume of prior 
authorization is impacting patients, physicians and the health care system. While these programs may reduce the 
amount health insurers are paying on care in the short-term, delaying or denying medically necessary care is not an 
appropriate or effective long-term solution to reducing costs. Prior authorization, if used at all, must be used 
judiciously, efficiently, and in a manner that prevents cost-shifting onto patients, physicians and other providers. 
Policymakers should consider the following prior authorization reforms: 
o Establish quick response times (24 hours for urgent, 48 hours for non~urgent care). 
o Adverse determinations should be made only by a physician licensed in the state and of the same specialty that 
typically manages the patient’s condition. 
o Prohibit retroactive denials if care is preauthorized. 
o Authorization should be valid for at least 1 year, regardless of dose changes, and for those with chronic 
conditions, the prior authorization should be valid for the length of treatment. 
o Require public release of insurers ’ prior authorization data by drug and service as it relates to approvals, denials, 
appeals, wait times and more. 
o A new plan should honor the patient’s prior authorization for at least 60 days. 
o Volume reduction through the use of solutions like prior authorization exemptions or gold-carding programs. 
For more info contact Emily Carroll at emiiy.carroll@ama-assn.org. 
*Data comes from the 2021 AMA Prior Authorization Physician Survey. For more information on the survey, to access prior authorization 
resources, and to join our grassroots campaign, visit fixQriorauth.org. 
© Z022 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. 
l
< 
l   
i 
