601 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW T 202.778.3200 
South Building, Suite 500 F 202.331.7487 
Washington, D.C. 20004 ahip.org 
Guiding Greater Health 
May 2, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Co-Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Co-Chair 
Joint Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services Committee 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, l\/IE 04333 
RE: AHIP Comments on L.D. 796, An Act Concerning Prior Authorizations for Health Care 
Provider Services -- OPPOSE 
To Chairs Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Members of the Joint Health Coverage, Insurance, 
and Financial Services Committee, 
America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP) appreciates the opportunity to comment on LD 796, legislation 
that contains extensive provisions on utilization review timeﬁames and disclosures, criteria for reviewers 
as well as mandating the voluntary practice of “gold-carding ” by waiving utilization review without any 
guardrails to ensure provider accountability and patient safety. 
We share with you the goal of ensuring that Mainers receive effective, safe, and affordable care. Prior 
authorization (PA) and other utilization management tools do just this — they provide health insurance 
providers the ability to deliver the most appropriate care at the right time and in the right setting to ensure 
quality care for patients and efficiently use healthcare dollars. 
However, AHIP respectfully opposes LD 796 for these reasons outlined below, and we ask the 
Committee to not pass the bill. 
LD 796 undermines critically important medical management tools that ensure safe and 
effective patient care. 
Health insurance providers work diligently to ensure that enrollees and insureds are getting the right care, 
at the right time, from the right provider. PA is an effective tool that helps lower a patient’s out-of-pocket 
costs, protects patients from overuse, misuse or unnecessary (or potentially harmful) care, and ensures 
care is consistent with evidence-based practices. It improves care coordination and is supervised by 
medical professionals. 
All health insurance providers rely on data and evidence to understand what treatments best improve 
patient health. Based on that information, health insurance providers use PA sparingly, typically less than 
l5% of covered services, procedures, and treatments. ‘ However, PA helps to provide big health care 
savings for consumers because it critical to identifying potential overuse, misuse, and safety issues before 
care is delivered. 
1 
Prior Authorization: Selectively Used & Evidence-Based: Results of an Industry Survey. America’s Health 
Insurance Plans. https:/!www.ahip.org/wp-content/uploads/Prior_Auth0rization_Survey_Infographic.pdf.
May 2, 2023 
Page 2 of3 
Plans report that up to 30% of PA requests they receive from clinicians are for unnecessary care that is 
not supported by medical evidence. Additionally, numerous studies show that Americans frequently 
receive inappropriate care including overuse, misuse, or underuse of health care services. In fact, 25% of 
unnecessary treatments2 were associated with complications or adverse events, and billions of dollars are 
wasted3 annually on excessive testing and treatment. For example, PA can help ensure safer opioid 
prescribing; help prevent dangerous drug interactions from antibiotics and other infection ﬁghting drugs; 
and help protect patients from unnecessary exposure to potentially harmful radiation from inappropriate 
diagnostic imaging, such as CT scans for back pain. 
Despite these cost and safety concerns, in January 2018, AI—IIP, together with providers and hospitals, 
issued a joint consensus statement with other critical interests in the health care community outlining our 
shared commitment to industry-wide improvements to PA processes and patient-centered care.“ Our 
recent surveys of our members show that health insurance providers are waiving or reducing PA 
requirements, as providers take on the fmancial risk related to their medical decisions by participating in 
value-based care arrangements. Furthermore, the surveys show that the percentage of plans waiving or 
reducing PA based on participation in risk-based contracts increased between 2019 to 2022 (for medical 
services, from 25% to 46%, for prescription medications, from 5% to 8%)5. 
We are particularly concerned with Section 4304-14 requiring that a.carrier allow a provider to participate 
in a gold carding program if they have a PA approval rate for a health care service of no less than 80% 
within the most recent 12-month period. This is completely inadequate. This low bar means at least 20% 
of the prescribed care could be medically inappropriate, dangerous, wasteful, or even fraudulent. 
Patients should expect to receive safe and appropriate care 100% of the time, period. The lax gold carding 
qualiﬁcation standard also signiﬁcantly limits a carrier’s ability to ensure health care dollars are used 
most efﬁciently to produce high quality health outcomes. Thus, LD 796 ends the accountability of fraud, 
waste, and abuse by allowing providers who are wasteful and abusive 20% of the time to still receive PA 
exemptions. 
LD 796 deprives Mainers of nationally recognized standards of care and safety. 
Limiting who can perform utilization review to Maine-licensed providers unnecessarily prolongs the 
review process and ultimately adds signiﬁcant costs to customers and patients. These requirements 
deprive Mainers of the medical and scientiﬁc expertise available from nationally prominent specialists 
and other accredited utilization review agents across state lines. In a dynamic health care environment 
where new technologies and telehealth are increasingly utilized, this bill creates a misguided mandate to 
limit available medical tools and expertise. 
2 
Overtreatment in the United States. Lyu H, Xu T, Brotman D, Mayer-Blackwell B, Cooper M, et al. (2017) 
Overtreatment in the United States. PLOS ONE 12(9): e018l970. https://cloi.orgf1O.1371[iournal.pone.Ol81970. 
3 
Institute of Medicine ’s “Best Care at Lower Cost”: Transformation of Health System Needed to Improve Care and 
Reduce Costs. Institute of Medicine, The National Academies (2012). PNI-IP. https://pnhporg/news/institute-0f- 
medicines-best-care-at-lowercost/. 
4 Consensus on Improving the Prior Authorization Process. American Hospital Association, America’s Health 
Insurance Plans, American Medical Association, American Pharmacists Association, Blue Cross Blue Shield 
Association, and Medical Group Management Association. Available at https1/iwww.ama-assn.org/sites/ama- 
assn.orgj ﬁlesfcorp/media —browser/public/arc-pub1ic!prior —authorization-consensus-statementpdf. 
5 
Improving Prior Authorization Processes: How Health Insurance Providers Are Delivering on their Commitments. 
America’s Health Insurance Plans. https1//wwwahip.org/documentsfZ02207 — 
AHlP_1P_Consensus_Statement_Actions-v02.pdf.
May 2, 2023 
Page 3 of3 
LD 796 is a complicated, expensive mandate that will likely greatly increase health care costs 
for Maine and become a huge expense on employers. 
LD 796 mirrors, in large part, a Texas gold carding law that passed in 2021. While the law had an 
effective date of January 1, 2022, implementation was delayed due to a particularly cumbersome 
rulemaking process. Now in 2023, over a year since the effective date, Health care system stakeholders 
are still unsure whether they will be able to implement gold carding programs due to how complicated 
and administratively burdensome it Will be to adhere to the requirements of the law. 
Aside from those logistical concerns, as carriers prepare to implement these programs, we have a better 
picture of the signiﬁcant cost impacts that gold carding programs will have in the state. The Texas law is 
estimated to increase premiums for small businesses and individuals by more than $1 billion annually 
in the fully insured market alone. Just one health plan estimates that the gold carding mandate will 
cost consumers $500 million a year to end prior authorizations — a ﬁgure that is estimated for just its 
members. 
For these reasons, we urge you not to pass SB 796. Dismantling programs like prior authorization that 
have been effective in addressing the long-standing challenges to safe and affordable evidence-based 
health care will harm Maine consumers and employers. 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments. AHIP and its members stand ready for further 
discussions on this important topic. 
Sincerely, 
Sarah Lynn Geiger, l\/IPA 
Regional Director, State Affairs 
America’s Health Insurance Plans 
slgeiger@ahip.org / (609) 605-0748 
Al-HP is the national association whose members provide health care coverage, services, and solutions to 
hundreds of millions of Americans every day. We are committed to market-based solutions and public 
private partnerships that make health care better and coverage more affordable and accessible for 
everyone. Visit www.ahip.org to learn how Working together, we are Guiding Greater Health.
