 
Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical StudenRepresentatives 
 
Staff 
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
May 8, 2023 
 
In Support Of: LD 1858 An Act to Ensure Access to Newly Born Male Infant 
Circumcision by Requiring MaineCare Coverage 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Laura Blaisdell--  I am a 
resident of South Portland, a board-certified pediatrician and the current president 
of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics. 
 
The Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics supports LD 1858 
primarily as a issue of equity for Maine’s children and families.  
 
Circumcision rates vary across the population but the CDC estimates circumcision 
prevalence in the US to be 80.5% (1).  Hence, circumcision is a procedure 
requested by a significant number of American parents.   
 
Circumcision has positive health benefits for infants, boys and young men. During 
infancy, circumcised infants are less likely than uncircumcised infants to 
experience urinary tract infections (UTIs) (2).  An estimated 14% of uncircumcised 
boys compared with 6% of circumcised boys experienced balanitis, irritation, 
adhesions, phimosis or paraphimosis, suggesting that circumcision is associated 
with an 8% absolute decreased risk of these conditions (3). Male circumcision 
reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of acquiring HIV and some STIs during 
intercourse (4).   
 
Pediatricians are at the bedside with parents as thay make myriad decisions for 
their newborn child, including the decision about circumcision.  Neonatal male 
circumcision has been shown to be safer, less expensive, and heals more rapidly 
than circumcision performed on older boys, adolescent males, and men. 
decreased risk of these conditions (3).  Complications of medically performed male 
circumcision in the United States are typically uncommon and easily managed. 
Severe complications are rare in all age groups and occur in 0.23% of all 
circumcised males overall (5).  
 
Despite its popularity, inconsistent insurance coverage complicates the 
pediatrician/parent conversation by allowing access to circumcision to some and 
not others. LD 1858 would allow a family to choose time-limited neonatal 
circumcision without consideration of their insurance status.  The Maine AAP 
urges you to support this legislation as an issue of equity.   
 
 
(1) https://www.mayoclinicproceedings.org/article/S0025-6196(14)00036-6/pdf  
(2) Shaikh N, Morone NE, Bost JE, Farrell MH. Prevalence of urinary tract infection in 
childhood - A meta-analysis. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2008;27(4):302-308. 
(3) Herzog LW, Alvarez SR. The frequency of foreskin problems in uncircumcised 
children. American Journal of Diseases of Children. 1986;140(3):254-256. 
(4) https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/risk/male-circumcision.html  
(5) El Bcheraoui C, Zhang X, Cooper CS, Rose CE, Kilmarx PH, Chen RT. Rates of 
adverse events associated with male circumcision in US medical settings, 2001 to 
2010. JAMA Pediatr. 2014;168(7):625-634. 
 
 
 
 
