Jane‘ T_ Mills 35*? Maine Department of Health and Human Seivices 
"’ -- ‘ Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
Governor ~Q 
"“ E" ll State House Station 
>.*»,.'= ‘1 
\| 
zse Water sn eet 
gi:'::i: ’:i0n::"hr° “’ P“ D Augusta, Maine 04333 0011 
Tel; (207) 287-8016; Fax (207) 287-9058 
"r'rv= om 711 (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Neither For Nor Against LD 75 An Act to Establish Maximum Contaminant Levels Under the 
State's Drinking Water Rules to Prohibit Certain Perﬂuoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
Hearing Date: April 28, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Sen/ices, my name is Amy Lachance, and I am the program manager for the Drinking 
Water Program within the Department of Health and Human Services Maine Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC). I am here today to provide testimony on behalf of 
the Maine CDC and will be speaking neither for nor against LD 75, An Act to Establish 
Maximum Contaminant Levels Under the State's Drinking Water Rules to Prohibit Certain 
Perﬂuoroalkyl and Polyjluoroalkyl Substances. 
This bill amends the new law, Resolve 2021 chapter 82, introduced to the 130"‘ Maine State 
Legislature as LD 129, and requires that the associated drinking water rules establish a maximum 
contaminant level (MCL) equivalent to zero nanograms per liter for certain perﬂuoroalkyl and 
polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PF AS). 
The Maine CDC supports the goal of reducing all contaminants in drinking Water to the lowest 
levels possible for the protection of public health. However, as written, LD 75 does not represent 
a workable approach to addressing the PFAS problem in Maine. The following information is 
provided for your consideration.. 
The Maine CDC’s Drinking Water Program (DWP) has been granted primacy authority by the 
US EPA to regulate public water systems for more than 90 naturally occurring and manmade 
contaminants under the federal Safe Drinking Water Act and State of Maine laws. The DWP has 
been implementing the provisions of Resolve 2021, chapter 82 since its enactment as emergency 
legislation in June 2021. This new law established an interim drinking water standard and testing 
requirements for six PFAS chemicals, including those listed in this proposed legislation. 
All of Maine’s Community Water Systems, as well as the schools and childcare facilities 
regulated by the DWP as stand-alone Public Water Systems (PWS) were required to sample their 
drinking water by December 31, 2022. Two hundred and ﬁve (205) out of 748, or twenty-eight 
percent (28%), of the systems found detectable levels of at least one of the six Maine-regulated 
PFAS in their ﬁnished water, and approximately 59 systems, or eight percent (8%) reported 
combined levels above the enforceable interim limit of 20 nanograms per liter, or parts per 
trillion (ppt). The DWP is currently working with these systems to ensure that the public notice
and monitoring provisions of the law were carried out. We are also providing technical 
assistance and/or ﬁmding support for installation of treatment to reduce PFAS levels where the 
interim standard has been exceeded. 
The Resolve also requires the DWP to promulgate rules establishing PFAS MCLs in drinking 
water by June l, 2024. However, as you may or may not be aware, the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) has just released a draft federal PFAS rule, which was printed in the 
Federal Register on March 29, 2023. EPA intends to make these rules, which will apply to all 
Community and Non-Transient, Noncommunity (NTNC) public water systems in the U.S., ﬁnal 
by the end of 2023. In order to maintain primacy status to continue the administration of drinking 
water regulations, the Maine DWP is prepared to draft State rules that effectively incorporate the 
federal provisions in their entirety by reference. As I will explain below, the PFAS data collected 
at Maine’s PWSs support our assertion that adoption of the federal standards would be equally or 
more protective of public health as compared to a continuation of the current interim standard, as 
discussed below. 
The draft federal mle proposes a Maximum Contaminant Level Goal (MCLG), a non~ 
enforceable health target, of gag for two of Maine’s regulated PFAS compounds, 
perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perﬂuorooctane sulfonic acid (PF OS). However, pursuant to 
the Safe Drinking Water Act, EPA must also consider practicality and feasibility, including 
currently available analytical methods, best available treatment technology, and a cost-bene ﬁt 
analysis, when establishing MCLs. Therefore, EPA has proposed individual MCLs of 4.0 ppt for 
PFOS and PFOA. The draft rule also proposes a combined MCL for four additional PFAS using 
a calculated Hazard Index of l (unitless), due to their likely co—occurrence and additive toxicity. 
These PFAS are: perﬂuorohexane sulfonic acid (PFHXS), hexaﬂuoropropylene oxide dimer acid 
(HFPO-DA) and its ammonium salt (also known as a GenX chemicals), perﬂuorononanoic acid 
(PFNA), and perﬂuorobutane sulfonic acid (PF BS). Therefore, there are six PFAS compounds 
included in the draft federal rule, and six PFAS compounds in Maine’s interim standard, but only 
four of these compounds overlap. GenX and PF BS are in the federal proposal but not Maine’s 
interim standard, and PFHpA and PFDA are covered only by Maine. 
Implementing the proposed federal standards would signiﬁcantly expand the number of the 
PWSs required to address PFAS levels in their drinking water as compared to Maine’s current 
interim standard. Currently, 59 PWSs exceed Maine’s interim standard; all 59 of these would 
also exceed the proposed federal MCLs if applied independently. A rough estimate indicates that 
installing treatment at these systems would cost approximately $8 million, not including 
operational and maintenance costs. An additional 62 systems, for a total of l2l PWSs, or 18 
percent (l8%) of those sampled, would exceed the federal standards. After incorporating the 
additional PWS, the total cost of treatment for systems exceeding the proposed federal standard 
is estimated at $61 million. It is also worth noting that an additional 88 NTNC PWSs would need 
to be tested and evaluated pursuant to the federal rule, since only the schools and child care 
facilities have been tested to date. These additional NTNCs are predominantly places of 
employment, such as businesses that employ 25 people or more. 
There are no systems that exceed Maine’s interim standard that would not exceed the proposed 
federal MCLs, despite the fact that two PFAS compounds in Maine’s standard are not included
in the federal draft MCLs. There were no detections of GenX in the data set, and the only 
exceedances attributable to PFBS were at systems that also exceeded the MCL of 4.0 for either 
PFOS or PFOA, the two chemicals that are most prevalent in the data set and drive the majority 
of the exceedances. And although some PWS with levels between the detection limit of 2 ppt and 
the proposed federal MCL of 4.0 ppt for these compounds would not be immediately required to 
treat, these PWS would be sampling quarterly for PFAS and preparing for the likelihood of 
required treatment in the future. It is therefore clear based on the data that the federal regulations 
are equally or more stringent than the current interim standard in Maine and would meet the 
intent of LD 75 in providing a very thorough level of protection against PFAS in drinking water. 
The DWP shares the Committee ’s concern about PFAS in Maine’s drinking water and believes 
that adopting the federal regulatory limits when finalized will be extremely protective of public 
health. In addition, this approach will be much more practical for the DWP and regulated PWSs 
to implement, rather than attempting to manage both the federal regulations and State regulations 
in parallel. Adoption of the federal standards would also allow us to utilize guidance material 
developed by EPA and be consistent in our rule implementation. 
Furthermore, setting MCLs at zero would cause the regulation to be very difﬁcult or impossible 
to implement for the simple reason that the analytical technology does not yet exist that would 
allow us to determine if the standard was being achieved. Currently, laboratories can reliably 
report the levels of the compounds in question to about 2 or 4 ppt, which is at or near the level of 
the proposed MCL’s for PFOA and PF OS. 
In summary, the Maine CDC believes that, while achieving PF AS concentrations of zero 
nanograms per liter in drinking water is an appropriate maximum contaminant level goal, 
adopting the federal PFAS rule when promulgated is the most appropriate, practical, and 
protective approach to address PFAS in Maine’s drinking water. 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I am happy to address questions from Committee and I will be available to participate in 
any work sessions held for LD 75 or related bills.
