PO Box 263 - 254 ALEXANDER REED RD 
RICHMOND ME 04357 
. i 
I I I I 1 
a PHONEI 207~737-409, 2 - FAx:207-737~715O 
E MAIL MRWA@MAIl\lERWA 0:26 
MAINE RURAL WATER ASSOCIATION WEBSWEI WVWV-MA'NERWA"ORG 
To: Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services 
From: Bradley Sawyer, Deputy Director 
Date: April 28, 2023 
Re: Testimony in Opposition to L.D. 775, An Act to Establish Maximum Contaminant Levels Under 
the State's Drinking Water Rules to Prohibit Certain Perﬂuoroalkyl and Polyﬂuoroalkyl 
Substances 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in opposition to L.D. 75 
as Written. The Maine Rural Water Association is a member-driven non-proﬁt organization based in 
Richmond that specializes in training, technical assistance, and advocacy on behalf of our almost three 
hundred members. The majority of our membership is made up of water and Wastewater utilities from 
around the state and are committed to ensuring clean and safe drinking water and a healthy environment 
through the proper treatment of wastewater. 
This legislation, while well intentioned, does not consider that current PFAS testing available to 
water utilities cannot test to zero. Resultsl from mandatory testing, accomplished through L.D. 129 in 
the 130th Legislature, does not list low results as having no PFAS, but often lists it as less than 2, or 1.8 
parts-per-trillion. Should this legislation pass as written it is very likely that utilities would receive the 
best report possible from a test, a non-detect, yet still be in violation of state statue. 
This legislation also appears before you months before the PFAS draft rule is due from the 
Maine Drinking Water Program, and during the comment period for a federal PFAS rule. MRWA 
respectively suggests that the United States Enviromnental Protection Agency and Maine Department of 
Health and Human Servies are the proper avenues for setting maximum contaminant levels as they have 
established processes to do so. While it is well within the Legislature ’s right to do so, it opens the door 
for politically motivated and kneej erk levels that are not rooted in the established scientiﬁc process. The 
current proposed federal rule includes analytes that are not included in Maine statue, while 
simultaneously not including all of the compounds mentioned in L.D. 129. This should highlight the 
need for these regulations to be made through the rulemaking process to ensure prudence and 
consistency. 
Should this legislation be used as a vehicle to align the State of Maine with a federal regulatory 
level we would suggest that it is unnecessary due to the mandatory nature of such alignment. While we 
respect the desire to have PFAS-free water we do not believe this legislation is a practical way to 
accomplish that and urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass. I am happy to be present at the work session if 
the committee would like. If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me at 
Bradley.Sawyer@MaineRWA.org of 207-737-9014. 
‘ https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/environmental-health/dwp/cet/documents/pfasResults.pdf
