 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT  
LD 73 - An Act to Require Bottled Water Companies to Monitor for  Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances   
& 
LD 75 - An Act to Establish Maximum Contaminant Levels Under the  State's Drinking 
Water Rules to Prohibit Certain Perfluoroalkyl  and Polyfluoroalkyl Su bstances   
Jacquelyn Elliott | April, 28, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Chair; Representative Meyer, Chair: Honorable Committee Members,  
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony IN SUPPORT OF LD 73 AND LD 75.  I 
would like to address both bills at this t ime as they are related in their intent to provide 
safe drinking water.  
My name is Jacquelyn Elliott and I live in Waterboro and I am providing this testimony  as 
a Board Member on behalf of Slingshot.  For three decades I have been an environmental 
health and just ice advocate. That journey began when my community was assaulted by 
pollution from a waste -to-energy incinerator and a leaking ash landfill threatening a 
source of our drinking water.  
Slingshot is an environmental justice organization who works together w ith people most 
impacted by pollution and public health threats to take aim at polluters and build 
community power. Slingshot believes whatever toxic hazard your community is facing; 
you have the right to make your voice heard and to create the changes you  want to see. 
Slingshot is a team of seasoned organizers, who bring decades of experience in the region 
to organize alongside communities for a healthier, more just world.  
Slingshot also co -facilitates the National PFAS Contamination Coalition, which is 
composed of 30 community groups from across the country, including Maine, that are 
directly impacted by PFAS (Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances). The coalition 
is fighting for a world where people are not exposed to any PFAS, where there is justi ce 
for the victims of PFAS exposure, and where laws and regulations prevent contamination 
disasters like this from happening again.  
2 
 We have been at the side of Maine communities facing the harmful impacts of drinking 
water contaminated by PFAS . From this work, we have witnessed the harm PFAS have on 
our bodies, families, and environment.  
Maine is having to step up and take the lead on the response to the horror of our 
contaminated communities. Drinking water is a primary pathway for PFAS contamination 
and people are losing access to the availability of safe drinking water.  
Bottled water is often the stop -gap measure to meet that emergency. LD 73 and LD 75 
provide a means to mitigate the PFAS threats that may be posed by drinking bottled 
water.  It is criti cal that we require bottled water producers to provide water that is free 
of PFAS contamination. Especially, if the consumers are people seeking safe drinking 
water because their drinking water is contaminated with toxics.  
PFAS are ubiquitous1 in our environment and our bodies. They are linked to kidney and 
other cancers, and are disruptive to reproductive and immune systems interfering with 
immunization protec tions primarily with children. Scientific evidence is demonstrating 
that there is no safe level for exposure and that all organ systems are impacted2.  These 
bills are steps in the right direction but should be made stronger and require testing 
results at minimum that meet the evolving EPA3 (Environmental Protection Agency) 
standards.  
Slingshot supports the greatest protections for drinking water and would urge the 
Committee to strengthen  the requirements for LD 75 and vote OUGHT TO PASS.  Thank 
you for cons idering these comments.  
 
Jacquelyn Elliott, Board Member  
Slingshot  
Waterboro, ME  
 
 
1 Environmental Working Group, PFAS Chemicals the ‘forever chemicals’ in 99% of Americans, 
https://www.ewg.org/what -are-pfas -chemicals  
2 Emanuel, Gabrielle, February 13, 2023, Tracing the path of toxic ‘forever chemicals’ inside the body, “Not 
only do we all have PFAS in our bodies, but we also know that PFAS affects almost every organ system. I’m 
not sure I know a tissue or organ system where effects haven’t been reported.” Dr.  Linda Birnbaum, 
former director of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences and the National Toxicology 
Program: https://www.wbur.org/news/2023/02/16/pfa s-biology -blood -new -hampshire  
3 March 14, 2023, Per - and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) Proposed PFAS National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulation: https://www.epa.gov/sdwa/and -polyfluoroalkyl -substances -pfas  
