Testimony of Lani Graham, MD, MPH 
Freeport, Maine 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 75 
An Act to Establish Maximum Contaminant Levels Under the State’s Drinking 
Water Rules to Prohibit Certain Perfluoroalklyl and Polyfluoroalskyl Substances 
Sponsored by Senator Richard Bennett 
Before Health and Human Services Committee, April Z8, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of 
the Committee. My name is Lani Graham. I am a family practice 
physician and former Chief Public Health officer for Maine. I served on 
the Governor's task force to consider Maine’s approach to dealing with 
the chemical family known as PFAS [perfluoroalkyl substances) which 
completed its work in 2019. 
Over the last few years, I have been very involved in helping to address 
the contamination of Maine’s land and water by the PFAS chemical 
family. I really like this bill for three reasons and couldn't resist 
offering some brief testimony in support of it. 
First, this bill is needed to bring Maine in line with the latest scientific 
thinking on the dangers posed to human health by this family of 
chemicals. The drinking water standard for Maine is currently too high 
and could result in suggesting to Maine people that PFAS is less 
dangerous to human health than we now know. 
Second, I was directly involved with testifying to this legislature about 
the need to set the current Maine PFAS drinking water standard of 20 
parts per trillion. At the time the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) had set a guidance standard of 75 parts per trillion. We knew 
from the research that this was too high, but our recommended level of 
20 parts per trillion was considered somewhat radical and we were 
questioned about the challenge to Maine people of having a standard so 
low. Since then, as often happens as research progresses, we have
learned that rather than being too low, our recommended standard was 
too high. The EPA has now set a standard of non-detectible for this 
family. That is the nature of research on toxic chemicals. I have never 
heard of an instance where doing more research resulted in the finding 
that that the chemical was less toxic than previously thought. 
Third, as this bill indicates, this family needs to be treated as a class, 
rather than trying to set standards for each member. There are 
thousands of family members and none of them belong on our land or in 
our water. 
Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any 
questions you might have.
