 
 
 
americanchemistry.com®                                                                          54 State Street, #304 | Albany, NY 12207 | (518) 432 -7835  
 
 
 
Honorable Joe Baldacci and Honorable Michele Meyer     Electronic Delivery  
Co-Chair s, Joint Committee on Health and Human Services  
Maine Legislature  
State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
          
 
RE: Oppose Maine  LD 75 / SP 47   An Act to Establish Maximum Contaminant Levels Under the State's 
Drinking Water Rules to Prohibit Certain Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances  
 
 
April 28, 2023  
 
             
Dear C o-Chairs Baldacci and Meyer and Members of the Health and Human Servi ces Committee,  
 
The American Chemistry Council (ACC) appreciates the opportunity to submit the following comments 
regarding LD 75 / SP 47, legislation that would amend the law authorizing adoption of state drinking 
water standards to require  maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) of zero for six specific chemicals : 
PFOS, PFOA, PFHxS, PFNA, PFHp A, PFDA .  
 
In March  2023 , the federal EPA announced the proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulation 
(NPDWR) for six PFAS  with the public comment period closing on May 30, 2023. The accompanying 
proposed rule would also require public water systems to m onitor for these PFAS ; notify the public of the 
levels of these PFAS ; and r educe the levels of these PFAS in drinking water if they exceed the proposed 
standards.  In developing the proposed rule, the EPA has engaged in stakeholder engagement 
activities  and followed a  regulatory process  in alignment with the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) .  
 
ACC respectfully requests that the state of Maine await the outcome of the proposed federal rulemaking , 
and if the EPA fails to adopt a final rule by 1/1/25, urges the state to use a science -based fr amework to 
pursue drinking water standards. It is neither technically feasible nor scientifically accurate to require 
MCL s of zero for the six listed PFAS  nor does the proposal take into consideration the significant  
impacts on water utilities and ratepayers.  
 
The federal Safe Drinking Water Act requires that MCLs be set at a level that is “economically and 
technically feasible” for public water systems to attain. Regarding the economic feasibility of the MCLs, 
Maine has not estimated state -wide costs of compliance  nor has there been info rmation provided on the 
costs for individual water systems or for the customers of those systems.  Without these data it is not 
possible to determine the affordability of the MCLs.   
 
For these reasons, ACC respectfully opposes LD 75 /SD 47. Thank you for the opportunity to provide 
comment s. If you have questions, please feel free to contact me at 518 -432-7835 or 
Margaret_gorman@americanchemistry.com.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Margaret Gorman  
Senior Director, Northeast Region  
American Chemistry Council  
Margaret_Gorman@americanchemistry.com   

