 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
In Opposition to  
 
LD 75 - An Act to Establish Maximum Contaminant Levels Under the State's Drinking Water Rules to 
Prohibit Certain Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances  
 
April 28, 2023  
 
 
Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services Committee, my name is Rebecca 
Lambert , and I am providing testimony in opposition to  LD 75 on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association’s 
(MMA) elected 70 -member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC). For reference, the LPC provides direction 
to the advocacy team at MMA and establishes the position on bills of municipal interest.    
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) developed National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations1 that dictate the limits of contaminant levels in public drinking water . In Maine, the 
130th Legislature passed LD 129 that set a maximum PFAS contaminant level at no more than 20 
nanograms per liter. In LD 75, this PFAS contaminant level is changed to zero. This change gives local 
leaders some concern and they questioned if zero level is achievable and a feasible benchmark  to have as 
a maximum c ontaminant level. According to the EPA’s  website  (linked below),  not one listed contaminant 
has a level of zero , albeit some very close to zero,  and officials are  a bit confused on the bill’s intent.  
Municipal leaders  appreciate clarity in statute and take  pride in providing their citizens with  
needed services that include access to safe public drinking water, where applicable.  Having clear 
achievable standards is  paramount to this effort and MMA would encourage the committee to be sure 
when deciding on whe re to set contaminant levels, that they use  professionally relevant experts and keep 
an eye on feasibility.  
Thank  you for your time and considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  
 
 
1 https://www.epa.gov/ground -water -and-drinking -water/national -primary -drinking -water -regulations  
