MW ‘ ' A 15 University Drive i 
Augusta, Maine 04330 if 
Maine Water Utilities Association 207~623-951 1 ' 
Organized 1925 
April 28, 2023 
Sen. Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Rep. Michele Meyer, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Opposition to LD 75 An Act To Establish Maximum Contaminant Levels Under The State ‘s 
Drinking Water Rules To Prohibit Certain Perfluoroalkyl And Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide the following 
testimony in opposition to LD 75 which proposes to establish a maximum contaminant level (MCL) of 
PFAS in drinking water of zero nanograms per liter. 
About MWUA. MWUA is a is a nonprofit association based in Augusta that provides support for water 
works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water through 
educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The 
Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members. 
Discussion: Per and poly fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) have been found in sources of drinking water in 
Maine and in locations across the United States. PFAS are a group of thousands of manmade 
compounds that have been in use since the 1940s. Because of their stability and persistence in the 
environment they are also known as "forever" chemicals. 
PFAS is one of the most challenging environmental issues drinking water and wastewater systems has 
faced in modern times. We understand Mainers are concerned about their safety and want PFAS 
completely out of their drinking water. These compounds have likely been in ground and surface water 
for decades, but the technology necessary to identify PFAS at very low levels in the environment has 
only been available for less than 10 years. 
ln 2021, the 130"‘ Legislature passed a law establishing an interim standard of 20 nanograms (parts per 
trillion) for the combination of six PFAS compounds. ln March 2023, the US Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) proposed national MCL standards for six PFAS compounds. The new EPA standard is4 
parts per trillion MCL for two of the six identified PFAS compounds, far more stringent than Maine's 
recently promulgated PFAS regulation. Another four PFAS compounds will be regulated by the EPA 
through a health index where both the toxicity of individual compounds as well as the combined toxicity 
of multiple compounds will be taken into consideration. The toxicity of these compounds is a complex 
science, and we strongly recommend that Maine allow the EPA to regulate these compounds through 
scientific methods rather than legislating standards that may not be grounded in science.
Letter to HHS Committee re LD 75 
April 28, 2023 
Page2 
As drinking water professionals, our obvious preference would be zero contaminants, including PFAS 
compounds. However, we also need to balance our ideal with the reality that water must be delivered 
to the hundreds of thousands of Mainers who rely on public water service every day. In this regard, we 
must accept that the ideal of zero contaminants is unrealistic. In fact, there are no regulated 
contaminants that have an MCL of zero. This includes compounds like lead and arsenic that drinking 
water systems tested for and treated for many years. Regarding PFAS, this group of thousands of 
compounds is ubiquitous in the environment and prevalent in the hydrologic cycle. In other words, it 
likely falls on the earth in precipitation all around the globe. Regulating PFAS at zero would necessitate 
installing treatment on every water supply in Maine, both private and public, because it is assumed that 
some level of PFAS exists in all water. Treating public water to attain a theoretical zero MCL would cost 
hundreds of millions of dollars, costs paid by our customer (your constituents), with no clear scientific 
evidence that an MCL of zero is any more beneficial to them than the l\/lCl.’s already established by the 
federal government. 
Moreover, testing for "zero" likely does not mean that there is in fact zero PFAS in water supplies. That 
is because the technology does not currently exist to demonstrate the absence of PFAS at such low 
levels. So, even if a water system shows a ”non-detect" for PFAS following testing, it could still be the 
case that PFAS is present at some undetectable level. 
As noted, PFAS standards are a work in progress by state and federal drinking water regulators. We urge 
the committee to allow the EPA to follow the course of implementation on PFAS regulation. The federal 
standard will consider both the safety of the public, as well as feasibility to monitor and implement 
regulatory measures. 
Conclusion: Technical regulatory standards should be established based upon known risks and benefits. 
Public health dollars are more likely to be spent effectively if legislative bodies direct regulatory agencies 
to develop regulations based upon technical feasibility and scientific data. Although well meaning, LD 
75 is not only impossible to implement, and unlikely to result in zero PFAS exposure, but it would result 
in hundreds of millions of dollars in treatment paid for by Maine's drinking water consumers. 
We urge the Committee to reject this legislation by voting ought not to pass. 
Yours for safe drinking water, 
/4% Roger rouse, 
Chair, MWUA Legislative and Regulatory Affairs Committee 
General Manager, Kennebec Water District 
ec: Bruce Berger, Executive Director, MWUA 
James l. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
