 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                                  Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
LD 75, An Act to Establish Maximum Contaminant Levels Under the State's Drinking 
Water Rules to Prohibit Certain Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
28 April 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services, I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 communities 
in Western Maine in the State Senate.  I am pleased to sponsor LD 75, "An Act to Establish 
Maximum Contaminant Levels Under the State's Drinking Water Rules to Prohibit Certain 
Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances.” 
 
I believe everyone on this committee is aware how passionate I am about this issue.  The health 
of Maine people, and our environment has been the focus of much of my legislative work. 
 
Maine’s current PFAS standard is 20 parts per trillion (PPT).  LD 75 would change that to zero 
nanograms per liter.  It is important to note the Environmental Protection Agency is currently 
considering a proposed rule on this very topic.  A hearing will be held on the proposed rule on 
May 4th and comments must be received by May 30th.   
 
By now, everyone is well aware of the dangers of PFAS.  Two types of PFAS, PFOA and PFOS 
are likely to cause kidney and liver cancer.  This is why the EPA is proposing to set the health-
based value, the Maximum Contaminant Level, for both of these contaminants 4.0 parts per 
trillion.  Anything less than 4.0 parts per trillion is unenforceable.   
 
I expect Maine would adopt the national standard, which is the purpose of this bill.  Therefore, I 
suggest the Committee carry over this bill in order to get direction from the Federal government.     
 
Thank you.  I would be happy to answer any questions.  
