PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:Members of the Joint Committ ee on Committ ee onEner gy, Utilities andTechnologyFrom:Jacob St ernDate:February 2, 2023Re:Testimon y inOpposition t o L.D . 175:An Act ToIncr ease The Use Of MunicipalWaste-To-Ener gy Pr ocesses As A Sour ce Of R enew able Ener gy
 Senat or La wrence, R epresentati ve Zeig ler, and the members of the Joint Committ ee onEner gy, Utilities, and T echnology ,
I am t estifying t oday on behalf of Sierr a Club Maine, r epresenting o ver 22,000 support ersand members stat ewide. F ounded in 1892, Sierr a Club is one of our nation ’s oldest andlargest en vironmental or ganizations. W e work diligentl y to amplify the po wer of our 3.8million members nation-wide as w e work towards combating climat e change andpromoting a just and sustainable econom y. To that end, w e ur ge an “oug ht not t o pass”report on L.D . 175:An Act To Incr ease The Use OfMunicipal W aste-To-Ener gy Processes As ASour ce Of R enew able Ener gy.
While ther e is some v alue in classifying w aste-to-ener gy as a unique gener ating sour ce, theproposed legislation flies in the f ace of decades of w ork to plan f or a clean ener gy futur e.The curr ent classification of r enew able r esour ces allo ws for incenti vizing specificclean-gener ating r esour ces, such as solar , wind, and tidal po wer (see Title 35- A MR SA§3210, sub-§2, ¶B-3). While the e xisting statut e does not perf ectly mat ch Sierr a Club ’spreferred r esour ce hier archy, waste-to-ener gy has no place in this list .
One of the significant benefits of r enew able ener gy is that most gener ating sour ces pr oducefew or no pollutants. Ho wever, it has pr oven impossible f or industry t o de velop a w astecombustion pr ocess, e ven with a lar ge biomass pr oportion, that does not pr oduceunacceptable t oxic and hazar dous air emissions. A dditionall y, as the nation with the lar gesthistorical emissions of gr eenhouse g asses, the Unit ed Stat es has an oblig ation t o respondvigor ousl y. The Sierr a Club places primary emphasis on making substantial cuts in C O2emissions as soon as possible b y mo ving polluting fuel sour ces and shifting t o a clean andsustainable ener gy econom y. Incenti vizing w aste-to-ener gy gener ation the same w ay we dosolar and wind w ould ha ve the eff ect of mo ving the needle in the opposit e dir ection.

Additionall y, placing w aste-to-ener gy inciner ation abo ve recycling in the solid w astehier archy – eff ectively mo ving it up tw o rungs on the ladder , is shortsig hted and danger ous(see Title 38 MR SA §2101). Sierr a Club str ongly opposes incenti vizing w aste inciner ation.While some ad vanced w aste treatment t echnologies ar e pr omot ed as alt ernati ve ener gyproducing, the ener gy conserv ed b y recycling and composting the sour ce mat erials e xceedsthe amount of ener gy pr oduced b y these t echnologies b y thr ee to five times.1That beingsaid, our solid w aste crisis is comple x and much w ork is needed t o mo ve our stat e towardsa zer o waste futur e, but this bill is not the ans wer.
If enact ed, this legislation w ould disastr ousl y impede pr ogress t o de veloping futur e cleangener ating r esour ces. It could allo w lar ge industrial inciner ation f acilities t o recei ve thesame incenti ves as clean ener gy gener ators, barring pr ogress and incr easing pollutionlevels. W e str ongly ur ge an “oug ht not t o pass” r eport on L.D . 175:An Act To Incr ease TheUse Of Municipal W aste-To-Ener gy Processes As A Sour ce Of R enew able Ener gy. Thank y ou foryour time and consider ation.
Sincer ely,Jacob St ern
--Member , Executi ve Committ eeSierr a Club Maine Chapt er
1Morris, Jeffrey, Comparative LCAs for Curbside Recycling Versus Either Landfilling or Incineration withEnergy Recovery, The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, July 2005.
