 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  (MMA)  
 
In Support of  
LD 175, An Act to Increase the Use of Municipal Waste -to-energy Processes as a Source of 
Renewable Energy  
 
February  2, 2022  
 
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler  and members of the Energy, Utilities and 
Technology Committee .  My name is Kate Dufour, and I am submitting testimony  in support of 
LD 175 on behalf of the 70 municipal leaders  elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s 
Legislati ve Policy Committee and directed to establish position s on bills of municipal interest.   
Municipal officials support amendments to Maine statute  that promote and support the 
goal of recycling  50% of th e waste generated by residents, businesses, commercial operations, 
and even by our beloved tourist s.  And recognize that innovative approaches for the disposal of 
waste are necessary to reduce both the volume and  ever-increasing  cost of managing solid waste , 
which is a burden  primarily  levied against the property taxpayers .  
As an example of the need  for innovation and incentives , there are sources of waste,  such 
as tires, mattresses,  and box springs, that are nearly impossible to recycle , and are deserving of 
disposal solutions that do not solely rel y on incineration to landfill .  To that end , municipal 
officials believe LD 175 offers an opportunity  to encourag e investments in the infrastructure 
necessary  to convert non -recycl able product s into energy source s in new and  more 
environmentally friendly ways .   
However, there is concern among our members that if the language in LD 175 is not 
clarified or expanded , Section 2 of the printed bill may unintentionally  deprioritize  the 
generation of other energy sources such as the methane  captured in a landfill or the anaerobic 
digest ion processes  used to create biofuels.   
For this reason, municipal officials ask  that through its deliberations the  Committee 
ensure that  the remedy proposed in the printed bill  is available to all providers of waste 
management services and does not single out a specific entity or process.  Approaches that as a 
priority s upport recycling , and then as a fallback  resort to the generation of power , should benefit  
all.    
Thank you for the opportunity to share the municipal perspective on LD 175.  If you have 
any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me at kdufour@memun.org  or (207) 592 -4038 . 

