 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
just-zero.org  | info@just-zero.org   
1 
ADVANCING  COMMUNITY -CENTERED  ZERO WASTE SOLUTIONS  
 
February 2, 2023  
 
Chair Lawrence  
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
Maine Legislature  
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: Testimony in Opposition to LD 175, An Act to Increase the Use of  
Municipal Waste-to-Energy Processes as a Source of Renewable Energy.  
 
Dear Chair Lawrence, and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology,  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony regarding LD 175, An Act to 
Increase the Use of Municipal Waste-to-Energy Processes as a Source of Renewable 
Energy. Just Zero opposes LD 175.   
 
Just Zero is a non-profit environmental advocacy organization that works alongside 
communities, policy makers, scientists, educators, organizers and others to 
implement just and equitable solutions to climate-damaging and toxic production, 
consumption, and waste disposal practices. We believe that all people deserve Zero 
Waste solutions with zero climate-damaging emissions and zero toxic exposures.  
 
LD 175 would be a step backwards for Maine. Incineration, often misleadingly referred 
to as “waste-to-energy” by the industry, is a high-heat waste treatment technology 
that involves burning municipal solid waste (“MSW”). This is not a solution to waste 
management in Maine. Nor are incinerators a form of renewable energy. Maine has 
been at the forefront of enacting progressive, solution-oriented waste reform 
legislation. This bill threatens to undermine the intent behind those laws while also 
increasing pollution.   
 
I. Incineration Does Not Produce Renewable Energy and Should Not Benefit 
from Programs Designed to Support Renewable Energy Projects.  
 
If enacted, LD 175 would classify incineration as a renewable capacity resource, 
thereby making it eligible for meeting the requirements of Maine’s Renewable 
Portfolio Standard (“RPS”).1  
 
 
1 M.R.S. 35-A §3210.  
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
just-zero.org  | info@just-zero.org   
2 
ADVANCING  COMMUNITY -CENTERED  ZERO WASTE SOLUTIONS  
Incineration converts MSW into bottom ash, fly ash, combustion gases, air pollutants, 
wastewater, sludge, and heat. Much of the material that comprises MSW is not 
“renewable.” Incineration of MSW that contains fossil fuel-based products, such as 
plastic and rubber, releases the carbon stored in those materials into the atmosphere. 
Per unit of electricity generated, waste incineration emits more carbon dioxide (2,988 
lbs/ WMh) than coal-fired power plants (2,249 lbs/ MWh).2 Given the level of 
greenhouse gas emissions associated with incineration, this technology should not be 
considered a renewable energy.  
 
II. Incinerators Release Toxic Emissions and Ash Which are Bad for the 
Environment, Public Health, and the Economy.  
 
Waste incineration not only emits greenhouse gasses at significantly higher rates that 
other renewable energy sources, but it also releases significant levels of toxic 
pollutants. In fact, waste incineration has the highest ratio of negative economic 
impacts from air pollution compared to the financial value added any industry in the 
nation.3 Given the array of pollutants emitted from incinerators, this is not surprising.  
 
On average, to produce the same amount of energy as a coal fired power plant, waste 
incinerators release:  
 28 times as much dioxin; 
 twice as much carbon monoxide; 
 three times as many nitrogen oxides; 
 6–14 times as much mercury; 
 nearly six times as much lead; and 
 70% more sulfur dioxides.4 
 
In addition to these air pollutants, incinerators are also significant sources of 
particulate matter.5 Inhalation of particulate matter is linked to respiratory and 
 
2 Morris, Jeffrey, Bury or Burn North America MSW? LCAs Provide Answers for Climate  
Impacts & Carbon Neutral Power Potential, Environmental Science & Technology, Volume 44,  
NO. 20, September, 2010. See also Energy Justice Network, Trash Incineration More Polluting  
Than Coal, http://www.energyjustice.net/incineration/worsethancoal  (when “biogenic” emissions  
are included in the calculus, incineration releases carbon dioxide “at a rate 2.5 times that of coal  
power plants”). 
3 Muller, Nicholas Z., Robert Mendelsohn, and William Nordhaus, 101 Environmental  
Accounting for Pollution in the United States Economy, American Economic Review 5, 1649,  
1664–69 (2011). 
4 Energy Justice Network, supra note 1; see also Environmental Integrity Project, Dirtying Maryland’s Air by 
Seeking a Quick Fix on Renewable Energy? 3–8 (2011), https://environmentalintegrity.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/11/FINALWTEINCINERATORREPORT-101111.pdf .  
5 The New School, U.S. Municipal Solid Waste Incinerators: An Industry in Decline 34 (2019), https://www.no-
burn.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/CR_GaiaReportFinal_05.21-1.pdf .  
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
just-zero.org  | info@just-zero.org   
3 
ADVANCING  COMMUNITY -CENTERED  ZERO WASTE SOLUTIONS  
cardiovascular issues.6 Research on direct health impacts of waste incineration in the 
United States is limited, but a handful of studies from Europe, where waste 
incinerators are prevalent, offer insights. For example, a 2013 study in Italy analyzed 
the occurrence of miscarriages in women aged 15-49 years residing near seven 
incinerators in northern Italy and found that particulate emissions from the 
incinerators were associated with an increased risk of miscarriage.7 
 
While some newer incinerators are equipped with air pollution control devices such as 
filters, these devices do not effectively prevent the escape of ultrafine particulate 
matter.8 To the extent that these filters are effective, they do not eliminate pollutants. 
Instead, these filters simply capture the pollutants and transfer them to by-products 
such as ash and wastewater treatment sludge which require subsequent 
management, usually landfilling. Once landfilled, the pollutants in these materials will 
eventually leak out of the facility through leachate and enter the environment.9  
 
III. Maine’s Renewable Portfolio Standard Should Not be Used to Prop Up and 
Extend the Life of Outdated, Aging Incinerators.  
 
Including incineration as part of Maine’s RPS would provide unwarranted life support 
to the outdated, unsafe, and unreliable incinerators in the state. Each of the three 
incinerators in Maine are at least thirty years old. The Eco-Maine waste-to-energy 
facility began operating in 1987.10 The Penobscot Energy Recovery facility in 
Orrington began operating in 1988.11  And the Maine Waste-to-Energy facility in 
Auburn began operating in 1992.12 
 
 
6 Howard, C. Vyvyan, Statement of Evidence, Particulate Emissions and Health, Proposed Ringaskiddy Waste-
to-Energy Facility 4–5 (2009).  
7 Candela, Air Pollution from Incinerators and Reproductive Outcomes A Multisite Study, Epidemiology 24, p 
863-870. (November 2013). Available at 
https://journals.lww.com/epidem/Fulltext/2013/11000/Air_Pollution_from_Incinerators_and_Reproductive.10.as
px  
8 Id.  
9 Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives, Incinerators: Myths vs. Facts 1 (2010), https://www.no-
burn.org/wp-content/uploads/Incinerator_Myths_vs_Facts-Feb2012.pdf .  
10 Maine Department of Environmental Protection, Eco-Maine – Air Emission License Renewal, p. 2. (Jan. 11, 
2021). Available at https://www.maine.gov/dep/ftp/AIR/licenses/titlev/A0283GRA.pdf   
11 Maine Department of Environmental Protection, Penobscot Energy Recovery Company – Air Emission 
License Renewal, p. 2. (Mar. 3, 2017). Available at 
https://www.maine.gov/dep/ftp/AIR/licenses/titlev/A0355ER.pdf   
12 Maine Department of Environmental Protection, Mid-Maine Waste Action Corporation – Air Emission License 
Amendment, p. 2. (July 24, 2014). Available at 
https://www.maine.gov/dep/ftp/AIR/licenses/titlev/A0378DA.pdf   
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
just-zero.org  | info@just-zero.org   
4 
ADVANCING  COMMUNITY -CENTERED  ZERO WASTE SOLUTIONS  
Incinerators typically have a lifespan of 20-30 years13, and require increasing capital 
investments as they age.14 This increased capital cost, along with other factors, have 
made waste incineration increasingly unviable from a financial perspective. In the 
U.S., at least 31 municipal solid waste incinerators closed between 2000 and 2020, 
largely due to the financial burden caused by necessary pollution control 
requirements.15 
 
As a means of both energy generation and waste disposal, incineration is more 
expensive than available alternatives. According to the U.S. Department of Energy, it 
costs four times as much to produce the same amount of energy from waste 
incineration than solar or wind energy. When compared to natural gas, the cost is 
double.16 Incineration is also more expensive than coal power.17  
 
Given the increased energy costs, incineration facilities typically derive most of their 
revenue from tipping fees, as opposed to electricity sales.18 These tipping fees are 
significantly more expensive than alternatives such as recycling or composting. 
Roughly $134,000 is required for an incinerator to burn 1,000 tons of MSW, while 
$56,000 is required to manage the same amount of material through a combination of 
collection, recycling, composting, and landfilling.19  
 
Classifying incineration as a form of renewable energy would provide unnecessary 
and unwarranted financial support to this expensive and polluting industry by allowing 
these facilities to generate Renewable Energy Certificates (“RECs”). RECs not only 
track compliance with the law, but also can be traded. This givens RECs a monetary 
value which is designed to help support and spur innovation in renewable energy 
resources. Allowing incinerators to generate these credits will provide them with a 
new and unjustified income stream that will prolong the life of these aging facilities. 
These credits should not be used to prop up aging, polluting incinerators.   
 
13 The New School, U.S. Municipal Solid Waste Incinerators: An Industry in Decline, p. 39-41. (2019), 
https://www.no-burn.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/CR_GaiaReportFinal_05.21-1.pdf .  
14 Id. at 29-30.  
15 Id.  
16 U.S. Department of Energy. (2019, August). Waste-to-Energy from Municipal Solid Wastes. Estimates only. 
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2019/08/f66/BETO--Waste-to-Energy-Report-August--2019.pdf .   
17 Id.  
18 U.S. Energy Information Administration, Updated Capital Cost Estimates for Electricity Generation Plants 7 
(2010), http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2018/ph241/wang-k2/docs/eia-nov10.pdf  (“Municipal solid waste 
incinerators rely primarily on tipping fees and secondarily on electricity sales for revenues. As an example, 
Covanta (which owns 22 facilities and operates 39 facilities in the U.S.), on average, derives its revenues: 71 
percent from tipping fees, 18 percent from electricity sales, 5 percent from metal recycling and 6 percent 
from ‘other’ (i.e. revenues derived from construction revenues, resale of purchased energy, fees from 
operating transfer facilities, etc.).”) 
19 Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives, The High Cost of Waste Incineration, p. 4. (Mar. 2021). Available 
at https://www.no-burn.org/wp-content/uploads/The-High-Cost-of-Waste-Incineration-March-30.pdf    
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
just-zero.org  | info@just-zero.org   
5 
ADVANCING  COMMUNITY -CENTERED  ZERO WASTE SOLUTIONS  
 
IV. Incineration is Not a Preferred Waste Management Method. 
 
LD 175 would also amend Maine’s solid waste management hierarchy to list 
incineration as the third-most preferred waste management method, behind waste 
reduction and reuse of waste. This would make incineration superior to more 
effective waste management practices such as recycling and composting. Given the 
environmental and public health risks associated with incineration, as well as the 
superior economic and environmental benefits associated with composting and 
recycling, the solid waste management hierarchy should not be amended.   
 
Unlike incineration, composting and recycling are central to creating a circular 
economy. Recycling ensures that materials such as paper, cardboard, metals, and 
some plastics are recaptured and used in the manufacturing of new products. This 
limits the need for the extraction of new natural resources during the manufacturing 
process. Composting captures the value of organic waste by transforming it into a 
nutrient rich fertilizer that can strengthen soil systems and promote healthy plant 
growth. Incinerating these materials results in a combination of air pollution, 
greenhouse gasses, and high energy prices.  
 
Incinerators also provide fewer jobs than recycling and composting facilities. 
Recycling creates over fifty times as many jobs as landfills and incinerators.20 These 
jobs also generally provide higher wages, and more permanent positions. The 
Institute for Local Self Reliance estimates that composting facilities can create more 
than three times as many jobs as incinerators per ton of waste.21 
 
Additionally, incinerators – unlike composting and recycling – do not eliminate the 
need for landfills. After incineration, roughly 25% of the weight of incoming waste 
remains in the form of residual ash.22 This ash contains high levels of dioxin, mercury, 
lead, polychlorinated biphenyls (“PCBs”), and polychlorinated naphthalene’s 
(“PCNs”).23 This ash is then disposed of in landfills where these pollutants eventually 
will leach out and pose an immediate threat to groundwater, drinking water, and 
surface water.24  
 
20 Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives, Zero Waste and Economic Recovery – The Job Creation 
Potential of Zero Waste Solutions, p. 4. (2021). Available at https://www.no-burn.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/11/Jobs-Report-ENGLISH-1.pdf   
21 Marie Donahue, Institute for Local Self-Reliance, Waste Incineration: A Dirty Secret in How States Define 
Renewable Energy 11 (2018), https://ilsr.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/ILSRIncinerationFInalDraft-6.pdf .  
22 Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives, Incinerators: Myths vs. Facts 1 (2010) , https://www.no-
burn.org/wp-content/uploads/Incinerator_Myths_vs_Facts-Feb2012.pdf .  
23 Id.  
24 Jindrich Petrlik and Ralph Anthony Ryder, After Incineration: The Toxic Ash Problem 4–6 (2005), 
https://ipen.org/sites/default/files/documents/ipen_incineration_ash-en.pdf   
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
just-zero.org  | info@just-zero.org   
6 
ADVANCING  COMMUNITY -CENTERED  ZERO WASTE SOLUTIONS  
 
Incineration also does not incentivize waste reduction or reuse. Incinerators rely on a 
constant stream of large volumes of waste which disincentivizes waste reduction. In 
fact, this is one of the reasons why the Penobscot Energy Recovery Company was 
importing waste from Northern Ireland to burn in Maine.25 To keep the incinerator 
running and profitable, it required more waste than Maine currently had available for 
burning.26  
 
V. Conclusion 
 
Classifying incineration as renewable energy and amending the solid waste hierarchy 
to favor incineration over recycling and composting will significantly undermine 
Maine’s clean energy and waste reduction and recycling goals. The Department of 
Environmental Protection is currently beginning the rulemaking process to implement 
Maine’s first-in-the-nation Extended Producer Responsibility for Packaging program. 
Once finalized, this program will significantly increase access to recycling while 
lowering recycling costs for municipalities across the state. Maine should continue to 
be looking at new, innovative ways to reduce waste and increase recycling. If 
enacted LD 175 would only serve to prop up aging, polluting facilities that do not 
benefit the state.  
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill. I strongly urge 
you to vote against LD 175.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Peter Blair, Esq.  
Policy Director  
Just Zero  
 
 
 
 
25  Sam Rogers, Trash from Northern Ireland Washes Up on Sears Island After an Off-Loading Accident, News 
Center Maine. (Dec. 10, 2020). Available at https://www.newscentermaine.com/article/life/trash-from-
northern-island-is-washing-up-on-sears-island-after-a-crane-accident/97-0b18f272-c838-43ee-88c9-
6a505cd9ec20     
26 Id.  
