A S Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street ~ Augusta, Maine 04330 ~ (207) 622-3101 ~ Fax: (207) 6,22-4343 v www.nrc'm,org 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 175 
An Act to Increase the Use of Municipal Waste-to-energy Processes 
as a Source of Renewable Energy 
Sarah Nichols, Sustainable Maine Director, February 2, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is Sarah Nichols, and I am the Sustainable Maine 
Director for the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). Thank you for this opportunity to 
testify in opposition to LD 175; this proposal is counter-effective to both Maine’s renewable 
energy and sustainable waste management goals. 
NRCM strongly supports the increase of renewable resources that help reduce our dependence 
on fossil fuels, improve our environment, and provide long-term stability for our energy system. 
Truly renewable energy sources are those that are naturally regenerative. When we harness the 
energy created by the tides, sun, and wind, for instance, we do not destroy these resources, they 
are inﬁnite. And it doesn’t take energy from our grid to create them. 
Municipal solid waste (MSW) on the other hand—Which is our daily household and commercial 
trash—is made of ﬁnite resources that needed signiﬁcant energy to create and ship to a disposal 
facility. Vi/hen burned, they are destroyed, and they do not naturally renew. Plastic isa 
particularly troubling fuel source since it’s made from fossil fuels. The plastics industry ’s 
contribution to climate change is on track to exceed that of coal-ﬁred power plants in this 
countiy by 2030.1 
NRCM’s position is that if we are going to be burning trash, then we should at least make 
lemonade out of lemons and capture the energy (and have strict pollution controls in place). 
Capturing energy should be required best practice for this disposal option, along with landﬁll gas 
capture, but we believe that neither should be considered to be a “renewable capacity resource, 
nor a “renewable resource ” in Title 35-A Chapter 32 {$3210. 
Facilities that incinerate MSW and recover the energy (waste-to-energy facilities) have been 
eligible to receive Class II renewable energy credits (RECs) since at least 2009 and were given 
special treatment above hydroelectric and biomass with a 300% multiplier in 2019, which is due 
to expire at the beginning of 2025. LD 175 would worsen the problem by allowing them to 
quality for Class I RECs in perpetuity. The purpose of Class I RECs are to incentivize 
investments in new renewable energy generation that help diversify and clean up our generation 
mix beyond its current situation. New generation also means new jobs, new investment, and 
growing new or emerging markets. Paying these waste-to-energy plants more for what they have 
been doing for decades provides none of that. 
' 
https://www.beyondplastics.orgjplastics-and-climate
The waste-to-energy facility in the Sponsor’s town of Orrington is a key part of our state’s waste 
processing infrastructure. But this facility provides a good example of one of the unintended 
consequences of waste-to-energy. I often refer to these facilities as “hungry trash monsters ” 
because they require a steady stream of MSW to operate. In 2019 that facility was not being fed 
enough plastic to burn efficiently, so they imported 100 metric tons of shredded plastic from 
Northern Ireland. Two of those tons were not unloaded safely at the Mack Point cargo facility in 
Searsport, and the result was a devastating plastic pollution spill in Penobscot Bay. 
One big reason why that plastic waste was shipped to Maine, and why our state has never met 
our Waste reduction and recycling goals is because disposal at a landﬁll or incinerator has 
historically been the cheapest waste management option. If our state’s energy policy is used to 
make disposal of waste at a landfill or waste-to-energy facility even cheaper, let’s say by 
providing them money from Class I RECS in perpetuity, for instance, it’s going to make Mainea 
desirable location for disposal and severely impact our ability to make the economics work in 
favor of Waste reduction and recycling in our state and prevent us from ever reaching our goals. 
Further, NRCM has long defended our State’s Solid Waste Management Hierarchy established 
in 1989 as we’ve worked to make Maine a leader in sustainable waste management policy, which 
starts with reduce-reuse-and recycle. Waste-to-energy is currently at the bottom of the hierarchy 
just above disposal at a landﬁll, because it significantly reduces the volume of waste that needs 
to be landﬁlled and has been reported to reduce greenhouse gas emissions when compared with 
landﬁlling, but not when compared with recycling or composting? LD 175 is misguided as it 
proposes to place waste-to-energy ABOVE recycling and composting in the hierarchy, asa 
subset of reuse. Incineration does not reuse, but destroys resources, and any claims that this 
waste management option provides greater environmental beneﬁt to recycling and composting 
are dubious at best. 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments, we urge you to vote ought-not-to-pass on 
LD 175, and I’d be happy to answer any questions. 
2 https://drawdown.org/solutions/waste —to-energy
