ti‘;‘ 
;‘_1€';“_:.,,’:~r~. _ A STATE OF MAINE" 
;a"Eﬁ ll - 
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION 
Philip I__. Bartlett, II Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATNE DIRECTOR 
Randall D. Davis 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONERS 
' 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
V In Support of 
LD 395, An Act to Expand Funding Sources Within the Public Utilities Commission for
' 
. Intervenor Funding (Commission Bill) _
. 
' 
March 2, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testiiying in support of LD 
395, An Act to Expand Funding Sources Within the Public Utilities Commission for Intervenor Funding on 
behalf of the Public Utilities Commission (Commission). _‘ 
Last session, Public Law 2021, chapter 736 amended the law regarding intervenor funding. The law 
directed the Conmiission to adopt rules regarding intervenor funding and included provisions the 
Commission was required to address in rule. On January 31, 2023, the Commission adopted its intervenor 
funding rule.‘' 
--
v 
ln addition to the rulemaking requirements, the law speciﬁed the sources of funds the Commission could 
utilize to provide intervenor funding to qualiﬁed individuals and includes: (1) compensation of intervenors 
by the utility involved in the proceeding; (2) the Public Utilities Commission Regulatory Fund; and (3) 
ﬁling fees. LD 395 expands the funding sources to include administrative penalties collected by the 
Commission.I 
The Commission introduced this legislation to ensure -Lt had options to provide funding to individuals 
qualiﬁed to receive intervenor ﬁmding and it provides the Commission with ﬂexibility in making ftmding 
decisions." 
The amendment to this bill is essential to clarify that intervenor funding is applicable to both intervenors in 
an adjudicatory proceeding, as Well participants in other Commission proceedings, such as rulemakings. 
This was the intent of the Commission when we made recommendations regarding intervenor funding in 
the report required pursuant to Public Law 2021, chapter 279; however, the term intervenor is generally 
applicable in Commission rule to those individuals participating in an adjudicatory proceeding only. The 
rule the Commission adopted is applicable to both traditional intervenors and participants and the 
Commission felt it was necessary to make this clariﬁcation so there is no question that We have the 
authority to provide this funding to a qualiﬁed individual in non-adjudicatoiy proceedings. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session. 
1 
Chapter 840 is not yet effective as it is under review by the Attorney General’s Ofﬁce. 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) "ITY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207)287-1039
