 
 
 
 
 
  
15 University Drive 
Augusta, Maine 04330 
207-623-9511 
  
 
March 7, 2023 
 
Honorable Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Honorable Stanley Zeigler House Chair 
Joint Legislative Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re: Testimony in Opposition to the proposed amendment to LD 395, An Act to Expand Funding 
Sources Within the Public Utilities Commission for Intervenor Funding , and request for 
exemption from intervenor funding law 
 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology: 
 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony in 
opposition to the proposed amendment to LD 395 which expands entities eligible for funding to include 
“participants” as well as intervenors. We further request an exemption for consumer-owned water utilities 
from the intervenor funding law. 
 
About MWUA.   MWUA is a nonprofit association based in Augusta that provides support for water 
works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water through 
educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The 
Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members.   
 
Consumer-owned water utilities are directly accountable to customers.  Consumer-owned water 
utilities exist to serve the public and are governed by locally elected or appointed officials.  The people 
who run consumer-owned water districts are directly accountable to the citizens who directly elect them, 
or the local elected officials who appoint them.  
 
Maine PUC and OPA provide further support for customers. In addition to direct control over 
governance, ratepayers of consumer-owned water districts who disagree with the policies of their local 
officials may still seek assistance through existing support systems at the Public Utilities Commission 
(PUC) and the Office of the Public Advocate (OPA).  Such government agencies exist to ensure that the 
activities of public utilities are in the public interest and meeting the needs of customers, and utility 
customers pay for such services in their rates. With such extensive consumer protections in place, at 
ratepayer expense, consumer-owned utilities do not believe there is a systemic need to improve the local 
governance process. 
 
No need to expand intervenor funding to “participants.” In addition to local governance and the 
support of state agencies like the PUC and OPA, Maine law in 35-A MRSA Section 1310-A also provides 
an opportunity for intervenors to participate in PUC proceedings, and where such intervenors provide an 
important perspective not otherwise represented by the OPA or other participants, such intervenors may 
obtain funding for their participation. This funding is paid for out of assessments on utility customers, 
including customers of consumer-owned water utilities. 
 
Letter from MWUA re LD 395 
March 7, 2023 
Page 2 
The proposed sponsor amendment presented at the public hearing goes a step further by allowing for 
ratepayer funding for individuals or groups who “participate” in a PUC proceeding but who are not 
formal “intervenors.”  This is a major change in policy that needs to be carefully considered before 
approved. Importantly, an “intervenor” is someone who has a direct interest in a proceeding who has 
successfully petitioned the PUC to be a formal party to a case. A “participant” is someone who is not a 
party but may engage in a case in less formal way. There could be multiple “participants” in a PUC case, 
all potentially funded by utility customers.  
 
What does this mean in practical terms?  Imagine that a developer has petitioned for utility service, and a 
group of neighbors has decided to oppose the development. In such an instance, dozens of such neighbors 
may decide to engage in any associated PUC proceeding, not by becoming a formal party, but merely by 
filing public comments. If this proposed amendment to LD 395 is approved such that such “participants” 
can obtain funding, then the ratepayers of Maine’s utilities will be asked to financially underwrite the 
engagement of these neighbors. We are concerned that this is not a proper use of ratepayer funds, and 
ratepayer interests are more than adequately protected by the local officials who govern the district, the 
PUC, the OPA, and any formal “intervenors” in a case. 
 
If “participants” are allowed to receive funding, this will only increase costs to the utility, and hence, the 
cost to the ratepayers. Creating additional intervenors/participants does not mean a better process, but it 
does mean increased costs. Accordingly, we oppose the proposed amendment to LD 395.  
 
MWUA requests an exemption from the underlying intervenor funding statute.  As noted earlier, 
customers of consumer-owned water utilities already have three mechanisms to influence the activities of 
their water system: (1) control over the governance of the utility; (2) the assistance of PUC staff; and (3) 
the assistance of the Office of Public Advocate. Moreover, all three of these entities are funded by 
customers. For this reason, our Association believes that having customers pay for a fourth entity – an 
“intervenor” – is unnecessary and a misuse of ratepayer funds. We therefore ask that LD 395 be further 
amended to exempt consumer-owned water utilities from the intervenor funding provisions in 35-A 
MRSA Section 1310-A. 
 
As it turns out, this is not a new issue. Last year, the Maine PUC undertook a rulemaking in Chapter 840 
governing intervenor funding, and in that rulemaking, MWUA requested an exemption. On three separate 
occasions, our Association filed comments to the MPUC asking for an exemption, most recently on 
November 2, 2022. For convenience, a copy of that letter is attached here. The reason for our request 
paralleled the points made earlier in this letter: consumer-owned water utilities are locally governed, and 
customers also can draw upon the resources of the Maine PUC and Maine OPA for assistance. Ultimately, 
after reviewing our comments, the PUC denied our exemption request on January 31, 2023, just over one 
month ago.  
 
Given this recent determination by the Maine PUC, LD 395 provides a timely opportunity to address our 
request. There are numerous instances in Maine law where consumer-owned utilities are exempt from 
requirements imposed on investor-owned utilities – including the process of setting utility rates, 
financing, and the disposition of property. We believe intervenor funding is another instance where local 
governance makes ratepayer funding of intervenors unnecessary and inappropriate. For this reason, we 
ask the Legislature to exempt consumer-owned water utilities from the intervenor funding statute. 
 
  
Letter from MWUA re LD 395 
March 7, 2023 
Page 3 
Conclusion.  For the reasons noted above, MWUA urges the Committee to not only prohibit the 
expansion of entities receiving PUC funding to intervene/participate, but also to exempt consumer-owned 
water utilities from 35-A MRSA §1310-A.  
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
 
 
 
Roger Crouse, 
Legislative Committee Chair, Maine Water Utilities Association 
General Manager, Kennebec Water District 
 
cc:  Bruce Berger, Executive Director (MWUA) 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel 
  
 
 
  
15 University Drive 
Augusta, Maine 04330 
207-623-9511 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 2, 2022 
 
Harry Lanphear, Administrative Director 
Maine Public Utilities Commission 
State House Station #18 
Augusta, Maine 04333-0018 
 
Submitted via Maine Public Utilities Commission’s Case Management System 
 
Re: Comments on Docket No. 2022-00299 Notice of Rulemaking (Chapter 840) 
 
Dear Mr. Lanphear: 
 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the notice of 
rulemaking regarding the Intervenor Funding Rule (Chapter 840).  MWUA was formed in 1925 and currently represents 
109 water utilities across the State of Maine.  
 
As indicated in the comments we provided during the notice of inquiry phase (2022-180), consumer-owned water 
utilities should be exempt from any requirement to fund intervenors either directly or through the Commission's 
regulatory fund. Such a finding is also consistent with Maine’s intervenor funding provision, 35-A MRSA §1310-A(2), 
which provision gives the Commission full discretion over whether to utilize the Commission’s regulatory fund or assess 
a utility directly for intervenor funding. 
 
We appreciate the proposed language does not cite filing fees or utility payments from consumer-owned water utilities 
to fund intervenors.  However, the proposed rule indicates the Commission can use the regulatory fund to fund 
intervenors.  The regulatory fund is a collection of assessments from consumer owned utilities so, although the 
individual utility may not fully fund the intervenor, all utilities will fund a portion of the intervenor costs.  Therefore, we 
request a complete exemption for consumer-owned water utilities.   
 
Consumer-owned water utilities exist to serve the public and are governed by locally elected or appointed officials.  
Local citizens and business can affect change on a local level through the local governmental bodies.  A State agency 
funding an outside body to intervene in a local governmental matter related to utility rates or operations should be no 
more acceptable than a State agency funding a political action committee.  
 
Please contact me at (207)623-9511 or at bberger@mwua.org if you have any questions. 
 
Sincerely, 
Bruce Berger 
Executive Director 
 
 
 
