For a thriving New England 
CLF Maine S3 Exvzhanqe Street, Sum 200 
Portland, ME 011101 
P: 207.210.6439 
7 F: 207.221.1240 
www.clf.org 
Conservation 
Law Foundation 
Testimony before the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
LD 395 - An Act to Expand Funding Sources Within the Public Utilities Commission for 
Intervenor Funding 
March 2, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology, my name is Sean Mahoney and I am Senior Counsel and Director of 
Conservation Law F oundation ’s (CLF) Maine Advocacy Center. I appreciate this opportunity to 
testify in support of LD 395, An Act to Expand Funding Sources Within the Public Utilities 
Commission for Intervenor Funding. 
CLF, founded in 1966, is a public interest advocacy group that works to solve the environmental 
challenges threatening the people, natural resources and connnunities in Maine and across New 
England. In Maine for almost four decades, ‘ CLF is a member~suppo1ted organization that works 
to ensure that laws and policies are developed, implemented and enforced that protect and restore 
our natural resources; are good for Maine’s economy and environment; and equitably address the 
climate crisis. 
CLF supports LD 395 because it would allow administrative penalties to go toward the Public 
Utilities Commission ’s newly expanded intervenor and participant funding program, thereby 
increasing available funding. CLF strongly supports that program for increasing access to 
Commission proceedings amongst Mainers that would otherwise be shut out of the agency’s far- 
reaching decision-making. As such, we support this effort to increase available funding. 
The Public Utilities Commission regularly issues determinations impacting all Mainers. And the 
import of this state agency is only increasing as it plays a significant role in shaping the state’s 
climate and economic future. The Commission regularly dispenses decisions about clean energy 
generation and transmission, grid modernization and resilience, energy efficiency, and beneficial 
electriﬁcation. 
Despite the consequence of Commission decision-making, to many Mainers these processes 
remain somewhat of a black box—the procedures are often complicated, and the subject matter 
is invariably technical and esoteric, requiring specific expertise. In fact, those who are most 
impacted by Commission decisions align with those least resourced to participate: low- and 
moderate-income households in Maine shoulder a vastly outsized energy burden.‘ 
' 
Synapse Energy Economics, Inc., Maine Low-Income Home Energy Burden Study, Prepared for Maine Office of 
the Public Advocate (June 3, 2019) at 14 (“Maine households with incomes below 150 percent of the FPG have an 
average in-home energy burden of 19 percent. In comparison, the average energy burden for all households in the 
state is 6 percent”).
For a thriving New England 
5 CLF Maine 5I3Ex:."iiar1Qe ':Ktreet. Suite 200 
Portland, ME£mit1'i 
#1‘ P: 20 7. 2 i o.z>4:;<> 
{Fm F: 207.221.1240 
. a - 
. rr. 
Conservation WWW mg 
Law Foundation 
The Legislature took a step to rectify that by enactment of P.L. 2021, ch. 736, An Act To 
Implement Recommendations Regarding the Incorporation of Equity Considerations in 
Regulatory Decision Making, directing the Commission to broaden its intervenor funding 
program. The program aims to expand access to Commission proceedings by reducing monetary 
barriers to participation. CLF strongly supports the program because underrepresented and 
underserved Mainers must have a seat at the table to help distribute energy burdens and benefits 
more equitably? 
While the Commission does not yet know what impacts the program expansion will have on 
participation, and therefore what the funding needs will be, they are likely to be significant. 
Enabling meaningful participation will entail covering costs of attomeys and expert witnesses, 
among other costs. Running out of financing early in the program could have a chilling effect on 
future participation. As such, We support LD 395, which expands the pool of funds from which 
the Commission may draw intervenor and participant funding. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 395. 
2 See, e.g., Maine Climate Council Equity Subcommittee, Draft Final Recommendations (Jan. 2023).
