 
 
March 2, 202 3 
 
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
c/o Office of Fiscal and Program Review  
5 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
 
RE:  Support of LD 395, An Act to Expand Funding Sources Within The Public 
Utilities Commission for Intervenor Funding  
 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler , and other members of the Committee,  
 
My name is Steve Clemmer, Director of Energy Research in the Union of Concerned 
Scientists (UCS) Climate and Energy Program. UCS is the nation’s leading science based 
non-profit organization with more than a half a million supporters, including more than 2 ,500 
in Maine.  I offer this testimony in support of LD 395.   
 
In addition to testif ying in support of LD 2018  last year , I participated in the  subsequent  
Maine Public Utilities Commission ( PUC ) proceeding to amend the intervenor funding rule, 
submitt ing joint comments with other environmental, community -based, and youth groups.  
Expand ing and diversify ing the funding sources for intervenor funding  will help ensure that 
sufficient funding is available to allow for greater participation from environmental justice  
groups and disadvantaged  communities in a wide  range of PUC proceedings . 
 
By adding  administrative penalties as a potential source of funding , LD 395  would help meet 
one of the guiding principles for elevating underrepresented voices in Commission decision  
making highlighted in our  July 2022  joint comments to the PUC : 
 
Adequacy : Funding for intervenor compensation must be adequate to ensure an  
opportunity for a wide range of voices and participation by all parties that are 
impacted by  Commission action. Arbitrary limits on funding awards should be 
avoided, particularly given the  significant complexity and potential impact o f 
Commission actions. Further, an assessment of  whether funding is adequate to meet 
the funding needs of prospective qualifying intervenors  should be included in regular 
reporting to the legislature.  
 
Enhanced  participation and contribution of more diverse  perspectives will result in better 
decisions,  improving services for al l. We also believe  that more robust processes and upfront 
opportunities for engagement may lead to greater public support and buy -in to the results, 
thereby obviating or reducing the need for subsequent challenges to agency decisions and 
reducing regulatory risk.  
 
 
 We also strongly support the PUC’s proposed amendment clarif ying that intervenor funding 
is available to participants in all  PUC  proceedings and is not limited t o just those participating 
in an  adjudicatory proceeding . These changes are consistent with our joint comments to the 
PUC and the final amended rule issued by the PUC in late January.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify  in support of LD 3 95. 
