1
Date: March 11, 2023[Testimony 5G Technology Bill-AMM.docx]
To:  Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and  
Technology (EUT)
From: Dr. Albert M. Manville, II; Certified Wildlife Biologist; 
Retired Supervisory/Senior Wildlife Biologist, Div. 
Migratory Bird Management, USFWS (17 yrs); Senior 
Lecturer and Adjunct Professor, Advanced Academic 
Programs, Johns Hopkins Univ. (23 yrs); Greenville 
Jct., ME 04442 residence
Re: Testimony on LD 697 — Resolve, to Study the Effects of 
5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations and 
the Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children
Sen. Lawrence, Rep. Zeigler, and Members of the EUT Committee.  Thank you for the opportunity to 
provide my brief written testimony regarding LD 697 which I submit for the administrative record.  
I am Albert M. Manville, Ph.D., a Certified Wildlife Biologist (by The Wildlife Society), and a full-time 
resident of Maine.  I served for 17 years as a Branch Chief and then Senior Wildlife Biologist for the 
Division of Migratory Bird Management, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, HQ Office, retiring in 2014.  I 
was my agency’s national lead on all structural things impacting migratory birds.  This included radiation 
from cellular and other broadcast towers, so-called “smart” technology devices, and related sources of 
non-thermal, radio frequency radiation (RFR) impacting birds and other wildlife.  I also continue to teach 
part-time as a Senior Lecturer and Adjunct Professor for the Advanced Academic Programs, Johns 
Hopkins University, including teaching graduate field classes (one in Maine) with a section on impacts to 
wildlife from structural collisions, electrocutions, and electromagnetic frequencies (EMF).  Until recently 
I ran a wildlife consulting LLC, addressing impacts from cellular tower bird collisions and radiation.  I 
have published extensively on tower collision and radiation issues and concerns, among numerous other 
issues.   
We are subjecting ourselves and all other living organisms — i.e., plants and animals, including the 
myriad species of wildlife, inclusive of birds, bees and beneficial insects — to this electro-smog.  It 
impacts us 24/7.  EMF now needs to be classified as an environmental pollutant and addressed 
accordingly.  LD 697 will begin to deal with one aspect of this radiation — the growing threats from 
radiation frequencies of the millimeter wavelengths, the so-called 5G technology.  Maine residents 
deserve to receive the most current and best available scientific information, recommendations for 
addressing best management practices to deal with effects of non-thermal radiation, and current facts 
about this 5G technology — not the industry hype presented ad nauseum in advertising on the radio, 
television, and electronic media.  Some of Maine’s residents, including my wife and I, are sensitive to 
EMF and need to know causes and consequences from the effects of this non-thermal radiation, and how 
best to address them.  LD 697 could clearly help.
I’ve had the distinct pleasure of co-authoring a 3-part, peer-reviewed scientific paper published in 2021 in 
Reviews in Environmental Health  (Levitt et al. 2021, with the cites and links referenced at the end of this 
testimony) on “The effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic fields on flora and fauna.”  It represents to 
date the most comprehensive review of some 1,000 peer-reviewed scientific papers assessing impacts 
from non-thermal, non-ionizing radiation on plants and animals, including research conducted by Ms. 
Levitt, Dr. Lai and myself.  We evaluated 5G in detail in our paper, although we have much to learn about 
2
likely impacts.  In 2022, I co-authored a prospectus review in Frontiers in Public Health on an ecosystem 
approach to radiation impacts to plants and animals (Levitt et al. 2022; cite attached).  I also am senior 
author of a paper on the pros and cons of using radio tracking devices on/in wildlife, currently submitted 
for publication but not yet accepted.   
I am testifying in favor of LD 697, as amended, and recommend it be further amended to appoint an 
independent commission to oversee the proposed study and ideally help release subsequent, follow-up 
information about the results to the public.  The model for establishing a commission regarding 5G has 
already been implemented in New Hampshire.  To be clear, LD 697 must stipulate that all commission 
members have no vested interest in the study outcomes, be willing to present the current and best 
scientific facts, be willing to challenge and call out misinformation when it arises, and have no ties 
financially and/or professionally to the telecommunications industry or its consultants.  Otherwise, any 
recommendations and/or study outcomes could be biased.  A voluntary independent commission to 
oversee the study and provide outreach would be preferable and more cost effective than what was 
proposed in the original language of the bill.
Lin et al. (2023; doi: 10.1016/j.coesh.2023.100456) just published a study on “Exposures to radio-frequency 
electromagnetic fields and their impacts on children's health – What the science knows?”, in Current 
Opinion in Environmental Science and Health.  The authors systematically reviewed epidemiological 
studies, and briefly reviewed the experimental animal or mechanistic studies used to evaluate the 
evidence for possible adverse non-thermal health effects on children. They used a search strategy and 
risk-of-bias assessment, summarizing existing data on cancer, birth outcome, neurocognitive 
development, and behavioral problems.  Their conclusion:  there was no sufficient evidence to determine 
adverse effects.  However, this meta-review did not include adverse impacts from 5G which have yet to 
be determined let alone evaluated in children as well as in wildlife. Moreover, they did acknowledge that 
recent large-scale animal studies — such as what we reference in Levitt et al. 2021 — have shown 
carcinogenic findings, but the biological mechanisms have yet to be explained and/or are poorly 
understood.  Lin et al. (2023) concluded that a well-designed, future study is needed to produce high-
quality scientific evidence of the possible harmful effects of RFR exposure in children.  I strongly concur 
but would suggest that a study on non-thermal effects must also include impacts to birds, bees and other 
beneficial insects — as LD 697 would do.  With 5G now being implemented, LD 697 could provide 
additional opportunities to evaluate these potential non-thermal impacts of RFR exposure on children as 
well as to wildlife.  To be clear, it would be unethical to actually perform a study of thermal effects on 
humans and wildlife. 
However, most effects from EMF, including 5G, are likely to be non-thermal, with extremely low levels 
of radiation causing such aberrations as DNA strand breaks, and effects to DNA repair mechanisms, not 
as a result of heat stress (thermal effects).  We’re witnessing biological effects seen broadly across all 
taxa, including at frequencies of vanishingly low intensities.  Currently, the Federal Communication 
Commission’s (FCC) RFR standards are more than 35 years out of date, still based on thermal heating — 
inapplicable today due to the incredibly low levels of energy causing negative impacts to plants, animals 
— including us — and other organisms.  FCC was sued by the Environmental Health Trust et al. in 2020; 
FCC lost.  Yet the Commission has yet to justify their RF standards, to date failing to respond to some 
1,800 peer-review studies showing harm from radiation imposed on plants and animals, including 
humans.  5G is particularly of concern to children, fetuses, plants, insects, and small birds such as 
hummingbirds and small songbirds many which are summer residents here in Maine.  Bees and monarch 
butterflies, among others, are already in trouble here in Maine and elsewhere.  These millimeter 
wavelengths resonate with animal and plant tissues particularly of these smaller organisms whose sizes 
are comparable in size to the millimeter frequency lengths.  Birds have hollow feathers which have 
piezoelectric properties, allowing millimeter waves to penetrate deep into bird body cavities, disrupting 
crucial biological functioning.   
3
I’ve published several research study protocols on assessing impacts from communication tower bird 
collisions while I worked for USFWS which could be used to evaluate impacts from radiation, with some 
modifications.  A detailed literature review of all published 5G and other radiation studies affecting 
humans and wildlife should also be a part of the commission’s assessments and work load.
5G is extremely complex, with signaling characteristics not well studied nor understood.  To add to the 
complexity, there has been no required environmental review of 5G under the National Environmental 
Policy Act (NEPA) by the FCC before its rollout, specifically requiring an Environmental Impact 
Statement (EIS).  What the public does not realize:  5G will require millions of “small cell” antennas 
placed very close together — by some estimates on the roof tops of every 2-5 houses or on the street poles 
in front of our homes  — to provide ubiquitous coverage.  These radiation waves are easily attenuated and 
diffracted by structures requiring huge numbers of antennas.  We’ll see this technology in our rural 
communities as well.
In summary, the timing for LD 697 is excellent, and urgent.  Maine residents need to know that our 
Legislature is trying to address a growing radiation and ecological problem, based on the existing 
evidence with some potentially frightening consequences.  Please “vote out to pass as amended.”  Thank 
you.
Respectfully submitted.   
Links to EMF and Wildlife papers 2021
Levitt BB, Lai HC, Manville AM.  Effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic fields on flora and 
fauna, part 1. Rising ambient EMF levels in the environment.  Rev Environ Health. 
37(1):81-122, 2021. (open access:  DOI: 10.1515/reveh-2021-0026  )
Levitt BB, Lai HC, Manville AM. Effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic fields on flora and 
fauna, Part 2 impacts: how species interact with natural and man-made EMF. Rev Environ 
Health. 37(3):327-406, 2021. (open access: DOI: 10.1515/reveh-2021-0050 )
Levitt BB, Lai HC, Manville AM. Effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic fields on flora and 
fauna, Part 3. Exposure standards, public policy, laws, and future directions.  Rev Environ 
Health. 37(4):531-558, 2021. doi: 10.1515/reveh-2021-0083. Print 2022 Dec 16.
       Links to 2022 papers:
Henry Lai & B. Blake Levitt (2022) The roles of intensity, exposure duration, and 
modulation on the biological effects of radiofrequency radiation and exposure guidelines, 
Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine, 41:2, 230-255, DOI: 
10.1080/15368378.2022.2065683
Levitt BB, Lai HC and Manville AM II (2022) Low-level EMF effects on wildlife and 
plants: What research tells us about an ecosystem approach. Front. Public Health, 25 
November 2022 Sec. Radiation and Health (open access: 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1000840 )
Albert Manville
Greenville Junction
LD 697
Date: March 11, 2023
To:  Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and       Technology (EUT)
From: Dr. Albert M. Manville, II; Certified Wildlife Biologist;     Retired Supervisory/Senior Wildlife
Biologist, Div.      Migratory Bird Management, USFWS (17 yrs); Senior      Lecturer and Adjunct 
Professor, Advanced Academic      Programs, Johns Hopkins Univ. (23 yrs); Greenville Jct., ME 
04442    residence
Re: Testimony on LD 697 — Resolve, to Study the Effects of     5G Technology on Bird, Bee 
and Insect Populations and      the Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children
Sen. Lawrence, Rep. Zeigler, and Members of the EUT Committee.  Thank you for 
the opportunity to provide my brief written testimony regarding LD 697 which I 
submit for the administrative record.  
I am Albert M. Manville, Ph.D., a Certified Wildlife Biologist (by The Wildlife 
Society), and a full-time resident of Maine.  I served for 17 years as a Branch Chief 
and then Senior Wildlife Biologist for the Division of Migratory Bird Management, 
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, HQ Office, retiring in 2014.  I was my agency’s 
national lead on all structural things impacting migratory birds.  This included 
radiation from cellular and other broadcast towers, so-called “smart” technology 
devices, and related sources of non-thermal, radio frequency radiation (RFR) 
impacting birds and other wildlife.  I also continue to teach part-time as a Senior 
Lecturer and Adjunct Professor for the Advanced Academic Programs, Johns Hopkins
University, including teaching graduate field classes (one in Maine) with a section on 
impacts to wildlife from structural collisions, electrocutions, and electromagnetic 
frequencies (EMF).  Until recently I ran a wildlife consulting LLC, addressing 
impacts from cellular tower bird collisions and radiation.  I have published 
extensively on tower collision and radiation issues and concerns, among numerous 
other issues.   
We are subjecting ourselves and all other living organisms — i.e., plants and animals,
including the myriad species of wildlife, inclusive of birds, bees and beneficial insects
— to this electro-smog.  It impacts us 24/7.  EMF now needs to be classified as an 
environmental pollutant and addressed accordingly.  LD 697 will begin to deal with 
one aspect of this radiation — the growing threats from radiation frequencies of the 
millimeter wavelengths, the so-called 5G technology.  Maine residents deserve to 
receive the most current and best available scientific information, recommendations 
for addressing best management practices to deal with effects of non-thermal 
radiation, and current facts about this 5G technology — not the industry hype 
presented ad nauseum in advertising on the radio, television, and electronic media.  
Some of Maine’s residents, including my wife and I, are sensitive to EMF and need to
know causes and consequences from the effects of this non-thermal radiation, and 
how best to address them.  LD 697 could clearly help.
I’ve had the distinct pleasure of co-authoring a 3-part, peer-reviewed scientific paper 
published in 2021 in Reviews in Environmental Health  (Levitt et al. 2021, with the 
cites and links referenced at the end of this testimony) on “The effects of non-ionizing
electromagnetic fields on flora and fauna.”  It represents to date the most 
comprehensive review of some 1,000 peer-reviewed scientific papers assessing 
impacts from non-thermal, non-ionizing radiation on plants and animals, including 
research conducted by Ms. Levitt, Dr. Lai and myself.  We evaluated 5G in detail in 
our paper, although we have much to learn about likely impacts.  In 2022, I 
co-authored a prospectus review in Frontiers in Public Health on an ecosystem 
approach to radiation impacts to plants and animals (Levitt et al. 2022; cite attached). 
I also am senior author of a paper on the pros and cons of using radio tracking devices
on/in wildlife, currently submitted for publication but not yet accepted.   
I am testifying in favor of LD 697, as amended, and recommend it be further amended
to appoint an independent commission to oversee the proposed study and ideally help 
release subsequent, follow-up information about the results to the public.  The model 
for establishing a commission regarding 5G has already been implemented in New 
Hampshire.  To be clear, LD 697 must stipulate that all commission members have no
vested interest in the study outcomes, be willing to present the current and best 
scientific facts, be willing to challenge and call out misinformation when it arises, and
have no ties financially and/or professionally to the telecommunications industry or 
its consultants.  Otherwise, any recommendations and/or study outcomes could be 
biased.  A voluntary independent commission to oversee the study and provide 
outreach would be preferable and more cost effective than what was proposed in the 
original language of the bill.
Lin et al. (2023; doi: 10.1016/j.coesh.2023.100456) just published a study on 
“Exposures to radio-frequency electromagnetic fields and their impacts on children's 
health – What the science knows?”, in Current Opinion in Environmental Science and
Health.  The authors systematically reviewed epidemiological studies, and briefly 
reviewed the experimental animal or mechanistic studies used to evaluate the 
evidence for possible adverse non-thermal health effects on children. They used a 
search strategy and risk-of-bias assessment, summarizing existing data on cancer, 
birth outcome, neurocognitive development, and behavioral problems.  Their 
conclusion:  there was no sufficient evidence to determine adverse effects.  However, 
this meta-review did not include adverse impacts from 5G which have yet to be 
determined let alone evaluated in children as well as in wildlife. Moreover, they did 
acknowledge that recent large-scale animal studies — such as what we reference in 
Levitt et al. 2021 — have shown carcinogenic findings, but the biological 
mechanisms have yet to be explained and/or are poorly understood.  Lin et al. (2023) 
concluded that a well-designed, future study is needed to produce high-quality 
scientific evidence of the possible harmful effects of RFR exposure in children.  I 
strongly concur but would suggest that a study on non-thermal effects must also 
include impacts to birds, bees and other beneficial insects — as LD 697 would do.  
With 5G now being implemented, LD 697 could provide additional opportunities to 
evaluate these potential non-thermal impacts of RFR exposure on children as well as 
to wildlife.  To be clear, it would be unethical to actually perform a study of thermal 
effects on humans and wildlife. 
However, most effects from EMF, including 5G, are likely to be non-thermal, with 
extremely low levels of radiation causing such aberrations as DNA strand breaks, and 
effects to DNA repair mechanisms, not as a result of heat stress (thermal effects).  
We’re witnessing biological effects seen broadly across all taxa, including at 
frequencies of vanishingly low intensities.  Currently, the Federal Communication 
Commission’s (FCC) RFR standards are more than 35 years out of date, still based on
thermal heating — inapplicable today due to the incredibly low levels of energy 
causing negative impacts to plants, animals — including us — and other organisms.  
FCC was sued by the Environmental Health Trust et al. in 2020; FCC lost.  Yet the 
Commission has yet to justify their RF standards, to date failing to respond to some 
1,800 peer-review studies showing harm from radiation imposed on plants and 
animals, including humans.  5G is particularly of concern to children, fetuses, plants, 
insects, and small birds such as hummingbirds and small songbirds many which are 
summer residents here in Maine.  Bees and monarch butterflies, among others, are 
already in trouble here in Maine and elsewhere.  These millimeter wavelengths 
resonate with animal and plant tissues particularly of these smaller organisms whose 
sizes are comparable in size to the millimeter frequency lengths.  Birds have hollow 
feathers which have piezoelectric properties, allowing millimeter waves to penetrate 
deep into bird body cavities, disrupting crucial biological functioning.   
I’ve published several research study protocols on assessing impacts from 
communication tower bird collisions while I worked for USFWS which could be used
to evaluate impacts from radiation, with some modifications.  A detailed literature 
review of all published 5G and other radiation studies affecting humans and wildlife 
should also be a part of the commission’s assessments and work load.
5G is extremely complex, with signaling characteristics not well studied nor 
understood.  To add to the complexity, there has been no required environmental 
review of 5G under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) by the FCC 
before its rollout, specifically requiring an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).  
What the public does not realize:  5G will require millions of “small cell” antennas 
placed very close together — by some estimates on the roof tops of every 2-5 houses 
or on the street poles in front of our homes  — to provide ubiquitous coverage.  These
radiation waves are easily attenuated and diffracted by structures requiring huge 
numbers of antennas.  We’ll see this technology in our rural communities as well.
In summary, the timing for LD 697 is excellent, and urgent.  Maine residents need to 
know that our Legislature is trying to address a growing radiation and ecological 
problem, based on the existing evidence with some potentially frightening 
consequences.  Please “vote out to pass as amended.”  Thank you.
Respectfully submitted.   
Links to EMF and Wildlife papers 2021
Levitt BB, Lai HC, Manville AM. Effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic fields on flora and 
fauna, part 1. Rising ambient EMF levels in the environment.  Rev Environ Health. 
37(1):81-122, 2021. (open access:  DOI: 10.1515/reveh-2021-0026  )
Levitt BB, Lai HC, Manville AM. Effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic fields on flora and 
fauna, Part 2 impacts: how species interact with natural and man-made EMF. Rev Environ 
Health. 37(3):327-406, 2021. (open access: DOI: 10.1515/reveh-2021-0050 )
Levitt BB, Lai HC, Manville AM. Effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic fields on flora and 
fauna, Part 3. Exposure standards, public policy, laws, and future directions.  Rev Environ 
Health. 37(4):531-558, 2021. doi: 10.1515/reveh-2021-0083. Print 2022 Dec 16.
       Links to 2022 papers:
Henry Lai & B. Blake Levitt (2022) The roles of intensity, exposure duration, and modulation 
on the biological effects of radiofrequency radiation and exposure guidelines, Electromagnetic
Biology and Medicine, 41:2, 230-255, DOI: 10.1080/15368378.2022.2065683
Levitt BB, Lai HC and Manville AM II (2022) Low-level EMF effects on wildlife and plants: 
What research tells us about an ecosystem approach. Front. Public Health, 25 November 
2022 Sec. Radiation and Health (open access: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1000840 )
