Ashley  Lenski
Midcoast
LD 697
Hi! My name is Ashley.  I have an Associates Degree in Liberal Arts with a 
concentration in Early Childhood and I have completed my first apprenticeship in 
Herbal Studies at the Boston Herbal School.  Since then I have continued classes from
places like the Botanic Wise community with Deb Soule's The Whole Garden or 
Christopher Hobbs Respiratory Health or Energy Body Mastery/Clearing at The Last 
Mask Center. 
When I was in high school in 2001 one of the things we were taught was that things 
like airplanes, x-rays, microwaves, and cell phones gave off certain amount of 
radiation.  The  more things you were exposed to added to your level of exposure, 
therefore increasing your risks to cancer, tumors etc.  We were taught to be aware and
add our exposure in a given year.
Before the pandemic we had no internet and no cable. When the pandemic happened 
they gave all the kids a chrome book and had them go to school online everyday.  My 
daughter who was about 9 at the time started to get headaches so bad she could not 
function.   I bought her the special glasses and within a half hour to an hour she would
get the headaches again.  Her sleep patterns changed and her anxiety was all day, 
everyday.  I would have to have her shut the computer down multiple times 
throughout the day all while trying to work.  It was a disaster.  When she went back to
school they kept the chrome book and again her anxiety was off the charts.    I didn't 
realize that they were continuing the education on the computer. When I did, I told 
them they needed to accommodate my daughter and print everything out and we gave 
her chrome book back.  It was like night and day.  I had my kid back.  It was such a 
relief!
I also wanted to communicate that I have been trying to move to Maine since around 
2018.  In October of this year our name finally came up for the Housing Foundation is
Searsport.  We visited the school and it was absolutely amazing!! They had awesome 
specials/electives and  found that they also don't use a lot of computers.  Sadly we had
to decline because the use of pesticides on the apartments.  If your at all informed 
then you also know that these pesticides disrupt the ph balance in the soil which 
disrupts the health and balance of the insects and pollinators as well. The use of 
pesticides which are chemicals also goes into your water and air. Research also shows
that pesticides contribute to a wide array of health concerns.  I have multiple herbs on 
my 4th floor patio that I use to make things sharing most with neighbors or just giving
to the community.  In November our name was called up for a place in Rockland 
Maine.  We again visited the school and it seemed awesome! They even compost! 
Unfortunately we found they use I-phones or I pads(I forget which) which is deeply 
concerning and frustrating considering if our name comes up on the list again and 
Scarlett needs to attend this school!  Belfast we had to decline our name from the 
waiting list  because of the fish farms. 
If you've ever heard of the saying "Everything is connected" then you can understand 
why Deb Soule is constantly talking about the importance of birds and bees into 
incorporating them into our lives and gardens. As earth beings we have a 
responsibility to our planet and all the beings who live on it. Our future insists on it!   
When we become engulfed into a society that keeps pulling us farther away from 
living in balance with what all our wise ancestors taught us, we not only lose 
ourselves, we put ourselves in great danger. I love Maine and I feel deeply called to it.
My wish is that Maine can be a good wise leader and that we can be happy  to live 
there someday!  Thank you for reading this.  
