Beedy Parker
Camden
LD 697
Testimony on LD697 the Resolve to Study 5G and other RFR Effects on People and Wildlife
Sen. Lawrence, Rep. Zeigler and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy,
Utilities and Technology:  
 I ask you to vote in support  of LD 697, Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on 
Bird, Bee and Insect
Populations and the Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children.
We, as humans, and all the other living forms around us,  have for decades been subjected to
rising levels of  man made EMF/ RF fields, without the benefit of adequate safety and health 
regulation, even though, as living things, our bodies depend on normal electrical and ionized  
metabolic functions  within, in order to live.  We cannot help but be affected by the increasing 
amount of artificial microwave, steadily, in bursts, in intersecting waves, in extreme swings 
and levels, at different times…) with which we  now surround ourselves.
But these fields and emissions are not adequately regulated. Only "thermal" exposures (those
that heat and "cook" the proteins in living forms) are regulated by the FCC. (the same was 
true in the past under the NRC (Nuclear Regulatory Commission)  where the regulation of low
level radioactive materials were concerned; they were not considered dangerous unless they 
"cooked" you)     And I also understand that health concerns are actually  not considered in 
hearings on the placement of cell towers and other frequency emitters ?
The FCC refuses to budge. This is called "corporate capture", where industry and marketing 
have such a strong  grip on a regulatory body, that regulation for health, safety and the 
environment cannot take place (think tobacco,  think chemical companies, mining, climate 
change even)  
In addition, we love our devices, the information transfer, we depend on them, our business 
depends on them, We call them progress, So the thought that they are unsafe is unthinkable, 
we resist, we are reluctant, socially, to push for regulation.
We need to start thinking about effects on wildlife  (metabolic, neurological, behavioral..) of 
the spreading and accelerating levels of electromagnetic frequency emissions and fields. We 
need to be particularly concerned about insect populations, which are plummeting, pollinator 
populations being essential to seeding and fruiting, and so to  most food for humans, along 
with the birds and other insect dependent species. These energetic vibrations affect insect 
life, communication and navigation, in addition to the deluge of pesticides they endure. (We 
also need to know what EMF/RF does to plant life )
This Resolve addresses exposures to insects (particularly pollinators), birds and human 
children, all of increasing concern
This Resolve could help initiate much needed independent (not industry funded) research, 
and study of existing research, and eventual adequate regulation.  We are on the cusp of 
accelerating the installation of 5 G  devices, in our communities, in our environment. things 
could get much worse. Time is of the essence
Please vote in support  of LD 697.
Thank you
Beedy Parker  Camden Maine
PS  I studied animal physiology in college, have been an environmental and food activist for 
50  years, following environmental exposures to toxics (and  the Board of Pesticide Control as
a MOFGA volunteer, for more than 20 years)
I include here a link to a study (below) and several attachments
Low-level EMF effects on wildlife and plants: What research tells us about an ecosystem 
approach 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1000840/full?&utm_source=Email_to_
authors_&utm_medium=Email&utm_content=T1_11.5e1_author&utm_campaign=Email_publi
cation&field=&journalName=Frontiers_in_Public_Health&id=1000840
