PITTSFIELD BOARD OF HEALTH
Roberta Orsi, MS, RN, CCP, Chairperson  
Kimberly Loring, PMHNP -BC ~ Steve Smith, MA ~ Brad Gordon, JD ~ Jeffrey A. Leppo, MD  
April 11, 2022  
Pittsfield Cellular Telephone Company  Pittsfield Cellular Telephone Company  
d/b/a Verizon Wireless   d/b/a Verizon Wireless  
99 East River Drive  Mark J. Esposito , Esq. 
East Hartford, CT 06108  Shatz , Schwartz & Fentin, P.C . 
Att: Attorney Ellen W. Freyman   1441 Main Street , Suite 1100  
Springfield, MA 01103  
Farley White South Street, LLC  
Att: Roger W. Altreuter , Manager  
155 Federal Street, 18th Floor  
Boston, MA 02110  
EMERGENCY ORDER  
REQUIRING THAT PITTSFIELD CELLULAR TELEPHONE COMPANY, D/B/A VERIZON 
WIRELESS, AND FARLEY WHITE SOUTH STREET, LLC, SHOW CAUSE WHY THE 
PITTSFIELD BOARD OF HEALTH SHOULD NOT ISSUE A CEASE AND DESIST ORDER 
ABATING A NUISANCE AT 877 SOUTH STREET ARISING FROM TH E OPERATION OF A 
VERIZON WIRELESS CELL TOWER THEREON AND CONSTITUTING IMMEDIATE 
ORDER OF DISCONTINUANCE AND ABATEMENT IF NO HEARING IS REQUESTED  
Pursuant to, inter alia , MGL 111 ss 122 -125, 127 -127I, 130, 143 -144, 146 -150, and State 
Sanitary Code 410.750, 410.831 -832, 410.850 -.960, the Board of Health deems the following actions 
necessary to protect the public health in the City of Pittsfield, State of Massachusetts.  
Whereas , Verizon Wireless has constructed and operates a wireless telecommunicatio ns facility, 
a cell tower (the “facility”), located at 877 South Street, Pittsfield, Massachusetts, on property Verizon 
Wireless leases from owner Farley White South Street LLC.  The Verizon Wireless facility was activated 
in August, 2020, and has been ope rating continuously since that date.  
Whereas , soon after the facility was activated and began transmitting, the City started to receive  
reports of illness and negative health symptoms from residents living nearby the facility, and in particular, 
from resid ents living in the so -called “Shacktown” neighborhood. The negative health symptoms the 
affected residents have reported include complaints of headaches, sleep problems, heart palpitations, 
tinnitus (ringing in the ears), dizziness, nausea, skin rashes, and memory and cognitive problems, among 
other medical complaints.  
Whereas , as further documented below, the neurological and dermatological symptoms 
experienced by the residents are consistent with those described in the peer -reviewed scientific and 
medical  literature as being associated with exposure to pulsed and modulated Radio Frequency (“RF”) 
radiation, including RF from cell towers.  
Whereas , those symptoms are sometimes referenced in the scientific and medical literature as 
electromagnetic sensitivity, also known as Electro -Hypersensitivity (“EHS”), Microwave Sickness, or 
Radiation Sickness. All these names describe a syndrome where the affl icted develop one or more 
2 
 recognized symptoms as a result of pulsed and modulated RF radiation (“RFR”). EHS is a spectrum 
condition.  For some, the symptoms can become debilitating, and severely affect their ability to function.  
Whereas , the federal governm ent has officially recognized this syndrome in various ways. For 
example, in 2002, the “Access Board,” an independent federal agency responsible for publishing 
Accessibility Guidelines used by the U.S. Department of Justice to enforce the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (“ADA”), recognized that “electromagnetic sensitivities may be considered disabilities 
under the ADA.”1 The Access Board contracted for the publication of the National Institute of Building 
Sciences 2005 report, which concludes that radiofr equency/electromagnetic frequency (RF/EMF) 
radiation is an “access barrier,” and can render buildings “inaccessible” to those with electromagnetic 
sensitivity.  The report recommends accessibility guidelines.2  For ADA Title I purposes, the U.S. 
Departmen t of Labor’s Office of Disability Employment Policy has issued guidelines for 
accommodations; these guidelines emphasize exposure avoidance and list as a resource, the EMF Medical 
Conference 2021 which trains medical doctors on the issue of electromagnetic  radiation and health.3 4 
Whereas , The Centers for Disease Control’s 2022 Classification of Diseases Codes Clinical 
Modification and Procedural Classification System implements the International Classification of 
Diseases, 10th Revision, Clinical Modific ation (ICD -10-CM). The “diagnosis code” for Radiation 
Sickness” is “T66.”5 The “injury” code for “Exposure to Other Nonionizing Radiation” is “W90.”6 These 
codes cover electro -sensitivity along with other RF exposure -related injuries and maladies.  
Where as, the Health Board does not administer disability laws, but the foregoing authority 
strongly confirms that RF/EMF – even if emitted at levels within the FCC emissions guidelines – can be 
injurious to health or cause common injury to that significant port ion of the public who are 
electromagnetic sensitive. Stated differently, pulsed and modulated RF can constitute a “public nuisance” 
or a “cause of sickness ,” and can constitute a trade which may result in a nuisance or be dangerous to the 
public health for  purposes of G.L. ch. 111 ss 122 -125, 127B, 127C, 143 -150, and 152.  
Whereas , the federal government’s recognition that pulsed RF can directly cause harm to at least 
certain individuals or create an access barrier means that for the purposes of Massachusett s law, RF/EMF 
may effectively render certain dwellings Unfit for Human Habitation or constitute a Condition Which 
May Endanger or Materially Impair the Health or Safety and Well -Being of an Occupant as defined in 
State Sanitary Code 410.020 and 410.750(P).  
Whereas , Verizon Wireless  877 South Street  wireless facility  is not itself a dwelling unit, but the 
Sanitary Code and other Massachusetts law allow the Health Board to act as necessary to ensure that 
 
1 U.S. Access Board. (n.d.). Indoor Environmental Quality . U.S. Access Board - Introduction. Retrieved March 31, 2022, from  
https://www.access -board.gov/research/building/indoor -environmental -quality/ . 
2 IEQ Indoor Environmental Quality Project  (IEQ) . (n.d.). National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS), The Architectural  and 
Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (Access Board).  https://www.access -board.gov/files/res earch/IEQ -Report.pdf . 
3 U.S. Department of Labor Office of Disability Employment Policy Accommodations Webpage ;  Job Accommodation Network: 
Accommodation and Compliance: Electrical Sensitivity  and Accommodation and Compliance Series: Employees with Electrical 
Sensitivity Publication Downloads . 
4 EMF – Medical Confer ence 2021  Continuing Medical Education for physicians and health professionals. Several experts who 
presented to the Board and provided information also presented at the EMF Medical  conference including Sharon Goldberg MD, 
Magda Havas PhD, Paul Héroux, Ph D, Cindy Russsell MD, Sheena Symington, B.Sc., M.A., Cecelia Doucette, and Theodora 
Scarato, MSW.  
5 2022 ICD -10-CM Diagnosis Code T66: Radiation sickness, unspecified . (n.d.). Retrieved March 31, 2022, from  
https://www.icd10data.com/ICD10CM/Codes/S00 -T88/T66 -T78/T66 -/T66. 
6 W90—ICD-10 Code for Exposure to other nonionizing radiation —Non-billable . (n.d.). ICD -10 Data and Code Lookup. 
Retrieved March 31, 2022, from  https://icd10coded.com/cm/W90/ . 
3 
 activity or operations in a non -dwelling building, stru cture, or facility do not contribute to conditions that 
impact occupants of a dwelling to the point they render a dwelling unfit for habitation for purposes of 
Sanitary Code 410.831.  
Whereas , the Health Board has been presented with credible, independent, and peer -reviewed 
scientific and medical studies and reports that provide convincing evidence that pulsed and modulated 
RFR is bio -active and affects all living things over the long term.  RFR can and does also cause more 
immediate harm and injury to human  beings. The Health Board has also received strong evidence that the 
Verizon Wireless 877 South Street  wireless facility  is presently causing such harm and injury to 
numerous residents in the adjacent neighborhood.  
Whereas , City of Pittsfield residents ha ve submitted to the Health Board over 11,000 pages of 
evidence of studies, reports, and scientific and medical experts’ opinion about the dangers to human 
health and the environment caused by exposure to wireless radiation.7 The Health Board also has heard 
testimony from medical professionals who directly treat patients injured by RF/EMF as well as testimony 
from scientific experts. The Board has been  presented with personal testimony from many of the City of 
Pittsfield  residents  who have been personally h armed by pulsed and modulated RF radiation transmitted 
from the Verizon Wireless 877 South Street wireless facility’s operations. Specifically, but without 
limitation, the Health Board bases its conclusions , findings,  and actions on all the scientific, med ical, and 
personal evidence that has been submitted , but provides this general summary:  
1.  The evidence presented to the Board includes well over one thousand peer -reviewed 
scientific and medical studies which consistently find that pulsed and modulated RFR has bio -
effects and can lead to short - and long -term adverse health effects in humans, e ither directly or by 
aggravating other existing medical conditions. Credible, independent peer -reviewed scientific and 
medical studies show profoundly deleterious effects on human health, including but not limited 
to: neurological and dermatological effect s; increased risk of cancer and brain tumors; DNA 
damage; oxidative stress; immune dysfunction; cognitive processing effects; altered brain 
development, sleep and memory disturbances, ADHD, abnormal behavior, sperm dysfunction, 
and damage to the blood -brain barrier.8  
2. Peer-reviewed studies have demonstrated that pulsed and modulated RFR can cause the 
symptoms suffered by and personally attested to by City of Pittsfield’s residents, including 
studies showing that these symptoms can develop as a result of  exposure to cell towers 
specifically.  
3. The symptoms described by City of Pittsfield’s residents are often referred to in the 
scientific and medic al literature as “ele ctrosensitivity.” The record evidence shows that exposure 
to pulsed and modulated RFR within the emission limits authorized by the FCC can cause the 
 
7 Environmental Health Trust et al. v. FCC Key Documents   Volume 1 , Volume 3 , Volume , Volume 5 , Volume 6 , Volume 7 , 
Volume 8 , Volume 9, Volume 10 , Volume 11 , Volume 12 , Volume 13 , Volume 14 , Volume 15 , Volume 16 , Volume 17 ,  
Volume 18 , Volume 19 , Volume 20 , Volume 21 , Volume 22 ,  Volume 23 , Volume 24:  Volume 25 , Volume 26 , Volume 27  
https://ehtrust.org/environmental -health -trust-et-al-v-fcc-key-documents/ . 
8 The California Medical Association Wireless Resolution . (2015, March 9). Environmental Health Trust . https://ehtrust.org/the -
california -medical -association -wireless -resolution/ ; bioadmin. (n.d.). Conclusions —BIOINITIATIVE 2012 —CONCLUSIONS 
Table 1 -1. The BioInitiative Report . Retrieved March 19, 2022, from  https://bioinitiative.org/conclusions/ ; bioadmin. (n.d.). Table 
of Contents . The BioInitiative Report . Retrieved March 19, 2022, from  https://bioinitiative.org/table -of-contents/ ; 
EMFscientist.org —International EMF Scientist Appeal . (n.d.). Retrieved March 19, 2022, from  
https: //www.emfscientist.org/index.php/emf -scientist -appeal . 
4 
 symptoms, injuries, and mechanisms of harm associated with electrosensitivity and exhibited by 
the residents near the facility.9  
4. Electrosensitivity describes a constellation of mainly neur ological symptoms that occur 
as a result of exposure to pulsed and modulated RFR. The symptoms described in the scientific 
and medical literature include headaches, sleep problems, heart palpitations, ringing in the ears, 
dizziness, nausea, skin rashes, me mory, and cognitive problems, among others. According to the 
evidence, exposure avoidance is the only effective management.  
5. There are diagnosis guidelines. The European Academy of Environmental Medicine 
(EUROPAEM) published the “ EUROPAEM EMF Guideline 2 016 for the prevention, diagnosis 
and treatment of EMF -related health problems and illnesses .”10 These peer -reviewed guidelines 
cite 235 scientific references for symptoms, physiological damage, and mechanisms of harm. 
These guidelines have been used by do ctors in the U.S. and throughout the world. Dr. Sharon 
Goldberg, MD, who diagnosed three City of Pittsfield residents with electro -sensitivity following 
their continuous exposure to the Verizon Wireless 877 South Street wireless facility, uses these 
guidel ines.  Dr. Goldberg has provided this Board with documentation and supporting 
information on the injuries  suffered by these three Shacktown residents which Dr. Goldberg has 
opined to a reasonable degree of medical certainty have been caused by their exposu re to the 
wireless radiation being emitted by this facility . 
6. The recent U.S. government reports regarding the “mystery illness” of U.S. diplomats in 
Cuba, China, Austria, and elsewhere provide further support that pulsed RF can cause injury 
similar to t hat suffered by Shacktown  residents. In December 2020, the National Academy of 
Sciences, Engineering , and Medicine (NAS) concluded11 that the diplomats’ “mystery illness” is 
likely caused by pulsed RF.  Prof. Beatrice Golomb, MD, PhD, 2018 , wrote the first  paper 
analyzing the science and show ed that pulsed RFR is the likely cause of the symptoms suffered 
by some US diplomats in Cuba and China.12  Her analysis relies on government studies as well as 
studies on commercial wireless devices and technology, and demonstrates  how the diplomats’ 
symptoms can result from pulsed RFR exposure. Dr. Golomb  concluded that the diplomats likely 
suffer from electrosensitivity (which she refers to as “Microwave Illness”). Most recently, on 
February 1, 2022, the federal govern ment published a report adopting the conclusion of the NAS , 
finding that pulsed RFR is likely the cause of the diplomats’ sickness.13 
 
9 Belyaev, I., Dean, A., Eger, H., Hubmann, G., Jandrisovits, R., Kern, M., Kundi, M., Moshammer, H., Lercher, P., Müller, K., 
Oberfeld, G., Ohnsorge, P., Pelzmann, P., Scheingraber, C., & Thill, R. (2 016). EUROPAEM EMF Guideline 2016 for the 
prevention, diagnosis and treatment of EMF -related health problems and illnesses . Reviews on Environmental Health , 31(3), 
363–397. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh -2016 -0011  ; Bray, R. (n.d.). Electromagnetic Hyp ersensitivity . 81. 
https://maisonsaine.ca/uploads/2016/09/ehs -bray-13-08-2016.pdf . 
10 Belyaev, I., Dean, A., Eger, H., Hubmann, G., Jandrisovits, R., Kern, M., Kundi, M., Mosh ammer, H., Lercher, P., Müller, K., 
Oberfeld, G., Ohnsorge, P., Pelzmann, P., Scheingraber, C., & Thill, R. (2016). EUROPAEM EMF Guideline 2016 for the 
prevention, diagnosis and treatment of EMF -related health problems and illnesses . Reviews on Environmental Health , 31(3), 
363–397. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh -2016 -0011 . 
11 National Academies of Sciences, E., and Medicine. (2020). An Assessment of Illness in U.S. Government Employees and Their 
Families at Overseas Embassies . The National Academies Press.  https://doi.org/10.17226/25889 . 
12 Golomb, B. A. (2018). Diplomats’ Mystery Illness and Pulsed Ra diofrequency/Microwave Radiation . Neural Computation , 
30(11), 2882 –2985.  https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01133 . 
13 Executive Summary  DECLASSIFIED by DNI Haines on 1 February 2022 . (2022). 
https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/2022_02_01_AHI_Executive_Summary_FINAL_Redacted.pdf . 
5 
 7. As the record shows, there is evidence of clusters of sickness around cell towers. 
Evidence filed in the Environmental Health Trust , et al. v. FCC case14 and provided to the Board 
of Health shows that California firefighters developed electrosensitivity  symptoms after a cell 
tower was installed on their stationhouse, including headaches, memory problems, sleeping 
problems, depression, and other neurological problems. SPECT brain scans found brain 
abnormalities. Additionally, TOVA testing found delayed re action time, lack of impulse control, 
and difficulty in maintaining mental focus.  Following these incidents, the International 
Association of Fire Fighters Division of Occupational Health Safety and Medicine investigated 
evidence of pulsed and modulated R F harm, and published a resolution opposing the use of fire 
stations as base stations for towers and/or antennas for the conduction of cell phone 
transmissions.15 
8. In November 2020, New Hampshire’s Commission to Study the Environmental and 
Health Effects  of Evolving 5G Technology ( the Commission was established by the State 
Legislature to learn about the health effects of 5G wireless radiation), published a report  which  
conclud es that RF emissions at levels below the FCC emissions guidelines can be harmfu l. The 
Committee’s final report followed a thorough study of the evidence. The Committee’s final report 
recommend s adoption of cell tower antenna setbacks and acknowledge s electrosensitivity and its 
association with RFR exposure.16 Dr. Kent Chamberlin, for mer Chair, Department of Computer 
and Electrical Engineering, University of New Hampshire, and Dr. Paul Heroux, PhD, Professor 
of Toxicology and Health Effects of Electromagnetism, McGill University Faculty of Medicine, 
two of the expert members of the New  Hampshire Committee, have provided testimony to the 
Pittsfield City Council about the health effects of RFR exposure, and this testimony has been 
included in the record considered by this Board.  
9. Other highly -credentialed, independent academic research experts  have  also offered 
testimony , at no cost,  in support of residents’ contentions that the Verizon Wireless 877 South 
Street wireless facility is the cause of their electrosensitivity symptoms. Experts include Dr. 
Martha Herbert, MD PhD, pediatric neur ologist and former Assistant Professor at Harvard 
Medical School , and Dr. Magda Havas PhD., Professor Emeritus, Trent School of the 
Environment, Trent University.  
10. Professor David Carpenter, MD, former Dean, School of Public Health at University of 
Alba ny, New York, wrote a letter to the City of Pittsfield in which he discussed studies showing 
that cell towers increase cancer risk, and cause changes in hormones as well as electrosensitivity 
symptoms, including headaches, fatigue, “brain fog,” and ringing  in the ears. Dr. Carpenter has 
published numerous studies on the negative health effects of electromagnetic radiation which 
have been submitted to this Board and are part of the record herein.17 Dr. Carpenter is the co -
 
14 Envtl. Health Tr., et al. v. FCC , 9 F.4th 893 (D.C. Cir. 2021).  
15 Cell Tower Radiation Health Effects . (2004). IAFF . Retrieved March 19, 2022, from  https://www.iaff.org/cell -tower -
radiation/ ; Susan Foster Ambrose, M.S.W., Medical Writer. (2004). INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIREFIGHTERS 
(IAFF) VOTES TO STUDY HEALTH EFFECTS OF CELL TOWERS ON FIRE STATIONS Call f or Moratorium on New Cell 
Towers on Fire Stations Until Health Effects Can Be Studied . Advancing Sound Public Policy on the Use of Electromagnetic 
Radiation (EMR).  https://ehtrust.org/wp -content/uploads/pr_iaff_vote -1.pdf . 
16 Final Re port of the Commission to Study The Environmental and Health Effects of Evolving 5G Technology  (HB 522, Chapter 
260, Laws of 2019, RSA 12 -K:12 –14). (2020). State of New Hampshire.  
http://www.gencourt.state.nh.us/statstudcomm/committees/1474/reports/5G%20final%20report.pdf . 
17 Bandara, P.,  & Carpenter, D. O. (2018). Planetary electromagnetic pollution: It is time to assess its impact . The Lancet. 
Planetary Health , 2(12), e512 –e514.  https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542 -5196(18)30221 -3. 
6 
 editor of the BioInitiative Report,18 a scientific review of the science on RF/EMF by independent 
expert scientists. The report reviewed approximately 2,000 published studies on RFR health 
effects.  After it was first released, the content of the Bioinitiative Report underwent peer review 
and was published in condensed form as a special two -volume issue of the Journal 
Pathophysiology.  Additional chapters have been published in various journals.19 The Report 
concludes that bio -effects from wireless technology and infrastructure, including fro m cell 
towers, occur at radiation levels significantly below the FCC’s emissions guidelines as 
documented in published research. The Report finds  that the overwhelming majority of published 
neurological studies show bio -effects.20 Over 90 percent of the st udies that examine the oxidative 
stress mechanism (a mechanism of harm associated also with electro -sensitivity) show bio -
effects.21 The Report contains cell tower  exposure  studies that show harmful effects of radiation 
emitted by cell towers, and demonstrate that exposure to pulsed RF causes hormonal and cell 
stress effects at radiation levels far, far lower than the FCC emissions guidelines.22 According to 
the 2012 Report’ s conclusion, public safety standards are 10,000 or more times higher than levels 
now commonly reported in mobile phone base station studies that reveal bio -effects. Because of 
the actual evidence of harm to humans from  exposure to wireless radiation trans missions from  
cell towers, the Report uses mobile phone base station -RFR levels studies and other studies with 
very, very low RF exposures to determine the “lowest observed effect level” for RFR exposure as 
the basis for its recommendations for biologically -based exposure guidelines.23 
11. Dr. Cindy Russell, a medical doctor and the executive director of “ Physicians for  Safe 
Technology ,”24 provided a synopsis of 28 studies showing cell tower harm in her letter to this 
Board, dated July 6, 2021, which explain s how it is “well established” that wireless radiation at 
non-thermal levels causes oxidative stress, and “oxidativ e stress plays a major part in the 
development of chronic, degenerative, and inflammatory illnesses such as cancer, autoimmune 
 
18 bioadmin. (n.d.). Table of Contents. The BioInitiative Report . Retrieved March 19, 2022, from  https://bioinitiative.org/table -
of-contents/ . 
19 Martin Blank (Ed.). (2009). Electromagnetic Fields (EMF) Special Issue . Pathophysiology , 16(2–3), CO2.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0928 -4680(09)00066 -2; Hardell, L., & Sage, C. (2008). Biological effects from electromagnetic field 
exposure and public exposure standards . Biomedicine & P harmacotherapy , 62(2), 104 –109. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2007.12.004 ; Herbert, M. R., & Sage, C. (2013). Autism and EMF?  Plausibility of a 
pathophysiological link – Part I. Pathophysiology , 20(3), 191 –209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pathophys. 2013.08.001 ; Herbert, M. 
R., & Sage, C. (2013). Autism and EMF? Plausibility of a pathophysiological link part II. Pathophysiology , 20(3), 211 –234. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pathophys.2013.08.002 . 
20 Neurological Effects Studies Percent Comparison, BioInitiative. (2022). https://bioinitiative.org/wp -
content/uploads/2020/10/13 -Neurological -Effects -Studies -Percent -Comparison -2020.pdf . 
21 Henry Lai. (n.d.). Research Summaries. The BioInitiative Report . Retrieved March 19, 2022, from  
https://bioinitiative.org/research -summaries/ ;  Neurological Effects Studies Percent Comparison, BioInitiative. (2022). 
https:/ /bioinitiative.org/wp -content/uploads/2020/10/13 -Neurological -Effects -Studies -Percent -Comparison -2020.pdf . 
22 BUCHNER K, EGER H (2011) A Long -term Study Under Real -life Conditions / Umwelt -Medizin -Gesellschaft  24(1): 44 -57. 
https://www.avaate.org/IMG/pdf/Rimbach -Study -20112.pdf . 
23 Henry Lai. (n.d.). Research Summaries. The BioInitiative Report . Retrieved March 19, 2022, from  
https://bioinitiative.org/research -summaries/ ; Neurological Effects Studies Percent Comparison, BioInitiative. (2022). 
https://bioinitiative.org/wp -content/uploads/2020/10/13 -Neurological -Effects -Studies -Percent -Comparison -2020.pdf . 
24 Physicians for Safe Technology | Cell Tower Radiation Health Effects. (2017, September 11). Physicians for Saf e Technology . 
https://mdsafetech.org/cell -tower -health -effects/ . 
7 
 disorders, aging, cataracts, rheumatoid arthritis, cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases, 
as well as some acute pathologi es (trauma, stroke). Effects of oxidative stress are cumulative.”25   
12. Devra Davis PhD, MPH, the founder of the Environmental Health Trust, sent a scientific 
letter and briefing materials to this Board, documenting the published science indicating how 
FCC limits do not ensure safety to human health, and how legal levels of wireless radiation can 
damage the health of children, pregnant women, and the medically vulnerable.   Studies of 
wireless radiation exposure from cell towers document  neuropsychiatric problems, elevated 
diabetes,  headaches,  sleep problems, and genetic damage.26 Attached to the letter were several 
published articles, including an article published in the journal Lancet Planetary Health, which 
presented an evaluation by the Oceania Radiofrequency Scientific Advisory Association  of 2266 
studies (including in -vitro and in -vivo studies in human, animal, and plant experimental systems 
and population studies).  The evaluation found that most studies ha ve demonstrated significant 
biological or health effects associated with exposure to anthropogenic electromagnetic fields.27  
Furthermore, a scientifically referenced Environmental Health Trust White Paper addressed 
common misconceptions around the health effects of wireless radiation.28 
13. These and other studies and reports in the record before this Board show that wireless 
radiation transmitted from cell towers can have adverse effects even when the pulsed and 
modulated RF emissions are significantly lo wer than the FCC’s emission guidelines. Compliance 
with FCC emission limits does not ensure safety nor protection from all harm. Published studies 
provided to the Board show negative health effects on human beings at legally allowed levels 
including: neuro logical effects and adverse effects on well -being, clear, measurable, 
physiological effects, hormonal changes, oxidative stress damage, negative effects on sperm, 
increased cancer risk, and DNA damage.29   
14. Epidemiological studies demonstrate that expos ure to wireless radiation emissions from 
cell towers causes symptoms similar to those suffered by Shacktown  residents as a result of the 
operation of the Verizon Wireless 877 South Street wireless facility. The record includes a 2010 
review of wireless rad iation exposure from cell towers and numerous other studies which are 
relevant to chronic long -term exposure similar to that from cell towers. Effects documented in 
these studies include various neurological symptoms such as fatigue, sleep problems, headac hes 
and other effects on “wellbeing” proportionate to the distance from the cell tower.30 31 32 A 
 
25 Russell, C., (2021, July 6). Cindy Russell MD to Pittsfield Board of Health. RE: Pittsfield testing o f RFR emissions . [Letter].  
26 Scarato, T., (2021, May 27). Theodora Scarato to Gina Armstrong, City of Pittsfield Board of Health ; Davis, D., et al., (2021, 
April 21). Dr. Devra Davis, et al., to the Honorable Joseph R. Biden, President/Science/Briefing.  [Letters].  
27 Priyanka Bandara, David O Ca rpenter, Planetary electromagnetic pollution: it is time to assess its impact , The Lancet 
Planetary Health, Volume 2, Issue 12, 2018, Pages e512 -e514,ISSN 254 2-5196, https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542 -5196(18)30221 -3. 
28 Myth Fact Scientific Response EHT 2022 . 
29See Appendices I and I I. 
30 Abdel -Rassoul, G., El -Fateh, O. A., Salem, M. A., Michael, A., Farahat, F., El -Batanouny, M., & Salem, E. (2007). 
Neurobehavioral effects among inhabitants around mobile phone base station s. Neurotoxicology , 28(2), 434 –440. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2006.07.012 ; Khurana, V., Hardell, L., Everaert, J., Bortkiewi cz, A., Carlberg, M., & Ahonen, M. 
(2010). Epidemiological Evidence for a Health Risk from Mobile Phone Base Sta tions . International Journal of Occupational 
and Environmental Health , 16, 263 –267. https://doi.org/10.1179/107735210799160192 . 
31 Levitt, B. B., & Lai, H. (2010). Biological effects from exposure to electromagnetic radiation emit ted by cell tower base 
stations and other antenna arrays . Environmental Reviews , 18(NA), 369 –395. https://doi.org/10.1139/A10 -018. 
32 78 Studies Showing Health Effects from Cell Tower Radio Frequen cy; Oberfeld, G., & Gustavs, K. (2007). 
Environmental Medicine Evaluation (30). 48. 
8 telecom company study found exposure to cell towers causes a variety of neurological symptoms 
and a dose response. The study also found a causal relationship with sleep disturbance. When, 
unknown to the subjects, the company secretly turned off the antennas for three days, the sleep 
quality improved in all subject groups that were studied.33  
15. Evidence of electrosensitivity and its association to pulsed and modulated RF exposure,
as well as evidence of harm to human health and the environment from exposure to wireless
radiation from cell towers was filed in the case of  Environmental Health Trust , et al., v. Federal
Communications Commission (FCC)  in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit.  The petitioners challenged the FCC’s decision in 2019 not to review and update its 1996
guidelines for wireless radiation emissions, following a multi -year proceeding to examine  the
developing science  on the health and environmental effects of exposure to wireless radiation.
The FCC determined in 2019 that its 1996 guidelines did not need to be updated.34 On appeal, the
DC Circuit court reversed the FCC, ruling in August 2021 that the FCC’s determinat ion that there
is no evidence of non -cancerous and environmental harm from RF emissions below the FCC
1996 emissions guidelines was arbitrary, capricious , and not evidence -based. The DC Circuit
court ruled that the FCC failed to explain why, despite the su bstantial evidence of harm filed in
the FCC record, the agency decided to not further review its 1996 guidelines for possible
updating.  The DC Circuit remanded the case back to the FCC, and ordered the FCC to “ address
the impacts of RF radiation on childr en, the health implications of long -term exposure to RF
radiation” as well as environmental effects, new technological developments and adequacy of RF
test procedures.  However, as of today’s date, the FCC has not provided any response to the court
order. Thus, while the 1996 FCC wireless emissions guidelines remain in effect, they have not
been updated in 26 years, and they have not been substantiated by an up -to-date scientific review
by any federal regulatory agency.  Evidence provided to this Board confirms that when it comes
to cell tower network RF emissions, there is no federal regulatory agency with health expertise
monitoring the published science, nor providing surveillance for health effects, nor measuring RF
levels in the environment.35 As is  also documented in a letter from the Environmental Protection
Agency (the “EPA”) to Theodora Scarato of Environmental Health Trust,  the EPA has not
reviewed the research on biological effects of exposure to wireless radiation since 1984.36  The
FDA has n ot reviewed the safety of environmental RF levels .  The FDA stated in a letter37 to a
family requesting information on the safety of base station antennas that : “The Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) does not regulate cell towers or cell tower radiation.  Therefore, the FDA
has no studies or information on cell towers to provide in response to your questions.” The lack of
oversight for the health effects of cell tower network radiofrequency exposure is a serious gap in
33 Cherry, N.J. (2002). Evidence of neurological effects of electromagnetic radiation: implications for degenerative disease and 
brain tumour  from residential, occupational, cell site and cell phone exposures (9) . 
34 Environmental Health Trust , et al v. FCC , 9 F. 4th 893 (D.C. Cir. 2021) . 
https://www.cadc.uscourts.gov/internet/opinions.nsf/FB976465BF00F8BD85258730004EFDF7/$file/20 -1025 -1910111.pdf . 
35
36 Myth Fact Scientific Response by Environmental Health Trust 2022, Theodora Scarato to Gina Armstrong, City of 
Pittsfield Board of Health ; Davis, D., et al., (2021, 
April 21). EPA letter is page 24  of Dr. Devra Davis, et al., to the Honorable Joseph R. Biden, President/Science/Briefing.  
[Letters].  
37 Theodora Scarato  presentation of the FDA letter in a video presentation submitted to Pittsfield Board of Health, 
Pittsfield MA Expert Forum on Cell Tower Cease -and-Desist Order , at minute 54:24, and also in Myth Fact Scientific 
Response EHT 2022 , under section “ Myth: The Food And Drug Administration (FDA) has reviewed the science on 5G and cell 
towers and determined the radiation is safe and FCC l imits protect public health.”  
9 
 federal accountability, especially wh en research documenting harmful effects continues to be 
published in respected journals.  
16. In November 2021, scientific and policy experts, including Dr. Linda Birnbaum, former 
Head of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences and National  Toxicology 
Program, Dr. Ronald Melnick, National Institute of Health scientist (now retired), Dr. Anthony 
Miller, Dr. Jerome A. Paulson, Devra Davis, PhD, and several others, sent new requests to the 
FCC calling for a full examination of the latest scient ific evidence in order for the U.S. to develop 
regulatory safety limits that protect the public and environment from wireless radiation exposure.  
Included in their filing are over 1,000 pages of reports and studies on demonstrating harm to 
humans from exp osure to RF radiation, including electrohypersensitivity, and harm to humans 
from exposure to RF radiation from cell towers specifically. The Environmental Health Trust 
filing to the FCC docket also include s letters from the Bio Initiative Report, Environme ntal 
Working Group, Consumers for Safe Cell Phones, Phonegate Alerte, and Dr. Kent Chamberlin.38  
17. The questions raised by the DC Circuit Court and the compelling scientific evidence 
submitted to this Board allows only one conclusion: pulsed and modulated RFR can and does 
cause harm , and at least a certain segment of the population can be severely harmed when 
exposed to this wireless radiation, especially for continuous periods of time. Exposure to wireless 
radiation can lead to significant tempor ary and possibly permanent injury, and according to the 
evidence, it seems that the most effective method to reduce the symptoms and mitigate the harm 
is through exposure avoidance.  
18. This Board also finds that the information and testimony provided by V erizon Wireless 
do not convince this Board otherwise. In particular, this Board invited Verizon Wireless to meet 
by Zoom in September 2021 with Board Member Brad Gordon, then -Director of Public Health 
Gina Armstrong, and then -Senior Sanitarian (now current  Director of Public Health) Andy Cambi 
to discuss the concerns of the City of Pittsfield Health Department, this Board, and residents of 
the City of Pittsfield about the wireless radiation emissions from the Verizon Wireless 877 South 
Street wireless facil ity ever since that facility was activated in August 2020.  These concerns 
arose from the complaints reported by numerous residents of the adjacent residential 
neighborhood of negative health symptoms these residents and their relatives had been and were 
continuing to suffer from what they believed to be exposure to the continuous wireless radiation 
being transmitted from that Verizon Wireless facility.  On September 9, 2021, Verizon Wireless 
appeared at the Board of Health Zoom session, represented by Veri zon General Counsel New 
England Market, attorney Joshua E. Swift, Verizon Wireless Network Engineer, Jay Latorre, 
Verizon Wireless State and Government Affairs Director, Ellen Cummings, and Dr. Eric S. 
Swanson, Professor, Department of Physics and Astronom y, University of Pittsburgh.  Professor 
Swanson was the primary spokesperson for Verizon Wireless at this meeting.   
19. Professor Swanson presented prepared remarks, accompanied by a Powerpoint slide 
presentation.  The Board did not place any time limits on Professor Swanson’s presentation, and 
Ms. Armstrong and Mr. Gordon asked Professor Swanson many questions following his remarks.  
Professor Swanson’s main points included: (a) electromagnetic radiation is the best understood 
phenomenon in the universe; it is not nuclear radiation; (b) electromagnetic waves form the 
 
38 Reassessment of Federal Communications Commission Radiofrequency Exposure Limits and Policies , (2021). ET Docket No. 
13-84, https://ecfsapi.fcc.gov/file/11302824721650/Remand%20Filing%20 -%20Nov%2030th.pdf ; Linda S. Birnbaum, PhD, et 
al. (2021, November 24). FCC Record Refresh Le tter from Scientists to The Honorable Jessica Rosenworcel, Commissioner, 
Acting Chairwoman, Federal Communications Commission . https:/ /ehtrust.org/wp -content/uploads/FCC -Record -Refresh -Letter -
from -ScientistsWireless -Radiation.pdf ; Scientific and Policy Developmen ts in Radiofrequency Radiation  (2019 - 2021), 
https://ehtrust.org/wp -content/uploads/New -Scientific -Developments -in-RFR -FCC -EHT -Remand -with-Studies -2.pdf ;  
Environmental Working Group , The Bioinit iative Report,  Consumers for Safe Cell Phones ,  New Hampshire State Commission 
on 5G .  
10 spectrum;  (c) some radiation is ionizing which can sometimes cause cancer; (d) electromagnetic 
waves below the ionization threshold cannot cause cancer; (e) only wavelengths above visible 
light on the spectrum are ionizing; (f) wavelengths in the visible light portion of the spectrum are 
non-ionizing, and cannot cause cancer; (g) wavelengths below visible light on the spectrum, 
including thermal, microwave, 5G, 4G, and radio, are non -ionizing, and cannot cause cancer; (h) 
the only verified biological effect on tissue of non -ionizing radiation is heating; (i) the FCC 
regulates RFR to limit thermal effects, and FCC limits are very strict, set at 1/50 of the level of 
what is detectable in animal ex periments; (j) the FCC limits are based on the evaluation of 
thousands of studies and the recommendations of expert organizations and agencies; (k) various 
international regulatory agencies and health organizations have concluded that there is no 
establish ed evidence for health effects from radio waves used in mobile communications; (l) the 
FCC regularly updates its rules; (m) the consensus view of all scientists is that wireless radiation 
does not and cannot cause cancer; all studies to the contrary are fr om fringe scientists and those 
studies all show confirmation bias.  
20. Following Professor Swanson’s remarks, Ms. Armstrong acknowledged, without
accepting, his contention that exposure to wireless radiation cannot cause cancer.  But she pointed
out that t he immediate medical symptom residents of the  Shacktown neighborhood adjacent to
the Verizon Wireless 877 South Street wireless facility were complaining about were not cancer
or thermal effects, but rather, headaches, tinnitus, and other conditions typica l of
electrohypersensitivity.  Ms. Armstrong asked Professor Swanson to explain how to deal with
those symptoms.  Professor Swanson responded by insisting that the only verifiable biological
effect of non -ionizing wireless radiation is heat, and the FCC so  strictly regulates those emissions
levels that heat cannot pose a problem  from that Verizon Wireless cell tower .  Professor Swanson
acknowledged that certain people truly believe that they are hypersensitive to wireless radiation.
But Professor Swanson s uggested that those persons have psychological issues , and they should
be dealt with sympathetically.  Professor Swanson maintains that transmission of wireless
radiation from Verizon’s cell tower cannot actually cause th ose persons any injury because the
immutable laws of physics make that impossible.
21. This Board has reviewed Professor Swanson’s presentation and discussion and finds
Professor Swanson’s conclusions, several of which are strident and absolute, to lack credibility.
A major problem with Pr ofessor Swanson is that he speaks as a purported expert about matters of
human health  and disease and medical and scientific studies about the health effects of exposure
to wireless radiation, but he lacks any academic or professional qualifications in tho se fields.
Professor Swanson is a professor of theoretical physics.39 Professor Swanson’s research interests
focus on esoteric topics in nuclear physics, cosmology, and hadronic physics, especially in
learning how “quarks” and “gluons” build the universe.   All 124 of Professor Swanson’s
published scientific studies are limited to these subject areas.40 Professor Swanson is not a
medical doctor.  Professor Swanson has no professional training or qualifications in medicine,
medical research, biology, environ mental studies, public health, epidemiology, or toxicology, and
his professional credentials show no such expertise.  See fn. 39.  Yet Professor Swanson rejects
the more than 2,000 peer -reviewed scientific studies showing that wireless radiation may or doe s
negatively impact human health as outliers by “fringe” scientists who may be “conspiracy
theorists” with an axe to grind , and asserts that their studies all show “confirmation bias.”
Professor Swanson asserts unequivocally that “the scientific consensus ” is that wireless radiation
cannot cause human harm.  This Board finds  that Professor Swanson lacks the qualifications and
39 https://www.physicsandastronomy.p itt.edu/people/eric -s-swanson . 
40 https://inspirehep.net/literature?sort=mostrecent&size=100&page=2&q=fin%20a%20swanson%2C%20e%20s . 
11 
 the expertise to make such sweeping statements, and his credibility as a witness is severely 
undermined thereby.  
22. Further undermi ning Professor Swanson’s credibility is his appearance before this Board 
as a paid expert on behalf of Verizon Wireless, retained through his consulting business, Swanson 
Scientific Consulting.41 On Professor Swanson’s private consulting business website, he lists on 
the “Past Clients” tab, “Pittsfield, MA ,” one of his 20  listed  “Scientific Presentations and 
Depositions to Cities.”  Professor Swanson also lists presentations to 5 State Senate Committees, 
the New York State Senators, the New Jersey Urban May ors Association, and the Center for 
Growth and Opportunity.   He names  Verizon and Crown Castle Development (a major cell tower 
operator) as clients, as well as CTIA, the U.S. wireless industry’s trade and lobbying association.  
See fn. 41.  This Board, in assessing Professor Swanson’s credibility, takes notice that he works  
as a paid industry consultant when making presentations such as the one he made to this Board 
regarding matters outside of his academic research and professional qualifications.  In contrast, 
the experts who presented to this Board and spoke about the haz ards to human health posed by 
wireless radiation from cell towers all had particular professional qualifications in the subject 
matter; none of these experts has received any compensation for their appearances before this 
Board, and all are independent academic researchers, with no affiliation to  Verizon Wireless and 
the telecommunications industry.  These facts enhance the credibility of these experts, especially 
vis-a-vis Professor Swanson.  
23. Verizon Wireless also submitted to this Board documents which  consist primarily of self -
promotional brochures or industry -funded advocacy pieces rather than peer -reviewed scientific 
studies. These materials generally deny any prospect of harm, but do not meaningfully address 
the scientific evidence in the record or counteract the fact that the majority of independent (not 
industry -funded) studies, especially studies that use pulsed and/or modulated signals, do show 
harm.42 Verizon Wireless did not present government regulatory agency reports or systematic 
scientific or medical reviews of cell tower wireless radiation exposure studies (or studies of 
comparable levels of chronic environmental exposures) which conclude that safety to human 
health is assured. Furthermore, Verizon Wireless cannot and does not adequately re but the 
personal testimonies provided by the residents of the neighborhood (“Shacktown”) in the City of 
Pittsfield adjacent to the Verizon Wireless 877 South Street wireless facility at the several public 
hearings before the Health Board of the actual harm s they have suffered and are suffering from 
the operation of this wireless facility. Simply stated, the position of Verizon Wireless is that what 
is plainly happening in Pittsfield cannot occur.  That position has been stated most clearly by 
Professor Swan son during his September 9, 2021 presentation to this Board.  But this Board finds 
that, in fact,  Shacktown residents have suffered, and are continuing to suffer, negative health 
effects from the continuous operation of the Verizon Wireless 877 South Stree t wireless facility 
since it was activated in August 2020.   
24. The evidence shows that involuntary  wireless radiation  exposure directed upon  
Shacktown residents in their homes has effectively evicted several residents injured by pulsed and 
modulated RFR;  they have no choice but to leave. Pulsed and modulated RFR from the Verizon 
Wireless 877 South Street wireless facility has rendered  their homes uninhabitable – unfit for 
human habitation – because the continued exposure causes them severe pain, unable  to function , 
and endangers and materially impairs their health and safety.  
 
41 https://swansonscientific.com/ .   
42 Panagopoulos, D. J., Johansson, O., & Carlo, G. L. (2015). Real versus Simulated Mobile Phone Exposures in Experimental 
Studies . BioMed Research International , 2015 , 607053.  https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/607053 . 
12 Whereas , this Board has received direct testimony and written submissions from specific 
individuals that reside, or previously resided, within the reach of the wireless facility in is sue. These 
residents state that they and/or other family members (including their children) have developed symptoms 
shortly after the facility was activated.43 Many of the residents have testified on multiple occasions, which 
indicates the symptoms are per sisting. It appears, based on the evidence, that there is a cluster of illness 
around the Verizon Wireless 877 South Street wireless facility  that is caused by the facility’s operation. 
Since no comprehensive survey has been conducted of all neighborhood r esidents, there may be 
additional affected residents.  
Whereas , the symptoms reported by affected neighborhood residents are mainly neurological; 
they include headaches, ringing in the ears, dizziness, heart palpitations, nausea, and skin rashes. As the 
evidence that was provided to this Board shows, these symptoms are consistent with the scientific 
literature regarding adverse health effects from exposure to pulsed and modulated RF, including evidence 
specific to cellular antennas.  
Whereas , this Board has r eceived evidence from at least seventeen residents who have suffered 
on-going medical symptoms that arose for the first time after the Verizon Wireless 877 South Street 
wireless facility was activated in August 2020 and who believe their symptoms are cause d by their 
continuous exposure to the wireless radiation being transmitted from that wireless facility.  This Board 
finds their letters and oral testimonies to be authentic, compelling, and credible. As a result of their now -
impaired health, some of these residents have decided to leave their homes, while others split their time 
between their home s in Shacktown and other temporary locations. This indicates that some affected 
Shacktown residents have been constructively evicted from their homes because of th e operation of the 
wireless facility, and have been effectively rendered homeless. According to the evidence in the record, 
these symptoms are consistent with a diagnosis of electromagnetic sensitivity.  
Whereas , this Board has received and reviewed,  inter alia , the following evidence from specific 
Shacktown residents who have been and are being injured by the continued operation of the Verizon 
Wireless 877 South Street wireless facility:  
1. REDACTED  a pre-school teacher, has testified that she and both of her daughters 
developed various symptoms immediately after the facility went into operation. Ms. REDACTED  
has provided a physician’s medical diagnosis by Dr. Sharon Goldberg, MD, an internal and 
environmental medicine physician. This diagnosis has linked REDACTED  symptoms directly to 
the RF/EMF emitted by the facility by way of causation.  REDACTED  diagnosis letter indicates  
her symptoms improve when she is away from home, but resume when she returns and is again  
exposed agai n to the facility’s radiation.
2. REDACTED  s minor daughter, testified that after the facility went into operation,  she 
and her sister both started getting headaches. They feel dizzy and develop  sleeping problems. Her 
sister also suffered itchiness and developed skin rashes, frequent nausea, and often has to sleep 
with a bucket next to her bed in case she needs to throw up. Both girls have missed school 
because of sickness caused by wireless radiation exposure from the cell tower. REDACTED 
explained  that when she is away from home (and out of range of the facility) she feels better.
3. REDACTED  reported that following the facility’s activation they began to  suffer nausea, 
headaches, and dizziness. They are especially concerned for their five year old son who has 
Sensory Processing Disorder, a neurological disease. Since he has limited verbal skills, they do 
not know whether he too suffers from exposure to the wireless radiation transmitted from  the cell 
tower.  They are concerned that the exposure to the cell tower’s emissions will aggravate
43 See Appendix V: Public Comment Testimony to Board of Health. 
13 his condition. The literature indicates that it is not unusual for individuals to have or develop 
sensitivity to multiple toxins, and this can become an escalating feedback loop.  
4. REDACTED  and their two children all developed headaches and insomnia after  the 
facility became operational. They left their home because it is essentially uninhabitable and 
inaccessible to them.
5. REDACTED , an elderly resident, testified that both he and his wife have been unable to 
sleep since the tower was activated and that his wife has been especially affected.
6. REDACTED  reported that they have been severely affected. He is nauseous and has 
headaches in the morning and again as soon as he returns from work.
7. REDACTED  testified that she and her husband developed tinnitus and other serious 
health issues following the facility’s activation. They are suffering from headaches and  
sleeplessness. They are deciding whether they must abandon their home because it is inaccessible  
and uninhabitable.
8. REDACTED  testified that he developed ringing in the ears and that his wife Luci has 
developed horrible headaches and migraines. He stated that he sent his wife and their three  year 
old daughter REDACTED  away from the house because they believe it is unsafe and therefore  
uninhabitable. They are concerned for their daughter as she also has limited verbal skills and 
therefore they don’t know if she suffers.
Whereas , this evidence cl early demonstrates to this Board that specific Shacktown residents in 
the vicinity of the facility have suffered and are suffering injuries and illnesses directly caused by the 
pulsed and modulated RFR emitted by the facility in issue, and for so long as the facility is in operation it 
will continue to be injurious to the public health and continue to drive residents from their homes.  
Whereas , the FCC’s emissions  guidelines provide limits for general population purposes. These 
guidelines were designed to m easure and address primarily only “thermal” or heating related effects. The 
guidelines for whole body exposure (such as for exposure from cell towers) are for 30 minutes exposure , 
and protect only from thermal injury. They were not developed to protect se nsitive populations against all 
harms. They ignore the effects of pulsation and modulation and non -thermal effects from long -term 
chronic exposure, cumulative effects, and effects of exposure to numerous sources of RF exposure.  
Whereas , the FCC emissions guidelines do not address the demonstrated scientific, medical, and 
even legally -established fact that these general population limits do not adequately recognize that pulsed 
and modulated RF radiation emissions are “bioactive” – living things bi ologically respond to pulsed and 
modulated RF radiation , and this response can lead to harmful effects. More importantly, these guidelines 
entirely fail to address or provide for the situation where, at least, certain individuals develop adverse 
reactions such as those who experience electromagnetic sensitivity.  
Whereas , this Board concludes that the FCC emissions guidelines do not prevent this Board , 
operating under State authority, from taking action to protect the health and safety of those specific 
individuals who have demonstrated that a continuously operating cell tower built adjacent to a densely 
populated residential neighborhood is injuring their health on a continuing basis, as well as the health of  
other neighborhood residents. The FCC has ruled t hat state and local zoning authorities can condition a 
land use permit on compliance with generally applicable state or local health and safety codes.44  Verizon 
44 Broadband Deployment: Expanding the Reach and Reducing the Cost of Broadband Deployment by Improving Policies 
Regarding Public Rights of Way and Wireless Facilities Siting; 2012 Biennial Revi ew of Telecommunications Regulations , 29 
FCC Rcd 12865, 122951, ¶202 (Oct. 17, 2014): (“We therefore conclude that States and localities may require a covered request  
to comply with generally applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes or  with other laws codifying objective 
standards reasonably related to health and safety, and that they may condition approval on such compliance.”).  
14 
 Wireless’ permit for this facility does precisely that. Verizon Wireless’ permit expressly req uires 
compliance with the Massachusetts Sanitary Code and Pittsfield’s health -related rules, regulations and 
requirements.  By this Order, this Board finds the Verizon Wireless 877 South Street wireless facility to 
be in violation, and this Board requires Verizon Wireless and the property owner to bring their facility 
and the premises into compliance with Massachusetts’ and Pittsfield’s generally applicable health and 
safety codes, just as FCC precedent and the permit expressly allow.  
Now, therefore, the Pi ttsfield Board of Health hereby FINDS AND ORDERS as follows:  
1. The Verizon Wireless 877 South Street wireless facility operated by Verizon Wireless is 
a public nuisance, a cause of sickness, and a trade which may result in a nuisance or be dangerous 
to the public health for purposes of G.L. ch. 111 ss 122 -125, 127B, 127C, 143 -150 and 152.  
2. The premises owner, Farley White South Street LLC, is also responsible for all activities 
on its premises and within its direction and control.  
3. The Verizon Wireless  877 South Street wireless facility operated on the premises creates 
an access barrier that directly causes harm to certain individuals, and renders dwellings Unfit for 
Human Habitation or constitute s a Condition Which May Endanger or Materially Impair the  
Health or Safety and Well -Being of an Occupant as defined in State Sanitary Code 410.020 and 
410.750(P).  
4. The Verizon Wireless 877 South Street wireless facility operated on the premises creates 
conditions that impact occupants of a dwelling to the poin t that it renders a dwelling unfit for 
habitation for purposes of Sanitary Code 410.831.  
5. Verizon Wireless and Farley White South Street LLC are jointly and severally 
responsible for these unsafe conditions.  
6. This Order shall be served on Verizon Wirel ess, through its authorized agents, and on 
Farley White South Street LLC, through its authorized agents, the persons responsible for the 
violations as provided by inter alia , G.L. ch. 111 ss 124, 127B, 127D, 144, and State Sanitary 
Code for 410.833, 410.85 0, and 410.851.  
7. Verizon Wireless and Farley White South Street LLC are hereby ORDERED to show 
cause why the Board of Health should not issue an order requiring cessation of operations at the 
facility pursuant to the Board of Health’s statutory and histo rical police power to protect its 
citizens from injury and harm.  
8. Verizon Wireless and Farley White South Street LLC shall have SEVEN (7) DAYS from 
the date of this order to request a hearing on this Order to Show Cause. The Board of Health will 
promptly  schedule such hearing in accordance with the provisions of G.L. ch. 111 and the State 
Sanitary Code, and provide public notice thereof.  
9. In the event Verizon Wireless and Farley White South Street LLC do not timely request a 
hearing, this Order shall be come and constitute a notice of discontinuance requiring that Verizon 
Wireless and Farley White South Street LLC abate and eliminate all activities and operations 
leading to the present and ongoing nuisance and violations of the State Sanitary Code at thei r own 
expense within SEVEN (7) DAYS of the expiration of the deadline to request a hearing.  
10. Verizon Wireless and Farley White South Street LLC shall have the right to inspect and 
obtain copies of all relevant inspection or investigation reports, orders , notices, and other 
documentary information in the possession of the Board of Health; the right to be represented at 
the hearing.  
11. Any affected party has a right to appear at said hearing and present evidence and 
argument in favor of or against discont inuance.  
15 12. This is an important legal document. It may affect your rights.
The Health Board reserves the right to take such other and further action as it deems necessary to 
ensure that all injurious activities and conditions end, including directly acting to remove the offending 
facilities at the expense of Verizon Wireless and Farley White South Street LLC and or appointment of a 
receiver responsible for accomplishing the same.  
This Order shall take effect upon issuance.  
Appendix I: Letter s and Testimony from Experts 
All links provided by reference  
Russell, C., (2021, April 6). Cindy Russell MD to Council Members in the City of Pittsfield. Re: 3/21/21 Agenda 
Item #15 to encourage the Pittsfield, Massachus etts Health Department to investigate the health effects reported in 
the vicinity of the Verizon 877 South Street Cell tower . [Letter].   
Russell, C., (2021, July 6). Cindy Russell MD to Pittsfield Board of Health. RE: Pittsfield testing of RFR emissions . 
[Letter].  
Carpenter, D.O., (2020, October 8). Dr. David Carpenter to Mayor of the City of Pittsfield MA and Board of Health 
on Cell Tower Radiation [Letter].  
Kulberg, A.G., (2021, August 31). Dr. Kulberg Chair of Pittsfield Board of Health to the Joint Committee on 
Consumer Protection RE: Senate Bill S.186 and in Support of MA Commission on Wireless Radiation . [Letter].  
Havas, M., (2021, July 6). Dr. Magda Ha vas to Gina Armstrong, Director of Public Health, Pittsfield Health 
Department, City of  Pittsfield MA on Cell Tower Radiation Measurements and the Lack of Protections by the FCC . 
[Letter]. Slide Presentation for BOH Forum . 
Heroux, Paul., (2021, July 7) Paul Héroux, PhD, McGill University Medicin e Comments on RF EMISSION 
STUDY of South St cell tower (SSct) on June 10th by VComm Telecommunications Engineering.  [Letter].  
White, P., (2021, October 4). Peter White, Councilor City of Pittsfield to Massachusetts S tate Legislatur e in Favor of 
Wireless Right to Kno w Legislation . [Letter]. 
Scarato, T., (2021, May 27). Theodor a Scarato to Gina Armstrong, City of Pittsfield Board of Health ; Davis, D., et 
al., (2021, April 21). Dr. Devra Davis, et al., to the Honorable Joseph R. Biden, President/Science/Briefing o=n 
Wireless. [Letters]. Myth Fact Scientific Response EHT 2022 . 
Boston Petitioners, (1997). Boston Physicians’ and Scientists’ Petition To Avert Pub lic Exposures to Microwaves . 
[Petition Signatures].  
Symington, S., (2021)  Letter to Pittsfield Board of Health July 7 2021  [Letter]. 
Chamberlain, K., (2022, February 20). Kent Chamberlin Ph D to Editor of th e Berkshir e Eag le Re: Respons e to Feb 
19th Opinion on Verizon C ell Tower. [Letter].  
Goldberg, S. (2022, February 28). Wireless Health E ffects [Slides from presentation]. https://ehtrust.org/wp-
content/uploads/Sharon-Goldberg- MD-Pittsfield- MA-2.28.22.pdf . 
Appendix II Testimony and Research on Cell Towers and Radiofrequency 
16 Note: This is not an exhaus tive list, but rather a short list of studies included in evidence sent to th e Board. 
Compilation Documents 
REDACTED testified repeatedly to the Board, communicated by email and submitted extensive scientific research, 
video lectures, documentation of health effects and reports.   
Michael Maudin, (Numerous letters 2021 and 2022) The Alliance for Microwave Radiation Accountability, Inc. 
Sent the Board numerous resources, scientific papers, and documents demonstrating evidence of adverse effects, 
research dating back decades on electromagnetic radiation and more including links Primary Source Documents - 
Microwave Radiation Syndrome in April 2021, Michael Maudin’s testimony of injury from base station antennas  
and primary source documents. Microwave-Radiation-Syndrome-Primary-Source-Documents-BoH-April-2021.pdf . 
Maudin also sent 35 pe er-reviewed studies and charts on microwave sickness caused by the radiation from cell 
towers  to the Pittsfield Board of Health on January 5, 2021 and these are included in the reference list.  
Compilation of Research Studies on Cell Tower Radiation and Health . (n.d.). Environmental Health Trust . Retrieved 
March 20, 2022, from  https://ehtrust.org/cell -towers -and-cell-antennae/compilation -of-research -studies -on-cell-
tower -radiation -and-health/  
Maryland Children’s Environmental Health and Protection Advisory Council (2016) 78 Studies Showing Health 
Effects from Cell Tower Radio Frequency . 
Research Studies 
Gandhi, G., Kaur, G., & Nisar, U. (2015). A cross -sectional case control study on genetic damage in individuals 
residing i n the vicinity of a mobile phone base station. Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine , 34(4), 344 –354. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/153 68378.2014.933349 . 
Yakymenko, I., Sidorik, E., Kyrylenko, S., & Chekhun, V. (2011). Long -term exposure to microwave radiation 
provokes cancer growth: Evidences from radars and mobile communication systems. Experimental Oncology , 33(2), 
62–70. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21716201/ . 
Santini, R., Santini, P., Le Ruz, P., Danze, J. M., & Seigne, M. (2003). Survey Study of People Living in the 
Vicinity of Cellular Phone Base Stations. Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine , 22(1), 41 –49. 
https://doi.org/10.1081/JBC -120020353 . 
Santini, R., Santini, P., Danze, J. M., Le Ruz, P.,  & Seigne, M. (2002). Investigation on the health of people living 
near mobile telephone relay stations: I/Incidence according to distance and sex. Pathologie -Biologie , 50(6), 369 –
373. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0369 -8114(02)00311 -5. [Article in French].
Shahbazi -Gahrouei, D., Karbalae, M., Moradi, H. A., & Baradaran -Ghahfarokhi, M. (2014). Health effects of living 
near mobile pho ne base transceiver station (BTS) antennae: A report from Isfahan, Iran. Electromagnetic Biology 
and Medicine , 33(3), 206 –210. https://doi.org/10.3109/15368378.2013.801352 . 
Parsaei, H., Faraz, M., & Mortazavi, S. M. J. (2017). A Multilayer Perceptron Neural Network –Based Model for 
Predicting Subjective Health Symptoms in People Living in the Vicinity of Mobile Phone Base Stations. 
Ecopsychology , 9(2), 99 –105. https://doi.org/10.1089/eco.2017.0011 . 
Kato, Y.,  & Johansson, O. (2012). Reported functional impairments of electrohypersensitive Japanese: A 
questionnaire survey. Pathophysiology: The Official Journal of the International Society for Pathophysiology , 19(2), 
95–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pathophys.2012.02.002 . 
17 
  
Dode, A. C., Leão, M. M. D., Tejo, F. de A. F., Gomes, A. C. R., Dode, D. C., Dode, M. C., Moreira, C. W., 
Condessa, V. A., Albinatti, C., & Caiaffa, W. T. (2011). Mortality by neoplasia and cellular telephone base stations 
in the Belo Horizonte municipality, Minas Gerais state, Brazil. The Science of the Total Environment , 409(19), 
3649 –3665.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.05.051 . 
 
Abdel -Rassoul, G., El -Fateh, O. A., Salem, M. A., Michael, A., Farahat, F ., El-Batanouny, M., & Salem, E. (2007). 
Neurobehavioral effects among inhabitants around mobile phone base stations. NeuroToxicology , 28(2), 434 –440. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2006.07.012 . 
 
Blettner, M., Schlehofer, B., Breckenkamp, J., Kowall, B., Schmiedel, S., Reis, U., Potthoff, P., Schüz, J., & Berg -
Beckhoff, G. (2009). Mobile phone base stations and adverse health effect s: Phase 1 of a population -based, cross -
sectional study in Germany. Occupational and Environmental Medicine , 66(2), 118 –123. 
https://doi.o rg/10.1136/oem.2007.037721 . 
 
Navarro, E. A., Segura, J., Portolés, M., & Gómez‐Perretta de Mateo, C. (2003). The Microwave Syndrome: A 
Preliminary Study in Spain. Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine , 22(2–3), 161 –169. https://doi.org/10.1081/JBC -
120024625 . 
 
Bortkiewicz, A., Zmyślony, M., Szyjkowska, A., & Gadzicka, E. (2004). [Subjective symptoms reported by people 
living in the vicinity of cellular phone base stations: Review]. Medycyna Pracy , 55(4), 345 –351. 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15620045/ . 
Navarro, E. A., Segura, J., Portolés, M., & Góme z‐Perretta de Mateo, C. (2003). The Microwave Syndrome: A 
Preliminary Study in Spain. Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine , 22(2–3), 161 –169. https://doi.org/10.1081/JBC -
120024625 . 
Gómez -Perretta, C., Navarro, E. A., Segura, J., & Portolés, M. (2013). Subjective symptoms related to GSM 
radiation from mobile phone base stations: A cross -sectional study. BMJ Open , 3(12), e003836.  
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen -2013 -003836 . 
Levitt, B., & Lai, H. (2010). Biological effects from exposure to electromagnetic radiation emitted by cell tower 
base stations and other antenna arrays. Environmental Reviews , 18, 369 –395. https://doi.org/10.1139/a10 -903. 
Richter, E. D., Berman, T., & Levy, O. (2002). Brain cancer with induction periods of less than 10 years in young 
military radar workers. Archi ves of Environmental Health , 57(4), 270 –272. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00039890209601409 . 
Wolf, R., & Wolf, D. (2004). Increased inciden ce of cancer near a cell -phone transmitter station. International 
Journal of Cancer , 1(2), 123 –128. [ Google Scholar ]. 
 
Yaky menko, I., Sidorik, E., Kyrylenko, S., & Chekhun, V. (2011). Long -term exposure to microwave radiation 
provokes cancer growth: Evidences from radars and mobile communication systems. Experimental Oncology , 33(2), 
62–70.https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21716201/ . 
 
Eger, et al., The Influence of Being Physically Near to a Cell Phone Transmission Mast on the Incidence of Cancer 
(2004).  Umwelt·Medizin·Gesellschaft. http://www.tetrawatch.net/papers/naila.pdf . 
 
Khurana, V. G., Hardell, L., Everaert, J., Bortkiewicz, A., Carlberg, M., & Ahonen, M. (2010). Epidemiological 
evidence for a health risk from mobile phone base stations. International Journal of Occupational and 
Environmental Health , 16(3), 263 –267. https://doi.org/10.1179/1077352 10799160192 . 
18 
  
Zothansiama, Zosangzuali, M., Lalramdinpuii, M., & Jagetia, G. C. (2017). Impact of radiofrequency radiation on 
DNA damage and antioxidants in peripheral blood lymphocytes of humans residing in the vicinity of mobile phone 
base stations. Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine , 36(3), 295 –305. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15368378.2017.1350584 . 
 
Gandhi, G., Naru, J., Kaur, M., & Kaur, G. (2014). DNA and Chromosomal Damage in Residents Near a Mobile 
Phone Base Station. International Journal of Human Genetics , 14(3–4), 107 –118. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09723757.2014.11886234 . 
 
Gandhi, G., Kaur, G., & Nisar, U. (2015). A cross -sectional case control stu dy on genetic damage in individuals 
residing in the vicinity of a mobile phone base station. Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine , 34(4), 344 –354. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/15368378.2014.933349 . 
Magras, I. N., & Xenos, T. D. (1997). RF radiation -induced changes in the prenatal development of mice. 
Bioelectromagnetics , 18(6), 455 –461. https://doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1521 -186x(1997)18:6<455::aid -bem8>3.0.co;2 -
1. 
Adang, D., Remacle, C., & Vander V orst, A. (2009). Results of a Long -Term Low -Level Microwave Exposure of 
Rats. IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques , 57(10), 2488 –2497.  
https://doi.org/10.1109/TMTT.2009.2029667 . 
Eskander, E. F., Estefan, S. F., & Abd -Rabou, A. A. (2012). How does long term exposure to base stations and 
mobile phones affect human hormone profiles? Clinical Biochemistry , 45(1–2), 157 –161. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2011.11.006 . 
Eşmekaya, M. A., Seyhan, N ., & Ömeroğlu, S. (2010). Pulse modulated 900 MHz radiation induces hypothyroidism 
and apoptosis in thyroid cells: A light, electron microscopy and immunohistochemical study. International Journal 
of Radiation Biology , 86(12), 1106 –1116.  https://doi.org/10.3109/09553002.2010.502960 . 
Loscher W, Kas G, (1998) Extraordinary behavior disorders in cows in proximity to transmission stati ons. Der 
Praktische Tierarz  79:437 - 444, 1998. (Article in German). 
http://www.teslabel.be/001/documents/Conspicuous%20behav ioural%20abnormalities%20in%20a%20dairy%20co
w%20herd.pdf . 
Balmori, A. (2010). Mobile phone mast effects on common frog (Rana temporaria) tadpoles: The city turned into a 
laboratory. Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine , 29(1–2), 31 –35. https://doi.org/10.3109/15368371003685363 . 
Koppel, T., Ahonen, M., Carlberg, M., Hedendahl, L. K., & Hardell, L. (2019). Radiofrequency radiation from 
nearby mobile phone base stations -a case comparison of one low and one high exposure apartment. Oncology 
Letters , 18(5), 5383 –5391.  https://doi.org/10.3892/ol.2019.10899 . 
 
Hardell, L., Carlberg, M., Hedendahl, L. K., Koppel, T., & Ahonen, M. (2019). Environmental radiofrequency 
radiation at the Järntorget  Square in Stockholm Old Town, Sweden in May, 2018 compared with results on brain 
and heart tumour risks in rats exposed to 1.8 GHz base station environmental emissions. World Academy of Sciences 
Journal , 1(1), 47 –54. https://doi.org/10.3892/wasj.2018.5 . 
 
Carlberg, M., Hedendahl, L., Koppel, T., & Hardell, L. (2019). High ambient radiofrequency radiation in Stockholm 
city, Sweden. Oncology Letters , 17(2), 1777 –1783.  https://doi.org/10.3892/ol.2018.9789 . 
 
Hardell, L., Carlberg, M., & Hedendahl, L. K. (2018). Radiofrequency radiation from nea rby base stations gives 
high levels in an apartment in Stockholm, Sweden: A case report. Oncology Letters , 15(5), 7871 –7883.  
https://doi.org/10. 3892/ol.2018.8285 . 
19 
  
Hardell, L., Carlberg, M., Koppel, T., & Hedendahl, L. (2017). High radiofrequency radiation at Stockholm Old 
Town: An exposimeter study including the Royal Castle, Supreme Court, three major squares and the Swedish 
Parliament. Molecula r and Clinical Oncology , 6(4), 462 –476. https://doi.org/10.3892/mco.2017.1180 . 
 
Hardell , L., Koppel, T., Carlberg, M., Ahonen, M., & Hedendahl, L. (2016). Radiofrequency radiation at Stockholm 
Central Railway Station in Sweden and some medical aspects on public exposure to RF fields. International Journal 
of Oncology , 49(4), 1315 –1324.  https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo.2016.3657 . 
 
López, I., Félix, N., Rivera, M., Alonso, A., & Maestú, C. (2021). What is the radiation before 5G? A corre lation 
study between measurements in situ and in real time and epidemiological indicators in Vallecas, Madrid. 
Environmental Research , 194, 110734.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.110734 . 
 
Hardell, L., & Koppel, T. (2022). Electromagnetic hypersensitivity close to mobile phone base stations —A case 
study in Stockholm, Sweden. Reviews on Environmental Health . https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh -2021 -0169 . 
 
Hardell, L., & Sage, C. (2008). Biological effects from electromagnetic field exposure and public exposure 
standar ds. Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy , 62(2), 104 –109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2007.12.004 . 
 
Koppel, T., Ahonen, M., Carlbe rg, M., & Hardell, L. (2022). Very high radiofrequency radiation at Skeppsbron in 
Stockholm, Sweden from mobile phone base station antennas positioned close to pedestrians’ heads. Environmental 
Research , 208, 112627.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.112627 . 
 
Pearce, J. M. (2020). Limiting liability with positioning to minimize negative health effects of cellular phone towers. 
Environmental Research , 181, 108845.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2019.108845 . 
 
SA, M., Alsubaie, Y., Almubarak, Z., Almutawa, H., AlQasem, Y., & Hasanato, R. (2015). Association of Exposure 
to Radio -Frequency Electromagnetic Field Radiation (RF -EMFR) Generate d by Mobile Phone Base Stations with 
Glycated Hemoglobin (HbA1c) and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health , 12, 14519 -14528;  https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph121114519 . 
 
Roda, C., & Perry, S. (2014). Mobile phone infrastructure regulation in Europe: Scientific challenges and human 
rights protection. Environmental Science & Policy , 37, 204 –214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2013.09.009 . 
 
Meo, S. A., Almahmoud, M., Alsultan, Q., Alotaibi, N., Alnajashi, I., & Hajjar, W. M. (2019). Mobile Phone Base 
Station Tower Settings Adjacent to School Buildings: Impact on Students’ Cognitive Health. American Journal of 
Men’s Health , 13(1), 1557988318816914.  https://doi.org/10.1177/1557988318816914 . 
 
Oberfeld, G., Navarro, E., Portoles, M., Maestu, C., & Gómez -Perretta, C. (2002). THE MICROWAVE SYNDROME 
- FURTHER ASPECTS OF A SPANISH STUDY . 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/237410769_THE_MICROWAVE_SYNDROME_ -
_FURTHER_ASPECTS_OF_A_SPANISH_STUDY . 
 
Rodrigues , N. C. P., Dode, A. C., de Noronha Andrade, M. K., O’Dwyer, G., Monteiro, D. L. M., Reis, I. N. C., 
Rodrigues, R. P., Frossard, V. C., & Lino, V. T. S. (2021). The Effect of Continuous Low -Intensity Exposure to 
Electromagnetic Fields from Radio Base Stations to Cancer Mortality in Brazil. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health , 18(3), 1229.  https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18031229 . 
 
Buchner, K., & Eger, H. D. I. (2011). Changes of Clinically Important Neurotransmitters under the Influence of 
Modulated RF Fields A Long -term St udy under Real -life Conditions . https://www.avaate.org/IMG/pdf/Rimbach -
Study -20112.pdf . 
 
Pachuau, Lalrinthar a & Pachuau, Zaithanzauva. (2016). Health Effects of Mobile Tower Radiation on Human — 
Case Study. International Journal of Applied Physics and Mathematics. 6. 72 -79. 10.17706/ijapm.2016.6.2.72 -79.   
20 Hecht, K., Savoley, E.N., (2007). Overloading of Towns and Cities with Radio Transmitters (Cellular Transmitter): 
a hazard for the human health and a disturbance of eco -ethics,  IRCHET  – International Research Centre of Healthy 
and Ecological Technology, Berlin, Germany. https://ecfsapi.fcc.gov/file/7521097890.pdf . 
Study of Cell Tower Radiation and its Health Hazards on huma n body - Lalrinthara Pachuau and Zaithanzauva 
Pachuau – IOSR Journal of Applied Physics (IOSR -JAP) e -ISSN: 2278 -4861. Volume 6, Issue 1 Ver. 1 (Jan 2014), 
PP 01 -06. 
Study of Cell Tower Radiation and its Health Hazards on human body – Lalrinthara Pachuau an d Zaithanzauva 
Pachuau IOSR Journal of Applied Physics, Vol. 6, Ver. 1 – January 2014.  
Belpomme, D., & Irigaray, P. (2020). Electrohypersensitivity as a Newly Identified and Characterized Neurologic 
Pathological Disorder: How to Diagnose, Treat, and Preven t It. International journal of molecular sciences , 21(6), 
1915. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21061915 . 
Shinjyo, T. & Shinjyo, A. (2014) Significant Decrease of Clinical Symptoms after Mobile Phone Base  Station 
Removal – An Intervention Study, Tetsuharu Shinjyo and Akemi Shinjyo Umwelt­Medizin­Gesellschaft, 27(4), S. 
294­301. 
Hecht, K., English edition of the German edition (2012), August 2016. Health Implications of Long -term Exposure 
to Electrosmog. B rochure 6. https://kompetenzinitiative.com/wp -content/uploads/2019/08/KI_Brochure -
6_K_Hecht_web.pdf . 
Meo, S. A., Alsubaie, Y., Almubarak, Z., Almut awa, H., AlQasem, Y., & Hasanato, R. M. (2015). Association of 
Exposure to Radio -Frequency Electromagnetic Field Radiation (RF -EMFR) Generated by Mobile Phone Base 
Stations with Glycated Hemoglobin (HbA1c) and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Internationa l journal of 
environmental research and public health , 12(11), 14519 –14528. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph121114519 . 
Gómez -Perretta, C., Navarro, E. A., Segura, J., & Portolés, M. (2013). Subjective symptoms related to GSM 
radiation from mobile phone base stations: A cross -sectional study. BMJ Open , 3(12), e003836.  
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen -2013 -003836 . 
Alazawi, S. A. (2011). Mobile Phone Base Stations Health Effects. Diyala Journal of Medicine , 1(1), 44 –52. 
https://djm.uodiyala.edu.iq /index.php/djm/article/view/483 . 
Amraee, A., Seif, F., Bayatiani, M. R., Shakeri, M., & Zakeri, F. (2021). Correlation between Base Transceiver 
Station and the Quality of Sleep and Life of Nearby Residents. Iranian Journal of Medical Physics , 18(1), 10 –14. 
https://ijmp.mums.ac.ir/article_14561.html . 
Marinescu, I. E., & Poparlan, C. (2016). Assessment of GSM HF -Radiation Impact Levels within the Residential 
Area of Craiova City. Procedia Environme ntal Sciences , 32, 177 –183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proenv.2016.03.022 . 
Hutter, H. -P., Moshammer, H., Wallner, P., & Kundi, M. (2006). Subjective symptoms, sleeping problems, and 
cognitive performance in subjects living near mobile phone base stations. Occupational and Environmental 
Medicine , 63(5), 307 –313. https://doi.org/10.1136/oem.2005.020784 . 
Kundi, M., & Hutter, H. -P. (2009). Mobile phone base stations -Effects on wellbeing and health. Pathophysiology: 
The Official Journal of the International Societ y for Pathophysiology , 16(2–3), 123 –135. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pathophys.2009.01.008 . 
Bevington, M., (2017). Adverse H ealth Effects of Mobile Phone Masts and Planning Policy, Electrosensitivity UK 
(ES-UK). 
21 Alster, Norm,  Captured Agency: How the Federal Communications Com mission Is Dominated by the Industries It 
Presumably Regulates , Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics Harvard University 2015 . 
Appendix III: Videos Resources Sent to Board of Health  
Pittsfield MA Expert Forum on Cell Tower Cease -and-Desist Order : With Senator Denise Ricciardi, NH; Dr. Paul 
Héroux; Dr. Magda Havas; Dr. Kent Chamberlin; Dr. Sharon Goldberg, Environmental Healt h Trust  Director 
Theodora Scarato; Attorney Robert Berg; Attorney Scott McCollough.  
Pittsfield MA Cell Tower Discussion 5 July 2021 :  Dr. Kent Chamberlin, EHTrust Policy Director Theodora Scarato 
& M A for Safe Technology Director Cecelia Doucette.  
Town of Lenox Board of Health Remote Meeting, August 1 9, 2021, with presentation by Kent Chamberlin, Ph.D., 
on Cell Tower Research .  
Sacramento City Council Meeting : Includes testimony of two young girls who became sick after Verizon cell 
installa tion was powered up . 
Wireless Radiation - What Environmental Health Leaders Need to Know : Featuring Linda Birnbaum, former 
Director of the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences an d the National Toxicology Program • 
Michael Lerner, Co -Founder and President of Commonweal and Co -Founder of Collaborative on Health and the 
Environment • Joel M. Moskowitz, PhD, Director Center for Family and Community Health, School of Public 
Health, Uni versity of California - Berkeley and Founder of Electromagnetic Radiation Safety • Uloma Uche, PhD, 
Environmental Working Group, author of new study on hazards of wireless radiation on children. • Sharon Buccino, 
Legal Expert, NRDC • Cindy Russell, MD  Foun der of Physicians for Safe Technology • Larry Ortega, Founder of 
Community Union • Theodora Scarato, Executive Director of the Environmental Health Trust.   
Appendix V: Public Testimony to the Board of Health 
All links provided by reference.  
In addition to public testimony referenced below, Pittsfield residents submitted numerous emails, documents and 
letters to the Board.  
Board of Health Meetings 
April 12 , 2021 
Agenda; https://cms2files.revize.com/pittsfieldma/calendar_app/docs/Boards_Commissions_Calendar/Board_of_Hea
lth/BOH_04_12.pdf  
Meeting link; https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/38962?channel=9  
May 5, 2021  
Agenda; https://cms2files.revize.com/pittsfieldma/calendar_app/doc s/Boards_Commissions_Calendar/Board_of_Hea
lth/BOH_05_05.pdf . 
Meeting link; https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/40347?channel=9 . 
 June 2, 2021  
Pittsfield Board of Heal th Wireless Harm Expert Forum: 
22 Agenda; https://cms2files.revize.com/pittsfieldma/calendar_app/docs/Boards_Commis sions_Calendar/Board_of_Hea
lth/BOHAgenda_06_02.pdf . 
Meeting Link; https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/40684?channel=9 . 
. 
July 7, 2021  
VComm presents readings from the cell tower (first in person meeting) 
Agenda; https://cms2files.revize.com/pittsfi eldma/calendar_app/docs/Boards_Commissions_Calendar/Board_of_Hea
lth/BOH_07_07.pdf . 
Meeting link; https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/40992?channe l=9. 
 
September 1, 2021 
Agenda; https://cms2files.revize.com/pittsfieldma/calendar_app/docs/Boards_Commissions_Calendar/Board_of_Hea
lth/Boardof Health_09_01.pdf . 
Meeting link; https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/41536?channel=9  
October 6, 202 1 
Agenda; https://cms2files.revize.com/pittsfieldma/calendar_app/docs/Boards_Commissions_Calendar/Board_of_Hea
lth/BoardofHealth_10_06.pdf . 
Meeting link; https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/41802?channel=9 . 
November 3, 2021  
Agenda; https://cms2files.revize.com/pittsfieldma/calendar_app/docs/Boards_Commission s_Calendar/Board_of_Hea
lth/BoardofHealth_11_03.pdf . 
Meeting link; https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/43053?channel=9 . 
December 1, 2021 
Agenda; https://cms2files.revize.com/pittsfieldma/calendar_app/docs/Boards_Commissions_Calendar/Board_of_Hea
lth/Boardof Health_12_01.pdf . 
Meeting link; https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/43228?channel=9 . 
February 2, 2022 - Cease and desist unanimously voted on  
Agenda; https://cms2files.revize.com/pittsfieldma/calen dar_app/docs/Boards_Commissions_Calendar/Board_of_Hea
lth/BoardofHealth_02_02.pdf . 
Meeting link; https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/43842?channel =9. 
February 23, 2022 -Executive session for cease and desist order - order upheld  
Agenda; https://cms2files.revize.com/pittsfieldma/calendar_app/docs/Boards_Commissions_Calendar/Board_of_Hea
lth/BoardofHealth_02_02.pdf . 
Meeting link; https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/44040?channel=9 . 
23 March 16, 2022 -Second executive session for the cease and desist order  
Agenda; https://cms2files.revize.com/pittsfieldma/calendar_app/docs/Boards_Commissions_Calendar/Board_of_Hea
lth/BOH_03_16.pdf  
Meeting link; https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/44241?channel=9 01:45  
. 
Additional Testimony at City Board Meetings  
Pittsfield residents and scient ific experts testified at numerous City Council meetings as well as other City Board 
Meetings providing testimony on harm.  
November 5, 2020 Community Development Board Meeting  
Pittsfield Community Development Board - November 5, 2020  
Topic: Cell towers setbacks 
Community Development Bo ard December 1, 2020  
https://watch.pittsfieldtv.net/CablecastPublicSite/show/37825?channel=9  
Certified and Regular Mail:  7021 -0350 -0000 -4282 -0554  (Pittsfield Cellular Telephone Company , Atty. 
Ellen W. Freyman ) 
Certified and Regular Mail : 7021-0350 -0000 -4282 -0547  (Pittsfield Cellular Telephone Company , Mark J. 
Esposito, Esq. ) 
Certified and Regular Mail: 7021 -0350 -0000 -4282 -0530  (Farley White South Street, LLC , Roger W. 
Altreuter, Manager ) 
24 ORDERED by unanimous vote of the Pittsfield Board of Health on April 7, 2022  
Roberta Orsi, MS, RN, CCP, Chairperson  
Kimberly Loring, PMHNP -BC 
Steve Smith, MA  
Brad Gordon, JD  
Jeffery A. Leppo, MD – Not Present -Did Not Participate  
Cecelia Doucette
Massachusetts for Safe Technology
LD 697
Dear Esteemed EUT Members,
I understand Dr. Eric Swanson testified for the wireless industry at your initial 
hearing on LD 697. Please know he also testified before the Pittsfield, MA Board of 
Health during its investigation of the biological harm caused to children and adults 
from a neighborhood Verizon cell tower.
The BOH investigated Dr. Swanson's credibility and found he has no credibility to 
offer "expertise" on the wireless radiation issue. The full Emergency Order to Verizon
is attached, and their remarks regarding Dr. Swanson are included below.
This underscores the need to be vigilant in vetting any claims the wireless industry 
and their "experts" make to you, as good as their assurances of safety and economic 
benefit may seem on the surface. 
"21.This Board has reviewed Professor Swanson’s presentation and discussion and 
findsProfessor Swanson’s conclusions, several of which are strident and absolute, to 
lack credibility.A major problem with Professor Swanson is that he speaks as a 
purported expert about matters ofhuman health and disease and medical and scientific
studies about the health effects of exposureto wireless radiation, but he lacks any 
academic or professional qualifications in those fields.Professor Swanson is a 
professor of theoretical physics.39 Professor Swanson’s research interestsfocus on 
esoteric topics in nuclear physics, cosmology, and hadronic physics, especially 
inlearning how “quarks” and “gluons” build the universe. All 124 of Professor 
Swanson’spublished scientific studies are limited to these subject areas.40 Professor 
Swanson is not amedical doctor. Professor Swanson has no professional training or 
qualifications in medicine,medical research, biology, environmental studies, public 
health, epidemiology, or toxicology, andhis professional credentials show no such 
expertise. See fn. 39. Yet Professor Swanson rejectsthe more than 2,000 
peer-reviewed scientific studies showing that wireless radiation may or 
doesnegatively impact human health as outliers by “fringe” scientists who may be 
“conspiracytheorists” with an axe to grind, and asserts that their studies all show 
“confirmation bias.”Professor Swanson asserts unequivocally that “the scientific 
consensus” is that wireless radiationcannot cause human harm. This Board finds that 
Professor Swanson lacks the qualifications and the expertise to make such sweeping 
statements, and his credibility as a witness is severely undermined thereby.
22. Further undermining Professor Swanson’s credibility is his appearance before this
Board as a paid expert on behalf of Verizon Wireless, retained through his consulting 
business, Swanson Scientific Consulting.41 On Professor Swanson’s private 
consulting business website, he lists on the “Past Clients” tab, “Pittsfield, MA,” one 
of his 20 listed “Scientific Presentations and Depositions to Cities.” Professor 
Swanson also lists presentations to 5 State Senate Committees, the New York State 
Senators, the New Jersey Urban Mayors Association, and the Center for Growth and 
Opportunity. He names Verizon and Crown Castle Development (a major cell tower 
operator) as clients, as well as CTIA, the U.S. wireless industry’s trade and lobbying 
association. See fn. 41. This Board, in assessing Professor Swanson’s credibility, 
takes notice that he works as a paid industry consultant when making presentations 
such as the one he made to this Board regarding matters outside of his academic 
research and professional qualifications. In contrast, the experts who presented to this 
Board and spoke about the hazards to human health posed by wireless radiation from 
cell towers all had particular professional qualifications in the subject matter; none of 
these experts has received any compensation for their appearances before this Board, 
and all are independent academic researchers, with no affiliation to Verizon Wireless 
and the telecommunications industry. These facts enhance the credibility of these 
experts, especially vis-a-vis Professor Swanson."
Thank you for your time and consideration.
