Cindy Russell
Menlo Park, California
LD 697
To: Maine Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee
From: Cindy Russell, MD
Executive Director, Physicians for Safe Technology
RE: LD 697 - Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and 
Insect Populations and the Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children
Position: Strongly in support of LD 697
Date: March 6, 2023
Dear Maine Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee Members:
I am a physician who has studied the health and environmental effects of wireless radiation 
for over 10 years and published 2 papers on the subject along with many articles through our 
local medical society. I am in strong support of this important legislative bill.  
Wireless radiation, while convenient, is problematic in many areas including adversely 
affecting human and environmental health. It is biologically active and can harm all species, 
including plants and trees.  5G as well as 2G, 3G and 4G antennas are moving closer to our 
homes, hospitals and businesses, with involuntary exposures that are a risk to our health and 
wellbeing. 5G is a manufactured need developed by industry, and while it is convenient tool, 
its usefulness is not tempered by adequate regulation or safeguards. 5G also does not mix 
well with the natural environment, so abundant in your beautiful state. There are also related 
issues of massive energy consumption, privacy and e waste that have not been taken into 
account.
 
We are at a juncture where we can give in to the telecommunications industry and throw up 
our hands or we can roll up our sleeves and take a scientific view of the matter and come to 
our own conclusions. There is a critical need for individual states to do this so they are keenly
aware of this issue and can make better decisions in telecommunications both locally and 
nationally.
As you know, New Hampshire formed the first Commission in the United States to 
study the environmental and health effects of 5G technology and released their 
comprehensive final report November 1, 2020. There has been more science that has 
been published since then and more work to be done by another commission. The 
members of the New Hampshire Commission were surprised how much research has 
been done in this field, and in some cases, they found a serious lack of information 
regarding safety of this new technology. We have not learned our lesson well with 
other toxins in the environment we have released and now have to clean up. 
I encourage you to move forward with this 5G Commission to help guide future 
telecommunications in your state and protect the health and wellbeing of your 
constituents, including nature, with no voice in this matter. 
Respectfully submitted,
Cindy Russell, MD

