In Support of Maine State Rep. Tracy Quint, RN LD 697-Resolve, to Study the 
Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations and the Effects 
of Long Term Exposure on Children.
Esteemed Legislators,
 
Please do everything in your power to ensure this bill is passed this session. Given the critical need daily 
to communicate and have access to information and technology, everyone should be aware of the safest 
ways to do so. Technology is vital, but it should also be safe, especially for children.
 
As someone whose health is affected by wireless, I am very aware of the impact and at very least can 
make choices to provide a safe place in my home because I am informed.  However, the vast majority of 
the public remains unaware. You cannot make choices for how to minimize risk without knowledge, 
especially if you do not realize that a risk may even exist. It is clear that most think, if there was risk, 
then "they" would not allow it.  However, there is no "they" protecting health and the environment in 
this industry despite the assurances that there are.  That is clear. 
My daughter is an elementary school teacher and I am very aware of the use of technology in school 
today. However, I can no longer be in the school to help her set up her class every summer as I cannot 
bear the wireless and that is with NO students in the classroom, no chromebooks on and no whiteboard 
among other typical technology used in school today.  Some of the many effects of wireless technology 
are: headaches, foggy head or inability to think or focus, dizziness, nausea, skin issues, eye problems, 
tinnitus, heart arrhythmias, difficulty breathing (which to some can be mistaken for a panic attack). 
These are only some of the many effects of wireless technology.  I am sure many of you know those who 
suffer with these symptoms and some may be told they have “anxiety” which may or may not actually 
be what is happening.  There may be much more to that issue with regard to the potential effect of 
wireless. 
When we hardwired our home and ensured all wireless was off by measuring with a meter, the plant in 
our kitchen window grew at least 15 inches in just two months!  If a plant’s growth can be that 
dramatically affected, imagine what is happening to children!  My health issues resolved as long as I 
avoid all wireless. In today’s world, that can be very difficult and very isolating.   Clearly, providing fast, 
safe, energy efficient, reliable technology via hardwiring is the BEST solution all around while providing a 
safe and healthy learning environment.  
New Hampshire was the first in the nation to do its own independent investigation on the health and 
environmental impact of today's wireless radiation. (NHHB 522 2019)  I am thankful that our Republican 
State Rep (engineering) and our Democrat State Senator, (medical doctor) joined forces to sponsor that 
bill. This is not a partisan issue, nor should it be.  They listened, reviewed the data, and acted.
 
NH showed that despite its size, it's not afraid to face an issue that is ubiquitous and affects everyone 
regardless of which state you live in.  The NH Commission laid the groundwork in their final report that 
shows conflicts of interest between industry and our federal agencies, reveals peer reviewed science 
and recommends hardwiring homes and schools and informing  the public and recognizing the need for 
those who are affected to have a voice. Cell towers do not belong near homes, schools, etc. where 
people have no control over their exposure to RF.
Please do your part for the citizens of Maine, our neighbor, where friends and family reside. They and 
your students and staff deserve your demand for open and transparent information on an invisible 
technology that surrounds all of us. 
 
Parents should not have to face the anguish they inevitably may feel years down the road when they 
realize the harm they inadvertently put their children in while thinking they were keeping them safe, 
because they did not know.
 
Knowledge is power. As Thomas Jefferson said, " Educate and inform the whole mass of people.... they 
are the only sure reliance on the preservation of our liberty." 
 
Please support transparency, information and the health and safety of children and the environment, 
while recognizing the critical need for safe technology on which we all depend by supporting Rep. Quint 
and the other co-sponsors from BOTH parties, like NH who put citizen’s first.
 
 
Respectfully,
 
 
Deb Hodgdon
Stratham, NH
(603) 380-4104
 
