Deborah Chandler
South Hadley MA
LD 697
Good Afternoon Esteemed Committee Members,
My name is Deborah Chandler and I currently live in South Hadley, MA. I am honored to have
been asked to submit testimony in support of Bill LD 697. I am not currently a resident of 
Maine, but the biological harms from wireless technology do not stop at the political 
boundaries of any town, state or country. 
 
I am what is called “a canary in the coal mine”, I am part of the early warning system with 
regards to the health injuries caused by wireless radiation. I join the 20% of the population 
(and growing) that has developed significant EMF sensitivity. I can no longer safely 
participate in a society that is saturated with wireless tech without getting sick and needing 
recovery time. 
I am not opposed to the use of wireless technology. But I am passionate about the fact
that we MUST learn to use this technology much more SAFELY. We must protect all
living beings so we can all survive on this planet. 
I sincerely request that the legislators of Maine take serious interest in looking at the 
harms from wireless radiation, including the damage being done to our pollinators, 
because as we know, if the pollinators die, our species and many others will be right 
behind them. 
Also, we MUST prioritize protecting our children from the harms of wireless 
radiation, as their brains are much more susceptible to harm as compared to adults. 
We are seeing proven correlations between exposure to wifi and behavioral issues like
HDD and autism as well as depression and anxiety. 
I have had serious symptoms from wireless radiation harms for many years, but it is 
only in the past few years that I figured out the cause. No doctor told me, because 
doctors are not being trained to know how to diagnose these harms. I am grateful I 
have been working with Cece Doucette of MA for Safe Technology, who is a key 
player in bringing the truth about wireless to a growing audience. Since working 
alongside Cece, I have been invited to testify in MA and NH so far, sharing my story 
and doing my part to educate about this gravely serious issue. 
There are some key facts I would like to share: The telecom industry is regulated by 
the FCC. But the FCC is a “captured agency”; they are run by powerful people from 
the telecom industry. It is the old adage of “the fox guarding the henhouse”. This 
document explains all of this, 
https://hwpi.harvard.edu/files/center-for-ethics/files/capturedagency_alster.pdf
A few passages from this document:
(From page 5) “Industry control, in the case of wireless health issues, extends beyond 
Congress and regulators to basic scientific research. And in an obvious echo of the hardball 
tactics of the tobacco industry, the wireless industry has backed up its economic and political 
power by stonewalling on public relations and bullying potential threats into submission with 
its huge standing army of lawyers. “ (The parallels with Big Tobacco are the focus on pages 
15-17) 
(From page 22): “Asked what he would do if he had policymaking authority, Dr. 
Hardell* swiftly replied that he would ―ban wireless use in schools and preschools. 
You don‘t need Wi-Fi,” he noted. This is especially interesting in view of the FCC‘s 
sharply hiked spending to promote and extend Wi-Fi usage, as well as its consistent 
refusal to set more stringent standards for children (more on all this later). “
* Lennart Hardell, professor of Oncology and Cancer Epidemiology at the University 
Hospital in Oreboro, Sweden.
In closing…
Big Tobacco was eventually brought to their knees. But in the meantime, many suffered. Our 
challenge now is to take the HUGE amount of evidence showing the serious and increasing 
harms from wireless radiation, and work MUCH FASTER than we did with Big Tobacco, and 
HALT these harms before they gain much more traction. 
We can do this! We need to educate and legislate!
Thank you for your time. 
Deborah Chandler
