Doe Kelly
Longmont Advocate for Safe Technology
LD 697
In 2016 I became electro-hypersensitive at the hands of two wireless routers 
broadcasting in my home concurrently, we were speed testing one against the other to 
decide which was best. We, unfortunately, forgot to turn off the second router after 
the speed test. Unbeknownst to me, the one from Comcast, our old provider (and a 
router we'd never used, but that was foisted on us by the company) contained two sets
of two antennas, one for the house, and one "for that hotspot over there, in the park." 
Comcast never asked our permission to broadcast that second set of frequencies nor 
did they ever compensate us for that.
From the moment our new wireless router from the (new fiber optic, latest, greatest) 
Internet service was switched on, I watched myself become sicker and sicker 
throughout the day, until that evening, when I was being full-on blasted by the 
microwave emanations in our home. My husband, at first, was resistant to this new 
reality. Over a bit of time he became my ally in figuring out a new, hard wired 
strategy for using the Internet that we both rely on for work. But it took some doing.
I was fortunate that, at the time, I had been doing some LENs therapy brain mapping. 
I was able to quantify a before and after state of my brain through sessions I had with 
my therapist. The "after" session showed a distinct regression of progress gleaned 
from using her technology. This therapist submitted a report to my doctor, quantifying
what she had found in my brain mapping before and after sessions. My doctor, being 
open minded, did add it into my medical record.
I have been aware of the problem of pollution from electromagnetic fields for several 
decades, having sold emf protective products since the early 1990s. I have been even 
more aware of this menace in the past fifteen years, as wireless as steadily encroached
on our lives, wreaking havoc on many of God's living things. I have studied this topic 
relatively extensively, but after my experience in 2016, I feel like Alice having gone 
through the looking glass. I now know the reality from the other side of the mirror. I 
have a great deal of compassion and empathy for those suffering from Havana 
Syndrome as well as the multitudes who suffer from the proliferation of wireless in 
our everyday environments, many of which have been forced to become "emf 
refugees."
This committee needs to study in depth the science of harm of non-ionizing radiation 
that wireless microwave devices pose to all living things on earth, including humans, 
pollinators, microorganisms/soil bacteria, other insects, animals and the list goes on. 
And then, once you review the reams of independent science that shows this harm you
need to create legislation that is protective of life. We cannot continue to go on our 
merry way with this dangerous technology moving forward, unbridled. It threatens 
our very existence on this planet and I daresay, may be the number one threat that we 
face to our existence. The science is there, just ask the FCC. 11,000 pages of science 
submitted into evidence in the EHT/CHD vs. FCC lawsuit of 2021 does not lie. The 
federal RF guidelines are badly in need of an update. The FCC was ordered to do so, 
taking the submitted science into consideration when it does. Now, over a year and a 
half since that lawsuit that prevailed against the FCC, there are no updated guidelines 
forthcoming. You now must take on the mantle that the federal government (FCC) as 
yet refuses to do, in creating your own suggestions, guidelines, and legislation to 
protect all the living residents of Maine.
