Testimony of Doug Dunbar
In Support of LD 697
Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations and the 
Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children
Public Hearing: March 7, 2023
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and Members of the Committee, my name is Doug 
Dunbar. I reside in Hermon, Maine and appreciate the opportunity to testify in support of LD 
697.
Given ongoing concerns about the safety of 5G among a substantial number of physicians and 
scientific experts, it would be prudent for the State of Maine to engage in research about the 
technology's potential risks.
According to a recent article in Forbes Health, "more than 3,500 physicians across preventive 
and environmental medicine, toxicology and other specialties have united against 5G, citing 
main associated risks of nonionizing radiation—according to peer-reviewed scientific 
literature—including cancer, cellular stress, genetic damage, reproductive changes and deficits 
and neurological disorders" (hwww.forbes.com/health/body/is-5g-safe).
With advances in technology happening rapidly and research into adverse impacts on health and 
safety often struggling to keep up, we should be cautious about possible threats, ask tough 
questions, and expect a thorough study of potential harms. 
There's practically no downside to conducting the research called for in LD 697, but 
tremendously serious potential consequences of not doing our due diligence and later learning of 
significant harm being done to humans and wildlife.
Thank you for giving this issue your thoughtful consideration. I hope you'll support LD 697.  
Doug Dunbar
Hermon
LD 697
Testimony of Doug Dunbar
In Support of LD 697
Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations 
and the Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children
Public Hearing: March 7, 2023
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and Members of the Committee, my name 
is Doug Dunbar. I reside in Hermon, Maine and appreciate the opportunity to testify 
in support of LD 697.
Given ongoing concerns about the safety of 5G among a substantial number of 
physicians and scientific experts, it would be prudent for the State of Maine to engage
in research about the technology's potential risks.
According to a recent article in Forbes Health, "more than 3,500 physicians across 
preventive and environmental medicine, toxicology and other specialties have united 
against 5G, citing main associated risks of nonionizing radiation—according to 
peer-reviewed scientific literature—including cancer, cellular stress, genetic damage, 
reproductive changes and deficits and neurological disorders" 
(hwww.forbes.com/health/body/is-5g-safe).
With advances in technology happening rapidly and research into adverse impacts on 
health and safety often struggling to keep up, we should be cautious about possible 
threats, ask tough questions, and expect a thorough study of potential harms. 
There's practically no downside to conducting the research called for in LD 697, but 
tremendously serious potential consequences of not doing our due diligence and later 
learning of significant harm being done to humans and wildlife.
Thank you for giving this issue your thoughtful consideration. I hope you'll support LD 697.  

