 
P.O. Box 233, Richmond, ME 04357 www.fomb.org  
 
Further Testimony in Support of LD 697 
Ed Friedman, Chair, Friends of Merrymeeting Bay (FOMB) via Electronic Filing 3/26/23 
 
Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations and the Effects of 
Long- term Exposure on Children  (as amended by the sponsor). 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler & members of the EUT Committee,  
 
Continuing in support of LD 697 as amended by Representative Quint, FOMB brings to your attention the 
following newly published paper  which is summarized below, hyperlinked and attached. 
 
Davis D, Birnbaum L, Ben- Ishai P, Taylor H, Sears M, Butler T, Scarato T. Wireless technologies, non-ionizing 
elect romagnetic fields and children: Identifying and reducing health risks.  Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care. 2023 
Mar 16:101374. doi: 10.1016/j.cppeds.2023.101374. Epub ahead of print. PMID: 36935315. 
 
Thank you, Ed Friedman, Chair
 
 
The paper includes sections on:  
1. The science documenting   children's unique vulnerability 
2. Scientific evidence indicating a myriad of adverse effects at levels compliant with FCC and ICNIRP   
3. How FCC and ICNIRP limits are inadequate.   
4. International policie s to reduce children's exposure and mitigate risk   
5. Medical and public health organization actions  
6. Recommendations on how to reduce exposure in homes, schools and hospitals 
7. Recommendations for clinicians and medical organizations.   
 
It makes the case for pr otecting children.   
 
New Scientific Paper on Wireless and Children’s Health: Renowned Experts Call for Physicians to Address Family 
Wireless Exposures as Part of Well -Child Visits  
 
New comprehensive paper links wireless radiation exposures to cancer and im pacts on brain development, memory and 
reproduction. Prevention includes reducing exposure.  
  
— A state -of-the- art assessment  on the scientific evidence of wireless radiation impacts on children’s health published in 
the journal Current Problems in Pediatric and Adolescent Health Care concludes that the medical community has a critical 
role to play to prevent harm from wireless radiation. “ Wireless Technologies, Non -ionizing Electromagnetic Fields and 
Children: Identifying and Reducing Health Risks ” is written by distinguished experts in medicine, epidemiology, 
toxicology, physics, biochemical engineering and public health who collectively have published more than 1,000 papers.  
  
The paper  references numerous studies that associate wireless exposure to effects including oxidative stress, DNA 
damage, cardiomyopathy, carcinogenicity, sperm damage, memory damage and neurol ogical effects. The American 
Academy of Pediatrics has long advocated  for U.S. government regulations to be updated to address children’s 
vulnerability. Pregnancy, infancy and childhood are periods of critical susceptibility, especially for the brain, which is 
rapidly developing.  
 
“Current government safety limits are outdated and do not reflect the latest science nor the way children use wireless 
technology today,” stated Linda Birnbaum Ph.D,  former Director of the National Toxicology Program and National 
Institu te for Environmental Health Sciences, regarding this critical examination of experimental and epidemiological 
evidence.  

  
“We highly recommend educating parents on why and how to reduce wireless radiation exposures, especially during 
pregnancy,” stated Hugh Taylor MD , Professor and Chair of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Yale 
University, whose research  has found increased hyperactivity and damage to memory in mice prenatally exposed to cell 
phone radiation.  
 
“The science indicates that wireless radiation acts like a classic endocrine disruptor,“ stated Devra Davis Ph.D, M.P.H. , 
President of Environmental Health Trust , pointing to “substantial evidence” linking wireless exposures to impaired 
memory, behavior, fertility and brain development, as well as cancer and neurological illness.  
 
Noting that human exposure limits for wireless radiation have not been updated for more than two decades, the distinguished authors recommend policies that reduce wireless exposures. The paper
 details how clinicians can integrate a 
preventive approach into their clinical practice by educating patients and families on simple measures to minimize 
exposure. It also offers specific measures to reduce exposure in schools and steps for professional medical and public 
health organizations to take to educate and motivate their members to advocate for more protective regulations.   
 
The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends parents minimize their children’s cell phone use with ten tips for 
families which includes distancing the cell phone from the brain and body, and when watching vi deos on a device parents 
can pre-download movies and then turn the wireless antennas off before handing the device to the child, “in order to avoid 
unnecessary radiation exposure.”   
 
Other U.S. public health entities’ recommendations to reduce children’s exposures include the Californi a Department of 
Public Health cell phone advisory and the Maryland State Children’s Environmental Health and Protection Advisory 
Council guidelines to reduce wireless radiation at home and school.   
 
Theodora Scarato, Executive Director of Environmental Health Trust, highlight s the international policies  to reduce 
children's exposure, such as France and Belgium's bans on the sale of cell phones designed for young children and the numerous countries that have restrictions on Wi -Fi exposure in classrooms. She state s that, “US government limits allow 
radiation emissions 10 to 100 times higher than numerous countries such as Switzerland, Italy, China, Russia and India. 
Many countries have more stringent laws to protect children and restrict cell towers near homes and schools.” 
 
 
The Environmental Health Trust has a website dedicated to educating parents and caretakers on how to reduce children's wireless radiation exposure at healthytechhome.org  as well as a campaign to elevate the issue
 at the federal level.   
 
"Decades of research on the biological effects of microwave radiofrequency radiation ( RFR) provide clear evidence of a 
variety of risks to the health and well -being of adults and, particularly, children from everyday , low- level exposure to 
wireless devices such as smartphones, tablets, laptops, and other WiFi -enabled wireless electronics. M y research  
demonstrates how the FCC  and the ICNIRP placed the needs of the ICT industry above the protection of children. Parents, 
clinicians and policymakers have been lulled into a false sense of security about the safety of childhood RFR exposure. " 
stated Tom Butler PhD, Professor of Information Systems at University College Cork  and former satellite and microwave 
telecommunications engineer .  
 
“A false presumption that wireless radiation is only harmful when tissue is over-heated has blocked progress in health 
protection in many (but not all) countries for decades. One mechanism that initiates harms, including cancers, is well 
known by chemical engineers and commercialized as ‘microwave catalysis,’” stated Meg Sears Ph.D., Chair of Prevent 
Cancer Now,  and Research Associate at the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (Canada). Sears works in environmental 
health, following studies in biochemical engineering and applied chemistry.  
 
“Non ioni zing radiation can have impacts at the cellular level that include impacts on cell homeostasis,  on mitochondrial 
processes critical to cellular energy and metabolism. The assumption that only ionizing radiation can cause harm is outdated and incorrect,” s tated Paul Ben Ishai Ph.D of the Department of Physics, Ariel University, Ariel, Israel, head of 
the laboratory of Terahertz Dielectric Spectroscopy.   
 
 
The enti re paper is open access and the PDF can be downloaded at this link.  
 
Friends of Merrymeeting Bay utilizes research, education, advocacy, and land conservation to preserve, protect, and improve the 
unique ecosystems of Merrymeeting Bay and Gulf of Maine.  
 
TaggedH1Wireless technologies, non-
ionizing electromagnetic ﬁelds
and children: Identifying and
reducing health risksTaggedEnd
TaggedPDevra Davis, PhD, MPH,a,b*Linda Birnbaum, PhD,c,#Paul Ben-Ishai, PhD,d
Hugh Taylor, MD,e,hMeg Sears, MEng, PhD,fTom Butler, PhD, MSc,gand
Theodora Scarato, MSWbTaggedEnd
Children today are conceived and live in a sea of wireless radiation
that did not exist when their parents were born. The launch of thedigital age continues to transform the capacity to respond to emer-gencies and extend global communications. At the same time that
this increasingly ubiquitous tech nology continues to alter the nature
of commerce, medicine, transport and modern life overall, its varied
and changing forms have not been evaluated for their biological orenvironmental impacts. Standards for evaluating radiation from
numerous wireless devices were ﬁrst set in 1996 to avoid heating
tissue and remain unchanged since then in the U.S. and many other
nations. A wide range of evidence indicates that there are numer-
ous non-thermal effects from wireless radiation on reproduction,
development, and chronic illness. Many widely used devices suchas phones and tablets function as two-way microwave radios, send-
ing and receiving variou s frequencies of informat ion-carrying micro-
wave radiation on multiple simultaneously operating antennas.
Expert groups advising governments on this matter do not agree on
the best approaches to be taken. The American Academy of Pediat-
rics recommends limited screen time for children under the age oftwo, but more than half of all toddlers regularly have contact with
screens, often without parental engagement. Young children of
parents who frequently use devices as a form of childcare canexperience delays in speech acquisition and bonding, while olderchildren report feelings of disappointment due to ‘technoference ’—
parental distraction due to techn ology. Children who begin using
devices early in life can become socially, psychologically and physi-
cally addicted to the technology and experience withdrawal upon
cessation. We review relevant experimental, epidemiological andclinical evidence on biological and other impacts of currently used
wireless technology, including advice to include key questions atpediatric wellness checkups from infancy to young adulthood. Weconclude that consistent with advice in pediatric radiology, an
approach that recommends that microwave radiation exposures be
As Low As Reasonably Achievable (ALARA) seems sensible andprudent, and that an independent ly-funded training, research and
monitoring program should be ca rried out on the long term physical
and psychological impacts of rapidly changing technologicalmilieu, including ways to mit igate impacts through modi ﬁcations in
hardware and software. Current kno wledge of electrohypersensitiv-
ity indicates the importance of reducing wireless exposures espe-
cially in schools and health care settings.
Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care 2023; 53:101374
TaggedEndAbbreviations: EMF, Electro-magnetic ﬁeld; EMR, Electromagnetic Radiation; FCC, Federal Communications Commission (U.S.A.); ICNIRP, Interna-
tional Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection; IEEE, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers; MF, Magnetic ﬁeld; GSM, Global Sys-
tem for Mobile Communications; RFR, Radiofrequency radiation; SAR, Speciﬁc Absorption Rate (a measurement of the rate at which energy is absorbed
into particular tissues, when exposed to RFR); SAM, Speciﬁc Anthropomorphic Mannequin (a physical model used to estimate SAR, based on a 220 pound
male with a 12 pound head); HPG, Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Gonadal axis; HSP, Heat Shock Proteins; ORSAA, Oceania Radio Frequency Scientiﬁc Advi-sory Association; DECT, Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications; ICBE-EMF, International Commission on the Biological Effects of Electromag-
netic Fields; ELF-EMF, Extremely Low Frequency Electromagnetic Fields (0 /C03 kHz); CDMA, Code Division Multiple Access; UMTS, Universal Mobile
Telecommunications System; LTE, Long Term Evolution; ROS, Reactive Oxygen Species
TaggedEndFrom the
aMedicine, Ondokuz Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey; TaggedEndbEnvironmental Health Trust, Teton Village, WY, USA; TaggedEndcNational Institute of Environ-
mental Health Sciences and National Toxicology Program, Scholar in Residence, Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University, USA; TaggedEnddDepart-
ment of Physics, Ariel University, Israel; TaggedEndeDepartment of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT USA; TaggedEndfOttawa Hospital Research Institute, Prevent Cancer Now, Ottawa, Canada; TaggedEndgUniversity College, Cork, Ireland; and TaggedEndhDepartment of
Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. TaggedEnd
TaggedEnd*Corresponding author
E-mail: ddavis@ehtrust.org
Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care 2023;53:1013741538-5442/$ - see front matter/C2112023 Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cppeds.2023.101374
TaggedEnd
#This research was conducted by retired Director of the National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, Linda S Birnbaum PhD in her personal
capacity. The opinions expressed in this article are the author’s own and do not reﬂect the view of the National Institutes of Health, the Department of
Health and Human Services, or the United States government.
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 1
TaggedH1Introduction. Children’ s exposures to
wireless radiation are increasing rapidly TaggedEnd
We live in the age of technological wonder,
where the ability to respond to emergencies,
engage in routine commerce, and even con-
duct warfare has been radically altered by wirelesscommunications. At the same time, we are also in an
age of technological imperatives; that is, the fact that
something cantechnically be done has been miscon-
strued as an argument that this should be done, i.e., in
favor of implementing that technology. Parents under-
stand that—just because you cango skateboarding
without a helmet and other protective equipment does
not mean that is a good idea. From wireless baby mon-
itors to the iPad potty for toddlers learning to use thetoilet, Wi-Fi Barbie, tablets and cell phones, today’s
infants, toddlers, young children, and adolescents are
surrounded by wireless technol-
ogies. None has been tested for
their impacts on children. Espe-
cially when used at early stages
of life these devices can inter-fere with social development,
learning, and socialization.
They also can have lifelong and
potentially irreversible adverse
biological effects.
TaggedP“Children are not little adults
and are disproportionately
impacted by all environmental
exposures, including cell phone
radiation.” American Academy
of Pediatrics to the FederalCommunications Commission
(2013)
1TaggedEnd
TaggedPCell phones, tablets, and lap-
tops typically operate as two-
way microwave radios sending
and receiving radiofrequency
radiation (RFR) to and from
internal and external antennas.
Unchanged since 1996, RFRexposure standards for the use
and operation of cell phones and other wireless devi-
ces rest on a crude physical model using an empty
plastic ball for the head into which homogenous ﬂuid
is poured; this uniform medium cannot reﬂect the dif-
ferent densities and electromagnetic properties of
developing physiology, morphology and tissues atdifferent ages, and the greater vulnerability of infants,toddlers, and children. Health based standards have
never been developed to take into account the vastly
different technologies, uses and users employing devi-ces today.TaggedEnd
TaggedPAlthough cellular communication systems and wire-
less technologies have demonstrated numerous direct
beneﬁts to society, they can also pose risks to the
health and safety of the billions who are exposed to
unnecessary levels of RFR throughout the life span.
As demonstrated in this review, given the substantial
experimental, epidemiological and clinical evidence
that current levels of wireless radiation can be harm-ful, especially to the young, we concur with those
experts who counsel that policies should be governed
by the concept of ALARA—as low as reasonably
achievable—while research continues to evolve. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe guiding principle of radiation safety, ALARA
means avoiding exposure to
radiation that does not have a
direct beneﬁt to you, even if the
dose is small .
2TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe guiding principle of radi-
ation safety is “ALARA”.ALARA stands for “as low as
reasonably achievable”.
ALARA means avoiding expo-
sure to radiation that does not
have a direct beneﬁt to you,
even if the dose is small.
2TaggedEnd
TaggedPFor more than a decade the
American Academy of Pediat-
rics3and the American Acad-
emy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry4advised that chil-
dren age two and under have noscreen time, yet infant and tod-
dler use of devices is skyrocket-
ing. That advice has now been
modiﬁed to allow parentally
supervised video calls for ages
18 to 24 months. The Pew
Research Foundation surveyed
parents in 2020 and 2021 and
found that 8 out of 10 parents of a child who was age
11 or younger (81%) said their child had ever used a
tablet computer in 2021 up from 68% in 2020
5; 71%
said their child had used a smartphone in 2021 (SeeFig. 1 ). More recent numbers are sure to be higher, as
the pandemic has led to increased reliance on digital“Children are not little adults
and are disproportionately
impacted by all environmental
exposures, including cell phone
radiation. ”American Academy
of Pediatrics to the Federal Com-
munications Commission
(2013)1The guiding principle of radia-
tion safety is “ALARA ”. ALARA
stands for “as low as reason-
ably achievable ”. ALARA means
avoiding exposure to radiation
that does not have a direct ben-
eﬁt to you, even if the dose is
small.2
TaggedEnd2 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
devices. Reports of serious behavioral problems
including problems with self-control, socialization,language acquisition and the like have been associated
with device addiction; and internet gaming disorder is
on the rise in all age groups.
6TaggedEnd
TaggedPDecades of research on RFR (including micro-
waves) indicate that everyday exposure to wireless
devices can impact the physical, emotional and psy-
chological health and well-being of adults and chil-
dren.7A growing number of independent researchers
ﬁnd that while regulators, such as the U.S. Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) and Interna-
tional Commission on Non-ionizing Radiation
(ICNIRP) currently consider “low-level” exposures
safe; these levels do in fact place children’s endocrine,
reproductive, and immune systems at risk. These cur-
rent regulatory limits are based on the assumption that
over-heating by high power RFR is the only estab-
lished health effect to be avoided. Nevertheless,
numerous studies ﬁnd that nonthermal levels of RFR
can cause major adverse effects such as induction of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), DNA damage, cardio-myopathy, carcinogenicity, sperm damage, memory
damage, and neurological effects.
8As with many
other chemical and physical hazards, there is evidenceindicating that greater detrimental impacts take place
when exposures occur during critical phases of growth
and development, including pregnancy.
9TaggedEndTaggedPSince the 1990s, member states of the European
Union and the FCC have looked to the ICNIRP10and
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers(IEEE)
11for risk assessments and guidance on occu-
pational and public exposure to RFR from all sources.These groups assume that only thermal effects (exces-
sive heating) are to be avoided. In contrast, the Inter-
national Commission on Biological Effects of
Electromagnetic Fields (ICBE-EMF)
12and the Oce-
ania Radiofrequency Scientiﬁc Assessment Associa-tion (ORSAA),
13,14among others, reject the
assumptions on which ICNIRP relies, providing
detailed grounds for their positions.15Moreover, the
former editor-in-chief of the journal Bioelectromag-
netics16contends that standards for evaluating wire-
less phones and other devices have not kept pace withdevelopments in technology ﬁnding that nonthermal
effects do occur and therefore current FCC standards
do not protect public health. TaggedEnd
TaggedPRegulations on both sides of the Atlantic have in
common that they are founded on risk assessments
conducted in the 1980s and early 1990s by industryscientists and their afﬁliates in the IEEE. Despite a
considerable weight of evidence indicating serious
biological and environmental impacts of nonthermal
levels of RFR, the FCC and the ICNIRP risk assess-
ments of non-ionizing radiation from phones and other
devices have remained unchanged for decades. TaggedEndTaggedFigure
Fig. 1. Children ’s engagement with digital devices Survey 2020 by PEW Research Center. (For interpretation of the references to
color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) TaggedEnd
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 3
TaggedPSeveral thousand apps have
been developed for infants and
toddlers to use on phones,
watches and tablets with noresearch on their long-term phys-
ical or psychological impacts. TaggedEnd
TaggedPWhen phones were ﬁrst
brought to market, children’s
cell phone use was unheard of.
Today children are exposed to
wireless radiation from cell phones as well as numer-
ous sources in their homes, child care settings and
schools as shown in Fig. 2 . Several thousand apps
have been developed for infants and toddlers to use on
phones, watches and tablets with no research on their
long-term physical or psychological impacts. ( Fig. 2 ) TaggedEnd
TaggedPThis article assembles key scientiﬁc information
regarding why and how to reduce wireless exposures
to the young, including limiting prenatal and neonatal
exposures. The latest scientiﬁc and clinical studies on
the biological impacts of wireless radiation andmodels of exposure are consid-
ered brieﬂy in terms of unex-
plained trends in cancer, autism
spectrum disorder, learning dif-ﬁculties, attention deﬁcit,
behavioral and psychiatric dis-
orders, and other increasing
pediatric disorders. Finally,
health professional and U.S.
national policy developments
aimed at protecting children from inappropriate andharmful exposures are presented, with speciﬁc recom-
mendations and practices for safer use of technolo-gies. TaggedEnd
TaggedH1Electromagnetic radiation and biological
effects TaggedEnd
TaggedPRadio communications lie at the heart of the cell
phone and wireless radiation revolution via electro-
magnetic “radio waves” or RFR. TaggedEnd
TaggedFigure
Fig. 2. Sources of wireless radiofrequency radiation in the home.TaggedEndSeveral thousand apps have
been developed for infants and
toddlers to use on phones,
watches and tablets with no
research on their long-term phys-
ical or psychological impacts.
TaggedEnd4 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
TaggedH2Electromagnetism TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe theory of electromagnetism emerged in 1865
when James Clerk Maxwell uniﬁed Amp /C18ere’s work
on electricity, and Faraday’s and others’ work on
magnetism into one uniﬁed theory.17,18TaggedEnd
TaggedPSimply put, an electric charge or the movement of
electric charge (in electric currents through wires and
devices) inﬂuences other charges or electrical currentsat a distance. The inﬂuence, called a “ﬁeld,” results
from attractive and repulsive forces between electrical
charges. Positive and negative charges attract, while
two charges of the same sign are forced apart. Of par-
ticular importance is how an oscillating charge creates
a ﬁeld that likewise oscillates, and this disturbance
(called “radiation”) propagates outward as a wave.
Imagine a child ﬂicking a skipping rope—the ‘ﬂick’
propagates down the rope in the same fashion as theelectric ﬁeld propagates in the form of a wave. The
theory was experimentally conﬁrmed in 1887 by
Heinrich Hertz.
19,20TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe duality of a wave is illustrated in Fig. 3 . The
oscillation can be described as a sine wave that
depends both on the time and place of observation.
The top frame of the Figure depicts the oscillation of
the wave as seen by an observer standing in one place
and looking over a period of time. One can imagine
standing near the ocean and staring at a buoy as it
undulates up and down as waves pass below. The bot-tom panel looks the same but depicts how at one
instant in time the waves would look at every spot.
Rather like standing on the same spot near the ocean
and surveying open sea and all the waves before you.
The characteristic features of the wave are its ampli-
tude, A, its wavelength, λ(the distance between two
sequential peaks) and its frequency, f(the number of
oscillations per second, measured as Hertz [Hz] or
reciprocal seconds [s
/C01]). The relationship between
these parameters, the cyclic frequency, v, and the
wavenumber, k, are illustrated in the Figure. Most
importantly the multiplication of the frequency with
the wavelength equals the speed of propagation, c. TaggedEnd
TaggedPMaxwell’s theory predicted that the speed of light
(visible light is a form of electromagnetic radiation)
would be constant at 186,000 miles per second, con-
ﬁrming a measurement ﬁrst made on earth (rather than
by astronomical estimation as done by Ole Rømer and
published in 167621) by Hippolyte Fizeau in 1848.22TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe frequencies of oscillation of electromagnetic
waves can range from fractions of Hertz (a slowvariation in ﬁeld strength taking more than a second
to complete) to billions of times a second. Each fre-
quency can be exploited technologically in different
ways and this is generally represented by the Electro-magnetic Spectrum. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2The electromagnetic spectrum TaggedEnd
TaggedPPhysicians utilize electromagnetic radiation (EMR)
in many forms. High-frequency, ionizing EMR is
employed for diagnosis (e.g., X-ray and CAT scan
imaging) and treatment (e.g., gamma-knife and other
ionizing radiation treatments for cancer; non-ionizing
ultraviolet radiation provides treatment of skin condi-
tions such as psoriasis; infrared radiation is applied in
physiotherapy and intensive care), while pulsed EMR
are increasingly used in orthopedics and physical ther-
apy. The electromagnetic spectrum includes visible
light that forms a sliver of the spectrum ( Fig. 4 ), with
much of the remaining parts being invisible. TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn public health, strong health and safety guidelines
proscribe exposing infants and young children to the
sun’s rays beyond limited exposures. The problematic
rays are found in the sun’s ultraviolet (UV) light in
the UVA and UVB frequency bands. While UVB is
traditionally associated with direct DNA damage that
leads to melanoma or less malignant forms of skin
cancer, recent evidence indicates that UVA plays a
greater role than previously assumed in the onset ofskin cancers and can affect the immune system and
other organs as well.
23Other parts of the spectrum,
especially that of blue light at 440 nanometers areused for their biological impacts on the skin to treat
hyperbilirubinemia
24by stimulating the production of
di-hydroxy-vitamin D in the liver in jaundiced new-borns. Untreated, the syndrome can result in bilirubin
concentrations that can cause acute bilirubin encepha-
lopathy and kernicterus /C0a permanent disabling neu-
rologic condition. Blue light
25is also known to
interfere with sleep by impeding the production ofmelatonin, a natural hormone released by the pineal
gland that is a potent anti-oxidant and free radical
scavenger produced by sleeping in darkness. TaggedEnd
TaggedPReturning to the use of the spectrum for communica-
tion, the ability to transmit a travelling electrical ﬁeld
across space cannot itself establish a communication
channel. For that to take place, information must be
encoded into that transmission. The ability to code
information on EMF was what Guglielmo Marconi
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 5
demonstrated in 189726with his ﬁrst transatlantic
radio transmission. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Signals TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe easiest way to encode information onto EMF is
to turn the transmission on and off—Morse code inother words. Making a spark earned early Morse Code
operators the moniker, “Sparky.” Dots and dashes (a
“digital” mode of communication) are comparable to
the ones and zeros at the root of modern computing.
More information can be transmitted by a careful
modulation of the amplitude of the signal in propor-
tion to the modulation of a sound, be it someone’sTaggedFigure
Fig. 3. Mathematical description of a continuous wave as a sine function. A is the amplitude of the oscillation, f is the frequency, T is
the time period for one complete oscillation, vis the cyclic frequency ( v= 2pf) and k is the wave number. TaggedEnd
TaggedEnd6 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
voice or music. This scheme, known as amplitude-
modulated (AM) radio, dominated early radio and
television broadcasts. However, there is a drawback
with such a scheme in that only one operator can use
the same radio frequency at a time. For two-way AM
communication either, each side must wait for the
other to stop and ‘release’ the frequency (hence the
use of ‘over’ by radio operators) or there must be dif-
ferent carrier frequencies for each channel. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe ﬁrst generation of cellular phones were little
more than AM radio handsets working with 2 channelcommunication (by using a protocol known as Fre-
quency Division Multiple Access
27(FDMA) and
transmitting to an antenna connected to the telephonenetwork, often using relatively high powers of EMF,
up to 5 Watts. Their transmissions could be famously
picked up by ham radio operators, as the future King
of England discovered to his chagrin, when an intimate
conversation between then Prince Charles and his par-
amour, Mrs. Camilla Parker-Bowles was recorded by ascanner enthusiast.
28Continuous analogue signals dom-
inated telephone signals via copper wires that knittedtogether cities and countries, radio and television
broadcasts right up until the early 1990s. TaggedEnd
TaggedPTo overcome problems of limited exchange, and
avoid interference and the embarrassment of royals,digital forms of transmission were introduced. Thesimplest form of digitization is to modulate a carrier
signal, transmitting at a set frequency by multiplying
it by zero or one. This is illustrated in Fig. 5 . TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe ﬁrst panel in the Figure shows the base sinusoi-
dal signal and is known as the “carrier frequency”.
The second panel is a digitization that turns on or off
the signal. The bottom panel is the result of multiply-
ing the two together, resulting in bursts - pulses- oftransmission. A receiver tuned to the carrier frequency
will translate the red envelope into ones and zeros,
resulting in a digital series and information. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2The increase in exposure to electromagnetic
radiation TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe quantity of data transmitted wirelessly and its
associated radiation have increased many orders of
magnitude since the inception of TV and radio pro-
gramming. Rather than weekly anticipation of seeing
a star on the Ed Sullivan Show or the next stage of a
sitcom, we can now enjoy instant gratiﬁcation withbinge-watching, and endless offerings on many plat-
forms, with important environmental implications,
29
including signiﬁcantly increased energy and green-house gas emissions.TaggedEndTaggedFigure
Fig. 4. Electromagnetic Spectrum
* Cellular and cordless phones; computers, laptops, tablets and peripheral equipment; antennae, Wi-Fi, access points and
drones; monitors (e.g. security, medical, for babies); toys and entertainment systems; “smart ”utility meters and appliances; control
systems (e.g. indoor climate or lighting); “wearables ”; power transfer/battery charging stations; and more. (For interpretation of the
references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) TaggedEnd
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 7
TaggedPSince the inception of the
mobile telephone age (the ﬁrst
commercial cellphone hit the
marketplace in 198330) 40 years
ago there have been 5 genera-tions of technological advances
(seeTable 1 ) culminating in the
last 5
thGeneration (5G) Mobile
networks. Each generation hasled to consequent increases in
exposure to EMR.
31One often
trumpeted claim is that the lat-est 5G networks will in fact be greener and reduce
exposure levels. However, in discussing the energy
implications of 5G rollouts, L /C19opez-P /C19erez et al. noted
in a recent survey that a 5G network may consume
over 140% more energy than an equivalent 4G net-
work.
32Additionally, there is no corroborated evi-
dence that 5G networks will reduce exposures. There
are number of studies indicating the opposite will be
true33/C036Some industry experts report that ambient
environmental exposures from near antenna installa-tions from 5G and the densiﬁcation of new wireless
infrastructure can exceed those of current 3 and 4Gnetworks up to 46 times.
33,37
5G networks have multiple
beam-forming antennas,
located about every 100 m.32
The public health and environ-mental impacts of 5G remain
untested. TaggedEnd
TaggedPPart of the reason for this
increase in exposure with 5G isdue to the fact that as higher
frequencies are used atmo-
spheric absorption and scatter-
ing increases. Because 5G frequencies operate alongthe millimeter wavelengths and signals cannot travel
as far as previous systems, they are more prone to dis-
ruption from objects that interfere, such as walls and
other barriers. Therefore, to maintain the same signal
strength more base stations are required, a processknown as “densiﬁcation.” Some estimates put the
number of additional 5G base stations required for
coverage in an urban environment to a 100-fold
increase compared to an equivalent 4G network.
34
More base stations translate to more radiation.Another reason that greater exposures can occur is aTaggedFigure
Fig. 5. A simple illustration of how a continuous carrier wave can be transformed into a pulsed signal for digital transmission. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) TaggedEnd
Some industry experts report
that ambient environmental
exposures near antenna instal-
lations from 5G and the densi ﬁ-
cation of new wireless
infrastructure can exceed those
of current 3 and 4G networks
up to 46 times.
TaggedEnd8 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
result of the fact that the 5G standard relies on a new
technological advance termed Multiple Input Multiple
Output (MIMO) antennas. The number of users that
can connect to a single base station increases by shar-
ing out the frequency band to many more frequency
channels (hence the requirement for higher frequen-
cies) and by dividing the time each individual channelutilizes the same frequency band. In contrast to 2G to
4G standards, this division of frequency bands in 5G
is multiplied by using beam-forming antennas. By
using many small antennas and by closely timing indi-
vidual transmissions on the same frequency, it is
possible to form the signal into a tightly conﬁned
spatial beam from the base station directly to the
user’s 5G phone, 5G tablet or 5G computer. As
long as 2 users are not standing together, they canboth use the same signal frequency and not inter-
fere with each other’s transmission. These are
known as “phased array antennas” and will form
the heart of multiple beam-forming antenna and the
need for MIMO in the 5G standard.
33The electro-
magnetic frequencies utilized for wireless and cel-lular communications, from 1G up to 5G occupy
the Megahertz (MHz) and Gigahertz (GHz) fre-
quency ranges as depicted in Table 1. TaggedEnd
TaggedPHow is EMF exposure quanti ﬁed? TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe metric used for measuring personal exposure
from cell phones is called SAR (Speciﬁc Absorp-tion Rate). It is a gauge of the rate of absorption of
electromagnetic energy by the ﬂesh of the user.
Properly deﬁned it is the rate of absorption of
energy from a cell phone or other wireless device,measured in Watts per Kilogram (W/kg) averaged
over a time period of 6 or 30 minutes distributed
into a 1 g or 10 g volume within the plastic phan-
tom 12-pound head of a large adult male ﬁlledwith homogenous ﬂuid or his 220-pound plastic
body phantom. A local SAR of 1.6 W/kg is
allowed for head and torso, and 4.0 W/kg is per-
mitted for extremities which include the ear (the
pinna). TaggedEnd
TaggedPUsing a computer-controlled probe that dips into the
ﬂuid-ﬁlled phantom head (see Fig. 6 ), the electromag-
netic ﬁeld strength is measured at various points insidethe model of 12-pound head of a large adult male. TheSAR is then calculated by the equation,
SAR¼
s/C12/C12/C12/C12E/C12/C12/C12/C122
rð1Þ
where sis conductivity of the saline solution at the
frequency of interest, Eis the electric ﬁeld strength
andris the density of the media. The protocol of mea-
surement is dictated by the IEEE standard C95.1-
2019.38The human phantom is known as the Speciﬁc
Anthropomorphic Mannequin (SAM) and is standard-
ized by the IEEE.39The SAR rating has been criti-
cized as under-estimating absorption for smallerpersons and for children by a number of authors
40
because the dimensions of the SAM are based on amodel of the 90
thpercentile of 1989 United States
military recruits.41,42,38The homogenized saline
liquid used to electrically mimic ﬂesh cannot
account for the varied and widely differing conduc-
tivities and densities of dif ferent tissues of different
ages.43Underlying this model for estimating expo-
sure is the assumption that the only harm that canbe caused by an electromagnetic wave is heating of
brain or body. In summary, if exposure heating
results in a rise in core body temperature of less
than 1 ˚C, then it is considered not hazardous.
Criticisms of the SAR are further discussed in Sec-
tion 7 on the need to update regulatory limits. TaggedEnd
TaggedPA further metric is the Ambient Power Density
(PD), measured in Watts per square meter or milli-
watts per square centimeter. The ambient PD met-ric measures the ﬂow of electromagnetic energy
per square meter from a distant source, such as a
cellphone base station. In the US the safety limit
for general public exposure to sources such as base
stations, is set at 10 W/m
2(sometimes quoted
equivalently as mW/cm2).TaggedEndTaggedEndTABLE 1. Common cellular technologies and their respective frequency
bands in the MHz (106 Hz) and GHz (109 Hz) ranges.30
Cellular technology MHz frequencies GHz frequencies
GMS (2G) 380 /C0900 1.8 /C01.9
CDMA (2G & 3G) 400 /C0900 1.8/C02.5
UMTS (3G) 699 /C0900 1.7/C02.69
LTE (4G) 400 /C0900 1.9/C05.925
5G NR (5G) FR1 600 /C0960 1.5/C06.7
Bluetooth 2.4
Wi-Fi 2.45, 5 and 6
5G NR (5G) FR2 ——— /C0 24.25 /C071.0
The acronyms stand for Global System for Mobile communications
(GSM), Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA), Universal Mobile Tel-
ecommunications System (UMTS), Long Term Evolution (LTE) and5
thGeneration New Radio Frequency Range (5G NR FR). Currently
5G NR FR1 is being nationally deployed, with limited applicationsof 5G NR FR2 being deployed in some major cities.
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 9
TaggedPThe origins of the ambient PD and the SAR regula-
tions can be traced to the late 1950s when the U.S.
Army and Navy became worried over potential harmto radar operators
44,45from heating by carrying out
studies on a handful of dogs, mon-keys and rats. They had noted eye
damage and burns from over
exposure and the standard for PD
was set at 10 W/m.
2,44,46This
became the established paradigmwith the issuance of the ﬁrst
American standard in 1966 by theAmerican Standard Association
and then by the Institute of Elec-
trical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) for exposure to RFR and
has remained ever since. Further
research, including animal behav-
ioral studies when exposed to
EMF to a level that did not cause
internal heating (of more than
1 ˚C) were used to conﬁrm this
initial assumption.
42In 1996 the
US Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) set current
guidelines for the allowable RFR
exposure of the general public to
RFR ranging from 300 kHz to
100 GHz (3G up to 5G andabove).47based on a 1986 Report of the National
Council on Radiation Protection & Measurements
(NCRP) as well as the Institute of Electrical and Elec-tronics Engineers (IEEE) C95.1-1991 standard. TaggedEnd
TaggedPInternationally, many
national governments either
take their cue for exposure lev-
els from the FCC or from the
International Commission for
Non-Ionizing Radiation Pro-
tection (ICNIRP).
10TaggedEnd
TaggedPA comparison of the
allowed PD limits amongstcounties is given in Fig. 7 . TaggedEnd
TaggedPICNIRP grew out of a
working committee of the
International Commission for
Radiation Protection, a non-
governmental organization
representing professionals and
bodies involved in radiation
industries.
48TaggedEnd
TaggedPNumerous publications
have criticized ICNIRP as aclose-knit invitation-only
group that downplays and
misrepresents research
49
indicating biological effectsat nonthermal levels andTaggedFigure
Fig. 6. Cell phone SAR RF test system using Speci ﬁc Anthropomorphic Mannequin Model. TaggedEnd
In 2021, the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the District of Colum-
bia Circuit issued its judgment in
Environmental Health Trust et al
v. FCC ,ﬁnding that the agency
h a df a i l e dt op r o v i d ear a t i o n a l
record of review of all submitted
science and speci ﬁcally had not
shown evidence of examination
of studies provided to the agency
on the greater vulnerability of
children, the impacts of long term
exposures, environmental
impacts or the failure to update
radiation test procedures for cell
phones and other wireless devi-
ces which have not changed in
more than 27 years.
TaggedEnd10 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
TaggedFigure
Fig. 7. Country variations for radiofrequency radiation exposure limits. TaggedEnd
TaggedEndTABLE 2. ICNIRP and FCC SAR Limits in the U.S. and other countries
SAR Limits for Cell
Phones and Wireless
DevicesWhole -body
average SAR
(W/kg)Head and Trunk *
Localized SAR(W/kg)Limbs and
Extremities **
Localized SAR
(W/kg)Examples of countries that adapted
limits for cell phone and wireless
device premarket tests
ICNIRP
100 kHz to 6 GHzAll SAR limits averaged over 6 minutes.
Local SAR averaged over 10 g of tissue.Occupational Europe, Mexico, China, Greenland, Can-
ada (for over 6 GHz), most countries in
South America except Bolivia, most
countries in Africa0.4 W/kg 10 W/kg averaged
over 10 grams tissue20 W/kg averaged
over 10 grams tissue
General Public
0.08 W/kg 2 W/kg averaged over
10 grams tissue cube4 W/kg averaged over10 grams tissue cube
ICNIRP (2020)
>6-300 GHz
*6 minute averaging ICNIRP states, “Local Sab
is to be averaged over a square 4-cm2sur-
face area of the body. Above 30 GHz, an addi-
tional constraint is imposed, such thatexposure averaged over a square 1-cm
2sur-
face area of the body is restricted to twotimes that of the 4-cm2 restriction.
”Occupational Australia
0.4 W/kg Local S ab
100 mW/cm2
General public
0.08 W/kg Local S ab
20 mW/cm2
FCC
Occupational, averaging time is 6 minutes.
General public averaging time ranges from 6 minutes
to 30 minutes.Occupational United States, India, Panama, Korea,
Vietnam, Canada (for under 6 GHz),Iran, Republic of Bolivia, Cuba0.4 W/kg 8 W/kg averaged over
1 gram of tissue cube20 W/kg averaged over10 grams tissue cube
General Public
0.08 W/kg 1.6 W/kg averaged
over 1 gram tissue cube4 W/kg averaged over10 grams tissue cube
*ICNIRP 's Head and Trunk tissues have both Type 1 and Type 2. ICNIRP deﬁnes Type 1 as all tissues in the upper arm, forearm, hand, thigh, leg,
foot, pinna (visible portion of the outer ear) and the cornea, anterior chamber and iris of the eye, epidermal, dermal, fat, muscle, and bone tissue.
ICNIRP deﬁnes Type 2 tissues: all tissues in the head, eye, abdomen, back, thorax, and pelvis, excluding those deﬁned as Type-1 tissue. Limbs do
not contain any Type-2 tissue.
**FCC deﬁnes extremities as hands, wrists, feet, ankles, pinna/ ear.
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 11
instead self-references its own
commissioners, many of whom
have a history of conﬂicts of
interest.50,51ICNIRP and FCC
limits for SAR are summarized
inTable 2 . TaggedEnd
TaggedPDespite innumerable studies
demonstrating nonthermal bio-
logical effects of RFR, dis-
cussed below, ICNIRP and
IEEE do not recognize non-thermal impacts as sufﬁ-
ciently “established” to be relevant to exposure
limits.7,8,31Numerous scientiﬁc expert groups7,29,52
such as ICBE-EMF and ORSAA emphatically do not
agree with this view. Yet, the FCC reafﬁrmed their
guidelines in 2019, by the expedient of simply recon-
ﬁrming the existing 1996
standard.53,54TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn 1996 the US Federal Com-
munications Commission
(FCC) set current guidelines for
the allowable RFR exposure of
the general public to RFR rang-
ing from 300 kHz to 100 GHz(3G up to 5G and above).
47
This led to legal action againstthe FCC because more than
11,000 pages of published sci-
entiﬁc studies and expert rec-
ommendations had been
submitted to the FCC regarding
the need to strengthen its RF
exposure guidelines.
55The
FCC failed to provide a rational
record of review of submitted
science, and speciﬁcally did not
take into account evidence on
the greater vulnerability of children or environmental
impacts. Human exposure limits and radiation test
procedures for cell phones and other wireless devices
have not changed in more than 27 years. TaggedEnd
TaggedPPublic exposure limits for radiofrequency radiation
from cellphone towers in Italy, Switzerland and Rus-
sia are 100 times lower than those of the U.S., lastset in 1996. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe World Health Organization (WHO) maintains a
dedicated EMF project
56which collates national gov-
ernment regulations57and offers advice to national
government agencies. However, the WHO EMF Proj-
ect has not performed health risk assessment ofradiofrequency electromagnetic
ﬁelds since 199358and several
have questioned its indepen-dence as well as its role in theglobal harmonization of EMF
standards.
59,60The World
Health Organization Interna-tional Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC) constitutes a
separate entity from the WHO
EMF project. IARC classiﬁed RFR as a class 2B pos-sible carcinogen in 2011.
61Within the past few years,
the IARC advisory group has recommended a re-eval-
uation of the body of evidence on cell phone risks to
human health, in light of mounting evidence of
adverse impacts discussed here. TaggedEnd
TaggedPSince 1996, measurement of
radiation permitted from any
particular cell phone is made by
testing temperature changes
inside a plastic phantom 12-
pound head of SAM (Speciﬁc
Anthropomorphic Mannequin),
ﬁlled with homogenous salineliquid to mimic the human
brain with its diverse tissues
and densities, making a 6 to 30
minute phone call, with a
spacer between the head and
the tested phone to allow for
the ear/pinna. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Physical mechanisms of the
interaction of RFR andtissues TaggedEnd
TaggedPNew 5G networks are using
the frequencies of previous generations, but they can
in addition employ higher submillimeter and millime-
ter wave frequencies. The higher the frequency, the
less the radiation penetrates the body, but less penetra-
tion does not mean little or no biological impact. To
the contrary, UVA and UVB are entirely absorbed in
the skin, and can cause important immunological
effects throughout the body including on the produc-tion of vitamin D. Indeed, immune effects of UV skin
exposure can have consequences for the liver, kidney
and other major organs, just as do the lower MHz and
GHz frequencies that can penetrate deeper into thePublic exposure limits for radio-
frequency radiation from cell-
phone towers in Italy,
S w i t z e r l a n da n dR u s s i aa r e
100 times lower than those of
the U.S., last set in 1996.
Since 1996, measurement of
radiation permitted from any
particular cell phone is made by
testing temperature changes
inside a plastic phantom 12-
pound head of SAM (Speci ﬁc
Anthropomorphic Mannequin),
ﬁlled with homogenous saline
liquid to mimic the human brain
with its diverse tissues and den-
sities, making a 6 to 30 minute
phone call, with a spacer
between the head and the tested
phone to allow for the ear/
pinna.
TaggedEnd12 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
body. Importantly, man-made RFR used in wireless
and medical devices can be modulated, polarized and
pulsed, which greatly inﬂuences and can alter their
ultimate impacts.62,63Electroceuticals constitute an
expanding ﬁeld of clinical applications involving a
range of medical devices, from pain control in ortho-
pedics to cancer treatment, biofeedback, and the use
of low-strength pulsed electromagnetic ﬁelds.64As
with pharmaceuticals, any agent that promotes healingmay also promote illness. It is therefore pertinent to
explore potential mechanisms of interaction between
tissues and electromagnetic waves. TaggedEnd
TaggedPAn important division in the spectrum happens at a
frequency of approximately 10
15Hz (wavelength
10/C08m). While Maxwell’s theory, as described above,
considers light as classical waves, modern quantumtheory embraces a dualism in considering light as both
a particle and concurrently as a wave.
65One can con-
sider an oscillating packet of waves conﬁned spatiallyand moving as one through space. This is known as a
photon and the energy it contains is proportional to
the frequency of its oscillation. As the frequency is
reduced and wavelengths get macroscopically longer
(the wavelength of visible light is measured in hun-dreds of nanometers, whereas of radio waves in the
MHz range the wavelengths are measured in hundreds
of meters) the quantum description of light is indistin-
guishable for the classical theory of Maxwell. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe energy inherent in a photon of light at frequen-
cies of UV and above is enough to cause the ionization
of biological molecules. That means that the absorp-
tion of the photon by the molecule can result in the
breaking of chemical bonds, leading to the destructionof the molecule. Speciﬁcally for DNA such an occur-
rence can lead to the promotion of cancers. At fre-
quencies of radio waves direct ionization of DNA or
other molecules cannot happen. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Physical mechanisms of the interaction of RFR
and tissues TaggedEnd
TaggedPAt the submicroscopic level molecules can be
regarded as collections of potentially charged atoms
held together by chemical bonds as they share elec-
trons. RFR also affects atoms that tend to be charged;
either positively charged “cations” (sodium Na+or
calcium Ca2+for example) or negatively charged
“anions” (chloride Cl-). Consequently, bonds will
react to an external electromagnetic ﬁeld, even if itsfrequency is not high enough to lead to direct ioniza-
tion. One can view such a perturbation as gently
“nudging” ions. Under certain conditions bonds can
change and form new chemicals. Indeed, microwavesare used commercially to speed up and alter products
of chemical reactions using “microwave catalysis”.
66
Dysfunctional chemical reactions can lie at the root ofmany distinct forms of ill health for living organisms. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Biological pathways for non-ionizing effects TaggedEnd
TaggedPThere are several pathways67/C071that may be
involved in biological effects of RFR, including the
induction of ROS leading to oxidative stress, activa-
tion of the ERK1/2 signaling pathway, and induction
of heat shock proteins. One of the more accepted path-
ways to damage is the perturbation of Voltage Con-
trolled Calcium Gates (VCCG) by pulsed EMF.72
VCCGs are an integral part of cell membranes that areresponsible for the transport of Calcium ions acrossthe cellular membrane for signaling and regulation of
the cellular homeostasis. In 2000 Panagopoulos et al.
concluded that the ELF EMF components of wireless
communication signals are a critical factor in under-
standing how exposures can lead to pathology.
72,73
Repeated irregular gating of electro-sensitive ionchannels disrupts the cellular electrochemical balance
and homeostasis leading to the overproduction of
reactive oxygen species. The cascading effects ofrepeated exposures can lead to numerous biological
endpoints including the weakening of cell mem-
branes. TaggedEnd
TaggedPDisturbance in ROS homeostasis leads to a patho-
logical state
74termed “oxidative stress”, which plays
an essential roles in regulation of cancer progression.ROS are understood to regulate every step of tumori-
genesis and have been found to be upregulated in
tumors; this can lead to aberrant signaling. In addition
to cancer, oxidative stress plays a role
75in the devel-
opment of many other chronic diseases, including dia-
betes and neurodegenerative syndromes. Reviews of
animal and cell studies consistently ﬁnd even very
low non-ionizing EMF exposures are associated with
increased oxidative stress. Children whose immune
systems are still developing are more vulnerable to
these ROS effects.76,77In 2019 Lai found strong indi-
cations that exposure to static and extremely low fre-quency electromagnetic ﬁelds also affects oxidative
status in cell cultures and experimental animals.
67/C072TaggedEnd
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 13
TaggedH1Children ’s unique vulnerability to
wireless radiation TaggedEnd
TaggedPChildren are more vulnerable to wireless radi-
ation,78/C081just as they are to other environmental pol-
lutants9and medicines. Present and future generations
will have many more hours of
cumulative lifetime exposure to
RFR, because exposures begin
prenatally and continue
throughout early and later life. TaggedEnd
TaggedPChildren have a unique physi-
ology, that results in propor-tionately greater RFR
absorption compared with
adults.
4Children have smaller
heads, resulting in shorter dis-tances for RFR to travel to
reach critical brain regions, andtheir brains contain more ﬂuid that can absorb rela-tively more energy from radiofrequency radiation sour-ces.Fig. 8
70shows that simulations of exposure from
cell phone use have determined that children absorb upto 10-fold greater RFR in the pediatric cerebellum, 10-
fold greater in the bone marrowof the skull and up to 30-fold
greater in the hippocampus.
82
Children’s eyes can absorb 2 toalmost 5-fold higher doses. TaggedEnd
TaggedPChildren absorb proportionally
more RFR than adults; about 2-
fold greater in the pediatric cere-bellum, ten-fold greater in the
bone marrow of the skull and up
to 30-fold greater in the hippo-
campus. Children’s eyes can
absorb 2- to almost 5-fold higher
doses than adults. TaggedEndTaggedFigure
Fig. 8. Absorption of wireless radiation in child vs adult brain and eye from cell phone or Virtual Reality.70(For interpretation of the
references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) TaggedEnd
Children absorb proportionally
more RFR than adults; about 2-
fold greater in the pediatric cere-
bellum, ten-fold greater in the
bone marrow of the skull and up
to 30-fold greater in the hippo-
campus. Children ’se y e sc a n
absorb 2- to almost 5-fold higher
doses than adults.
TaggedEnd14 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
TaggedPChildren’s brain and body tissues have a higher
dielectric constant, a measurement of the ease with
which electromagnetic ﬁelds can move through differ-
ent media. Peyman83documented how the young
brain has a higher dielectric constant due to the higher
water content and less developed myelin sheath. Bony
tissues also change over time depending on the degree
of mineralization of the bone matrix. The largest age-
dependent variation in dielectric properties is
observed in bone because as an animal grows, the
high water content of red marrow is transformed to
the high fat content of yellow marrow.TaggedEnd
TaggedPEvery tissue in the body has unique dielectric prop-
erties. For example, the distinctive dielectric proper-ties of normal and cancerous breast are being
employed to enhance detection of abnormal cells
84
and to devise EMR-based treatments for the disease.85TaggedEnd
TaggedPPregnancy, infancy and childhood are periods of
critical susceptibility, especially for the brain, whichis developing rapidly.
86Children have a faster rate of
neuronal cell growth and the fatty protective sheath ofmyelin is not fully formed until the mid-20s.
87Even
very low levels of an environmental exposure early indevelopment can have lifelong implications for neuro-development. Stem cells
88are more active in children
and have been found to be more sensitive to wirelessfrequencies than differentiated cells.
88TaggedEnd
TaggedPCell phones and wireless devices have premarket RF
emission tests using the large adult SAM model, with
an empty twelve pound head into which homogenous
ﬂuid is poured. Devices are not tested using a child’s
smaller head and body, nor with models of preg-
nancy.42Devices are also tested at a distance from the
body, without direct contact between the antenna and
the body or skull. This is why most smartphones, Wi-
Fi devices and other wireless electronics have instruc-
tions, deeply buried in user manuals, which advise
that devices be kept at a distance from the body.TaggedEnd
TaggedPFig. 977shows the radiation pattern simulated from a
Wi-Fi tablet into the head of a 6 year old.TaggedEnd
TaggedH1Reproduction and pregnancy TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Reproductive capacity TaggedEnd
TaggedPSeveral, but not all reviews89of the effects of EMFs
on male and female reproductive function have identi-ﬁed numerous serious effects that occur at levels ofRFR that do not heat tissues. Gye and Park
90and
Jangid et al.91present a number of in vivo andin vitro
experimental studies demonstrating that non-ionizingnonthermal EMF exposure can alter cellular homeo-stasis, endocrine function, reproductive function, and
fetal development. Impacts on both male and female
reproductive parameters have been reported, includ-
ing: male germ cell death, the estrous cycle, reproduc-
tive endocrine hormones, reproductive organ weights,
sperm motility, early embryonic development, and
pregnancy success. TaggedEnd
TaggedPMechanisms that appear to be involved at the cellu-
lar level include increases in free radicals and calciumions [Ca
2+] related to effects of EMFs, which lead to
cell growth inhibition, protein misfolding and DNAbreaks. TaggedEnd
TaggedPReproductive parameters reported to be affected by
EMF include male germ cell damage and death.
Females may experience impacts on the estrous cycle
affecting ovarian follicles, reproductive endocrine
hormones and reproductive organ weights. Effects on
reproduction include impairments of early embryonic
development, fertilization, miscarriage and a variety
of pregnancy-related outcomes. As with other end-points, experimental effects on reproductive function
differ according to frequency, polarity, wave-form,
strength (energy), and duration of exposure. TaggedEnd
TaggedPA robust body of research on the male reproductive
system speciﬁcally has found decreased testosterone
92
as well as impacts to sperm viability,93motility and
morphology68,94/C0100from current levels of RFR
resulting from use of cell phones or other devices. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe induction of oxidative stress101is understood to be
a key pathway of action that underlies the biological
impacts of RFR on the reproductive organs and also can
play a major role in the induction of cancer as discussed
below.101At the cellular level, increased free radicals
impact mitochondrial metabolism and affect nitric oxidelevels and antioxidant mechanisms.
102RFR may alter
membrane transport and integrity, affecting ion (e.g.,calcium) transport; these are among mediators of effects
of EMFs that lead to cell growth inhibition, protein mis-folding and DNA breaks. See Fig. 10 .
56,92TaggedEnd
TaggedPAcute exposure can stimulate plasma membrane
NADH oxidase and increase the production of ROS.Increases in ROS can stimulate endothelial growth
factor (EGF) receptors which in turn activate extra-
cellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) pathways. The
ERK pathway consists of subsequent activation of
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 15
Ras, Raf proteins, and mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK). The MAPK pathway also has a tumor
promoting role. Chronic exposure to ROS can activatevarious stress kinases (p38 MAP kinase), stimulate
the ERK pathway, and also lead to phosphorylation of
heat shock proteins (Hsp) that inhibit apoptosis,
thereby promoting survival of damaged cells and
carcinogenesis. Hsp can increase the permeability of
the blood-testis barrier and produce infertility.
RFR also can interfere with membrane calcium chan-
nels and promote cancer by stimulating ornithine
decarboxylase, a rate-limiting enzyme in polyamine
synthesis. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Pregnancy is a critical window of vulnerability TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn both animals and humans, prenatal EMF expo-
sures have been linked with impaired development of
structures and functions of the brain, as well as the
reproductive organs and reproductive capacity ofoffspring. Experimental and epidemiological evidenceindicates that prenatal impacts could range from
impaired oogenesis and spermatogenesis, to reducedvolume and number of brain pyramidal cells, other
serious neuronal impairments, ovarian dysfunction
103
as well as increased DNA damage in multipleorgans
104of offspring. TaggedEnd
TaggedPDamage to oocytes in female offspring can in turn
affect fertility as well as the health of following gener-
ations. Daily exposure of young Sprague-Dawley
female rats for 2 h of GSM radiation for 1 and 2
months produced inﬂammation and impairment of
ovarian function103consistent with endometritis, a
growing problem for young adolescents. Intergenera-
tional impacts are increasingly being understood; a
2021 study of more than 200 mother-daughter-grand-
daughter triads, found that granddaughters of those
who had been in the top third of DDT exposure during
pregnancy had 2.6 times the chances of having an
unhealthy body mass index by their mid-twenties andTaggedFigure
Fig. 9. Radiation pattern from 2.45 Wi-Fi enabled tablet into model of 6-year-old head. Radiation pattern normalized to 0.0132
W/g = 0 dB, with a 30 dB color scale, and SAR averaged over 1g cube of tissue. TaggedEnd
TaggedEnd16 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
were more than twice as likely to have started their
periods before age 11—both of which increase their
chances of developing breast cancer and other chronic
illnesses later in life.105TaggedEnd
TaggedH1Toxicological evidence of adverse
impacts of RFR TaggedEnd
TaggedPExperimental studies form the foundation for evalu-
ating pharmaceutical agents and other chemical and
physical environmental exposures that can affect pedi-
atric health. In vitro studies of well-established animalcell lines and human cell lines constitute one effectivesource of information that can be used to predict and
prevent harm in humans. Employing validated rodent
and other models, both short term and long-term in
vivo studies on rodents and other animals are
employed to clarify physiological consequences of
exposures. TaggedEnd
TaggedPStudies of prenatal impacts can yield information on
birthweight along with longer term consequences forhealth of offspring into adulthood. While the key male
role ends at fertilization, damage to sperm in utero
may have transgenerational effects on offspring.
106
There is growing evidence that male-mediated factorsTaggedFigure
Fig. 10. Acute and chronic impacts of cell phone radiation on male reproduction. The Figure shows various acute and chronic cellu-
lar targets of radiofrequency electromagnetic waves (RF-EMW).56,92TaggedEnd
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 17
relating both to preconception and fertilization, as
well as prefertilization and perifertilization exposures
also play roles in determining health outcomes of
progeny. In addition, early-life RFR exposures havebeen demonstrated to cause a range of negative
impacts on male and female reproductive health,
including damage to the testicular proteome
107and
low birthweight. After a month of 4 h daily controlledexposure to nonthermal levels of cell phone radiation,
signaling proteins in the rat testes and sperm produc-
tion were signiﬁcantly altered, indicating impaired
reproductive function and increased cancer risk. TaggedEnd
TaggedPExperimental studies are especially useful in under-
standing the roles of avoidable early-life environmen-tal exposures on outcomes that affect children and
adolescents, since controlled human studies are uneth-
ical. As a result, most human studies that can be used
to clarify the impact of RFR are observational. Fre-
quently, such studies are opportunistic, complex and
expensive, and also challenging to interpret with poor
quality longitudinal data, and limited exposure data,
particularly with evolving uses of ever-changing tech-
nologies. In the real world, children are exposed to
numerous sources of RFR at various frequencies andmodulations throughout their daily lives. Smart
phones can operate with 5 or more antennae simulta-
neously sending and receiving radiation to and from
towers or routers, as most apps are set to update auto-
matically. Yet, most experimental studies only look at
a single frequency at a time. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Prenatal exposures and the central nervous
system TaggedEnd
TaggedPOver the past two decades a number of experimental
investigations have found that prenatal exposure to
some EMF negatively affects both the structure and
function of the adult central nervous system
(CNS).108/C0110As an example, a series of experiments
by Odaci, Bas and Kaplan and colleagues measuringimpacts through stereological analysis demonstrated
that rodents exposed prenatally to 900 MHz had fewercells and more indications of damage in various brain
regions of the hippocampus responsible for learning
and memory.
111Likewise, studies on postnatal expo-
sures of 8 week old rats also found impacts on hippo-campal pyramidal cells.
112,113This team also found
prenatal and postnatal impacts occurred to the Pur-kinje cells in the cerebellum. The cerebellum is criti-
cal to memory, balance and impulse control andappears especially vulnerable to RFR. Others have
hypothesized that RFR might also alter the membrane
current of Purkinje cells within the cerebellum.
Haghani et al. evaluated properties of Purkinje cells
108
following prenatal exposure to 900 MHz EMF and
found that exposed progeny had signiﬁcantly reduced
spontaneous cell ﬁring. While these areas of the brain
have been well characterized after prenatal EMF
exposure, it is likely that many other areas of the brain
are similarly affected. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Prenatal exposures in humans alter behavior
and cognition in offspring TaggedEnd
TaggedPAlthough they are few in number, human studies
investigating in utero exposure to wireless and other
non-ionizing EMF have found a variety of adverse
effects on pregnancy outcomes as well as the health of
offspring regularly exposed to EMF or EMF/RF. TaggedEnd
TaggedPSeveral studies by a team from Kaiser Permanente
lead by Dr. De Kun Li report a range of impacts to
pregnancy and offspring. They measured pregnant
women’s exposure to magnetic ﬁelds (MF) early in
pregnancy using an EMDEX Lite meter (Enertech
Consultants Inc.) that measures magnetic ﬁeld MFexposure for 24 h during a typical day, and providing
a detailed diary of activities to allow the researchers
to: (1) identify locations of daily activities (at home,
at home in bed, in transit, at work, and other); (2) ver-
ify if activities were reﬂective of a typical day; and (3)
examine if locations and activities were associated
with high MF exposure. Women and their progeny
were followed over several years. After controlling
for multiple other factors, they found that women whowere exposed to higher MF levels had 2.7 times the
risk of miscarriage compared to those with lower MF
exposure, a ﬁnding that corroborated earlier research
by the same team.
114Later publications also found
higher in utero MF exposures associated with child-
hood obesity, asthma, and ADHD.115/C0117Similarly
designed research118that measured MF exposure with
the EMDEX meter found lower neural volume and
bud length, measured by ultrasound, in embryos of
women with higher workplace and other exposures to
EMF, who were seeking induced abortion ofunwanted pregnancies that were terminated in the ﬁrst
trimester. Women in the top quartile of MF exposure
had a four-fold increased risk of a shorter embryonic
bud length than those in the bottom quartile. TaggedEnd
TaggedEnd18 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
TaggedPGreater habitual self-reported
maternal mobile device use was
associated with less infant
recovery upon reunion.119TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Behavior and cognition in
children and adolescentsaffected by cell phones TaggedEnd
TaggedPResearchers at the University
of California School of Public
Health in Los Angeles pub-
lished studies in 2008 (13,159
children)120and 2012 (28,745
children)121that found that
exposure to cell phones prena-tally/C0 and, to a lesser degree,
postnatally /C0was associated with behavioral difﬁcul-
ties such as emotional and hyperactivity problems at
the age of school entry. Although smaller studies have
not found an association, in 2017 the largest study to
date of 83,884 mother-child pairs in the ﬁve cohorts
reported that high prenatal cell phone use was linked
to hyperactivity/inattention problems in children,
while no prenatal cell phone use was linked to lowrisk for any behavioral problems. The association was
fairly consistent across and between these large
cohorts. The nearly 40% of the cohort
122reporting no
cell phone use during pregnancy were much less likelyto have a child with overall behavioral or emotional
problems, while those with the highest reported use
during pregnancy had 1.5 times more such problems
documented in their children. The authors indicate
that the “interpretation of these results is unclear asuncontrolled confounding may inﬂuence both mater-
nal cell phone use and child behavioral problems.”
Greater habitual self-reported maternal mobile device
use was associated with less infant recovery upon
reunion .
119TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn addition, two studies reported consistent evidence
associating RFR with lower ﬁgural memory perfor-
mance in adolescents. Foerster et al.123conﬁrmed
Schoeni et al124in a larger study population of 843
adolescents. Teens who used the phone against one
side of their head scored more poorly on tests thatmeasured memory skills speciﬁc to the most highly
exposed brain regions TaggedEnd
TaggedPTeens who used the phone against one side of their
head scored more poorly on tests that measuredmemory skills speciﬁc to the
most highly exposed brain
regions. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Behavior in animals TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn addition to effects on brain
development, pre- and post
natal EMF exposures in numer-
ous studies have found that cell
phone radiation signiﬁcantly
affects a range of learning,
memory, and behavior disor-
ders in rodents.125/C0136Thus,
Aldad et al. showed that prena-
tal exposures to conventional
cell phone radiation throughout
pregnancy resulted in impaired memory and hyperac-tive behavior, as well as altered neuronal developmen-
tal programming, glutamatergic-synaptic transmission
onto pyramidal neurons of the prefrontal cortex. Fra-
goupoulou and Margaritis demonstrated in several
studies that animals exposed to radiation have
impaired performance on several standard measures
of learning. Employing the standard Morris water
maze test of hippocampal-dependent spatial memory,they showed that just 2 h per day of exposure to pulsed
nonthermal cell phone signals of 900 MHz resulted in
signiﬁcant deﬁcits in performance in exposed animals.
Moreover, sham-exposed animals showed the
expected preference for the target quadrant, while
exposed animals showed no preference. These results
indicated that the RFR exposed mice had deﬁcits in
their capacity to consolidate and/or retrieve and recall
learned spatial information. TaggedEnd
TaggedPDespite these and numerous other studies demon-
strating nonthermal impacts of RFR, standard settinggroups such as IEEE and ICNIRP generally dismiss
experiments that use actual transmitting devices (cell
phones, Wi-Fi routers) in their studies, arguing that
the exact exposures are not adequately quantiﬁed.
Indeed, it is true that real devices emit constantly
varying signals and erratic pulsation patterns that are
more bioactive than can be produced through con-
trolled laboratory simulations.
137A number of other
expert groups including the ICBE-EMF and ORSAA
contend that employing actual phones and devices in
controlled studies with shielded systems can yield
important ﬁndings that are more realistic than those
achieved through other means. In fact, experimentalGreater habitual self-reported
maternal mobile device use was
associated with less infant
recovery upon reunion.119
Teens who used the phone
against one side of their head
scored more poorly on tests that
measured memory skills speciﬁc
to the most highly exposed
brain regions.
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 19
studies employing real mobile phone exposures are
fairly consistent in showing adverse effects.138As an
example, Aldad andcolleagues
139provided evi-
dence that prenatal exposures
to RFR from an operating
phone signiﬁcantly alter behav-
ior of offspring. TaggedEnd
TaggedPMice prenatally exposed to
cell phone radiation from oper-
ating phones (800-1900 Mhz)
through gestation exhibited
behavioral and neurophysiolog-ical alterations that persisted
into adulthood. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe prenatally exposed mice were more hyperac-
tive, with diminished memory and decreased anxiety.
Findings further demonstrated impairment of glutama-
tergic synaptic transmission among pyramidal cells in
the prefrontal cortex associated with these behavioral
changes, suggesting a mechanism by which these
exposures could lead to increased prevalence of neu-
robehavioral disorders. There
was a signiﬁcant trend acrossthe groups treated for 0, 9, 15,
and 24 h/day demonstrating
that evidence of damage
increased in direct proportion
to the amount of exposure the
animals experienced. Mice pre-
natally exposed to cell phone
radiation from operating
phones (800-1900 Mhz)through gestation exhibited
behavioral and neurophysiolog-
ical alterations that persisted
into adulthood. TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn another example, Broom exposed mice to non-
thermal levels of long-term evolution wireless (LTE)
1846 MHz downlink from late pregnancy (gestation
day 13.5) to weaning (postnatal day 21) and observed
28-day-old offspring. They found signiﬁcant effects
on both eating behaviors and activity, and concluded
that repeated exposure to low-level RFR in early lifemay have persistent and long-term effects on adult
behavior.
140TaggedEnd
TaggedPAfter ﬁnding cell phone radiation exposure affected
spatial memory in mice, researchers from the Depart-
ment of Cell Biology and Biophysics at the University
of Athens, Greece conducted experimentsinvestigating brain proteome responses in mice fol-
lowing whole body exposures to mobile phone or
wireless DECT base radia-tion.
141They found that long-
term irradiation from both sour-
ces signiﬁcantly altered the
expression of 143 proteins in
total, in critical brain regions
such as the hippocampus, cere-
bellum, and frontal lobe. They
speculated that these
“underexpressed” or
“overexpressed” proteins fol-lowing EMF exposures may
play a role in short term or
long-term effects of RFR reported in humans as a con-sequence of mobile phone exposure, including mem-
ory deﬁcits, headaches, sleep disorders, and brain
tumors. TaggedEnd
TaggedPMice exposed to mobile phone radiation at levels
well below the permissible ICNIRP exposure limits
for human-head exposure (SAR 2 W/kg) induced hip-
pocampal lipidome and tran-scriptome changes that mayunderlie brain proteome
changes and memory deﬁcits. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThus, Fragopoulou et al.
showed that phone radiation
(SAR 0.022/C0 0.366 W/kg), well
below ICNIRP limits forhuman-head exposure but com-
parable to SAR levels produced
in human brain regions inducessubstantial phospholipid fatty
acid remodeling in the brain, on
the one hand, and on the other
hand, alters the expression of
genes that are implicated in lipid metabolism. Thesemechanisms are hypothesized to account for the deﬁ-
cits in memory that this group has reported.
142Mice
exposed to mobile phone radiation at levels wellbelow the permissible ICNIRP exposure limits for
human-head exposure induced hippocampal lipidome
and transcriptome changes that may underlie brainproteome changes and memory deﬁcits. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Carcinogenicity TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn 2011 WHO/IARC designated wireless RFR as a
Class 2B “possible” carcinogen based largely onMice prenatally exposed to cell
phone radiation from operating
phones (800-1900 Mhz)
through gestation exhibited
behavioral and neurophysiolog-
ical alterations that persisted
into adulthood.
Mice exposed to mobile phone
radiation at levels well below
the permissible ICNIRP exposure
limits for human-head exposure
(SAR 2 W/kg) induced hippo-
campal lipidome and transcrip-
tome changes that may underlie
brain proteome changes and
memory de ﬁcits.
TaggedEnd20 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
studies of heavy cell phone users, that found increased
risks for tumorsboth glioblastoma brain tumors and
acoustic neuroma, as well as
some experimental data withanimals. Earlier, in 2002, mag-
netic ﬁeld ELF-EMF was also
classiﬁed Group 2B possible
carcinogen due to studies asso-
ciating residential magnetic
ﬁeld exposure with childhood
leukemia.
143This association
continues to be observed.144,145TaggedEnd
TaggedPSince the 2011 WHO/IARC
designation, several large ani-
mal71,146/C0148and case-control
human149/C0152studies investi-
gating carcinogenicity have
been published associating
RFR with cancer. A 2020 systematic review and
meta-analysis153of case-control studies found that
1,000 or more hours of cell phone use, or about17 min per day over 10 years, was associated with a
statistically signiﬁcant increase in tumor risk. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Experimental carcinogenicity evidence TaggedEnd
TaggedPEvery agent proven to cause cancer in humans will
also produce it in animals when adequately tested—
World Health Organization,
International Agency for
Research on Cancer TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe international gold stan-
dard for rodent carcinogenicity
studies has been developed by
the U.S. National ToxicologyProgram (NTP), a program sup-
ported by several major federal
agencies (NIH, CDC, FDA)
that carries out transparent
studies. To date the NTP has
evaluated more than 600 different physical and chemi-
cal agents for their potential to cause cancer in ani-
mals under carefully controlled conditions. Every
agent proven to cause cancer in humans will also pro-
duce it in animals when adequately tested—World
Health Organization, International Agency forResearch on Cancer. TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn 2018, the NTP released the results of their large-
scale rodent studies on cell phone radiation, which
used non-thermal levels of RFR designed to mimiccell phone exposures. Especially relevant for pediat-
rics and long-term human impacts is the ﬁnding that
the rodents exposed prenatallyto RFR had signiﬁcantly lowerbirth weights compared to
unexposed animals. This ﬁnd-
ing constitutes an important
signal that nonthermal radiation
levels can impair development,
as low birth weight is under-
stood to reﬂect an important
lifelong risk factor for adult
health. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe NTP found signiﬁcant
increases in relatively rare andhighly malignant schwanno-
mas of the heart and gliomas
in male rats. These tumor
t y p e sa r et h es a m eh i s t o t y p ef o u n dt ob ei n c r e a s e din epidemiological studies of long-term cell phone
users. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe NTP study also reported increases in DNA dam-
age
71in both mice and rats and the induction of car-
diomyopathy of the right ventricle in male and female
rats.147,148TaggedEnd
TaggedPWhen it was completed in 2018, the NTP study,
which followed long-established protocols, was the
largest rodent bioassay ever conducted on cell
phone radiation that beganwith prenatal exposures and
ended after 24 months of
exposures. Soon afterwards,
the Ramazzini Institute
146
employing similarly con-
trolled protocols released its
ﬁndings from an even larger
animal study of 2448 rats,
which employed both similar
and lower exposures compara-
ble to those of base stations
such as Wi-Fi, and observed the same types ofmalignant tumors—schwannomas of the heart—in
male rats. Overall, these two large scale animal
studies alongside the human data
153provide reason-
ably strong evidence of the potential for non-ther-
mal levels of RFR to cause cancer in humans. TaggedEnd
TaggedPAnalysis of the NTP and Ramazzini data according
to current risk assessment guidelines concluded that to
be consistent with other toxicological assessments, the
protection of children requires that U.S. governmentEvery agent proven to cause
cancer in humans will also pro-
duce it in animals when ade-
quately tested —World Health
Organization, International
Agency for Research on CancerThe NTP found signi ﬁcant
increases in relatively rare and
highly malignant schwannomas
of the heart and gliomas in male
rats. These tumor types are the
same histotype found to be
increased in epidemiological
studies of long-term cell phone
users.
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 21
FCC limits should be strength-
ened by 200 to 400 times.154TaggedEnd
TaggedPU.S. RFR exposure standards
would lower current standardsby 200 to 400 times, if they
were consistent with usual
methods for assessing risks for
chemical and other hazards. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Cancer epidemiology —
Case-control studies TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe multi-nation Interphone case-control study155
from 2010, deﬁned a cell phone user as someone who
made one call a week for 6 months. That study did not
include any cases from the U.S., was led by the IARC,
and reported no overall increased risk of brain cancer
with cell phone use, but did ﬁnd that the highest users
of phones incurred the greatest risk. Combining par-
ticipants with little phone use with those with heaviest
use diluted the chances of ﬁnd-
ing any effect. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe case-control MobiKids
study of 352 brain cancer
patients between the ages of 10to 24 reported cell phone use; it
also found no overall increased
risk for brain tumors in the age
group diagnosed between 2010
and 2015. The latency for brain
cancer in adults is known to
range up to four decades; in
children it is believed to be
shorter. In fact, only 5% of thestudy participants /C017 individu-
als/C0had used cell phones for
more than 5 years. Unsurpris-
ingly, no evidence of signiﬁcant association
emerged. This study has also been criticized as
methodologically ﬂawed
156especially as so few of
the participants had signiﬁcant exposures to cellphones. Although no overall increased risk was
reported for brain tumors in the temporal region of
these young cases an increased risk was found in
the age groups 10 /C014 and 20 /C024 years /C0age groups
that had lived long enough to have incurred more
exposure than the younger children included in this
study.TaggedEndTaggedPResearchers examining the
Canadian MobiKids cohort car-
ried out sophisticated statistical
modeling including potentialsources of biases and probabi-
listic methods, and did not ﬁnd
strong evidence of an associa-
tion between reported cell-
phone use and meningioma,
acoustic neuroma, or parotid
gland tumors /C0tumors plausibly linked with cell phone
radiation, but they did note a signiﬁcant association
with glioma. TaggedEnd
TaggedPFor glioma, when comparing those in the highest
quartile of use ( >558 lifetime hours) to those who
were not regular users, the odds ratio among Canadian
children participating in Mobikids was 2.0 (95% con-
ﬁdence interval: 1.2, 3.4). After adjustment for selec-
tion and recall biases, the odds ratio was 2.2 (95%
conﬁdence interval: 1.3, 4.1). TaggedEnd
TaggedPDespite major limitations in design, the Mobikids
study of cell phone use in Cana-
dian children reported a dou-
bled risk of glioblastomamultiforme from using cell
phones, a risk that should pro-
vide a sobering message to
those that seek to prevent such
disease from occurring in the
ﬁrst place. TaggedEnd
TaggedPMore recent case-control
studies of glioma in adults from
Sweden
157and France,149and
systematic analyses that com-
bine data on adult cell phone
users carried out in China ﬁnd
10 years or more of cell phone
use signiﬁcantly associated with increased risk of glio-blastoma, with 20 years of exposure resulting in a
more than doubled risk. Analyses of shorter-term
exposures, such as predominated in the Interphone
study, do not ﬁnd such an association, suggesting that
there is a latency of 10 years or more for glioblastoma.
Thus, in those few studies that have followed longerterm users, more hours of use and longer time periods
of use have been found signiﬁcantly associated with
between a 40% to more than 200% increased risk of
glioblastoma. TaggedEndU.S. RFR exposure standards
would lower current standards
by 200 to 400 times, if they
were consistent with usual meth-
ods for assessing risks for chem-
ical and other hazards.
Despite major limitations in
design, the Mobikids study of
cell phone use in Canadian chil-
dren reported a doubled risk of
glioblastoma multiforme from
using cell phones, a risk that
should provide a sobering mes-
sage to those that seek to pre-
vent such disease from
occurring in the ﬁrst place.
TaggedEnd22 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
TaggedH2Cancer epidemiology —
Cohort studies TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn contrast to case controls
studies, the UK ‘Million’ Woman
Cohort study and the Danish
Cohort Study constitute two stud-
ies often cited as proof that there
is no relationship between cell
phone use and brain cancer. Bothhave been roundly criticized for
serious shortcomings. For exam-
ple, in the UK cohort study of
almost 800,000 older menopausal women, only 18%
of cell phone users
158talked 30 or more minutes per
week, as self-reported from 2001 to 2011. Yet, the U.K. study combined slight and regular mobile phone
users into a single category and compared them with
those who reported no phone use. More than 80% of
UK households had landlines during the study
period. It is likely many in this cohort also usedcordless phones, yet, this signiﬁcant additional
source of RF was not evaluated. In fact, the UK
cohort authors acknowledge
159their study was
unable to assess the risks associated with consider-ably greater levels of exposure. Consequently, the
authors note that: “advising heavy users on how to
reduce unnecessary exposures remains a good pre-
cautionary approach.” TaggedEnd
TaggedPOther cancers plausibly reported in epidemiological
studies to be tied with cell phone radiation include:thyroid cancer, early-onset breast cancer, early-onset
colorectal cancer, and testicular cancer. In a certain
subset of those with a common genetic susceptibility,
heavy cell phone usage is associated with signiﬁcantly
doubled risk of thyroid cancer.
69Since the advent of
smart phones in 2010, phone antennas tend to belocated at the bottom of phones As a result, peak
phone RFR exposure is more likely to occur in the
neck than in the brain.
160Smart phones include sev-
eral different antennas, each one of which can send
and receive RFR, with multiple antennas for data,
photos, video and other applications located around
the phone perimeter. In addition, women who have
carried phones in their bras or worn Vocera devices
next to their chest have developed unusual patterns of
breast cancer, with tumors sometimes appearing pre-
cisely under the areas where their phone antennas
were located.161,162TaggedEndTaggedPSeveral independent analyses
published since the originalIARC assessment in 2011 con-
clude that if the criteria that theWHO/IARC relied on when
determining carcinogenicity
were applied to current science,
this would result in classiﬁcation
of cell phone radiation as a prob-
able carcinogen (Group 2A) or
proven (Group 1) human
carcinogen.
7,8,16,163/C0167TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Unexplained increases in
pediatric and young adult cancers are
consistent with increasing wireless exposures TaggedEnd
TaggedPTrends in cancer can provide signals about underly-
ing etiologic factors, as occurred with increases in
lung cancer in male and female smokers in the mid-
twentieth century, and increases in the rare clear-cell
adenocarcinoma of the cervix in young women whose
mothers had used diethylstilbestrol to prevent miscar-
riage.168Cancers tend to have multiple contributory
causes, which can ebb and ﬂow over time. Over thelast several decades, incidence of several differentearly-onset cancers in adults
169below 50 years of age
have increased in many nations, including those of thebreast, colorectum, bone marrow, and thyroid.
Although explanations for these patterns will certainly
be multi-factorial, wireless radiation is one of the fac-
tors that should be more widely explored. TaggedEnd
TaggedPRates of rectal cancer have quadrupled in those
under age 24 in the past decade in the U.S. and Iran
and risen rapidly
170in the U.K, Egypt, and Brazil.
One recent study171asserts that these increases could,
in part, be associated with radical changes in expo-sures to cell phone radiation due to devices kept close
to the body for extended periods of time. More and
more children and young adults keep transmitting
smartphones with their multiple antennas that are con-
stantly updating apps next to their abdomens inside
their tight clothing for hours a day, along with a wire-
less earpiece in their ear. Thus, although speaking
directly into phones has declined, close proximity to
their radiation has not.TaggedEnd
TaggedPWhat makes the potential connection between colo-
rectal cancer increases and cell phone exposuresIn those few studies that have
followed longer term users,
more hours of use and longer
time periods of use have been
found signi ﬁcantly associated
with between a 40% to more
than 200% increased risk of
glioblastoma.
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 23
especially plausible is an experimental study showing
that colon and rectal cells are exquisitely sensitive to
non-ionizing radiation like that emitted by phones
today. Moreover, exposure to non-ionizing mobilephone radiation can lead to effects on treated colon
tissues of rats similar to t hose observed from ioniz-
ing 3Gy gamma radiation. Mokarram et al.
172
reported that epigenetic patterns of the estrogen
receptor (ER a) after exposure
to ionizing radiation paral-leled those occurring after
exposure to non-ionizing
RFR. Using biomarkers thathave previously been estab-
lished to signal damaging
exposures, they further found
that methylation patterns may
constitute an important vali-
dated biomarker of exposure
to radiofrequency radiation
that has the potential to play
a role in the expression and
promotion of colorectal cancer.
172TaggedEnd
TaggedH2EMFs as endocrine disruptors TaggedEnd
TaggedPEndocrine disruptors are understood to be agents,
either natural or man-made, which can mimic or inter-
fere with the body’s hormones and disrupt develop-ment leading to a range of developmental,
reproductive, neurological, and immune problems, as
well as cancers. Common sources include plastics,
metal can liners, detergents, ﬂame retardants, and pes-
ticides. TaggedEnd
TaggedPEMF exposures have been linked to a range of clas-
sical endocrine disrupting effects. TaggedEnd
TaggedPA team from the California Institute of Behav-
ioral Neurosciences & Psychology reviewed the
effects
173of both RFR and ELF on thyroid gland
hormones and histopathology and found evidence
that RFR was associated with alterations in T3,
T4, and TSH hormone levels, disruption of the
function of the HPG axis leading to thyroid
insufﬁciency and hyper-stimulation of thyroid
gland follicles. This caused apoptosis of follicular
cells. Non-ionizing radiation was seen to be sig-
niﬁcantly associated with histopathological
changes in the thyroid gland follicles and the
authors contend that non-ionizing EMF radiationmight be responsible for the recent increase inthe incidence of thyroid insufﬁciency and cancer
in the general population. TaggedEnd
TaggedPCritical research needs to be conducted to under-
stand the effects especially to future generations.Cant €urk et al.
174investigated the effects of pre- and
postnatal 2450 MHz RFR on the thymus of rats over
four generations and found that the number of pups
and weight of all rats decreasedsigniﬁcantly in the third-gener-
ation. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThus, it appears that non-ion-
izing
175RFR has all the classic
hallmarks of endocrine disrup-
tors that affect reproduction,
development of the hypotha-
lamic-pituitary-gonadal axis
(HPG) and alter normal male
and female reproductive end-
points. Alterations in spermato-
genesis and oogenesis, for
example, in turn affect a num-
ber of endocrinological and other functions through-out life, including fertility and behavior in offspringalong with the risk of cancer, neurological disorders
and other chronic illnesses.TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Animal studies of additive or synergistic effects
of RFR with other agents TaggedEnd
TaggedPReplicated experiments show that RFR can have
important co-carcinogenic and tumor promoting
effects when combined with known carci nogens.
Lerchl et al.152found carcinogen-induced tumor rates
were signiﬁcantly higher in mice exposed to nonther-
mal doses of radiofrequency below current regulatory
limits. The authors argued that it was a “very clear
indication that in principle tumor-promoting effects of
life-long RFR exposure may occur at levels supposedlytoo low to cause thermal effects.” TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe Ramazzini Institute performed two large life-
span rat cancer studies
176combining magnetic ﬁeld
non-ionizing EMF with either acute exposure togamma radiation or chronic exposure to formalde-
hyde in drinking water and found signiﬁcantly
greater incidence of mali gnant tumors with either
co-exposure than occurs without such combinedexposures. TaggedEndRFR has all the classic hallmarks
of endocrine disruptors that
affect reproduction, develop-
ment of the hypothalamic-pitui-
tary-gonadal axis (HPG) and
alter normal male and female
reproductive endpoints.
TaggedEnd24 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
TaggedPInvestigators from the Beijing
Institute of Radiation Medicine
in China have also produced
important evidence of synergis-tic effects. They determined
that combining 2.8 GHz and
1.5 GHz microwaves
177
impaired spatial memory muchmore strongly than exposures to
a single frequency. It is impor-
tant to realize that such com-
bined frequencies can easily
occur at this time within a single smart phone that canoperate on different frequencies at the same time. This
same team has reported
178that exposure to nonther-
mal levels of 2.8 GHz and 9.3 GHz—as could occurwith 5G networks /C0led to signiﬁcant impacts to the
thymus and spleen, such as congestion and nuclearfragmentation of the lymphocytes, and more severe
injuries. Their transcriptomic
and proteomic analysis of
peripheral blood and spleen
suggested that alterations of
DNA replication, cellularmetabolism, and signal trans-
duction might be involved in
microwave-induced immune
activation. The spleen not only
ﬁlters blood-borne pathogens
and antigens but also plays a
critical role in immune system
regulation.TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Effects of screen time TaggedEnd
TaggedPHigher levels of adolescent
screentime,179social media
access180and cell phone use in teenagers’ bedrooms
are associated with reduced sleep time181as well as
negative effects on daily functioning,180behavior182
and mood. An ever growing body of evidence183is
associating184children’s addictive and excessive use
of screens and digital media with a myriad of adverse
social (relationships, social skills, cyberbullying), psy-
chological (anxiety, depression, suicidal ideation,
obsessive compulsive disorder185) neurodevelopmen-
tal (cognitive development, behavior, attention,
speech186) and physical (obesity, high blood pressure)
consequences. Key factors187determining screen time
effects include duration, content, media type, degreeof access to social media,
whether screens are located in
the bedroom180and the amount
of after dark/evening use.180,187TaggedEnd
TaggedPHigher levels of adolescent
screentime,179social media
access180and cell phone use in
teenagers’ bedrooms are associ-
ated with reduced sleep time181
as well as negative effects ondaily functioning,
180behav-
ior182and mood. TaggedEnd
TaggedPAxelsson et al.188found the amount of time spent
with screens predicted shorter sleep in preschoolers.
Regardless of the time of day that screens were
accessed by children, greater screen time was associ-
ated with poorer sleep quality, poor communication,
poor problem solving and greater attention problems.
The AAP notes,184“the prevalence of problematic
Internet use among childrenand adolescents is between 4%
and 8%.TaggedEnd
TaggedPUp to 8.5% of U.S. youth 8 to
18 years of age and 4.6 % ofChinese youth meet criteria for
Internet gaming disorder
deﬁned by the World Health
Organization in its standard
Diagnostic and Statistical Man-
ual of Mental Disorders-Fifth
Edition (DSM-5) as an uncon-
trollable, persisting need to
engage directly with digitalmedia and games that cannot be
stopped. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThis diagnostic code is
included in the DSM-5,
189and
in the 11th Revision of the International Classiﬁcationof Diseases (ICD-11
6), signaling interference with
socialization, including disturbing important areas oflife such as family relationships, school, work, eating,
bathroom habits and sleep. In its criteria for gaming
disorder, the WHO does not include in its criteria any
speciﬁc number of hours spent with screens, butinstead focuses on the inability to engage in normal
social life of young children and teens, including out-
door activities as well as socializing indoors with fam-
ily and at school. The category of internet gaming
disorder was added in 2019. According to Pew,
190
97% of teen boys and 83% of girls play games onHigher levels of adolescent
screentime,179social media
access180and cell phone use in
teenagers ’bedrooms are asso-
ciated with reduced sleep
time181as well as negative
effects on daily functioning,180
behavior182and mood.
Up to 8.5% of U.S. youth 8 to
18 years of age and 4.6 % of
Chinese youth meet criteria for
Internet gaming disorder
deﬁned by the World Health
Organization in its standard
Diagnostic and Statistical Man-
ual of Mental Disorders-Fifth
Edition (DSM-5) as an uncontrol-
lable, persisting need to engage
directly with digital media and
games that cannot be stopped.
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 25
some kind of device. How
many of them are addicted is a
matter that should be seriously
examined, as the toll on pediat-ric mental and physical health
continues to mount. TaggedEnd
TaggedPHigher screen time has been
associated with a higher preva-
lence of prospective disruptive
behavior disorders.
191
Clinicians187,192posit that the
effects of electronic screen time
can mimic or exacerbate psy-chiatric disorders as the interac-
tive media can lead to
chronically high arousal levels
which can lead to nervous sys-
tem dysregulation. As a conse-
quence, treating physicians
have developed treatments
including an “electronic fast” to
rebalance the brain and relieve
overstimulated reward (addiction) and sensory path-
ways. Interventions such as reducing screen mediahave been found to result in a substantial increase in
children’s engagement in physical activity
193and
increasing outdoor “green” time194is beneﬁcial to
mental health as well as lowering myopia incidence195
in school-aged children.196TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Technoference contributes to speech and
bonding delays TaggedEnd
TaggedPStudies116of infant parental dyads ﬁnd that more
frequent reported mobile device use was associated
with less room exploration and positive affect, and
less recovery (i.e., engagement with mother, room
exploration positive affect) even when controlling for
individual differences in temperament. Delays in
speech acquisition197and the development of interac-
tive skills also have been reported in infants of parentsthat use devices more frequently. In addition, the phe-
nomenon of “technoference”
198is receiving increased
attention from experts in behavioral and developmentpsychology. Heavy parental digital technology usehas been associated with suboptimal parent-child
interactions. Parental problematic technology use—
termed “technoference” — is associated with technol-
ogy-based interruptions in parent-child interactionsand potentially associated with
a range of child behavior prob-
lems. TaggedEnd
TaggedPStudies
120of infant parental
dyads ﬁnd that more frequentreported mobile device use was
associated with less room
exploration and positive affect,
and less recovery (i.e., engage-
ment with mother, room explo-
ration positive affect) even
when controlling for individual
differences in temperament.Delays in speech acquisition
and the development of interac-
tive skills also have been
reported in infants of parents
that use devices more fre-
quently. TaggedEnd
TaggedPParental distraction in early
infancy can be problematic for
obvious reasons. This remains a
topic of increased research attention and a matter thatshould be routinely queried at every well child visit,beginning with infancy throughout the school years.
Simple questions noted below can provide the founda-
tion for teachable moments that convey the need for
direct parental involvement in early years when life-
long beneﬁts can accrue. Harried young parents, espe-
cially those who are raising children without partners,
may rely heavily on digital devices as a form of child-
care. They should be informed about the importance
of direct eye and verbal contact with infants, as wellas reading aloud starting in infancy, as these practices
have been shown to have lifelong beneﬁts to social
and emotional development. TaggedEnd
TaggedH1Clinical practice guidance TaggedEnd
TaggedPAvoidable environmental exposures can profoundly
affect and alter children’s development and health.Along with the beneﬁts of nutrition and regular physi-
cal and social activity, clinicians are aware of adverse
effects of lead, pesticides, food additives, air pollu-
tion, ultraviolet radiation, and more broadly climate
change, on children’s health. Exposures that takeplace early life can have disproportionately large
impacts on later life health and well-being. TaggedEnd
TaggedPAs recommended by the AAP, clinicians can inte-
grate developmental as well as EMF issues in practiceStudies120of infant parental
dyads ﬁnd that more frequent
reported mobile device use was
associated with less room explo-
ration and positive affect, and
less recovery (i.e., engagement
with mother, room exploration
positive affect) even when con-
trolling for individual differences
in temperament. Delays in
speech acquisition and the
development of interactive skills
also have been reported in
infants of parents that use devi-
ces more frequently.
TaggedEnd26 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
by regularly discussing screentime and digital media
use. AAP guidance regarding phones and other wire-
less devices should be widely shared and employed.
These include:
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15For children under 18 months, avoid screen-based
media except video chatting.TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15For children 18 months to 24 months, parents should
choose high-quality programming and watch while
interacting with their children, on a limited basis. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15For children 2 to 5, no more than one hour per day
of high-quality screen time and engage with chil-
dren regarding content and experiences. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15For children 6 and up, establish consistent limits on
the time spent using media and the types of media. TaggedEnd
TaggedPRecognizing that RFR may contribute to ill health
provides further incentive to include clinical practices
such as:
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15Query use of screens, digital media, cell phones and
Wi-Fi linked devices at yearly physicals; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Provide guidance to patients and their families on
how to decrease excessive screen time and to reduce
RFR exposure (See Section 7); TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Respond with additional interview questions,
resources and referrals as appropriate if symptoms
potentially related to use of screens or exposure to
EMFs are reported; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Engage in continuing education and training on
EMF issues, and screen use; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Record and report cases where links have been iden-
tiﬁed between EMF and symptoms or health out-
comes; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Encourage undistracted reading out loud to infants
and young children; and TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Develop family media plans for parents as well as
children, explaining that parental distraction with
devices can impair child development including
speech acquisition. TaggedEnd
TaggedPPractitioners also need training in EMF-related
effects to be able to discern whether common pediat-
rics complaints such as headaches and problems sleep-
ing could, in fact, be due to the excessive use of
technologies in the home or school environment.Clinicians encountering patients presenting with unex-
plained symptoms can consider the complete clinical
picture and health history, and investigate, treat if nec-
essary, or exclude commonly recognized etiologies.For example, patients may come into the ofﬁce with
unexplained array of symptoms such as headaches
and rashes that may be related to EMF (e.g., cell
antennas recently mounted nearby, or upgraded schoolWi-Fi system recently installed). Clinicians need
greater awareness so that in differential diagnosis they
include the possibility that symptoms may be associ-
ated with EMF and evaluate the patient in a systematic
fashion. TaggedEnd
TaggedPClinical practice guidelines for EHS have been
developed by trained clinicians and experts,
199
EUROPAEM group,200Dr. Riina Bray, Medical
Director, Environmental Health Clinic, at Women’sCollege Hospital, University of Toronto
201and the
Austrian Medical Association,202among others. TaggedEnd
TaggedPClinical practice guidelines include:
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15Comprehensive case history that includes environ-
mental exposure history including questions regard-
ing typical daily EMF/ RFR exposure, toxic metal
exposures, diet, mold, and other potentially toxic
chemical exposures at home, child care settings,
school, work and play, and in the community.TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Assess community, work, school and home expo-
sures to EMFs: proximity of cell phone towers,
routers, DECT cordless phones, and any other wire-
less technology, especially in sleeping areasTaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Assess variation of health problems depending on
time and location. For example, do headaches or
other unexplained symptoms attenuate in different
areas, but return chieﬂy when the child is in one spe-
ciﬁc location? Did headaches or symptoms beginwhen a new router or cell antenna was installed? TaggedEnd
TaggedPAs technologies (and healthier alternatives) evolve
and knowledge advances, there is a need for cliniciansperiodically to update their knowledge through con-
tinuing medical education with technical experts in
bioelectromagnetics—a ﬁeld that is not widely taught
or studied in medical schools at this juncture. Some
accredited programs
203offering up to 24.5 continuing
medical education credits can be found online. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Electromagnetic sensitivity —An
underdiagnosed pediatric problem TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe phenomenon of hyper-reactivity to chemical
and physical phenomena remains poorly understoodbut is believed to be a serious and sometimes disabling
problem. TaggedEnd
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 27
TaggedPElectromagnetic hypersensitivity (EHS)204is
believed to affect a small but signiﬁcant segment of
the population—with estimates up to 15%. Its preva-
lence in children has never been evaluated, but couldprove to be important in cases in which vague symp-
toms of headache, numbness, tingling and rash cannot
otherwise be alleviated. EHS is characterized by head-
aches, sleeping problems, memory problems, nose-
bleeds, unexplained skin rashes, digestive problems,
neurological problems, heart palpitations and fatigue.
Symptoms
200vary from person to person, making this
a challenging subject to study and to treat. Notably,prenatal and postnatal exposure to cell phone RFR islinked to increased headaches in children,
205adoles-
cents,206and adults,205and use of smartphones have
been identiﬁed as a trigger for migraines.207TaggedEnd
TaggedPEHS symptoms208have been linked to exposures to
non-ionizing EMF, including from nearby cell towers
and base station wireless antennas and routers. No
studies have been conducted on EHS in children. Die-
udonn /C19e209studied forty individuals convinced that
they were sensitive to electromagnetic ﬁelds, and con-cluded that contrary to allegations of nocebo
responses, attribution of theirsymptoms followed a common
linear model: (1) onset of
symptoms; (2) failure to ﬁnd a
solution; (3) discovery of EHS;
(4) gathering of information
about EHS; (5) implicit appear-
ance of conviction; (6) experi-
mentation; and (7) conscious
acceptance of this knowledge. TaggedEnd
TaggedPFurther evidence of the
importance of identifying sour-ces of exposure and reducing
them comes from a recent
report from Sweden on the sud-
den acquisition of highly reac-
tive biological responses to a
newly introduced source of
RFR. Following the introduction of 5G networks in a
dense urban environment, a previously healthy couple
reported disabling symptoms of headache, palpita-tions, tingling, tinnitus and major discomfort. Upon
detailed examination of their environment, it was
determined that 5G network had recently been
installed quite close to their apartment. A thoroughlydetailed case report
210documents this sudden change
in RF exposure and the onset of severe symptoms inthis couple just a few days after the installation of a
5G base station on the roof above their apartment. Thedeployment of 5G caused a dramatic increase in maxi-
mum (peak) microwave radiation exposure, from 9
000mW/m2 to >2 500 000 mW/m2. The symptoms
quickly reversed when the couple moved to a dwellingwith much lower exposure. TaggedEnd
TaggedPSymptoms often are misdiagnosed as health profes-
sionals lack training on the matter. Preliminary clini-
cal practice guidelines
201have been developed. The
U.S. Access Board211has recognized that
“electromagnetic sensitivities may be considered dis-abilities” under the Americans with Disabilities Act,
and the Job Accommodations Network supported
by the U.S. Department of Labor’s Ofﬁce of Dis-
ability Employment Policy has issued a list of
guidelines
212for accommodation of electromag-
netic sensitivity.213Adults in the U.S. are often
accommodated in the workplace (being provided
hardwired computer connections, or moving to a
lower-EMF ofﬁce) but in many cases they have
had to ﬁle legal actions. TaggedEnd
TaggedPDespite these accommoda-
tions for adults, parents seeking
accommodations in U.S. public
schools for children who expe-
rience EHS have been challeng-
ing as schools will refuse to
accommodate and the families
often must resort to home-
schooling. In the UK, parentswon a legal battle
214against
local authorities who are nowcompelled to provide an envi-
ronment with reduced wireless
radiation so that their child can
attend school. There are also
other examples internationally
of legal decisions mandating
workplace accommodations or payment for injuries
215
from EMF exposure. TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn Canada, EHS is described in the report, Medical
Perspectives on Environmental Sensitivities216to the
Canadian Human Rights Commission.217Medical and
legal216reports underpin a policy218for accommoda-
tion under the Canadian Human Rights Act. TaggedEndThe U.S. Access Board211has
recognized that “electromag-
netic sensitivities may be consid-
ered disabilities ”under the
Americans with Disabilities Act,
and the Job Accommodations
Network supported by the U.S.
Department of Labor ’sO fﬁce
of Disability Employment Policy
has issued a list of guide-
lines212for accommodation of
electromagnetic sensitivity.213
TaggedEnd28 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
TaggedH2Synergistic and combined toxic exposures in
children TaggedEnd
TaggedPChildren are exposed to numerous combinations of
environmental exposures over their lifetime. Even
where exposures are low, they can interact with each
other resulting in additive or synergistic results. TaggedEnd
TaggedPAnimal and human studies219indicate that non-ion-
izing EMF can act synergistically when combined
with other toxic agents. For example, Sueiro-Bena-vides et al.
220found that 2.45 GHz, a frequency used
in Wi-Fi networks, combined with carbon black (CB)increased CB-induced toxicity and prolonged inﬂam-
matory immune responses. Exposures to non-ionizing
EMF from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or cell
phones has been found to enhance the release of mer-
cury from dental amalgam.
221RFR has been found in
several studies to impact the integrity of the blood-brain barrier that protects the brain from toxic mole-
cules circulating in the blood.
132,222/C0225TaggedEnd
TaggedPA longitudinal study226of 2,422 children at 27 ele-
mentary schools in 10 Korean cities examined effectsand interactions between voice call cell phone use and
blood lead levels (lead levels were comparable to
those in U.S. children). Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder symptom risk was signiﬁcantly greater in the
children with above-median lead levels and above-
median weekly cell phone call duration. TaggedEnd
TaggedPA similar interaction was reported by Choi et al.
227
Across the cohort, maternal cell phone use duringpregnancy was not associated overall with child neu-
rodevelopment during the ﬁrst three years. Among
children exposed to higher maternal blood lead level
in utero , however, a greater risk of both a poorer psy-
chomotor development index and a lower mentaldevelopment index up to 36 months of age was associ-
ated with higher cell phone calling time or frequency
during pregnancy. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2A theoretical role for RFR in the etiology of
autistic spectrum disorder TaggedEnd
TaggedPAutism remains a puzzling and troubling problem
for growing numbers of children, their families and
their physicians. The disease228is increasing among
both males and females, and among nearly all racial/ethnic subgroups, from 4.2 per 1,000 in 1996 to 15.5
per 1,000 in 2010. A recent report from the U.S.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention notes thatrates have continued to increase. The prevalence of
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) among 11 surveil-
lance sites is 1 in 54 among children aged 8 years in2016 (or 1.85%). This constituted a 10% increase
from 2 years previously when it was 1 in 59, and the
highest prevalence since the CDC began tracking
ASD in 2000. Consistent with previous reports, boys
were 4 to 5 times more likely to be identiﬁed with
ASD than girls. The rate for ASD is 1 in 34 among
boys (2.97 percent) and 1 in 145 among girls (0.69%).
Although many environmental factors
229have been
posited, including air pollution, pesticides, and heavy
metals, the potential role of RFR should also be seri-
ously explored. TaggedEnd
TaggedPExperimental studies showing that prenatal expo-
sures to RFR can disrupt the development of the hip-
pocampus provide some foundation for speculating
that EMFs could also be a contributing factor. Thus,
RFR has plausibly been hypothesized to play a role in
the development of ASD via disruption of the devel-
oping poorly myelinated central nervous system.
When presented with serious behavioral disorders
including autism, some psychiatrists have employedsuccessful treatment protocols that involve family
management systems to facilitate cessation and with-
drawal from use of digital devices. Psychiatrist Victo-
ria Dunckley
192notes that early use of digital devices
can create a heightened state of ﬁght or ﬂight amongyoung brains and bodies, placing them under constant
stress. Children are easily addicted to routines of fall-
ing asleep, eating and even using the toilet accompa-
nied, not by parents soothing assurances, but bydigitized music, visions and sounds that increase
dopamine—the brain chemical tied with pleasure and
addictive behaviors. Providing several impressive
case reports of toddlers that had been out of control
and unable to give up their digital ﬁxations,
Dunckley notes that digital fasting can yield
impressive results, especially with children on the
autism spectrum. Her book provides several
detailed instances where altering children’s access
to digital devices can radically improve behavior.
Other published reports also offer corroboration forthis hypothesized connection.
230,231TaggedEnd
TaggedPPsychiatrist Martha Herbert and research analyst and
editor of the Bioinitiative Report , an ongoing record of
relevant scientiﬁc ﬁndings, Cindy Sage, among others,
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 29
have called for more aggressive investigation of the
possible connections between RFR uses and expo-
sures and disorders on the autism spectrum. They
speculate that behaviors on the autism spectrum couldemerge from alterations of electrophysiological oscil-
latory synchronization and EMF/RFR could contrib-
ute and “worsen challenging biological problems and
symptoms; conversely, reducing exposure might ame-
liorate symptoms of ASD by reducing obstruction of
physiological repair.”
232,233TaggedEnd
TaggedH1Inadequate regulatory limits TaggedEnd
TaggedPFCC and ICNIRP regulatory limits have been long
criticized by experts and the court because they do not
address children’s unique vulnerability, the biological
and health effects of long-term exposure nor the cur-
rent ways that children are exposed to cell phone and
wireless radiation. In 2012, the AAP wrote the FCC
and other federal agencies calling for an update to the
FCC’s 1996 exposure limits stating, “it is essential
that any new standard for cell phones or other wireless
devices be based on protecting the youngest and most
vulnerable populations to ensure they are safeguardedthroughout their lifetimes.” A decade later that call
remains unanswered. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Cell phone and wireless
device limits TaggedEnd
TaggedPRegulations regarding human
exposure to RFR include: 1.
allowable limits for ambient
exposures created by cell towernetwork emissions and wireless
networks, called maximum per-
missible exposure limits in the
U.S.; and 2. exposure limits for
localized exposures into areas
of body tissue from phones, and
personal and household devi-
ces, referred to as Head and
Body SAR limits. The ICNIRP
and IEEE
38standards used as
the basis for many gov-
ernments’ limits remain largely
unchanged since the 1990s and they are intended to
protect for effects caused by short term high powered
exposures. These limits are not designed to protect foreffects from long term, low level chronic exposures
because ICNIRP and IEEE do not consider such
effects as “established.” As former ICNIRP member
James C. Lin describes them: “ They are ﬂawed and
are not applicable to long-term exposure at low levels.
Instead of advances in science, they are predicated on
misguided assumptions with outdated exposure met-
rics that do not adequately protect children, workers,
and the public from exposure to the RF radiation or
people with sensitivity to electromagnetic radiation
from wireless devices and systems. Thus, many of the
recommended limits are debatable and absent of sci-
entiﬁc justiﬁcation from the standpoint of safety andpublic health protection.”
16TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Wireless network exposure limits TaggedEnd
TaggedPU.S. limits for RFR were promulgated by the FCC in
1996, based largely on a 1986 Report of the NationalCouncil on Radiation Protection & Measurements
(NCRP)
234and the Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineers (ANSI/IEEE) C95.1-1991 stan-dard.
235The U.S. limits for environmental RF levels
are among the most lenient in the world, and are simi-lar to those of Australia, Japan, Germany and other
countries that also adopted inadequate ICNIRP limits. TaggedEnd
TaggedPHowever, some countries, including Italy, Switzer-
land, China, and Russia haveadopted regulatory limits for
cell towers and base station net-
work emissions that are far
more stringent
236than the ther-
mally based limits of the U.S.FCC and ICNIRP.TaggedEnd
TaggedPEuropean nations with more
stringent regulatory limits settheir policies based on the pre-
cautionary principle, a key
framework used in their deci-
sion making process. This prin-
ciple rests on the sage advice of
Benjamin Franklin—better to
be safe than sorry. TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn 2011, the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of
Europe (PACE) Resolution
1815: The potential dangers of electromagnetic ﬁelds
and their effect on the environment ”
237strongly rec-
ommends that the ALARA (as low as reasonablyachievable) principle is applied, covering both the so-In 2011, the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of
Europe (PACE) Resolution 1815:
The potential dangers of electro-
magnetic ﬁelds and their effect
on the environment ”237
strongly recommends that the
ALARA (as low as reasonably
achievable) principle is applied,
covering both the so-called ther-
mal effects and the athermic or
biological effects of electromag-
netic emissions or radiation. ”
TaggedEnd30 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
called thermal effects and the athermic or biological
effects of electromagnetic emissions or radiation.” TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn contrast, the more strict RF limits in Russia and
China238are considered “science based,” not precau-
tionary, and were developed based on their own gov-
ernment scientists’ studies of the biological effects of
nonthermal RFR levels. India lowered its limits to 1/
10 of ICNIRP limits in 2012239in response to a report
from an Inter-Ministerial Committee that reviewedthe research
240on impacts to wildlife, including hon-
eybees and other pollinating insects, and concluded239
that the “vast majority of published literature indicate
deleterious effects of EMFs in various species.” (SeeFig. 7 for comparisons) It is notable that other groups
have recommended even lower limits. For example,the
Ecolog Report, commissioned by T-Mobile and
Deutsche Telekom in 2000, reviewed the science rec-ommended a limit of 0.01 W/m2 to” be rigorously
adhered to by all base stations near sensitive places
such as residential areas, schools, nurseries, play-
grounds, hospitals and all other places at which
humans are present for longer than 4 hours.”
241TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Why the SAR standard is inadequate to protect
children TaggedEnd
TaggedPPre-market tests for cell phones and wireless devices
measure the Speciﬁc Absorption Rate (SAR), which is
the standard accepted measurement of the rate of RF
(radiofrequency) energy absorption. (See Table 2 .)
For cell phones and other handheld wireless devices,many countries have adopted either FCC or the
ICNIRP limits for premarket RF compliance.
Although the FCC limit is slightly more restrictivecompared to ICNIRP limits, both rest on avoiding the
effects of heating as measured by the SAR. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe SAR metric is criticiz ed as a heat-based measure
unable to capture
72the numerous characteristics242of
nonthermal exposure considered relevant to bioeffectssuch as pulse, modulation, variability or duration of expo-
sure.TaggedEnd
TaggedPThat said, even if the SAR was a valid measure for
health effects thresholds, the SAR testing protocol
itself has long been criticized as unrealistic for numer-
ous reasons. To start, it does not take into account thesmaller sizes of women, infants and children, and
other properties of children that place them at greater
vulnerability. Thus, the child brain sits in a thinner
skull that contains more ﬂuid which can absorb moreradiation per unit volume than the adult brain with its
thicker skull. TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn regards to children’s exposure, the AAP
1wrote
the FCC in 2012 noting that, “although wireless devi-ces sold in the United States must ensure that they do
not exceed the maximum allowable SAR limit when
operating at the device’s highest possible power level,
concerns have been raised that long-term RF exposure
at this level affects the brain and other tissues and
may be connected to types of brain cancer, including
glioma and meningioma,” and also that, “The current
metric of RF exposure available to consumers, the
Speciﬁc Absorption Rate, is not an accurate predictorof actual exposure.” TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe head and body phantom are ﬁlled with a homog-
enous liquid that does not capture the way the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld moves through different tissues in the
head such as brain tissue, which is of varying thick-
nesses and characteristics. The dielectric properties of
tissues in children’s head and brain differ from adults
because children’s tissues have more water content
and thus are more conductive than adults. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe SAM model has long been argued to provide a
conservative estimation of the exposure from a mobilephone, even for children. However, research supporting
this position has generally used a scaled down version of
an adult head which did not account for all age depen-
dent variations in children, such the anterior fontanels
which close between 7 and 18 months. When these more
realistic variations are accounted for, the SAR values for
children are signiﬁcantly higher. For example,
Mohammed
243used realistic head models in several sce-
narios simulating young children between 3 months and
18 months holding phones near their ear and mouth as
well as a person holding a mobile phone near a child’s
head. They found that 10g SAR values in the heads of
young children are signiﬁcantly higher than those for
adults and also noticeably higher than the scaled models
used in previous studies that considered dosimetry for
children over 3 years old. TaggedEnd
TaggedPResearch supporting the SAM model244is based on
early phone models that were designed with antennas
on the top of the phone body and more recent research
has found that for newer phone models with antennasintegrated along the bottom of the phone, the SAM
does not always ensure
40a conservative estimation. TaggedEnd
TaggedPPhones are tested while operating at the highest
power level, in speciﬁc positions against the phantom
head and body. Devices generally operate at the mini-
mum necessary power, in order to maximize battery
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 31
life, but in many situations the power output is much
higher, to ensure reception at the receiving antenna in
the cellular base station. Low incoming signal strength
triggers a signiﬁcant increase a phone’s emissions;people encounter low signal strength in rural areas far
from base stations and also, for example, in rooms in
basements or buildings where building materials block
the signal. The many real world exposure scenarios
result in highly variable emissions from any one cell
phone model, regardless of the stated SAR value. TaggedEnd
TaggedPAlthough the standardized SAR test positions are
supposed to simulate the way people typically hold a
cell phone, the standardized positions do not test inbody contact positions for body SAR tests. The test
positions do not mimic a cell phone in full body con-
tact such as in a pants pocket or resting against the
abdomen. Parents today often hold their newborns
with the cell phone right up against the baby and yet
premarket SAR tests do not include such positions. TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn summary, the SAR test and SAM have been roundly
criticized as underestimating and not adequately captur-
ing the real world exposures of children, babies, and tod-
dlers, and children who are positioned in direct or close
body contact with cell phones or other devices. TaggedEnd
TaggedPFurthermore, manufacturers SAR test phones at var-
ious distances from the body. In the U.S. a manufac-turer can decide to test for body SARs at 5, or 10, or
even 25 mm. The measured SAR value will increase
the closer the phone is tested to the body phantom.
Thus, the manufacturer posted SARs of different mod-
els that use different separation distances cannot be
directly compared to each other. TaggedEnd
TaggedPAlthough SAR levels often are used to compare cell
phones in terms of which phone emits more RF thanothers, the SAR value does not necessarily reﬂect a
difference in a consumer’s actual exposure for these
reasons. Hence a phone with a lower SAR level does
not necessarily mean lower RF exposure. Nonetheless,
the SAR is the metric in use and the basis for exposure
limits worldwide. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Regulatory gaps affecting children TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe AAP1has long advocated1that federal agencies
strengthen regulations calling for:
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15A reassessment of human exposure limits and testing
requirements to ensure children’s uniquevulnerabilities are addressed and to reﬂect the waychildren use phones today in close proximity to the
body; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Establishing a federal research program as the basis
for exposure standards; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Cell phone and wireless device product labeling
requirements to “enable parents to better understand
the potential dangers of RF energy exposure and
protect their children.” TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe AAP supported245national legislation, the Cell
Phone Right To Know H.R. 6358,246proposed in
2012, which would have addressed numerous regula-tory gaps in federal policy regarding stating that,
“Children are disproportionately affected by environ-
mental exposures, including cell phone radiation. Thedifferences in bone density and the amount of ﬂuid in
a child’s brain compared to an adult’s brain could
allow children to absorb greater quantities of RF
energy deeper into their brains than adults.” TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Prevention: medical organization, public
health, government policy and actions tomitigate risk to children TaggedEnd
TaggedPBased on the established science, including child-
ren’s special vulnerabilitie s, trajectories of expo-
sures and diseases, clinicians need to know that
they are supported by medical associations, have
the resources to support their patients, and ﬁnally
have the evidence in hand to advocate for them. A
few of the supportive agencies and recommenda-
tions are noted below. Others can be found at
www.ehtrust.org .247TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Medical organizations and public health
agencies TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe AAP and several in ternational medical
organizations248/C0251have recommendations252on
how to reduce cell phone radiation exposure. The
AAP has long advocated for more protective245
federal regulations and issued ten ways to decreaseexposure in 2016
252including “avoid carrying your
phone against the body like in a pocket, sock, orbra. Cell phone manufacturers can’t guarantee that
the amount of radiation you’re absorbing will be at
as a f el e v e l . ” TaggedEnd
TaggedEnd32 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
TaggedP“Avoid carrying your phone
against the body like in a
pocket, sock, or bra. Cell phone
manufacturers can’t guaranteethat the amount of radiation
you’re absorbing will be at a
safe level.” American Academy
of Pediatrics.
252TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn 2017, the California
Department of Public Health
(CDPH) released an advisory
on cell phones.253CDPH’s sci-
entists had evaluated the RFR from almost254two
dozen phones and found that when they transmit attheir highest power due to use in areas of low service
(one or two bars) the emissions can be up to 10,000-
fold higher than when the phone is used in areas of
strong signal. The CDPH’s advice initially was based
on the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute’s
2008
253cell phone radiation reduction advice to doc-
tors and staff, constituting the ﬁrst ever U.S. medicalinstitution advisory on cell phone radiation. TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn 2022, the Maryland State Children’s Environ-
mental Health and Protection Advisory Council
255
issued information on how families can reduce wire-
less and non-ionizing EMF exposures at home and
also made recommendations to schools. TaggedEnd
TaggedPA summary of basic recommendations from these
organizations and agencies is presented below. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2How families can reduce EMF exposure TaggedEnd
TaggedPCell phones TaggedEnd TaggedP
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15Cell phones are not toys or teething items. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15When parents hold their babies or children in their
arms, they should not simultaneously use or hold
mobile phones or wireless devices as this will
expose the child to RFR. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Decrease overall time spent on wireless phones and
prefer corded phones for long calls. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Delay purchasing a ﬁrst cell phone for a child. Cell
phones should only be used by children for emer-
gencies. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Prefer text messaging over voice and video calls. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Decrease exposure to and through the brain by using
cell phones in speaker mode, away from the head
and body, or wired airtube headsets with the phone
away from the body. Avoid airpods. WhileBluetooth signals are much
weaker than cell phones, chil-
dren and teens keep them in
their ears for hours a day andthe long term impact has
never been independently
evaluated. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Avoid carrying cell phones
against the body like in a
pocket, sock, or bra. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Do not talk or text while driv-
ing.TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Learn how to switch phone to airplane mode with
Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, Hotspot antennas toggled off in
settings. Many applications on phones can still be
utilized in airplane mode. For example, in order to
play movies and music but avoid unnecessary RFR
exposure, download the ﬁles ﬁrst, then switch the
device to airplane mode and play. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Keep an eye on your signal strength (i.e. how many
bars you have). The weaker your cell signal, the
harder your phone has to work and the more radia-
tion it gives off. It’s better to wait until you have a
stronger signal before using your device. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Avoid making calls in cars, elevators, trains, and
buses. The cell phone works harder to get a signal
through metal, so the power level increases. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Learn how to connect the cell phone to the internet
with ethernet cables. TaggedEnd
TaggedPComputer, laptop and tablet internet
connections in buildings TaggedEnd TaggedP
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15Install internet access via a hardwired ethernet con-
nection instead of Wi-Fi. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Wi-Fi routers should be distanced from areas where
children sleep, play and school. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15At a minimum, power Wi-Fi networks off at bed-
time and during periods when not in use. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Connect computer/laptop/tablet accessories and
peripherals such as printers, speakers, keyboard and
mouse with cords, rather than Wi-Fi or Bluetooth.TaggedEnd
TaggedPAt home TaggedEnd TaggedP
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15Replace cordless phones with corded phones. Cord-
less phones and their base stations emit RFR. TaggedEnd“Avoid carrying your phone
against the body like in a
pocket, sock, or bra. Cell phone
manufacturers can ’t guarantee
that the amount of radiation
you’re absorbing will be at a
safe level. ”American Academy
of Pediatrics.252
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 33
TaggedP/C15Avoid wireless digital baby monitors. If necessary,
choose wired monitoring systems. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Remove screens, electronics and wireless devices
from the bedroom. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Turn off devices at night and ensure sleep areas are
not against a wall where utility meters are installed
on the other side as “smart” meters are sources ofRFR and other EMF. TaggedEnd
TaggedPAdditional considerations
during pregnancy TaggedEnd
TaggedPSimple preventive measures
during pregnancy can signiﬁ-
cantly decrease fetal exposures,
especially the high intensity
exposures from a wireless
device resting directly on the
abdomen.
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15Distance cell phones and
wireless devices away from
your abdomen. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Power off cell phones when
carrying them near your
body.TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Always use laptops and tablets on a desk, not on
your lap or close to your abdomen. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15For voice calls, use corded phones instead of cell
phones or cordless phones. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Use ethernet connections instead of Wi-Fi to con-
nect devices. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Cell tower emission and ambient limits TaggedEnd
TaggedPAs shown in Fig. 7 numerous countries such as
India, Israel, Greece, China,256Russia and eastern
European countries have RFR limits for cell towernetwork emissions that are much stricter than the lim-
its of the US/FCC (although there is not always docu-
mented reliable monitoring or enforcement in every
country). Australia, Japan, Italy and Switzerland have
limits for areas such as schools and apartment build-
ings and areas where people spend several hours a
day. Several governments, such as France, Israel,Greece and Switzerland have RFR measurement pro-
grams in place along with easy access to the data. For
example, in France, the National Frequency Agency
ANFR “Observatoire des Ondes”
257posts online theRFR measurements taken numerous times a day in
various major cities. Countries such as Greece and
Israel have policies in place that speciﬁcally restrict
the placement of cell towers near “sensitive areas”deﬁned generally as schools and/or homes and hospi-
tals and provide for online access to real-time radia-
tion levels. Greece further restricts exposure to a
stronger limit within 300 m ofsensitive areas. Chile’s
“Antenna Law”
258has estab-
lished mitigation measures inareas with dense infrastructure
and prohibits towers near“sensitive areas” deﬁned as
institutions serving children,
the elderly, and the medically
compromised. Again, monitor-
ing and enforcement are not
reliably determined in many
instances. TaggedEnd
TaggedPAt the local level, numerous
municipalities in the U.S.
259
and other countries260have pol-
icies to restrict cell towers onschool property and many com-
munities have removed wire-
less antennas from school properties. For example, theSupreme Court of India upheld a decision by the High
Court of the State of Rajasthan to remove installations
on school properties and playgrounds.
261TaggedEnd
TaggedPSeveral countries focus their RFR monitoring and
oversight on children’s areas. Brazilian Law nr 11,934
includes regulations262deﬁning a critical area as the
50-meters-radius around hospitals, clinics, schools,
day care centers, and facilities for the elderly. The
RFR levels must be assessed within 60 days after the
issuance of a license and then regularly re-evaluated.
Like France, Brazil hosts an online map263with the
country’s RFR measurements. Greece’s NationalObservatory of Electromagnetic Fields
264has 500 sen-
sors providing RFR level monitoring for schools andother sensitive areas. Further measures that are com-
monly implemented internationally are listed in
Table 3 . TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Regulatory gaps in the U.STaggedEnd
TaggedPAt the federal level in the U.S., policy changes are
needed to address numerous regulatory gaps regardingSeveral governments, such as
France, Israel, Greece and Swit-
zerland have RFR measurement
programs in place along with
easy access to the data. For
example, in France, the
National Frequency Agency
ANFR “Observatoire des
Ondes”257posts online the RFR
measurements taken numerous
times a day in various cities.
TaggedEnd34 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
all aspects of control, monitoring, measuring and
remediating wireless radiation. TaggedEnd
TaggedPFirst, no federal agencies with health or environ-
mental expertise have reviewed the totality of the sci-
ence to ensure U.S. regulations are adequate. In 2021
the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia issued a landmark ruling in the case of
Environmental Health Trust et al. vs. the FCC55that
challenged the FCC’s decision not to update thehuman exposure limits for RFR emissions from cellphones, Wi-Fi, and cell tower networks. The Court
found that the FCC did not provide evidence of prop-
erly examining scientiﬁc evidence on the record and
had ignored studies indicating low level non-thermal
exposures could cause harm, especially for children.
The Court then ordered the FCC to provide a reasoned
explanation regarding these issues:
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15the impacts of wireless radiation on children; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15the health implications of long-term exposure to RF
radiation; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15the ubiquity of wireless devices and the technologi-
cal developments since the FCC last updated itsguidelines; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15the cell phone radiation emission test methods that
use heat measurements and allow a space between
the phone and body; and TaggedEndTaggedP/C15the impacts of wireless radiation on the environ-
ment. TaggedEnd
TaggedPAnother critical regulatory gap is that when consid-
ering cell tower network emissions, there is no U.S.
agency with health or environmental expertise
engaged in any funded activities regarding health
effects. TaggedEnd
TaggedPUnlike other countries that are gathering data via
countrywide monitoring programs, the U.S. has no
active federal ﬁeld measurement program for assess-ment, compliance, or enforcement regarding cell
tower and base station antenna RF emissions. The last
federal agency report on RFR measurements was
compiled in 1986 by the EPA.
265When companies
apply to build a cell tower in the U.S. near a school orhomes, there are no requirements for real world RFR
measurements before and after the antenna facilities
are built, nor any requirement for annual measure-
ments. The computer simulations provided by the
company do not always provide estimated RFR levels
for all of the areas that will be impacted by the cellantenna installation, such as inside an apartment that
shares a wall with a building mounted antenna, or
inside the room of a school or home in direct line of
sight of the main beam of an antenna. Such closeTaggedEndTABLE 3. International policy to Increase transparency, ensure compliance and reduce cell phone and RF radiation.
Policy Country examples
Public RFR exposure limits are more stringent than ICNIRP/
FCC limitsItaly, India, Israel, Croatia, Ukraine, Greece, China, Russia, Canada, Switzer-
land, Belgium, Bosnia Herzegovina, Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, Belarus,
Georgia, Serbia, Slovenia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, Turkey, Liechtenstein,
Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Kuwait, Republic
of Moldova, Iraq
RFR monitoring program for cell tower/base station emission
compliance and/or environmental RFR exposures.France, Greece, Turkey, Spain, Romania, Serbia, India, Israel, French Polyne-
sia, Croatia, Bulgaria, Tunisia, Malta, Brazil, Bahrain, Monaco, Bhutan,
Senegal, United Kingdom, Australia, Spain, Austria, India, Israel, Gibraltar,
Brussels Belgium, Switzerland, Norway, Lithuania.
Straightforward ofﬁcial government advice that the public and/
or children “should” minimize cell phone RF exposure.United Kingdom, Russia, Switzerland, Finland, Ireland, Germany, Belgium,
Greece, Israel, Turkey, Singapore, France, Denmark, India, Austria,
Cyprus, Canada, Italy, French Polynesia - Maryland U.S. for Wi-Fi in Schools
(CEHPAC), Korea, Sri Lanka, Croatia, Krakow Poland, European ParliamentResolution 1815
Ban on mobile phone advertising to children France, Belgium, French Polynesia, Russia
Ban on sale of phones designed for young children Belgium, France, French PolynesiaSAR labeling on device, packaging or by retailer at point of sale France, Israel, India, Belgium, Russia, KoreaSAR levels for cell phone models are publicly posted on easily
accessible government websiteFrance, Korea, Austria, Senegal, Germany,
Market surveillance program for cell phone SAR compliance France, CanadaPublic awareness program, robust website and/or educational
campaign to educate the public on how to minimize RFR
exposures from cell phonesFrance, French Polynesia, Israel, Cyprus, Israel
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 35
proximity installations can result in increased RF
exposure35,266,267and are associated with various
EMF-related symptoms.208,210TaggedEnd
TaggedPAlthough several nations post online maps with
the location of cell towers and wireless facilities
alongside RFR measurements, U.S. federal agencies
neither collect, nor provide this information to the
public. For example, small cell wireless facilities
(such as those on poles less than 50 feet tall such
as street lamps) generally do not need to be regis-
tered with the FCC. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2International marketing, compliance and
transparency measures TaggedEnd
TaggedPSome countries have enacted a variety of regulations
designed to minimize children’s exposure, ensure
compliance with cell phone regulations, and ensure
that the public has access to RFR information as
shown in Table 3 . For example, since 2010 France has
prohibited the sale of cell phones designed for chil-
dren under 6 years, and banned advertising cell
phones to children under 14 years. In 2015, their cell
phone labeling requirements were strengthened.
Advertising must clearly recommend how to reduce
exposure to the head or companies can be ﬁned. In
2019, a joint order of the French Health and Finance
Agencies268ordered that the cell phone consumer
information should include several speciﬁc ways toreduce RF exposure to the brain, minimizing fre-
quency and duration of use. In addition, the cell phoneinformation includes “Keep radio equipment away
from the belly of pregnant women,” and “away from
the lower abdomen of adolescents.”
269TaggedEnd
TaggedP2020 regulations270now mandate that computers, tab-
lets and other handheld wireless electronics (as well as
refurbished products) held close to the body were sub-
ject to the same labeling regulations as cell phones. In
2022, the French General Directorate for Competition,
Consumer Affairs and Fraud Prevention found numer-ous violations
271of their labeling requirements for
wireless devices and issued over 200 warnings. TaggedEndTaggedPIn 2014, Belgium implemented two Royal
Decrees272that prohibited the sale and advertising of
cell phones designed for children under 7 years old.273TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Premarket cell phone and wireless device RFR
testing TaggedEnd
TaggedPSome countries such as France and Canada perform
independent SAR measurements of cell phone models
to ensure regulatory compliance. Both countries have
found that some phone models exceed their regulatory
limits, even when tested at the manufacturer’s stated
separation distance, i.e. 5 or 10 or 15 mm from the
head or body.TaggedEnd
TaggedPSo far, over 35 non-compliant phone models have
been either withdrawn from the French market or had
software updates to decrease the RFR. The FrenchNational Frequency Agency, ANFR, posts their inde-
pendent SAR test measurements for hundreds of cell
phones online.
274The U.S. does not have an oversight
program for cell phone RFR emission compliance. TaggedEnd
TaggedPFurthermore, all cell phones and Wi-Fi devices such
as routers, speakers, and gaming consoles have ﬁneprint instructions in their manuals stating that the user
should maintain a speciﬁed minimum distance
between their body and the phone or device in order
to ensure compliance with regulatory safety limits.TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Schools and child care settings TaggedEnd
TaggedPFrance, Israel, and regions in Belgium have removed
Wi-Fi from kindergarten classrooms and restrictedexposures in elementary classrooms. See Table 4 . For
example, French law (2015)
275stipulates that Wi-Fi
be off as the default setting, so that it is only turned on
if needed for a particular classroom activity. The Par-
liamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
(PACE) Resolution 1815276(2011) recommends that
“for children in general, and particularly in schoolsand classrooms, give preference to wired Internet con-nections, and strictly regulate the use of mobile
phones by school children on school premises.” TaggedEnd
TaggedEndTABLE 4. International examples of policy measures to reduce RFR exposures in schools and child care settings.
Recommendations to prefer wired over Wi-Fi in kindergartens and
schoolsFrance, Israel, Germany, French Polynesia, Salzburg Austria, Mary-
land U.S.
Wi-Fi banned in child care settings and kindergarten France, Israel, Ghent Belgium, French Polynesia, Cyprus
Wi-Fi off or minimized in elementary France, Israel, Cyprus, Various municipal school districts worldwide
TaggedEnd36 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
TaggedPIn the U.S., there are no speciﬁc school-focused or
workplace-based federal regulations for RFR expo-
sures. The Maryland State Children’s Environmental
Health and Protection Advisory Council report on Wi-Fi in school
277recommends the reduction of RFR
exposures in schools “as much as feasibly practical.”Clegg et al.
278outlines how to minimize RFR in build-
ings and includes the Collaborative for High Perfor-mance Schools
279criteria to reduce RFR and ELF
EMF in classrooms. (See a summary of recommenda-tions below.) TaggedEnd
TaggedPRecommendations by Maryland Expert Advisors
to the Governor and the Collaborative For HighPerformance Schools include:
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15Install and use wired local area network (LAN) for
internet access instead of Wi-Fi and connect class-
room tech with cables whenever possible and
always when building/remodeling. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Ensure devices (tablets and laptops) are always used
on a desk, not lap. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Laptops, tablets and notebooks should have an
Ethernet port and a physical switch to disable allwireless radios at once. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Cell phones should be powered off and stored away
during the school day. Wireless wearables should be
turned to airplane mode.TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Prohibit use of DECT and cordless phones. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Corded telephones should be installed in every
classroom and there should be a way that students
can contact parents and make calls during the day
for planning purposes. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Schools should integrate education on why and how
to reduce RFR exposure into elementary, middleand high school class curriculum. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Cell towers and wireless facilities should not be
built on or adjacent/near to school property. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Measure ELF and RFR levels in classrooms and
sports areas yearly and when new technology is
added to classrooms. TaggedEnd
TaggedH2Healthcare settings TaggedEnd
TaggedPSources of non-ionizing EMF exposure inside hospi-
tals and healthcare facilities come from both the wire-
less networks (RFR) as well as electrical medical
equipment (ELF-EMF). TaggedEnd
TaggedPEMF levels in neonatal units have been the subject
of research due to the elevated exposure to anespecially vulnerable patient group. Measurements of
ELF inside incubators can range from 2 to 100 mG,
depending on the distance from the top of the mattress
to the electrical equipment.280After documenting
higher levels of low frequency EMF levels inside
closed incubators as compared to the ambient levels
in the room, Penn State Medical Center researchers
moderated the exposure through a grounding tech-
nique and found the mitigation improved infant’s
vagal tone, a marker of vulnerability to stress, and the
risk of developing necrotizing enterocolitis.281TaggedEnd
TaggedPRFR in neonatal intensive care units primarily origi-
nates from staff and families’ use of cell phones andwireless devices. A prudent avoidance strategy is rec-
ommended because these newborns are particularly
vulnerable.
282TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn 2017, in Israel measurements of magnetic ﬁeld
EMF were taken for incubators in neonatal units at the
request of the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of
Environmental Protection283and they found a range
from 0.05 to 5 mT. The Israel Ministry of Environ-
mental Protection identiﬁed manufacturer approved
efﬁcient shielding methods to mitigate exposure in
incubators and recommends reducing the duration ofexposure as much as possible and prioritizing the use
of low EMF incubators. TaggedEnd
TaggedPIn Cyprus, the National Committee on Environment
and Children’s Health, under the auspices of the Minis-
try of Health, worked with the Archbishop Makarios
III Hospital to pilot an RFR reduction program
284in
the pediatric intensive therapy unit and neonatal units.They removed the Wi-Fi access points, installed wired
LAN networks and launched a multimedia educationalprogram for families. RFR levels were measured before
and after the mitigation and the measures resulted in a
signiﬁcant reduction in ambient exposure in the units. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe Agaplesion Diakonie Hospital in Hamburg,
Germany has designed two “environmental” rooms
for people with multiple chemical sensitivities and/or
environmental allergies including sensitivity to elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds. In addition to using low VOC
emission building materials and fragrance free clean-
ing, several measures have been taken to reduce expo-
sure to non-ionizing electromagnetic ﬁelds includingthe installation of power circuit breakers and prohibi-
tion of the use of cell phones.
285TaggedEnd
TaggedPRecommendations for healthcare settings to min-
imize exposures, to support positive health out-
comes as well as to accommodate patients with
sensitivities:13,83,197,199,215,275,281
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 37
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15Decrease RFR exposures in pediatric healthcare set-
tings including waiting rooms, treatment areas, hos-
pital rooms, and administrative workspaces by
prioritizing wired connections and setting routers to
their lowest operating settings; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Ensure facilities have spaces with adequate EMF
mitigation for treatment of sensitive patients; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Educate patients, families, and staff; TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Utilize medical devices, equipment and technology
designed without wireless features, or conﬁgured
such that wireless connections are not essential and
can be turned off when not in use; and TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Work with companies on research and design of
safer technologies. TaggedEnd
TaggedH1Conclusion: next steps for clinicians to
better protect the young from impacts ofRFR TaggedEnd
TaggedPModern telecommunications have been embraced
for their innumerable beneﬁts to society, but we have
been slower to acknowledge the need to avoid and
reduce harms to youngsters or to the natural world on
which our lives depend.286Fortunately, alternatives to
employing wireless devices can provide safer, fasterand more efﬁcient technical performance for many
modern applications. There are many distinct physi-
cal, psychological and sociological grounds for mod-
erating children’s screen time to promote healthydevelopment. The principle of ALARA—as low as
reasonably achievable—ought to be adopted as a strat-
egy for RFR health and safety protection. TaggedEnd
TaggedPWhile such measures are being implemented in clin-
icians’ ofﬁces, clinics and the like, there is a critical
need for an independently funded training, research
and monitoring program to identify major data gaps in
the ﬁeld which are substantial, to set relative priorities
for research and training, and to conduct long term
studies of the physical and psychological impacts of
rapidly changing technological milieu, including waysto mitigate impacts through modiﬁcations in hardware
and software. TaggedEnd
TaggedPThe medical community has a critical role to play in
the prevention and treatment of EMF associated ill-
ness. Steps that doctors and other healthcare professio-
nals can take include:
TaggedEndTaggedP/C15Federal level: Advocate with the AAP and other
health professionals for a reassessment of RFRexposure limits and the development of standards
that adequately address biological impacts, child-
ren’s vulnerabilities and current use patterns.TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15State level: Engage membership with educational
and training activities as well as resolutions to sup-
port federal initiatives. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Support policies that reduce EMF exposure for chil-
dren in home, child care, school, health care, and
recreational settings. TaggedEnd
TaggedP/C15Support the continued development of clinical
guidelines for prevention, treatment and diagnosis
of EMF related illness. TaggedEnd
TaggedH1ReferencesTaggedEnd
TaggedP1. McInerny T.K.. Letter from President of the American Acad-
emy of Pediatrics, Thomas K. McInerny, MD, FAAP to the
FCC. August 2013. TaggedEnd
TaggedP2. CDC. ALARA - As Low as Reasonably Achievable. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention; 2022 https://www.cdc.
gov/nceh/radiation/alara.html Published May 18Accessed
January 24, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP3. Council on Communications and Media, Hill D, Ameenud-
din N, et al. Media and young minds. Pediatrics 2016;138
(5):e20162591. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-2591 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP4. AACAP. Screen Time and Children. American Academy of
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry; 2020 https://www.aacap.
org/AACAP/Families_and_Youth/Facts_for_Families/FFF-
Guide/Children-And-Watching-TV-054 . Accessed January
24, 2023Published February. TaggedEnd
TaggedP5. Mcclain C.. How parents’ views of their kids’ screen time,
social media use changed during COVID-19. Pew Res
Cent.https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2022/04/28/
how-parents-views-of-their-kids-screen-time-social-media-use-changed-during-covid-19/ . Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP6. American Psychiatric Association, Sherer J. Internet Gam-
ing. https://www.psychiatry.org:443/patients-families/inter-
net-gaming . Published January 2023. Accessed January 24,
2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP7. Belpomme D, Hardell L, Belyaev I, Burgio E, Carpenter DO.
Thermal and non-thermal health effects of low intensity non-ionizing radiation: An international perspective. Environ
Pollut 2018;242:643–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.env-
pol.2018.07.019 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP8. Belyaev I, Blackman C, Chamberlin K, et al. Scientiﬁc evi-
dence invalidates health assumptions underlying the FCC
and ICNIRP exposure limit determinations for radiofre-
quency radiation: implications for 5G. Environ Health
2022;21(1):92. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-022-00900-9. TaggedEnd
TaggedP9. English K, Lau C, Jagals P. The unique vulnerabilities of
children to environmental hazards. In: Xia Y, ed. Early-Life
Environmental Exposure and Disease: Facts and Perspec-tives, Singapore: Springer, 2020. pp. 103–12. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-981-15-3797-4_6 . TaggedEnd
TaggedEnd38 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
TaggedP10. International Commission on Non-ionizing Radiation Protec-
tion (ICNIRP). ICNIRP. https://www.icnirp.org/en/about-
icnirp/aim-status-history/index.html . TaggedEnd
TaggedP11. IEEE - The world’s largest technical professional organiza-
tion dedicated to advancing technology for the beneﬁt of
humanity. https://www.ieee.org/ . Accessed January 25,
2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP12. Who We Are. Int Comm Biol Eff Electromagn Fields .https://
icbe-emf.org/who-we-are/ . Accessed January 25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP13. McCredden JE, Cook N, Weller S, Leach V. Wireless tech-
nology is an environmental stressor requiring new under-standing and approaches in health care. Front Public Health
2022;10 https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fpubh.2022.986315 . Accessed January 25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP14. Oceania Radiofrequencyscientiﬁc Advisory Association
(ORSAA). Oceania radiofrequency scientiﬁc advisory asso-ciation (ORSAA). https://www.orsaa.org/ . Accessed January
25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP15. Panagopoulos DJ, ed. Electromagnetic Fields of Wireless
Communications: Biological and Heal , 1st ed.., Boca Raton:
CRC Press, 2022 https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/edit/
10.1201/9781003201052/electromagnetic-ﬁelds-wireless-communications-biological-health-effects-dimitris-panago-
poulos . Accessed January 25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP16. Lin JC. Carcinogenesis from chronic exposure to radio-fre-
quency radiation. Front Public Health 2022;10 https://www.
frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1042478 .
Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP17. Hampshire DP. A derivation of Maxwell’s equations using
the Heaviside notation. Philos Transact A Math Phys Eng
Sci 2018;376(2134):20170447. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsta.2017.0447 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP18. Maxwell J.C. VIII. A dynamical theory of the electromag-
netic ﬁeld. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 1865;155:459–512.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstl.1865.0008 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP19. Bryant JH. Heinrich Hertz’s experiments and experimental
apparatus: his discovery of radio waves and his delineation
of their properties. In: Baird D, Hughes RIG, Nordmann A,(eds). Heinrich Hertz: Classical Physicist, Modern Philoso-
pher. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science , Dor-
drecht: Springer Netherlands, 1998. pp. 39–58. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-94-015-8855-3_4 . TaggedEnd
T aggedP20.
Hertz H. Ueber sehr schnelle electrische Schwingungen. Ann
Phys 1887;267(7):421–48. https://doi.org/10.1002/
andp.18872670707 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP21. texte A des inscriptions et belles lettres (France) A du. Le
Journal des S ¸cavans. Gallica; 1676 https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/
12148/bpt6k56527vPublishedAccessed January 31, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP22. Hellemans A. The Timetables of Science. Simon and Schus-
ter; 1988 http://archive.org/details/timetablesofscie00hell_0 .
Accessed January 21, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP23. Mullenders LHF. Solar UV damage to cellular DNA: from
mechanisms to biological effects. Photochem Photobiol Sci
Off J Eur Photochem Assoc Eur Soc Photobiol 2018;17
(12):1842–52. https://doi.org/10.1039/c8pp00182k . TaggedEnd
TaggedP24. Kemper AR, Newman TB, Slaughter JL, et al. Clinical prac-
tice guideline revision: management of hyperbilirubinemia
in the newborn infant 35 or more weeks of gestation.Pediatrics 2022;150(3):e2022058859. https://doi.org/
10.1542/peds.2022-058859 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP25. Wahl S, Engelhardt M, Schaupp P, Lappe C, Ivanov IV. The
inner clock—Blue light sets the human rhythm. J Biophoton-
ics 2019;12(12):e201900102. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jbio.201900102 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP26. Hugh A. The Continuous Wave. Princeton, USA: Princeton
Legacy Library; 2016 https://press.princeton.edu/books/
hardcover/9780691639680/the-continuous-wave . Accessed
January 21, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP27. ECSTUFF4U for Electronics Engineer. https://www.
ecstuff4u.com/ . Accessed January 24, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP28. Carter C. How the Camillagate Tapes were Revealed to the
Rest of the World. Mirror; 2017 http://www.mirror.co.uk/
news/uk-news/how-camillagate-tapes-exposed-secret-10958350 Published August 9Accessed January 23, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP29. Levitt BB, Lai HC, Manville AM. Low-level EMF effects on
wildlife and plants: What research tells us about an ecosys-tem approach. Front Public Health 2022;10 https://www.
frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1000840 .
Accessed January 23, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP30. Harris A, Cooper M. Mobile phones: impacts, challenges,
and predictions. Hum Behav Emerg Technol 2019;1(1):15–7.
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbe2.112 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP31. 
Bandara P, Carpenter DO. Planetary electromagnetic pollu-tion: it is time to assess its impact. Lancet Planet Health
2018;2(12):e512–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(18)
30221-3 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP32. L /C19opez-P /C19erez D, De Domenico A, Piovesan N, et al. A Survey
on 5G radio access network energy efﬁciency: massive
MIMO, lean carrier design, sleep modes, and machine learn-
ing. IEEE Commun Surv Tutor 2022;24(1):653–97. https://
doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2022.3142532 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP33. El-Hajj AM, Naous T. Radiation analysis in a gradual 5G
network deployment strategy. In: 2020 IEEE 3rd 5G World
Forum (5GWF) ; 2020. p. 448–53. https://doi.org/10.1109/
5GWF49715.2020.9221314 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP34. Bonato M, Dossi L, Fiocchi S, et al. Computational assess-
ment of RF exposure levels due to 5G mobile phones. In:
2022 Microwave Mediterranean Symposium (MMS) ; 2022.
p. 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/MMS55062.2022.9825603 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP35. Koppel T, Ahonen M, Carlberg M, Hedendahl LK, Hardell
L. Radiofrequency radiation from nearby mobile phone base
stations ‑a case comparison of one low and one high exposure
apartment. Oncol Lett 2019;18(5):5383–91. https://doi.org/
10.3892/ol.2019.10899 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP36. Patr /C19ıcio S, Correia LM, Gomes M. Inﬂuence of active anten-
nas on EMF restrictions in 5G base stations deployment. In:
2022 IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Prop-
agation and USNC-URSI Radio Science Meeting (AP-S/
URSI) ; 2022. p. 1280–1. https://doi.org/10.1109/AP-S/
USNC-URSI47032.2022.9886131 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP37. Mazloum T, Aerts S, Joseph W, Wiart J. RF-EMF exposure
induced by mobile phones operating in LTE small cells intwo different urban cities. Ann Telecommun 2019;74(1):35–
42.https://doi.org/10.1007/s12243-018-0680-1 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP38. IEEE standard for safety levels with respect to human expo-
sure to electric, magnetic, and electromagnetic ﬁelds, 0 Hz
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 39
to 300 GHz. In: IEEE Std C951-2019 Revis IEEE Std C951-
2005 Inc IEEE Std C951-2019Cor 1-2019; October 2019. p.
1–312. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2019.8859679 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP39. Beard BB, Kainz W. Review and standardization of cell
phone exposure calculations using the SAM phantom andanatomically correct head models. Biomed Eng OnLine
2004;3(1):34. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-925X-3-34 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP40. Lee AK, Hong SE, Choi HD. Is the SAM phantom conserva-
tive for SAR evaluation of all phone designs? ETRI J
2019;41(3):337–47. https://doi.org/10.4218/etrij.2018-0231 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP41. Gordon C., Churchill T., Clauser C., et al. Anthropometric
Survey of U.S. Army Personnel: Summary Statistics, InterimReport for 1988. January 1989. TaggedEnd
TaggedP42. Gandhi OP, Morgan LL, de Salles AA, Han YY, Herberman
RB, Davis DL. Exposure Limits: The underestimation ofabsorbed cell phone radiation, especially in children. Elec-
tromagn Biol Med 2012;31(1):34–51. https://doi.org/
10.3109/15368378.2011.622827. TaggedEnd
TaggedP43. Christ A, Gosselin MC, Christopoulou M, K €uhn S, Kuster N.
Age-dependent tissue-speciﬁc exposure of cell phone users.
Phys Med Biol 2010;55(7):1767–83. https://doi.org/10.1088/
0031-9155/55/7/001 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP44. Mumford WW. Some Technical Aspects of Microwave
Radiation Hazards. Proc IRE 1961;49(2):427–47. https://doi.
org/10.1109/JRPROC.1961.287804 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP45. Steneck NH, Cook HJ, Vander AJ, Kane GL. The origins
of U.S. safety standards for microwave radiation. Science
1980;208(4449):1230–7. https://doi.org/10.1126/sci-
ence.6990492. TaggedEnd
TaggedP46.Shore M. Review of the Ten-Milliwattt per Square Centime-ter Microwave Standard. A Decade of Progress. Harrisburg
Pennsylvania: U.S. Department of Health, Education, andWelfare; 1978. p. 32–9. TaggedEnd
TaggedP47.47 CFR x1.1310 - Radiofrequency radiation exposure lim-
its.; 2020. https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/47/1.1310 .
Accessed January 24, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP48. Repacholi MH. A history of the international commission on
non-ionizing radiation protection. Health Phys 2017;113
(4):282–300. https://doi.org/10.1097/HP.0000000000000699 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP49.
Melnick R. Regarding ICNIRP’S evaluation of the nationaltoxicology program’s carcinogenicity studies on radiofre-quency electromagnetic ﬁelds. Health Phys 2020;118
(6):678–82. https://doi.org/10.1097/HP.0000000000001268 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP50. Buchner K., Rivasi M.. The International Commission on
Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection: Conﬂicts of Interest,Corporate Capture and the Push for 5G. This Rep Was Comm
Coord Publ Two Memb Eur Parliam /C0Mich /C18e Rivasi Eur
/C19Ecologie Klaus Buchner €Okol-Demokr Part Financ Green-
sEfAgroup Eur Parliam . June 2020:98. https://klaus-buch-
ner.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/ICNIRP-report-FINAL-19-JUNE-2020.pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP51. Hardell L, Carlberg M. [Comment] Health risks from radio-
frequency radiation, including 5G, should be assessed by
experts with no conﬂicts of interest. Oncol Lett 2020;20
(4):1.. https://doi.org/10.3892/ol.2020.11876 :-1. TaggedEnd
TaggedP52. Carpenter DO, Sage C. Setting prudent public health policy for
electromagnetic ﬁeld exposures. Rev Environ Health 2008;23
(2):91–118. https://doi.org/10.1515/REVEH.2008.23.2.91. TaggedEndTaggedP53. FCC Maintains Current RF Exposure Safety Standards. Fed-
eral Communications Commission. https://www.fcc.gov/
document/fcc-maintains-current-rf-exposure-safety-stand-ards. Published December 4, 2019. Accessed April 11, 2020. TaggedEnd
TaggedP54. Human Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields
and Reassessment of FCC Radiofrequency Exposure Limits
and Policies. Federal Register. https://www.federalregister.
gov/documents/2020/04/01/2020-02745/human-exposure-to-radiofrequency-electromagnetic-ﬁelds-and-reassessment-of-fcc-radiofrequency . Published April 1, 2020. Accessed
January 23, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP55.No. 20-1025 ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH TRUST, ET AL.,PETITIONERS v. FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COM-
MISSION AND UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, RESPOND-
ENTS Consolidated with 20-1138 .(United States Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit 2012). https://
www.cadc.uscourts.gov/internet/opinions.nsf/FB976465BF00
F8BD85258730004EFDF7/$ﬁle/20-1025-1910111.pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP56. The International EMF Project. https://www.who.int/initiatives/
the-international-emf-project . Accessed January 24, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP57. World Health Organization. The International EMF Proj-
ect. Participating Countries & Entities. https://www.who.
int/initiatives/the-international-emf-project/participating-
countries-entities .
 Accessed February 1, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP58. World Health Organization. Electromagnetic Fields and
Public Health. https://www.who.int/teams/environment-cli-
mate-change-and-health/radia tion-and-health/non-ionizing/
emf/radiofrequency-ﬁelds . Accessed January 24, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP59. Mercer D. The WHO EMF Project: legitimating the imagi-
nary of global harmonization of EMF safety standards.
Engag Sci Technol Soc 2016;2:88–105. https://doi.org/
10.17351/ests2016.41 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP60. Hardell L. World Health Organization, radiofrequency radia-
tion and health - a hard nut to crack (Review). Int J Oncol
2017;51(2):405–13. https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo.2017.4046 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP61. IARC. Press Release N˚ 208 IARC classiﬁes Radiofrequency
Electromagnetic Fields as possibly carcinogenic to humans.
2011. https://www.iarc.who.int/wp-content/uploads/2018/
07/pr208_E.pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP62. Lai H, Levitt BB. The roles of intensity, exposure dura-
tion, and modulation on the biological effects of radiofre-quency radiation and exposure guidelines. Electromagn
Biol Med 2022;41(2):230–55. https://doi.org/10.1080/
15368378.2022.2065683 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP63. Barnes F, Freeman JER. Some thoughts on the possible
health effects of electric and magnetic ﬁelds and exposure
guidelines. Front Public Health 2022;10 https://www.fron-
tiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2022.994758 . Accessed
January 25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP64. Gonz /C19alez-Guti /C19errez MD, L /C19opez-Garrido /C19A, Cort /C19es-P/C19erez I,
Obrero-Gait /C19an E, Le /C19on-Morillas F, Ib /C19a~nez-Vera AJ. Effects
of non-invasive radiofrequency diathermy in pelvic ﬂoor dis-
orders: a systematic review. Medicina (Mex) 2022;58
(3):437. https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina58030437 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP65.Halliday D, Resnick R, Walker J. Fundamentals of Physics,
Volume 2 . 12th edition Wiley; 2021. TaggedEnd
TaggedP66. 
Yoshimura T, Mineki S, Ohuchi S. Microwave-assistedenzymatic reactions. Microwaves in Catalysis. John Wiley &
TaggedEnd40 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
Sons, Ltd; 2015. p. 213–38. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9783527688111.ch11 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP67. Lai H. Exposure to static and extremely-low frequency elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds and cellular free radicals. Electromagn
Biol Med 2019;38(4):231–48. https://doi.org/10.1080/
15368378.2019.1656645 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP68. Desai NR, Kesari KK, Agarwal A. Pathophysiology of cell
phone radiation: oxidative stress and carcinogenesis with
focus on male reproductive system. Reprod Biol Endocrinol
RBE 2009;7:114. https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-7827-7-114 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP69. Luo J, Li H, Deziel NC, et al. Genetic susceptibility may
modify the association between cell phone use and thyroidcancer: a population-based case-control study in Connecti-
cut.Environ Res 2020;182:109013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2019.109013. TaggedEnd
TaggedP70. Pall ML. Electromagnetic ﬁelds act via activation of voltage-
gated calcium channels to produce beneﬁcial or adverse
effects. J Cell Mol Med 2013;17(8):958–65. https://doi.org/
10.1111/jcmm.12088 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP71. Smith-Roe SL, Wyde ME, Stout MD, et al. Evaluation of the
genotoxicity of cell phone radiofrequency radiation in male
and female rats and mice following subchronic exposure.Environ Mol Mutagen 2020;61(2):276–90. https://doi.org/
10.1002/em.22343 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP72. Panagopoulos DJ, Karabarbounis A, Yakymenko I, Chrousos
GP. Human‑made electromagnetic ﬁelds: Ion forced ‑oscilla-
tion and voltage ‑gated ion channel dysfunction, oxidative
stress and DNA damage (Review). Int J Oncol 2021;59
(5):1–16. https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo.2021.5272 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP73. Panagopoulos DJ, Messini N, Karabarbounis A, Philippetis
AL, Margaritis LH. A mechanism for action of oscillatingelectric ﬁelds on cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2000;272(3):634–40. https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2000.2746 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP74. Zhou L, Zhang Z, Huang Z, Nice E, Zou B, Huang C. Revis-
iting cancer hallmarks: insights from the interplay betweenoxidative stress and non-coding RNAs. Mol Biomed
2020;1:4. https://doi.org/10.1186/s43556-020-00004-1. TaggedEnd
TaggedP75. Emerit J, Edeas M, Bricaire F. Neurodegenerative diseases
and oxidative stress. Biomed Pharmacother Biomedecine
Pharmacother 2004;58(1):39–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biopha.2003.11.004 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP76.
Yakymenko I, Tsybulin O, Sidorik E, Henshel D, KyrylenkoO, Kyrylenko S. Oxidative mechanisms of biological activity
of low-intensity radiofrequency radiation. Electromagn Biol
Med 2016;35(2):186–202. https://doi.org/10.3109/
15368378.2015.1043557 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP77. Schuermann D, Mevissen M. Manmade electromagnetic
ﬁelds and oxidative stress—biological effects and conse-
quences for health. Int J Mol Sci 2021;22(7):3772. https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijms22073772 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP78. Miller AB, Sears ME, Morgan LL, et al. Risks to health and
well-being from radio-frequency radiation emitted by cellphones and other wireless devices. Front Public Health
2019;7 https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fpubh.2019.00223 . Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP79. Moon JH. Health effects of electromagnetic ﬁelds on chil-
dren. Clin Exp Pediatr 2020;63(11):422–8. https://doi.org/
10.3345/cep.2019.01494 . TaggedEndTaggedP80. Redmayne M, Johansson O. Radiofrequency exposure in
young and old: different sensitivities in light of age-relevantnatural differences. Rev Environ Health 2015;30(4):323–35.
https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2015-0030 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP81. Sage C, Burgio E. Electromagnetic ﬁelds, pulsed radiofre-
quency radiation, and epigenetics: how wireless technologiesmay affect childhood development. Child Dev 2018;89
(1):129–36. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12824 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP82. Fern /C19andez C, de Salles AA, Sears ME, Morris RD, Davis
DL. Absorption of wireless radiation in the child versus adult
brain and eye from cell phone conversation or virtual reality.
Environ Res 2018;167:694–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2018.05.013 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP83. Peyman A. Dielectric properties of tissues; variation with
age and their relevance in exposure of children to electro-magnetic ﬁelds; state of knowledge. Prog Biophys Mol Biol
2011;107(3):434–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomol-
bio.2011.08.007 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP84. Hussein M, Awwad F, Jithin D, El Hasasna H, Athamneh K,
Iratni R. Breast cancer cells exhibits speciﬁc dielectric signa-
ture in vitro using the open-ended coaxial probe technique
from 200 MHz to 13.6 GHz. Sci Rep 2019;9(1):4681. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-41124-1 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP85.
Jimenez H, Blackman C, Lesser G, et al. Use of non-ionizingelectromagnetic ﬁelds for the treatment of cancer. Front Bio-
sci Landmark Ed 2018;23(2):284–97. https://doi.org/
10.2741/4591 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP86. J /C19ulvez J, Paus T, Bellinger D, et al. Environment and brain
development: challenges in the global context. Neuroepidemi-
ology 2016;46(2):79–82. https://doi.org/10.1159/000442256 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP87. Redmayne M, Johansson O. Could myelin damage from
radiofrequency electromagnetic ﬁeld exposure help explain
the functional impairment electrohypersensitivity? A review
of the evidence. J Toxicol Environ Health Part B 2014;17
(5):247–58. https://doi.org/10.1080/10937404.2014.923356 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP88. Markov /C18a E, Malmgren LOG, Belyaev IY. Microwaves from
mobile phones inhibit 53BP1 focus formation in human stem
cells more strongly than in differentiated cells: possiblemechanistic link to cancer risk. Environ Health Perspect
2010;118(3):394–9. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0900781 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP89. Yahyazadeh A, Deniz €OG, Kaplan AA, Altun G, Yurt KK,
Davis D. The genomic effects of cell phone exposure on thereproductive system. Environ Res 2018;167:684–93. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2018.05.017 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP90. Gye MC, Park CJ. Effect of electromagnetic ﬁeld exposure
on the reproductive system. Clin Exp Reprod Med 2012;39
(1):1–9. https://doi.org/10.5653/cerm.2012.39.1.1 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP91. Jangid P, Rai U, Sharma RS, Singh R. The role of non-ioniz-
ing electromagnetic radiation on female fertility: a review.
Int J Environ Health Res 2022;0(0):1–16. https://doi.org/
10.1080/09603123.2022.2030676 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP92. Maluin SM, Osman K, Jaffar FHF, Ibrahim SF. Effect of
radiation emitted by wireless devices on male reproductivehormones: a systematic review. Front Physiol 2021;12
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fphys.2021.732420 . Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP93. Agarwal A, Desai NR, Makker K, et al. Effects of radiofre-
quency electromagnetic waves (RF-EMW) from cellular
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 41
phones on human ejaculated semen: an in vitro pilot study.
Fertil Steril 2009;92(4):1318–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fertnstert.2008.08.022 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP94. Negi P, Singh R. Association between reproductive health and
nonionizing radiation exposure. Electromagn Biol Med 2021;40
(1):92–102. https://doi.org/10.1080/15368378.2021.1874973 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP95. Adams JA, Galloway TS, Mondal D, Esteves SC, Mathews
F. Effect of mobile telephones on sperm quality: a systematicreview and meta-analysis. Environ Int 2014;70:106–12.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2014.04.015 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP96. Kim S, Han D, Ryu J, Kim K, Kim YH. Effects of mobile
phone usage on sperm quality /C0No time-dependent relation-
ship on usage: A systematic review and updated meta-analy-
sis.Environ Res 2021;202:111784. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2021.111784 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP97. Yu G, Bai Z, Song C, et al. Current progress on the effect of
mobile phone radiation on sperm quality: An updated sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of human and animal stud-
ies. Environ Pollut 2021;282:116952. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.envpol.2021.116952 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP98. Yadav H, Rai U, Singh R. Radiofrequency radiation: A pos-
sible threat to male fertility. Reprod Toxicol 2021;100:90–
100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reprotox.2021.01.007 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP99. Kesari KK, Agarwal A, Henkel R. Radiations and male fer-
tility. Reprod Biol Endocrinol RBE 2018;16(1):118. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s12958-018-0431-1 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP100. Krzastek SC, Farhi J, Gray M, Smith RP. Impact of environ-
mental toxin exposure on male fertility potential. Transl
Androl Urol 2020;9(6):2797–813. https://doi.org/10.21037/
tau-20-685. TaggedEnd
TaggedP101. Houston BJ, Nixon B, King BV, Iuliis GND, Aitken RJ. The
effects of radiofrequency electromagnetic radiation on spermfunction. Reproduction 2016;152(6):R263–76. https://doi.
org/10.1530/REP-16-0126 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP102. Santini SJ, Cordone V, Falone S, et al. Role of mitochondria
in the oxidative stress induced by electromagnetic ﬁelds: focus
on reproductive systems. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2018;2018:
e5076271. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/5076271 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP103.
Alchalabi ASH, Rahim H, Aklilu E, et al. Histopathologicalchanges associated with oxidative stress induced by electro-
magnetic waves in rats’ ovarian and uterine tissues. Asian
Pac J Reprod 2016;5(4):301–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apjr.2016.06.008 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP104. Bozok S, Karaagac E, Sener D, Akakin D, Tumkaya L. The
effects of long-term prenatal exposure to 900, 1800, and2100 MHz electromagnetic ﬁeld radiation on myocardial tis-
sue of rats. Toxicol Ind Health 2023;39(1):1–9. https://doi.
org/10.1177/07482337221139586. TaggedEnd
TaggedP105. Cirillo PM, La Merrill MA, Krigbaum NY, Cohn BA.
Grandmaternal perinatal serum DDT in relation to grand-
daughter early menarche and adult obesity: three generationsin the child health and development studies cohort. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2021;30(8):1480–8. https://doi.
org/10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-20-1456 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP106. Davis DL, Friedler G, Mattison D, Morris R. Male-mediated
teratogenesis and other reproductive effects: Biologic and
epidemiologic ﬁndings and a plea for clinical research.Reprod Toxicol 1992;6(4):289–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0890-6238(92)90190-5 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP107. Sepehrimanesh M, Kazemipour N, Saeb M, Naziﬁ S, Davis
DL. Proteomic analysis of continuous 900-MHz radiofre-
quency electromagnetic ﬁeld exposure in testicular tissue: arat model of human cell phone exposure. Environ Sci Pollut
Res Int 2017;24(15):13666–73. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-017-8882-z . TaggedEnd
TaggedP108. Haghani M, Pouladvand V, Mortazavi SMJ, Razavinasab
M, Bayat M, Shabani M. Exposure to electromagnetic
ﬁeld during gestation adversely affects the electrophysio-
logical properties of purki nje cells in rat offspring. J
Biomed Phys Eng 2020;10(4):433–40. https://doi.org/
10.31661/jbpe.v0i0.560 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP109. Kaplan S, Deniz OG, €Onger ME, et al. Electromagnetic ﬁeld
and brain development. J Chem Neuroanat 2016;75:52–61.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jchemneu.2015.11.005 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP110. Hu C, Zuo H, Li Y. Effects of radiofrequency electromagnetic
radiation on neurotransmitters in the brain. Front Public Health
2021;9:691880. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2021.691880 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP111. Odaci E, Bas O, Kaplan S. Effects of prenatal exposure to a
900 MHz electromagnetic ﬁeld on the dentate gyrus of rats: a ste-reological and histopathological study. Brain Res
2008;1238:224–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2008.08.013 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP112. ¸Sahin A, Aslan A, Ba ¸s O, et al. Deleterious impacts of a 900-
MHz electromagnetic ﬁeld on hippocampal pyramidal neurons
of 8-week-old Sprague Dawley male rats. Brain Res
20
15;1624:232–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2015.07.042 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP113. Bas O, Odaci E, Kaplan S, Acer N, Ucok K, Colakoglu S.
900 MHz electromagnetic ﬁeld exposure affects qualitative
and quantitative features of hippocampal pyramidal cells in
the adult female rat. Brain Res 2009;1265:178–85. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2009.02.011 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP114. Li DK, Chen H, Ferber JR, Odouli R, Quesenberry C. Expo-
sure to magnetic ﬁeld non-ionizing radiation and the risk ofmiscarriage: a prospective cohort study. Sci Rep 2017;7
(1):17541. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-16623-8 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP115. Li DK, Ferber JR, Odouli R, Quesenberry CP. A prospective
study of in-utero exposure to magnetic ﬁelds and the risk of
childhood obesity. Sci Rep 2012;2(1):540. https://doi.org/
10.1038/srep00540 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP116. Li DK, Chen H, Odouli R. Maternal exposure to magnetic
ﬁelds during pregnancy in relation to the risk of asthma in
offspring. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2011;165(10):945–50.
https://doi.org/10.1001/archpediatrics.2011.135 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP117. Li DK, Chen H, Ferber JR, Hirst AK, Odouli R. Association
between maternal exposure to magnetic ﬁeld nonionizing
radiation during pregnancy and risk of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder in offspring in a longitudinal birth
cohort. JAMA Netw Open 2020;3(3):e201417. https://doi.
org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.1417 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP118. Su XJ, Yuan W, Tan H, et al. Correlation between exposure
to magnetic ﬁelds and embryonic development in the ﬁrst tri-mester. PLOS ONE 2014;9(6):e101050. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0101050 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP119. Myruski S, Gulyayeva O, Birk S, P /C19erez-Edgar K, Buss KA,
Ta D-T. Digital disruption? Maternal mobile device use is
TaggedEnd42 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
related to infant social-emotional functioning. Dev Sci
2018;21(4):e12610. https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12610 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP120. Divan HA, Kheifets L, Obel C, Olsen J. Prenatal and postna-
tal exposure to cell phone use and behavioral problems in
children. Epidemiol Camb Mass 2008;19(4):523–9. https://
doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0b013e318175dd47. TaggedEnd
TaggedP121. Divan HA, Kheifets L, Obel C, Olsen J. Cell phone use and
behavioural problems in young children. J Epidemiol Com-
munity Health 2012;66(6):524–9. https://doi.org/10.1136/
jech.2010.115402 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP122. Papadopoulou E, Haugen M, Schjølberg S, et al. Maternal
cell phone use in early pregnancy and child’s language, com-munication and motor skills at 3 and 5 years: the Norwegian
mother and child cohort study (MoBa). BMC Public Health
2017;17:685. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-017-4672-2. TaggedEnd
TaggedP123. Foerster M., Thielens A., Joseph W., Eeftens M., R €o€osli M..
A prospective cohort study of adolescents’ memory perfor-
mance and individual brain dose of microwave radiation
from wireless communication. Environ Health Perspect . 126
(7):077007. doi:10.1289/EHP2427 TaggedEnd
TaggedP124. Schoeni A, Roser K, R €o€osli M. Memory performance, wire-
less communication and exposure to radiofrequency electro-
magnetic ﬁelds: A prospective cohort study in adolescents.
Environ Int 2015;85:343–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2015.09.025 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP125. Fragopoulou AF, Miltiadous P, Stamatakis A, Stylianopou-
lou F, Koussoulakos SL, Margaritis LH. Whole body expo-
sure with GSM 900 MHz affects spatial memory in mice.Pathophysiology 2010;17(3):179–87. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.pathophys.2009.11.002 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP126. Hao D, Yang L, Chen S, et al. Effects of long-term electro-
magnetic ﬁeld exposure on spatial learning and memory inrats. Neurol Sci 2013;34(2):157–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10072-012-0970-8 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP127. Li Y, Shi C, Lu G, Xu Q, Liu S. Effects of electromagnetic
radiation on spatial memory and synapses in rat hippocampal
CA1. Neural Regen Res 2012;7(16):1248–55. https://doi.org/
10.3969/j.issn.1673-5374.2012.16.007 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP128. Narayanan SN, Kumar RS, Karun KM, Nayak SB, Bhat PG.
Possible cause for altered spatial cognition of prepubescent
rats exposed to chronic radiofrequency electromagnetic radi-ation. Metab Brain Dis 2015;30(5):1193–206. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11011-015-9689-6 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP129. Narayanan SN, Kumar RS, Potu BK, Nayak S, Mailankot M.
Spatial
memory performance of Wistar rats exposed to
mobile phone. Clin Sao Paulo Braz 2009;64(3):231–4.
https://doi.org/10.1590/s1807-59322009000300014 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP130. Ntzouni MP, Skouroliakou A, Kostomitsopoulos N, Margari-
tis LH. Transient and cumulative memory impairments
induced by GSM 1.8 GHz cell phone signal in a mouse
model. Electromagn Biol Med 2013;32(1):95–120. https://
doi.org/10.3109/15368378.2012.709207 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP131. Ntzouni MP, Stamatakis A, Stylianopoulou F, Margaritis
LH. Short-term memory in mice is affected by mobile phoneradiation. Pathophysiology 2011;18(3):193–9. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pathophys.2010.11.001 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP132. Tang J, Zhang Y, Yang L, et al. Exposure to 900 MHz elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds activates the mkp-1/ERK pathway andcauses blood-brain barrier damage and cognitive impairmentin rats. Brain Res 2015;1601:92–101. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.brainres.2015.01.019 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP133. Megha K, Deshmukh PS, Banerjee BD, Tripathi AK, Abe-gaonkar MP. Microwave radiation induced oxidative stress,cognitive impairment and inﬂammation in brain of Fischerrats. Indian J Exp Biol 2012;50(12):889–96. TaggedEnd
TaggedP134. Azimzadeh M, Jelodar G. Prenatal and early postnatal exposure
to radiofrequency waves (900 MH z) adversely affects passive
avoidance learning and memory. Toxicol Ind Health 2020;36
(12):1024–30. https://doi.org/10.1177/0748233720973143 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP135. Shahin S, Banerjee S, Swarup V, Singh SP, Chaturvedi CM.
From the cover: 2.45-GHz microwave radiation impairs hip-
pocampal learning and spatial memory: involvement of local
stress mechanism-induced suppression of iGluR/ERK/CREBsignaling. Toxicol Sci 2018;161(2):349–74. https://doi.org/
10.1093/toxsci/kfx221 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP136. Othman H, Ammari M, Rtibi K, Bensaid N, Sakly M, Abdel-
melek H. Postnatal development and behavior effects of in-utero exposure of rats to radiofrequency waves emitted from
conventional WiFi devices. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol
2017;52:239–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.etap.2017.04.016 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP137. Panagopoulos DJ, Johansson O, Carlo GL. Real versus simu-
lated mobile phone exposures in experimental studies.
BioMed Res Int 2015;2015:e607053. https://doi.org/10.1155/
2015/607053 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP138. Leach V, Weller S, Redmayne M. A novel database of bio-
effects from non-ionizing radiation. Rev Environ Health
2018;33(3):273–80. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2018-0017 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP139. Aldad TS, Gan G, Gao XB, Taylor HS. Fetal radiofrequency
radiation exposure from 800-1900 Mhz-rated cellular tele-phones affects neurodevelopment and behavior in mice. Sci
Rep2012;2:312. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep00312 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP140.
Broom KA, Findlay R, Addison DS, Goiceanu C, Sienkie-
wicz Z. Early-life exposure to pulsed LTE radiofrequencyﬁelds causes persistent changes in activity and behavior in
C57BL/6 J mice. Bioelectromagnetics 2019;40(7):498–511.
https://doi.org/10.1002/bem.22217 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP141. Fragopoulou AF, Samara A, Antonelou MH, et al. Brain pro-
teome response following whole body exposure of mice to
mobile phone or wireless DECT base radiation. Electromagn
Biol Med 2012;31(4):250–74. https://doi.org/10.3109/
15368378.2011.631068 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP142. Fragopoulou AF, Polyzos A, Papadopoulou MD, et al. Hip-
pocampal lipidome and transcriptome proﬁle alterations trig-gered by acute exposure of mice to GSM 1800 MHz mobile
phone radiation: An exploratory study. Brain Behav 2018;8
(6):e01001. https://doi.org/10.1002/brb3.1001 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP143. IARC. Non-Ionizing Radiation, Part 1: Static and
Extremely Low-Frequency ( ELF) Electric and Magnetic
Fields . https://publications.iar c.fr/Book-And-Report-
Series/Iarc-Monographs-On-The-Identiﬁcation-Of-Car-
cinogenic-Hazards-To-Humans/Non-ionizing-Radiation-
Part-1-Static-And-Extremel y-Low-frequency-ELF-Elec-
tric-And-Magnetic-Fields-2002 . Accessed January 10,
2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP144. Carpenter DO. Extremely low frequency electromagnetic
ﬁelds and cancer: How source of funding affects results.
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 43
Environ Res 2019;178:108688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2019.108688 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP145. Seomun G, Lee J, Park J. Exposure to extremely low-fre-
quency magnetic ﬁelds and childhood cancer: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. PLOS ONE 2021;16(5):e0251628.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0251628 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP146. Falcioni L, Bua L, Tibaldi E, et al. Report of ﬁnal results
regarding brain and heart tumors in Sprague-Dawley ratsexposed from prenatal life until natural death to mobile phoneradiofrequency ﬁeld representative of a 1.8 GHz GSM base
station environmental emission. Environ Res 2018;165:496–
503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2018.01.037 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP147. National Toxicology Program NI of ESciences. Toxicologyand carcinogenesis studies in B6C3F1/n mice exposed to
whole-body radio frequency radiation at a frequency (1,900mHz) and modulations (GSM and CDMA) used by cellphones. NTP Tech Rep 2018;596:260. TaggedEnd
TaggedP148. National Toxicology Program NI of EHS. Toxicology and
carcinogenesis studies in Hsd: Sprague Dawley SD ratsexposed to whole-body radio frequency radiation at a fre-
quency (900 MHz) and modulations (GSM and CDMA)
used by cell phones. NTP Tech Rep 2018;595:384 https://
ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/htdocs/lt_rpts/tr595_508.pdf . Accessed
November 15, 2018. TaggedEnd
TaggedP149. Coureau G, Bouvier G, Lebailly P, et al. Mobile phone use
and brain tumours in the CERENAT case-control study.
Occup Environ Med 2014;71(7):514–22. https://doi.org/
10.1136/oemed-2013-101754 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP150. Turner MC, Sadetzki S, Langer CE, et al. Investigation of
bias related to differences between case and control inter-
view dates in ﬁve INTERPHONE countries. Ann Epidemiol
2016;26(12):827–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annepi-
dem.2016.09.013 :e2. TaggedEnd
TaggedP151. Momoli F, Siemiatycki J, McBride ML, et al. Probabilistic
multiple-bias modeling applied to the canadian data from the
interphone study of mobile phone use and risk of glioma,
meningioma, acoustic neuroma, and parotid gland tumors.
Am J Epidemiol 2017;186(7):885–93. https://doi.org/
10.1093/aje/kwx157 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP152. Lerchl A, Klose M, Grote K, et al. Tumor promotion by expo-
sure to radiofrequency electromagnetic ﬁelds below exposurelimits for humans. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2015;459
(4):585–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.151 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP153. Choi YJ, Moskowitz JM, Myung SK, Lee YR, Hong YC.
Cellular phone use and risk of tumors: systematic review andmeta-analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2020;17
(21):8079. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17218079 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP154. Uche UI, Naidenko OV. Development of health-based expo-
sure limits for radiofrequency radiation from wireless devi-
ces using a benchmark dose approach. Environ Health
2021;20(1):84. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-021-00768-1 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP155.
The INTERPHONE Study Group. Brain tumour risk in rela-
tion to mobile telephone use: results of the INTERPHONE
international case /C0control study. Int J Epidemiol 2010;39
(3):675–94. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyq079 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP156. Hardell L, Moskowitz JM. A critical analysis of the MOBI-
Kids study of wireless phone use in childhood andadolescence and brain tumor risk. Rev Environ Health May
2022. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2022-0040 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP157. Repacholi MH, Lerchl A, R €o€osli M, et al. Systematic review
of wireless phone use and brain cancer and other head
tumors. Bioelectromagnetics 2012;33(3):187–206. https://
doi.org/10.1002/bem.20716 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP158. Birnbaum LS, Taylor HS, Baldwin H, Ben-Ishai P, Davis D.
RE: cellular telephone use and the risk of brain tumors:update of the UK million women study. JNCI J Natl Cancer
Inst 2022;114(11):1551–2. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/
djac110 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP159. Moskowitz JM. RE: cellular telephone use and the risk of
brain tumors: update of the UK million women study. JNCI
J Natl Cancer Inst 2022;114(11):1549–50. https://doi.org/
10.1093/jnci/djac109 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP160. Carlberg M, Hedendahl L, Ahonen M, Koppel T, Hardell L.
Increasing incidence of thyroid cancer in the Nordic coun-
tries with main focus on Swedish data. BMC Cancer
2016;16(1):426. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-016-2429-4. TaggedEnd
TaggedP161. West JG, Kapoor NS, Liao SY, Chen JW, Bailey L, Nagour-
ney RA. Multifocal breast cancer in young women with pro-
longed contact between their breasts and their cellularphones. Case Rep Med 2013;2013:e354682. https://doi.org/
10.1155/2013/354682 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP162. Shih YW, Hung CS, Huang CC, et al. The association
between smartphone use and breast cancer risk among taiwa-
nese women: a case-control study. Cancer Manag Res
2020;12:10799–807. https://doi.org/10.2147/CMAR.S267415 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP163. Carlberg M, Hardell L. Evaluation of mobile phone and
cordless phone use and glioma risk using the bradford hill
viewpoints from 1965 on association or causation. BioMed
Res Int 2017;2017:e9218486. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/
9218486 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP164. Peleg M, Berry EM, Deitch M, Nativ O, Richter E. On radar
and radio exposure and cancer in the military setting. Envi-
ron
Res 2023;216:114610. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2022.114610. TaggedEnd
TaggedP165. Miller AB, Morgan LL, Udasin I, Davis DL. Cancer epide-
miology update, following the 2011 IARC evaluation ofradiofrequency electromagnetic ﬁelds (Monograph 102).
Environ Res 2018;167:673–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2018.06.043 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP166. Melnick RL. Commentary on the utility of the National Tox-
icology Program study on cell phone radiofrequency radia-tion data for assessing human health risks despite unfoundedcriticisms aimed at minimizing the ﬁndings of adverse health
effects. Environ Res 2019;168:1–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2018.09.010 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP167. Directorate-General for Parliamentary Research Services (Euro-
pean Parliament), Belpoggi F. Health Impact of 5G: Current
State of Knowledge of 5G Relate d Carcinogenic and Reproduc-
tive/Developmental Hazards as They Emerge from Epidemio-logical Studies and in Vivo Experimental Studies. LU:
Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union; 2021 https://data.
europa.eu/doi/10.2861/657478 . Accessed September 21, 2022. TaggedEnd
TaggedP168. White MC, Weir HK, Soman AV, Peipins LA, Thompson
TD. Risk of clear-cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina and
TaggedEnd44 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
cervix among US women with potential exposure to diethyl-
stilbestrol in utero. Cancer Causes Control CCC 2022;33
(8):1121–4. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10552-022-01598-3. TaggedEnd
TaggedP169. Ugai T, Sasamoto N, Lee HY, et al. Is early-onset cancer an
emerging global epidemic? Current evidence and futureimplications. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2022;19(10):656–73.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41571-022-00672-8. TaggedEnd
TaggedP170. Loomans-Kropp HA, Umar A. Increasing incidence of colo-
rectal cancer in young adults. J Cancer Epidemiol 2019;2019:
e9841295. https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/9841295 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP171. Rising colon and rectal cancer rates could be due to cell phone
radiation. Environ Health Trust September 2020 https://
ehtrust.org/rising-colon-and-rectal-cancer-rates-could-be-due-
to-cell-phone-radiation/ . Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP172. Mokarram P, Sheikhi M, Mortazavi SMJ, Saeb S, Shokrpour
N. Effect of exposure to 900 MHz GSM mobile phone radio-frequency radiation on estrogen receptor methylation status
in colon cells of male sprague dawley rats. J Biomed Phys
Eng2017;7(1):79–86. TaggedEnd
TaggedP173. Alkayyali T, Ochuba O, Srivastava K, et al. An exploration
of the effects of radiofrequency radiation emitted by mobile
phones and extremely low frequency radiation on thyroidhormones and thyroid gland histopathology. Cureus 2021;13
(8).https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.17329 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP174. Cant €urk Tan F, Yal ¸cin B, Yay AH, Tan B, Ye /C21gin K, Da ¸sda/C21g
S. Effects of pre and postnatal 2450 MHz continuous wave
(CW) radiofrequency radiation on thymus: four generation
exposure. Electromagn Biol Med 2022;41(3):315–24. https://
doi.org/10.1080/15368378.2022.2079673 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP175. La Merrill MA, Vandenberg LN, Smith MT, et al. Consensus
on the key characteristics of endocrine-disrupting chemicalsas a basis for hazard identiﬁcation. Nat Rev Endocrinol
2020;16(1):45–57. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41574-019-
0273-8. TaggedEnd
TaggedP176. Soffritti M, Giuliani L. The carcinogenic potential of non-
ionizing radiations: the cases of S-50 Hz MF and 1.8 GHz
GSM radiofrequency radiation. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxi-
col 2019;125(Suppl 3):58–69. https://doi.org/10.1111/
bcpt.13215 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP177. Tan S, Wang H, Xu X, et al. Acute effects of 2.856 GHz and
1.5 GHz microwaves on spatial memory abilities and CREB-
related pathways. Sci Rep 2021;11(1):12348. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-021-91622-4 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP178.
Yao C, Wang H, Sun L, et al. The biological effects of com-
pound microwave exposure with 2.8 GHz and 9.3 GHz onimmune system: transcriptomic and proteomic analysis. Cells
2022;11(23):3849. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11233849 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP179. Parent J, Sanders W, Forehand R. Youth screen time and
behavioral health problems: the role of sleep duration and
disturbances. J Dev Behav Pediatr JDBP 2016;37(4):277–
84.https://doi.org/10.1097/DBP.0000000000000272 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP180. Royant-Parola S, Londe V, Tr /C19ehout S, Hartley S. [The use of
social media modiﬁes teenagers’ sleep-related behavior].L’Encephale 2018;44(4):321–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
encep.2017.03.009 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP181. Hale L, Kirschen GW, LeBourgeois MK, et al. Youth screen
media habits and sleep: sleep-friendly screen behavior rec-
ommendations for clinicians, educators, and parents. ChildAdolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am 2018;27(2):229–45. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.chc.2017.11.014 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP182. Guerrero MD, Barnes JD, Chaput JP, Tremblay MS. Screen
time and problem behaviors in children: exploring the medi-ating role of sleep duration. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act
2019;16(1):105. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12966-019-0862-x . TaggedEnd
TaggedP183. Stiglic N, Viner RM. Effects of screentime on the health and
well-being of children and adolescents: a systematic reviewof reviews. BMJ Open 2019;9(1):e023191. https://doi.org/
10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023191 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP184. Council on Communications and Media, Hill D, Ameenud-
din N, et al. Media use in school-aged children and adoles-cents. Pediatrics 2016;138(5):e20162592. https://doi.org/
10.1542/peds.2016-2592 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP185. Nagata JM, Chu J, Zamora G, et al. Screen time and obses-
sive-compulsive disorder among children 9/C0 10 years old: a
prospective cohort study. J Adolesc Health December 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2022.10.023 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP186. van den Heuvel M, Ma J, Borkhoff CM, et al. Mobile media
device use is associated with expressive language delay in
18-month-old children. J Dev Behav Pediatr 2019;40(2):99–
104. https://doi.org/10.1097/DBP.0000000000000630 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP187. Lissak G. Adverse physiological and psychological effects of
screen time on children and adolescents: Literature review
and case study. Environ Res 2018;164:149–57. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envres.2018.01.015 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP188.
Axelsson EL, Purcell K, Asis A, et al. Preschoolers’ engage-
ment with screen content and associations with sleep and cog-nitive development. Acta Psychol (Amst) 2022;230:103762.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2022.103762 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP189. American Psychiatric Association. DSM-5 Task Force.Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, FifthEdition (DSM-5). 5th ed Arlington, VA: American Psychiat-
ric Association; 2013. TaggedEnd
TaggedP190. Perrin A.. 5 facts about Americans and video games. Pew
Res Cent .https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/09/
17/5-facts-about-americans-and-video-games/ . Accessed
January 25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP191. Nagata JM, Chu J, Ganson KT, et al. Contemporary screen
time modalities and disruptive behavior disorders in chil-
dren: a prospective cohort study. J Child Psychol Psychiatry
2023;64(1):125–35. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.13673 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP192. Dunkley V.L.. Reset Your Child’s Brain: A Four-Week Plan
to End Melt-Downs, Raise Grades, and Boost Social Skillsby Reversing the Effects of Electronic Screen Time .https://
www.publishersweekly.com/9781608682843 . Accessed Jan-
uary 25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP193. Pedersen J, Rasmussen MGB, Sørensen SO, et al. Effects of
limiting recreational screen media use on physical activity
and sleep in families with children: a cluster randomized
clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr 2022;176(8):741–9. https://doi.
org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2022.1519 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP194. Camerini AL, Albanese E, Marciano L. The impact of screen
time and green time on mental health in children and adoles-cents during the COVID-19 pandemic. Comput Hum Behav
Rep2022;7:100204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chbr.2022.100204 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP195. Li M, Lanca C, Tan CS, et al. Association of time outdoors
and patterns of light exposure with myopia in children. Br J
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 45
Ophthalmol 2023;107(1):133–9. https://doi.org/10.1136/
bjophthalmol-2021-318918 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP196. Philipp D, Vogel M, Brandt M, et al. The relationship between
myopia and near work, time outdoors and socioeconomic sta-
tus in children and adolescents. BMC Public Health 2022;22
(1):2058. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-14377-1 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP197. MacRoy-Higgins M, Kolker C. Time to Talk: What You
Need to Know About Your Child’s Speech and Language
Development. First edition New York: AMACOM; 2017. TaggedEnd
TaggedP198. McDaniel BT, Radesky JS. Technoference: parent distrac-
tion with technology and associations with child behaviorproblems. Child Dev 2018;89(1):100–9. https://doi.org/
10.1111/cdev.12822. TaggedEnd
TaggedP199. Davis D, Sears ME, Miller AB, Bray R. Microwave/radiofre-
quency radiation and human health: clinical management inthe digital age. In: Cohen A, vom Saal FS, Weil A, (eds).Integrative Environmental Medicine , Oxford University
Press, 2017. p. 0. https://doi.org/10.1093/med/
9780190490911.003.0010 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP200. Belyaev I, Dean A, Eger H, et al. EUROPAEM EMF Guide-
line 2016 for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment ofEMF-related health problems and illnesses. Rev Environ
Health 2016;31(3):363–97. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-
2016-0011 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP201. Bray R.. Clinical Practice Guidelines in the Diagnosis and
Management of Electromagnetic Field Hypersensitivity
(EHS). October 2020. TaggedEnd
TaggedP202. Austrian Medical Association. Guideline of the Austrian Medi-
cal Association (w) for the diagnosis and treatment of EMFre-
lated health problems and illnesses (EMF syndrome). March
2012 https://ehtrust.org/wp-conten t/uploads/The-Austrian-Med-
ical-Association-Guidelines-f or-Diagnosis-and-Treatment-of-
EMF-related-Heal th-Problems.pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP203. EMF /C0Medical Conference 2021. https://emfconfer-
ence2021.com/ . Accessed January 25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP204. Stein Y, Udasin IG. Electromagnetic hypersensitivity (EHS,
microwave syndrome) /C0Review of mechanisms. Environ Res
2020;186:109445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.109445 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP205. Farashi S, Bashirian S, Khazaei S, Khazaei M, Farhadinasab
A. Mobile phone electromagnetic radiation and the risk of
headache: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int Arch
Occup Environ Health 2022;95(7):1587–601. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00420-022-01835-x . TaggedEnd
TaggedP206. Redmayne M, Smith E, Abramson MJ. The relationship
be
tween adolescents’ well-being and their wireless phone use:
a cross-sectional study. E n v i r o nH e a l t hG l o bA c c e s sS c i
Source 2013;12:90. https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-12-90 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP207. Chongchitpaisan W, Wiwatanadate P, Tanprawate S, Nark-
pongphan A, Siripon N. Trigger of a migraine headache
among Thai adolescents smartphone users: a time series
study. Environ Anal Health Toxicol 2021;36(1):e2021006.
https://doi.org/10.5620/eaht.2021006 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP208. Balmori A. Evidence for a health risk by RF on humans liv-
ing around mobile phone base stations: From radiofrequencysickness to cancer. Environ Res 2022;214:113851. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2022.113851 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP209. Dieudonn /C19e M. Does electromagnetic hypersensitivity origi-
nate from nocebo responses? Indications from a qualitativestudy. Bioelectromagnetics 2016;37(1):14–24. https://doi.
org/10.1002/bem.21937. TaggedEnd
TaggedP210. Hardell L, Nilsson M. Case Report: the microwave syn-
drome after installation of 5G emphasizes the need forprotection from radiofrequency radiation. Ann Case Rep
January 2023 https://www.gavinpublis hers.com/article/
view/case-report-the-microwa ve-syndrome-after-installa-
tion-of-5g-emphasizes-the-need-for-protection-from-radiofrequency-radiation . Accessed January 25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP211. US Access Board. IEQ Indoor Environmental Quality Proj-
ect.https://www.access-board.gov/research/building/indoor-
environmental-quality/ . Accessed January 25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP212. Electrical Sensitivity. https://askjan.org/disabilities/Electri-
cal-Sensitivity.cfm#otherinfo . Accessed January 25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP213. Job Accommodation Network. Accommodation and Compli-
ance Series: Employees with Electrical Sensitivity. 2022.https://askjan.org/publications/Disability-Downloads.cfm?
pubid=226622 . Accessed January 25, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP214. Physicians’ Health Initiative for Radiation and Environment.
Press Release: Education Health Care Plan (EHCP) awarded
(July 2022) for UK child on the basis of Electromagnetic
Hypersensitivity (EHS). August 2022. https://phiremedical.
org/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/phire-2022-press-release-
hm-courts-and-tribunals-service-ehcp-for-uk-child-with-ehs.
pdf. TaggedEnd
TaggedP215. McDonald and Comcare .(Administrative Appeals Tribunal
of Australia 2013). http://www8.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/view-
doc/au/cases/cth/aat/2013/105.html . Accessed January 26,
2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP216. Wilkie C., Baker D.. Accommodation for environmental sen-
sitivities: legal perspective. TaggedEnd
TaggedP217. Sears M.E., Eng M.. The medical perspective on environ-
mental
sensitivities. 2007. TaggedEnd
TaggedP218. Canadian Human Rights Commission. Policy on Environ-
mental Sensitivities. In:; 2019. https://www.chrc-ccdp.gc.ca/
en/resources/publications/policy-environmental-sensitivities .
Accessed January 26, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP219. Kostoff RN, Lau CGY. Modiﬁed health effects of non-ioniz-
ing electromagnetic radiation combined with other agents
reported in the biomedical literature. In: Geddes CD, ed.
Microwave Effects on DNA and Proteins , Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2017. pp. 97–157. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-50289-2_4 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP220. Sueiro-Benavides RA, Leiro-Vidal JM, Salas-S /C19anchez A /C19A,
Rodr /C19ıguez-Gonz /C19alez JA, Ares-Pena FJ, L /C19opez-Mart /C19ın ME.
Radiofrequency at 2.45 GHz increases toxicity, pro-inﬂam-
matory and pre-apoptotic activity caused by black carbon in
the RAW 264.7 macrophage cell line. Sci Total Environ
2021;765:142681. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scito-
tenv.2020.142681 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP221. Ledoigt G, Sta C, Goujon E, Souguir D, Ferjani EE. Syner-
gistic health effects between chemical pollutants and electro-magnetic ﬁelds. Rev Environ Health 2015;30(4):305–9.
https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2015-0028 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP222. Leszczynski D, Joenv €a€ar€a S, Reivinen J, Kuokka R. Non-
thermal activation of the hsp27/p38MAPK stress pathway by
mobile phone radiation in human endothelial cells: Molecu-
lar mechanism for cancer- and blood-brain barrier-related
TaggedEnd46 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
effects. Differentiation 2002;70(2):120–9. https://doi.org/
10.1046/j.1432-0436.2002.700207.x . TaggedEnd
TaggedP223. Salford LG, Brun AE, Eberhardt JL, Malmgren L, Persson
BRR. Nerve cell damage in mammalian brain after exposure
to microwaves from GSM mobile phones. Environ Health
Perspect 2003;111(7):881–3. https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.6039 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP224. Sirav B, Seyhan N. Effects of radiofrequency radiation expo-
sure on blood-brain barrier permeability in male and femalerats. Electromagn Biol Med 2011;30(4):253–60. https://doi.
org/10.3109/15368378.2011.600167 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP225. Sırav B, Seyhan N. Effects of GSM modulated radio-fre-
quency electromagnetic radiation on permeability of
blood /C0brain barrier in male & female rats. J Chem Neuroa-
nat 2016;75:123–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jchem-
neu.2015.12.010 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP226. Byun YH, Ha M, Kwon HJ, et al. Mobile phone use, blood
lead levels, and attention deﬁcit hyperactivity symptoms in
children: a longitudinal study. PLOS ONE 2013;8(3):
e59742. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0059742 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP227. Choi KH, Ha M, Ha EH, et al. Neurodevelopment for the ﬁrst
three years following prenatal mobile phone use, radio fre-quency radiation and lead exposure. Environ Res
2017;156:810–7. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.envres.2017.04.029 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP228. Braun KVN, Christensen D, Doernberg N, et al. Trends in
the prevalence of autism spectrum disorder, cerebral palsy,
hearing loss, intellectual disability, and vision impairment,
metropolitan Atlanta, 1991 /C02010. PLOS ONE 2015;10(4):
e0124120. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0124120 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP229. Dutheil F, Comptour A, Morlon R, et al. Autism spectrum dis-
order and air pollution: a systema tic review and meta-analysis.
Environ Pollut Barking Essex 1987 2021;278:116856. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.116856 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP230. Ahuja YR, Sharma S, Bahadur B. Autism: an epigenomic
side-effect of excessive exposure to electromagnetic ﬁelds.Int J Med Med Sci 2013;5(4):171–7. https://doi.org/10.5897/
IJMMS12.135 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP231. Thornton IM. Out of time: a possible link between mirror
neurons, autism and electromagnetic radiation. Med Hypoth-
eses 2006;67(2):378–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mehy.2006.01.032 . TaggedEnd
T aggedP232. Herbert MR, Sage C. Autism and EMF? Plausibility of a path-
o
physiological link /C0Part I. Pathophysiology 2013;20
(3):191–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pathophys.2013.08.001 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP233. Herbert MR, Sage C. Autism and EMF? Plausibility of a path-
ophysiological link part II. Pathophysiology 2013;20(3):211–
34.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pathophys.2013.08.002 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP234. National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements.
Report No. 086 /C0Biological Effects and Exposure Criteria
for Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields (1986). Bethesda,MD: NCRP; 1986.| https://ncrponline.org/shop/reports/report-
no-086-biological-effects-and-exposure-criteria-for-radiofre-quency-electromagnetic-ﬁelds-1986/ . Accessed January 26,
2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP235. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Section
1.1310 - Radiofrequency radiation exposure limits. Code
Fed Regul 2011;1 https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2011-title47-vol1/xml/CFR-2011-title47-vol1-sec1-1310.xml . Accessed February 1, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP236. National Institute for Public Health and the Environment
(RIVM). Comparison of International Policies on Electro-
magnetic Fields. 201820.TaggedEnd
TaggedP237. Parliamentary Assembly. The Potential Dangers of Electro-
magnetic Fields and Their Effect on the Environment.
https://assembly.coe.int/nw/xml/XRef/Xref-XML2HTML-
en.asp?ﬁleid=17994& Accessed January 26, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP238. Redmayne M. International policy and advisory response
regarding children’s exposure to radio frequency electromag-netic ﬁelds (RF-EMF). Electromagn Biol Med 2016;35
(2):176–85. https://doi.org/10.3109/15368378.2015.1038832. TaggedEnd
TaggedP239. Sivani S, Sudarsanam D. Impacts of radio-frequency electro-magnetic ﬁeld (RF-EMF) from cell phone towers and wire-less devices on biosystem and ecosystem /C0a review. Biol
Med 2012. TaggedEnd
TaggedP240. Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of India.
Report on Possible Impacts of Communication Towers onWildlife Including Birds and Bees .; 2010. https://www.ee.
iitb.ac.in/ »mwave/Report%20on%20Possible
%20Impacts%20of%20Communication%20Towers.pdf. TaggedEnd
TaggedP241. Hennies K, Neitzke HP, Voigt H. Mobile Telecommunica-
tions and Health Review of the Current Scientiﬁc Researchin View Of Precautionary Health Protection. ECOLOG-Institut; April 2000. p. 86 https://ehtrust.org/wp-content/
uploads/T-mobile-RF-Radiation-Ecolog-2000-Report-.pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP242. Belyaev I. Dependence of non-thermal biological effects ofmicrowaves on physical and biological variables: Implica-tions for reproducibility and safety standards. Eur J Oncol
Libr 2010;5:187–218. T aggedEnd
TaggedP243.
Mohammed B, Jin J, Abbosh AM, Bialkowski KS, Manou-
fali M, Crozier S. Evaluation of children’s exposure to
electromagnetic ﬁelds of mobile phones using age-speciﬁc
head models with age-dependent dielectric properties.IEEE Access 2017;5:27345–53. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2017.2767074 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP244. Beard BB, Kainz W, Onishi T, et al. Comparisons of com-
puted mobile phone induced SAR in the SAM phantom to
that in anatomically correct models of the human head. IEEE
Trans Electromagn Compat 2006;48(2):397–407. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TEMC.2006.873870 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP245. McInerny T.K.. Letter from President of the American Acad-
emy of Pediatrics, Thomas K. McInerny, MD, FAAP to the
Honorable Dennis Kucinich, Representative. December2012. https://ehtrust.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/aap_-
support_letter_cell_phone_right_to_know_act.pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP246. Cell Phone Right to Know Act (2012 - H.R. 6358). GovTrack.us.
https://www.govtrack.us/con gress/bills/1 12/hr6358 . Accessed
January 27, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP247. Environmental Health Trust | Information About Cell Phone,
Wi-Fi, 5G, and Bluetooth Radiation Science Facts on HealthEffects. Environmental Health Trust. https://ehtrust.org/ .
Accessed January 27, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP248. Common Position on 5G Deployment of the Cyprus Medical
Association and the Cyprus National Committee of Environ-
ment and Children’s Health (19/09/2019) | Paidi.com.cy.
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 47
https://paidi.com.cy/common-position-on-5g-deployment-
of-the-cyprus-medical-association-and-the-cyprus-national-committee-of-environment-and-childrens-health/?lang=en .
Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP249. Steiner E, Aufdereggen B, Semadeni C. Vorsorgeprinzip beim
Mobilfunk konsequent anwenden. Schweiz €Arzteztg 2020;101
(46):1534–6. https://doi.org/10 .4414/saez.20 20.19274. TaggedEnd
TaggedP250. Inquinamento radioattivo. ISDE Ital .https://www.isde.it/
cosa-facciamo/aree-tematiche/inquinamento/inquinamento-radioattivo/ . Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP251. Gravalos T.. H anάgkh na λh’uoύnm έtra,gia thn
prostas ίaa p όthn h λektromagnhtik ήaktin oboλίa,
tonίsthk estopλaίsiohmerίda& p oyd iorgάnvs eoISA,
ypόthn aig ίda th& KEDE. Iatrik ό&Sύλλogo&Auh
 nώn.
https://www.isathens.gr/syndikal/6743-imerida-ilektromag-nitiki-aktinovolia.html . Published April 2, 2017. Accessed
January 27, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP252. American Academy of Pediatrics. Cell Phone Radiation &
Children’s Health: What Par ents Need to Know. Healthy-
Children.org. https://www.healthychildren.org/English/
safety-prevention/all-around /Pages/Cell-Phone-Radiation-
Childrens-Health.aspx . Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP253. California Department of Public Health, Division of Envi-
ronmental and Occupational Disease Control. How toReduce Exposure to Radiofrequency Energy from CellPhones. https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CCDPHP/
DEODC/EHIB/CDPH%20Document%20Library/Cell-Phone-Guidance.pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP254. Wall S, Wang ZM, Kendig T, Dobraca D, Lipsett M. Real-
world cell phone radiofrequency electromagnetic ﬁeld expo-
sures. Environ Res 2019;171:581–92. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.envres.2018.09.015 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP255. Children’s Environmental Health and Protection Advisory
Council. Maryland.gov Guidelin es to Reduce Electromagnetic
Field Radiation. https://health.marylan d.gov/phpa/OEHFP/EH/
Shared%20Documents/CEHPAC/CEHPAC_EMF%20Guide-lines%20to%20Reduce%20Exposure_12.20.2022.pdf . Accessed
January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP256. Madjar HM. Human radio frequency exposure limits: An
update of reference levels in Europe, USA, Canada, China,
Japan and Korea. In: 2016 International Symposium on Elec-
tromagnetic Compatibility - EMC EUROPE ; 2016. p. 467–
73.https://doi.org/10.1109/EMCEurope.2016.7739164 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP257. ANFR. Wave Observatory. https://www.anfr.fr/maitriser/
information-du-public/observatoire-des-ondes . Accessed
January 27, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP258. Silva A. New communications antenna law in Chile. Com-
mun Law Newsl Int Bar Assoc Leg Pract Div 2013;20(1)
https://www.carey.cl/download/newsalert/
Communications%20Law%20(April%202013).pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP259. Local cell tower laws that protect communities. Environ
Health Trust November 2022: https://ehtrust.org/local-cell-
tower-laws-that-protect-communities/ Accessed January 27,
2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP260. Database of Worldwide Policies on Cell Phones, Wireless
and Health. Environ Health Trust. https://ehtrust.org/policy/
international-policy-actions-on-wireless/ .
 Accessed January
27, 2023. TaggedEndTaggedP261. Sharma A. Rajasthan HC Orders Relocation of Mobile Towers
from Schools, Hospitals. The Economic Times; 2012 https://
economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/tel ecom/rajasthan-hc-
orders-relocation-of-mobile-towers-from-schools- hospitals/arti-
cleshow/17397645.cms?intenttarget=no Published November
28Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP262. Linhares A., da Silva M.. INTERNATIONAL EMF PROJ-
ECT ADVISORY COMMITTEE (IAC) MEETING Anatel
Report on EMF Activities in Brazil . Brazil; 2018:2. https://
cdn.who.int/media/docs/defau lt-source/radiation/radiation/
emf-international-project-coun try-reports/amro-region/bra-
zil_2019.pdf?sfvrsn=2b0e7f97_5&download=true . TaggedEnd
TaggedP263. National Telecommunications Agency Brazil. Electromag-
netic Field Exposure Map. Anatel Gov Brazil. https://infor-
macoes.anatel.gov.br/paineis/espectro-e-orbita/mapa-de-exposicao-a-campos-eletromagneticos . Accessed January 27,
2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP264. Observatory. https://paratiritirioemf.eeae.gr/en/?rCH=2 .
Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP265. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Hankin NN. Radiofre-
quency Radiation Environment Environmental Exposure Lev-els And Rf Radiation Emitting Sources. July 1986 https://nepis.
epa.gov/Exe/ZyNET.exe/2000ECT Q.txt?ZyActionD=ZyDocu-
ment&Client=EPA&Index=1981%20Thru%201985&Docs=&-Query= &Time=&EndTime=&SearchMethod=1&TocRes-trict=n&Toc=&TocEntry=&QFi eld=&QFieldYear=&QField-
Month=&QFieldDay=&UseQField =&IntQFieldOp=0& ExtQFieldOp=0&XmlQuery=& File=D%3A% 5CZYFILES%5
CINDEX %20DATA%5C 81THRU85%5CTXT %5C00000003 %5C2000ECTQ.txt&User= ANONYMOUS&Password=
anonymous&SortMethod=h%7C-&MaximumDocuments=1&-FuzzyDegree=0&ImageQuality=r75g8/r75g8/x150y150g16/i425&Display=hpfr&DefSeekP age=x&SearchBack=ZyAc-
tionL&Back=ZyActionS&BackD esc=Results%20page &Max-
imumPages=1&ZyEntry=1 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP266. Hardell L, Carlberg M, Hedendahl LK. Radiofrequency radi-
ation from nearby base stations gives high levels in an apart-ment in Stockholm, Sweden: a case report. Oncol Lett
2018;15(5):7871–83. https://doi.org/10.3892/ol.2018.8285 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP267. Koppel T, Ahonen M, Carlberg M, Hardell L. Very high
radiofrequency radiation at Skeppsbron in Stockholm, Swe-den from mobile phone base station antennas positionedclose to pedestrians’ heads. Environ Res 2022;208:112627.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.112627 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP268. Order of 15 November 2019 relating to the display of thespeciﬁc absorption rate of radio equipment and consumer
information . Vol NOR: SSAP1834792A.; 2019. https://
www.legifrance.gouv.fr/loda/id/JORF-
TEXT000039385174#JORFARTI000039385179 . Accessed
November 16, 2022. TaggedEnd
TaggedP269. Order
of 15 November 2019 Relating to the Display of the
Speciﬁc Absorption Rate of Radio Equipment and ConsumerInformation . TaggedEnd
TaggedP270. ANFR. SAR Regulation Guide on 1st July 2020. 2020.
https://www.anfr.fr/ﬁleadmin/mediatheque/documents/expace/2020-guide-R%C3%A9glementation-DAS-EN.pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP271. Directorate of Legal and Administrative Information (Prime
Minister). Ondes /C19electromagn /C19etiques : plus de vigilance sur
TaggedEnd48 Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023
l’information aux consommateurs. Electromagn Waves More
Vigil Consum Inf November 2022: https://www.service-pub-
lic.fr/particuliers/actualites/A16183 Accessed January 27,
2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP272. Bolksgezondheid F.O., Van De Voedselketen En Leefmilieu
V.. New rules for selling mobile phones Practical guide for
sellers and distributors. https://www.health.belgium.be/sites/
default/ﬁles/uploads/ﬁelds/fpshealth_theme_ﬁle/19096044/Guide%20mobile%20phone%20v5.pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP273. Lukovnikova DrM. Implementation of the council recom-
mendations in Belgium introduction of new rules for mobilephone sales. In: Presented at the: Workshop on Electromag-
netic Fields and Health Effects: from Science to Policy and
Public Awareness , Athens, Greece; 2014.March 28 https://
ec.europa.eu/health/scientiﬁc_committees/emerging/docs/
ev_20140328_co06_en.pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP274. ANFR-The results of SAR measurements. https://www.anfr.
fr/maitriser/equipements-radioelectriques/le-debit-dabsorp-tion-speciﬁque-das/les-resultats-des-mesures-de-das .
Accessed January 27, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP275. Adopted Text N °468 “Little Law.” https://www.assemblee-
nationale.fr/14/ta/ta0468.asp . Accessed January 26, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP276. Parliamentary Assembly. PACE website. https://assembly.
coe.int/nw/xml/XRef/Xref-XML2HTML-en.asp?ﬁleid=17994& . Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP277. Friday SEHTP, March 03, Permalink 2017 at 11:43 AM
CST-. First State in the Nation: Maryland State AdvisoryCouncil Recommends Reducing School Wireless to Pro-tect Children. SBWire. http://www.sbwire.com/press-
releases/ﬁrst-state-in-the-nation-maryland-state-advisory-
council-recommends-reducing -school-wireless-to-pro-
tect-children-777904.htm . Published March 3, 2017.
Accessed January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP278. Clegg FM, Sears M, Friesen M, et al. Building science and
radiofrequency radiation: what makes smart and healthy
buildings. Build Environ 2020;176:106324. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.106324 . TaggedEndTaggedP279. Collaborative for High Performance Schools. 2014 US-
CHPS Criteria New Construction and Renovation Low-EMFBest Practices. 2014. https://ehtrust.org/wp-content/uploads/
2015/12/US-CHPS_Criteria_2014_Low-EMF-Crite-ria102314.pdf . TaggedEnd
TaggedP280. Bellieni CV, Nardi V, B uonocore G, Di Fabio S, Pinto I,
Verrotti A. Electrom agnetic ﬁelds in neonatal incubators:
the reasons for an alert. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
2017;32(4):695–9. https://doi.org/10.1080/
14767058.2017.1390559 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP281. Passi R, Doheny KK, Gordin Y, Hinssen H, Palmer C. Elec-
trical grounding improves vagal tone in preterm infants. Neo-
natology 2017;112(2):187–92. https://doi.org/10.1159/
000475744 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP282.
Calvente I, V /C19azquez-P /C19erez A, Fern /C19andez MF, N /C19u~nez MI,
M/C19u~noz-Hoyos A. Radiofrequency exposure in the neonatal
medium care unit. Environ Res 2017;152:66–72. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envres.2016.09.019 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP283. Sadetzki S, Ghelberg S, Kandel, S. National Activity Report
/C0ISRAEL 2016 . Israel; 2016:4. https://cdn.who.int/media/
docs/default-source/radiation/emf-international-project-
country-reports/euro-region/israel-2017.pdf?sfvrsn=27e550b4_3 . TaggedEnd
TaggedP284. Campaign at Archbishop Makarios Hospital 2019 /C0EMF/
RF | Paidi.com.cy. https://paidi.com.cy/campaign-at-arch-
bishop-makarios-hospital-2019-emf-rf/?lang=en . Accessed
January 10, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP285. Environmental Medicine Matters » Hamburg hospital offers
rooms for patients with MCS and environmental illness.http://www.csn-deutschland.de/blog/en/hamburg-hospital-
offers-rooms-for-patients-with-mcs-and-environmental-ill-
ness/ . Accessed February 1, 2023. TaggedEnd
TaggedP286. Levitt BB, Lai HC, Manville AM. Low-level EMF effects on
wildlife and plants: what research tells us about an ecosys-tem approach. Front Public Health 2022;10 https://www.
frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1000840 .
Accessed December 9, 2022. TaggedEnd
TaggedEndCurr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care, February 2023 49
Ed Friedman
Friends of Merrymeeting Bay
LD 697
Additional testimony attached making EUT Committee aware of newly published 
paper on this subject.
Thank you.
Electronic Submissions should allow for Subject Headings. It is impossible when 
looking at testimony online to distinguish between multiple testimony documents 
submitted by the same party.
