Eli Brown
Milbridge
LD 697
I have been an Amateur Radio (Ham) operator since 1997.  I have been exposed to RF
in the HF, VHF and UHF bands.  Amateur Radio is a federal radio service requiring a 
federal license to operate. Licenses are issued by the Federal Communications 
Commission. It is a hobby, but it is also what ALWAYS works when "All Else Fails".
When the Ice Storm of '98 hit Maine causing phone lines and public safety systems to 
fail, Amateur Radio operators prevailed.  This is proven around the world many times
annually, every year.  Amateur Radio does not rely on any sort of infrastructure to 
work, whereas telephone systems, cellular phones, satellite phones, internet and even 
some public safety communications do.  This past winter when we had the storm roll 
in right as Christmas arrived, people were without power and heat in Maine.  Ham 
operators were communicating around the state and passing information to 
Emergency Management Agencies.
Yes, RF energy can be dangerous.  That's why there are Maximum Permissible 
Exposure limitations.  
Our world is saturated with RF.  Laptop computers, cell phones, smart TV's...ANY 
wireless device that connects to another device emits RF energy.  Keep in mind that 
when you pop your favorite TV dinner, bag of popcorn or whatever into the 
microwave and hit the START button and stand there waiting for it, you just started 
radiating yourself with RF.  A 1000 watt microwave oven is nothing more than a 
1000 watt radio operating at about 2.45 GHz. That's the same frequency as your 2.4 
GHz WIFI router (about 100 milliwatts) and your laptop computer sitting on your lap 
while you surf the net.  
Do you have a cell phone to your head?  That's RF.  Do you use bluetooth earpieces 
to link to your cell phone?  That's RF.
The way this bill is worded it talks about 5G, but it also opens it up to all "modulated 
radio frequency radiation at nonthermal levels".  That means essentially everything.  
If RF energy is determined to be harming the birds, bees and insects, then let's shut 
down the most powerful radio station there is in Maine.  VLF in Cutler that can emit 
over 1 MILLION watts of RF power. I noticed that the college is supposed to submit 
a report with it's findings by Dec 6 of this year.  So they are going to thoroughly study
all of this between April at the earliest and December?  School is out from June until 
September.  They're going to study effects on school children?  Maybe just during 
May, September through December.  Sure, that seems like a good long time period to 
really study this....a whopping 4 months.  All of their data will be discovered, 
analyzed, compiled and presented into an accurate report that quickly?  Riiighttt.... 
Now, there are some people who do not like ham radio operators or cellular 
companies building towers and they fight against both with baseless claims of "It's 
gonna cause cancer.", yet they can't seem to back up their claims with real facts.  
We'll also notice that these cancer preachers have cell phones, but they don't seem 
worried about the RF emissions from THEIR phone.  It's probably safe to say that 
they own and use microwave ovens on a regular basis, are they worried about the RF 
emissions while making their Hungryman? 
If it ain't broke, don't fix it.  Leave Amateur Radio alone. 5G is one thing,  modulated 
radio frequency radiation at nonthermal levels and opening it up to essentially 
everything is a completely different ball game. 
