Page 1 of 3 
  
 
Members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology     
Committee  
 
 
  
March 7, 2023 
                              
PO Box 33  
Maple Grove Village Postal Outlet  
Oakville, ON  
L6J 7P5 
 
Subject:  Support for LD 697 -  Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and 
Insect Populations and the Effects of Long -term Exposure on Children . 
 
Dear Members of the  Energy, Utilities and Technology  Committee:    
 
I am writing in support of LD 697 - Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect 
Populations and the Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children . 
 There is no regulation in Canada that provides protection to biota from the harmful effects of RF -EMR.  I believe 
there is a similar lack of regulation in the United States.  
 
Today, there are over 300,000 cell towers in the United States
1 and thousands more to come across the country. 
In addition, as new technologies are rolled out, there wi ll be tens of thousands more so -called “ small” cell 
antennas, installed every 20 to 100 metres or so, in urban areas. Today’s ambient levels of anthropogenic2 RF-
EMR are estimated to be millions of times higher than natural levels. Adding more RF-EMR-e mitting cell antennas 
will lead to substantially more RF -EMR in the environment.  
 
It was once thought that the energy of non -ionizing RF-EMR was too weak to cause harmful biological effects. 
There is now ample evidence to the contrary. Adverse biological effects from RF -EMR exposures have been 
demonstrated in biota, su ch as birds, bees and trees, at ambient RF-EMR levels.  
 
We are particularly concerned about the upcoming plans for wireless 5G, and its impact on our health, esp. 
children and the environment . Our White Paper “Protect Birds, Bees and Trees: Include Electromagneti c 
Radiation in Canadian Environmental Protection Act Amendments“, prepared jointly with Prevent Cancer Now , 
outlines the scientific evid ence of biological harms of RF -EMR. https://c4st.org/wp -
content/uploads/docs/Studies/RF -EMR_in_CEPA_White_Paper_by_PCN__C4ST.pdf    
 
Sectio n 4 of the peer -review paper we published Building science and radiofrequency radiation: What makes 
smart and healthy buildings3, 4. Adverse health effects of RFR  references studies  that show “ consistent with the 
increasing use of cell phones, there was a statistically significant increase in incidence of primary malignant brain 
 
1 How Many Cell Towers Are There In The World? (tribunewired.com)   
2 Originating from human activity.  
3 Building science and radiofrequency radiation: What makes smart and healthy buildings - ScienceDirect  

Page 2 of 3 
 and central nervous system tumors in children and adolescents in the US between 2000 and 20104, and brain 
tumors subsequently became the most common malignancy in children and adolescents, w ith disease shifting to 
more aggressive gliomas5. Modeling indicates that childre n absorb substantially higher RFR doses from cell 
phones, in deeper brain structures, than do adults ( Fig. 1). Research has also found proportionately higher doses 
to tissues in children compared with adults, from wireless laptops and utility meters6,7,8. Not only can RFR act 
along with carcinogens to promote tumor development9, it also may synergize with toxic chemicals in ot her 
ways. For example, in a study of  Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder  in children, ADHD was associated with 
mobile phone use for voice calls only in children who were also exposed to relatively high lead levels (lead is an 
established, potent neurotoxin)10. Further  synergistic effects  between RFR and various chemicals including 
nutrients (i.e., both beneficial and adverse) are described in a 2016 review by Kostoff and Lau11.” 
 
Fig. 1. Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) in adult and child (age 6 years) male heads with phone in talk position. The 
scale is 50 dB with 0 dB = 1.6 mW/kg. From work of Claudio Férnandez, 201812 (used with permission of 
Environmental Health Trust). 
  
 
4 Trends in c entral nervous system tumor incidence relative to other common cancers in adults, adolescents, and children in 
the United States, 2000 to 2010 - Gittleman - 2015 - Cancer - Wiley Online Library  
5 American Brain Tumor Association Adolescent and Young Adult Primary Brain and Central Nervous System Tumors 
Diagnosed in the United States in 2008- 2012 | Neuro -Oncology | Oxford Academic (oup.com)  
6 Numerical evaluation of human exposure to WiMax patch antenna in tablet or laptop -  Siervo - 2018 - Bioelectromagnetics 
- Wiley Online Library  
7 SAR simulations of EMF exposure due to tablet operation close to the user's body | IEEE Conference Publication | IEEE 
Xplore  
8 Assessment of exposure to radio frequency electromagnetic fields from smart utility meters in GB; part II) numerical 
assessment of induced SAR within the human body -  Qureshi - 2018 - Bioelectromagnetics - Wile y Online Library  
9 Tumor promotion by exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields below exposure limits for humans - ScienceDirect  
10 Mobile Phone Use, Blood Lead Levels, and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Symptoms in Children: A Longitudinal Study | 
PLOS ONE  
11 Combined biological and health effects of electromagnetic fields and other agents in the published literature -  
ScienceDirect  
12 Absorption of wireless radiation in the child versus a dult brain and eye from cell phone conversation or virtual reality - 
ScienceDirect  

Page 3 of 3 
 We believe LD 697 - Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations and the 
Effects of Long -term Exposure on Children  is a tremendous opportunity now to start the  actions necessary to 
provide protection from RF -EMR to bird s, bees and trees and our c hildren .   
 
I would  be pleased to meet with you via a vi deo or telephone call to answer any questions and provide more 
details.  Please let me know if this is a possibility.  
 Sincerely,  
 
  
 
Frank Clegg  
CEO, Canadians for Safe Technology (C4ST)  
frank@c4st.org
 
   
Keep your family safe from wireless radiation –  See how at www.C4ST.org   
 
Cc: Maine State Representative Tracy Quint, RN  
 
ABOUT C4ST:  
Founded in 2012, Canadians for Safe Technology (C4ST), is a national, non -partisan, not -for-profit organization 
that is concerned with the health risks of wireless technology. C4ST is a volunteer coalition of parents, scientists and citizens whose mission is to educate Can adians and policy makers about the dangers of exposures to unsafe 
levels of radiofrequency/microwave radiation from commonly used wireless devices and network  antennas. We 
work with all levels of government to create healthier communities for children and families.  
 
ABOUT Frank Clegg:  
Frank Clegg  spent over 40 years in the technology industry;  his most recent position wa s President of Microsoft 
Canada. Having  met with experts from institutions such as  Harvard, Yale, Colu mbia, the University of Toronto, an 
expert advisor for  the World Health Organization  and one of the lead scientific writers for  Al Gore' s team that 
won the Nobel Prize, Mr. Clegg concluded that the current implementation  of wireless technology is not safe  and 
helped co -found C4ST.  
 

