Dear Esteemed Legislators and Staff,
I respectfully submit this email as my testimony in support of
LD 697 - Resolve, to
Study the Effects of 5G.
I regret that my testimony is not able to be given
in person today as I am
unable to attend due to a prior commitment that was immovable.
Because of
my family's personal journey which led us to understand first hand about the dangers of
wireless radiation and due to the fact that ALL wireless communications including "5G"
utilize various frequency ranges-
have both negative
and positive biological effects
- I
have pasted my testimony from
Massachusetts bill
H115
An Act relative to best
management practices for wireless in schools and public institutions of higher
education
.
I have submitted testimony each time the various iterations of this bill have come up for
hearing over the last few sessions. I have met with Committee Chairs, legislators, and
aides countless times in person to express my concern for the lack of best practices and
of the overall failure to make schools safer for our children.
I strongly urge you to finally pass this important bill before you. The following website
HOME | TechSafe Schools
will provide practical best
practices and
MITIGATION
recommendations for your consideration.
The recent August 2021
US Appeals Court Judgement
in which the
Court ordered the
FCC to reconsider RF radiation limits on mobile devices,
is relevant to H115 as
all wireless transmitters including wi-fi access points in school classrooms are subject to
this order.
This is an urgent matter to parents seeking
to protect their
children in school  and acting to pass this bill would prioritize the health
and safety of students and staff.
My young child was harmed in school with extremely strong enterprise/high- density
wi-fi. The school wanted seamless coverage at the expense of safety and did not take the
time to responsibly understand the harm transmitters can cause when too close to the
body. It is well understood that children are more vulnerable to all toxins. It is also
known that
the average radiofrequency radiation energy
deposition for
children exposed to  RF is two times higher in the brain and 10 times
higher in the bone marrow of the skull as stated in
T
he
International Agency
for Research on Cancer, Monograph
.
The image below from the Aerohive Networks, the network provider at my child's
school,  shows the intensity of the microwave radiation from the enterprise/high-density
wi-fi . The warm colors indicates greater intensity and thus greater microwave radiation
exposure- this scenario creates a seamless or blanket coverage- with no reprieve for
those impacted :
We do not use wi-fi at home because of the harm it caused my family. Rather, we opt for
faster, safer, fiber-optic connections.  However,  I think it is important to understand
home and school environments can differ greatly. For example, the typical home wi-fi
coverage looks more like the image below- clearly, much less coverage and exposure
than a typical school :

Without my prior conset or knowledge my child's school placed transmitters close to my
child (see photos of actual transmitter placement below)  without regard for the
manufacturer's advice or the advice from
the
American
Academy of Pediatrics
.
(
See
letter from AAP to FCC
with additional cautionary
advice that was
ignored )
Antennas very
close to head/body at my child's school

Antennas at my child's school under desk
Below is the exposure measured for the entire school day. This school does
not
use enterprise/high -density wi-fi  :

The school below ( my child's school) has enterprise / high-density wi-fi - the
exposure is far greater for students and staff:

The harm to my child occurred daily in school and resulted in debilitating headaches,
bloody noses, tachycardia, ear pressure , ear ringing,  ear pain, and "underwater" ear
sensations, chest pain, dizziness, nausea, etc. These symptoms were not present on
weekends or over school breaks and summer when away from this intense and chronic
microwave radiation exposure.
Note: The purple bars
in the graphs above
represent electric field change or peaks of pulsed microwave radiation that
are emitted by the wireless access points. These peaks above are higher
than 5 mW/m^2 = 0.5 
μ
W/cm^2. The science shows that from 1 
μ
W/cm^2
we can have DNA damage with short-term exposures
(
see
Panagopoulos
papers referenced below in resources
)
Had simple best practices been employed in my child's school, this irreparable harm
could have been prevented. We have a collective opportunity with this important bill to
help schools understand the unique risks to children and mitigate these risks with
reasonable best practices.
Unfortunately, the placement of wireless emitting devices is dictated by coverage and
profit goals only- not safety. It is the proverbial "wild west" with wireless vendors vying
for a larger market share and high sales volume. Below illustrates various wi-fi access
point placement suggested in the respective manuals of the providers- Note: under seat

mounting exposes the user to intense and unsafe exposure yet this is commonly
recommended for school setting:
Cisco - advantages of under seat mounting
:
“The users
themselves attenuate the
signals. Second, this can generally provide a great way to
hide
AP’s (access points).”
Aerohive Networks
:
“Installing AP’s on the
opposite
side of a wall, beneath the floor ,
at low height (< 6 feet), or underneath seating
can
accomplish high-density Wi-FI.”
Netgear
:
“In high-density environments, the demands
on throughput are often
exacerbated by users carrying two or three devices using multiple applications that
consume network resources simultaneously .”
Securedge
:
“Never try and use access points that were
made for residential
environments..”
Extreme Networks
:
“Wi-Fi system satellites use mesh
technology to talk to the router
and to each other . Each node (Access Point) serves as a hop point for other nodes in
the system. This helps the nodes farthest from the router to deliver a
strong W i-Fi
signal
as they are talking to other nodes and not
relying on one-to-one communications
with the router .” *
Radar antennas
can be integrated
Cisco:
Wireless LAN Design Guide for High Density
Client Environments in Higher Education (cisco.com)
,
Wireless High Client
Density Design Guide - Cisco
Aerohive:
https://d2cpnw0u24fjm4.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/Aerohive-High-Density-Wi-Fi-Design-Configuration-Guide-v2.pdf
NetGear
Best Practices for High Density Wireless Network
Design In (pdfslide.net)
Secureedge
Wireless Access Point Placement: 3 Common
Mistakes (securedgenetworks.com)
AP30 - Extreme Networks
Source: Former President Frank Clegg’ s slide presentation Shrewsbury , MA 2019
Reasonable best practices are articulated below by Mr. Frank Clegg, former president of
Microsoft Canada:
●
Begin to Re-orient the mindset of developers, designers, and installers to meet
consumer demand with
minimal radiation exposure-
industry
has IP
●
In the interim
immediate opportunities to follow
CDC
ALARA  principle
(As Low
As Reasonably Achievable)*, commercially available solutions are abundant
●
Safest Solution- use hardwired connections
whenever
possible.
100 times
faster , more economical in the long run, more reliable, less vulnerable to
security and privacy problems and safer . Hard W ired systems
Use 10x less
energy than wireless systems
1
more green less climate
impact.
●
If hardwired connections are unavailable,
turn of f Wi-fi Access Points
and
devices when not in use via commercially available wall switch with timer
●
The wireless vendor can easily
and
programmatically
reduce power density
without materially impacting coverage (See
Tech Safe
School Mitigation
recommendations)
●
Content for teaching can be
downloaded
to a tablet
or device prior to the
lesson
●
Prohibit
cell phones and other wearables in the classroom
●
Ask industry
to provide devices and software with
hard-wired features
Frank Clegg's comments pasted from 2019 Shrewsbury, MA  presentation
1 Schoechle,
Timothy,
Re-Inventing Wires: The Future of  Landlines
and Networks
, National Institute for
Science, Law & Public Policy Washington, DC
Please reach out if I can help provide further information. Thank you for your time and
attention.
Respectfully,
H. Davis
Westboro, MA 01581
774-571-9308
hdavisinc@gmail.com
Heidi  Davis
Westborough, MA
LD 697
Dear Esteemed Legislators and Staff, 
I respectfully submit this email and attach my testimony ( see attached PDF) in 
support of  LD 697 - Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G.
Please see my personal story described in my testimony to understand how my family
learned the hard way about the biological health impacts of wireless radiation. 
Please consider the insidious impacts on health as you roll out 5G in your state. 
Perhaps you will lead with fiber optics to the premises and be thoughtful about 
deployment to provide safer connectivity for all residents to benefit.  Respectfully, 
Heidi 
