James Dean
Perry
LD 697
Testimony in Opposition to H.P.-466/LD-697 Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G 
Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations and the Effects of Long- Term 
Exposure on Children
Submitted by: James L. Dean III, Amateur Radio Station W1LWO 
Given that Amateur Radio Services, and other communication services utilize "radio 
frequency emissions", should H.P.466/LD 697 pass, these communication services 
could possibly be in serious jeopardy due to the wording in the text of 
HP-466/LD-697. 
In February of 2023, The Maine State Legislature recognized the public service that 
the 4500 amateur (ham radio) operators contribute-right here in Maine. Many FCC 
licensed hams furnish crucial emergency communication services right here in Maine 
via their state and local Emergency Management Services.
With respect to safety, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requires all 
amateur radio operators to conduct RF exposure evaluations with respect to their ham 
radio stations -not only when first installed but also whenever system changes are 
made, such as the installation of a new antenna or an amplifier that can increase the 
transmitted signal strength.
In addition, 3G, 4G and 5G frequency segments as well as other portions of the radio 
frequency spectrum are used by many local, state, and federal entities that are 
involved with various emergencies and disasters, including entities such as electric 
utilities and others that could not even function without access to a wide array of the 
radio frequency spectrum.
As a University of Maine Electrical Engineering Graduate (BS-EE 1966), I am 
normally very supportive of the university's research projects. In this case, I'm 
opposed to requiring the University of Maine to produce the clinical study that would 
be required by H.P. 466/ LD-697. as I view such a study to be an absolute misguided 
use of public funds.
Amateur radio service is currently protected by both State of Maine and federal laws. 
I urge that this proposed legislation be soundly rejected but should it be passed in any 
form at all, kindly make sure that Amateur Radio Service and all public safety 
communications and other crucial communications are exempt.
