janet drew
york
LD 697
I testify in support of LD 697, a bill to study the effects of wireless radiation, 
I support this bill,  because I've been told that a study is a first necessary step (from a 
legislative standpoint) to evaluate risk, & to ultimately create  optimal, safe connectivity in 
Maine. 
So I support this bill for the first step it is. But in reality, this study and the legislative & court's 
actions are moving very slowly, and the scope of the study would hopefully encompass more 
than just 5G.
 While the FCC delays court-mandated reforms, and the telecoms continue a rush to install 
facilities on every block of any community they choose, maybe we can exercise caution. This 
study is educational and the concerns and LD, are both bipartisan in nature.
I hope this study will lead Maine to  fast, reliable, capacious, cybersafe, wired fiber with 
planned regulated siting of  wireless facilities. ME and the nation are really in a situation of 
playing catch-up. So
please make enacting LD 697, a priority.
Priority because:
  
Regulations to protect public health and safety are inadequate and outdated & unacceptable 
as per 9th District court . The telecom industry and the commissioners of the FCC are rushing
to deploy the next generation of wireless before these issues have been addressed. The 
"race" to be first in 5G technology is one not worth winning if the cost exceeds the benefits.  
There is no justification for this massive wireless densification. The build-out of millions of 
new wireless antennas to facilitate 5G is not necessary for national security or public safety. It
will not improve emergency responsiveness; its signals are weak inside structures.
The build-out of new wireless networks will exacerbate existing energy, cybersafety, & storm 
safety issues. But telecoms profit because it allows them to compete with cable companies by
selling wireless subscriptions and by mining and marketing the resulting customer data, 
without having to invest the money to lay cable.
 
RF microwave radiation affects everyone, and with 4G/5G installations in every 
neighborhood, Americans will not be able to escape continuous, involuntary exposures in 
their own homes. Women who are or may become pregnant, infants, small children, the 
elderly, and people with chronic illnesses, microwave sickness, or compromised immune 
systems are particularly vulnerable.
 
Read the letter from 400-plus medical and public health professionals to the FCC
Thousands of studies have already shown biological harm from exposure to radiofrequency 
radiation ("wireless radiation") .
  - confirmed by the National Institutes of Health, 
   - admitted into evidence in 9th district court ruling against the CDC.
  - Major insurance companies will not insure wireless companies against personal injury 
claims from exposure to RF radiation.  
So we need this study first, and its recommendations, so we create a biosafe, fast, reliable, 
cybersecure communications utility.
There is an existing solution for internet connectivity: Fiber-optic To and Through the 
Premises ("FTTP").  Fiber-optic is faster, thousands of times more energy-efficient, and much
more secure and reliable compared to wireless.  It is more easily defended and resilient in the
face of natural disasters and/or direct attacks, and is not hazardous to human health.
               
By law, Maine is entitled to obtain refunds from the telecoms.  American telephone customers
already paid for a national, fiber-optic network to provide reliable, low-cost, secure and safe 
broadband internet access to every American. But instead of using the funds to build the 
network, as they had promised, the telecoms push building out their wireless networks. Read 
the press release about FIBERGATE. Listen to the podcast. 
 FCC overreach, their corrupt OTARD & public right of way rules  all gut our democratic 
norms, local control, and sources of revenue. Americans elect local leaders to represent their 
interests and respond to their needs, including a clean and healthy environment and the 
unique aesthetic of their community. Telecom-sponsored tyranny violates basic democratic 
norms.  
​ The proposed study must be run by an independent voluntary commission free from industry conflict 
of interest
The NH Commission Report on 5G and RFR provides a great springboard for Maine’s 
proposed study to begin from
