Jeff Bishop
Phillips
LD 697
I am a Ham Radio Operator (FCC: KB3QMT) who resides in Maine and am opposed 
to the passage of this bill, unless there is an exemption for Amateur Radio.  This bill 
is nearly identical to the bill passed in New Hampshire, which has made a mess of the
Ham Radio community over there.
Sure, there's only about 4,500 ham radio operators in the state, so we don't really 
stand out except under certain conditions or circumstances, those being disasters, and 
disaster relief.
Ham Radio Operators, by virtue of networks we have established across the nation, 
are interconnected to another 775K radio operators nationwide.  As such, we are an 
asset to the state, prepared to provide emergency communications when all other 
forms of communication fail.
There was a slogan that spawned during Hurricane Katrina about Ham Radio, "When 
All Else Fails."
During Katrina, when the power and phone lines were out, ham radio operators 
stepped up and set up a communications network as a public service.  This allowed 
those in need to connect with the fire, police, and emergency crews, as well as 
relaying messages to family members across the nation.
What you may not know about ham radio operators, is that we practice emergency 
drills every year from remote sites across the nation.  We are prepared to stand behind
and support the citizens of the nation when disaster strikes.
It might be good to note that many national organizations have formal agreements 
with the Amateur Radio Emergency Service (ARES) and other Amateur Radio groups
including: Department of Homeland Security -- Citizen Corps, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, National Communications System, Salvation Army, National 
Weather Service, and the Association of Public Safety Communications Officials.
I want to know that our legislators are prepared to stand behind and support ham radio
operators and the service we provide.  You can be confident that we've got your backs
when the need is the greatest; I would like to be confident that you have ours as well.
The ham radio operators of the state are an asset to the state.  We cannot accept 
passage of this bill without an exemption for Amateur (ham) Radio.
Reference:  http://www.arrl.org/amateur-radio-emergency-communication

