Jim Kelty
Hardwick, Vermont
LD 697
Dear Esteemed Legislators and Public Servants:
I commend you for addressing the concerns of your constituents about the health 
hazards of wireless technology.
I began suffering from RFR (radiofrequency radiation) sickness about 20 years ago. 
The chronic symptoms I have struggled with over the years include tinnitus, head and 
facial pain, head fogginess/dizziness, eye and vision problems, nosebleeds. 
My doctor and I spent years trying to determine the cause of my symptoms. I saw 
various specialists including an ENT doctor and at least three different neurologists. I 
had a CT scan and two brain MRIs.
I had no success with any of the prescribed treatments, and none of my health care 
providers could figure out what was going on. 
Finally, about 10 years ago, I stopped using a cordless phone and took other steps to 
reduce my RFR exposure. In doing so, I experienced a dramatic reduction in my 
symptoms. 
The general public needs to be aware that wireless radiation is harmful to human 
health. I have lost three jobs in the last six years because my employers refused to 
provide a safe working environment. 
In the most recent incident, a WiFi router was located near my desk and I asked for 
permission to move the router at least 15 feet away. My boss refused to accommodate
my request. When I told her that my doctor had advised me not to sit in such close 
proximity to the router, she terminated my employment.
In the United States, we, the public, are not adequately protected by our safety 
standards. Thousands of peer-reviewed scientific studies, accumulated over decades, 
report biological effects from exposure to non-thermal, non-ionizing electromagnetic 
radiation (the kind emitted by cell towers, smart meters, WiFi routers, cell phones, 
Bluetooth devices, etc.).
Our safety regulations fail to consider the bioeffects of wireless radiation at 
non-thermal levels. In addition, the regulations consider only short-term exposure 
from a single source. They fail to consider exposure from multiple simultaneous 
sources, such as occurs when you, for example, make a cell phone call near a smart 
meter in a location covered by multiple WiFi networks. Nor do the regulations 
consider the cumulative effects of long-term exposure over a period of years.
One thing we know about wireless radiation is that, among the many effects seen, a 
very serious one is the deterioration of the genome (genotoxicity).  Such an effect, if 
seen in a food item under development or in a potential pharmaceutical drug, would 
immediately completely ban the product from further marketing and sale. 
The wireless revolution began more than 20 years ago, and the damage done so far is 
incalculable. The scientific and medical evidence is clear. Our government agencies 
need to protect the public from wireless harm, and they need to act now.
Respectfully,
Jim Kelty
Hardwick, Vermont
