John  Decristofaro
Little Compton
LD 697
We always considered moving to Maine especially after my wife became ill from exposure to 
3G and 4G cell towers, disabled with severe Electromagnetic Hypersensitivity (EHS) in 2019. 
She had collapsed at work while on the top floor with an excruciating headache from swelling 
of the brain under a 3G tower on the roof and started vomiting until she blacked out.   Prior to 
this, she noticed that the employees in that area were not making sense, had poor 
performance and decision making, took all kinds of anti-anxiety meds and called out sick 
often.  
While working in that building for a Telecom, she was exposed along with hundreds of other 
employees who also started having neurological and heart problems.  One employee died at 
work of a heart attack and there were numerous ambulances called to the building for people 
having shortness of breath and other health effects.   
It's a known fact that electricians and telephone workers and pilots get very bad neurological 
issues from high exposure to EMF. 
Well, now with strong 5G phones and 24x7 wi-fi and increase towers and masts on every 
roof, it seems the entire population is being exposed at a high rate as well.  
Currently research Martin Pall and Magda Havas estimate 4-10% of the population have 
symptoms and are EHS.  There are over 30% who are having symptoms like insomnia, 
anxiety, depression, memory issues, fibromyalgia, spasms, etc.. but do not know why.  
After chronic exposure to cordless phones, Wi-Fi, cell phones, wireless laptops and 
tablets and close proximity to additional 4G/LTE towers my wife developed several 
disabling conditions that affect almost every organ in her body.  She has terrible nerve
pain, neurological and cognitive impairments, including short term memory issues, 
mood disorders, including PTSD and severe anxiety and depression, endocrine 
disorders, insomnia, heart palpitations and racing heart rate, Autonomic Nervous 
System dysfunction, Addison's Disease (which can develop from exposure to 
radiation) and autoimmune disease.   
The U.S. Naval Medical Research had a study released in 1971 about the symptoms 
resulting from microwave RF exposure.  It shows the very suffering she has endured 
and numerous symptoms above were known to be caused from wireless RF exposure. 
So many people are being pushed over their tolerance by the internet of things and all 
new wireless connections in the home, work, school, stores, restaurants, cars, 
hospitals and more.   We are heading towards an entire society that will become 
disabled if this tech is allowed to be on every street near residential areas.  
People need safe places with low to no cell signal and to be away from other wireless harms 
like wi-fi, to recover and stay well. We need wired solutions and less wireless now. 
 
My wife cannot be near to people with cellphones, wireless devices, connected cars, etc.  
Because of the exposure she suffered and the increasing wireless proliferation,  she lost the 
ability to work and even go to public places where the wireless signals are too strong.   She  
can't stay in a hotel, go to a concert or event with people because of the wireless devices.  
She can't be in a new car with all the sensors and RF.  She can't even get medical care 
without being exposed to wi-fi and towers on top of medical buildings and hospitals.  
When she is exposed it starts with stabbing head pains in the temple and sharp pains in her 
ears and then palpitations begin.  It progresses to cognitive decline and appetite loss, 
nausea, and numbness and tingling in hands and feet.  
The price we have paid is enormous.  We had to leave our home after the Nationwide 5G was
turned on in the Fall of 2020 and she started having palpitations in our home.  When the 5G 
was turned on even the birds and squirrels abandoned a full feeder and disappeared for more
than a week!  Unheard of at any time during feeding birds at the same feeder for 7 years.   
 We have to pay attention to the decline of birds, bees and other species that rely on 
magnetic navigation.  They are sensitive as my wife has become and they are suffering with 
all the wireless signals as well.  
We have spent a small fortune on moving to a more rural area, selling our dream home, 
selling our Teslas which made her even sicker... and buying RF blocking fabrics for her to 
wear and a shielded canopy to sleep in.  Expensive RF meters, dirty electric filters, shielding 
glasses, hats, scarves...  
The life she has today is very sad and limited.  
Please adopt a safer technology future by reducing RF emitting towers and small cells, 
working to reduce RF limits currently allowed from telecoms and wireless devices 
(cellphones, routers, printers, wearables, tablets, etc).  I ask that you support and adopt wired
technology for health, security, speed and the environment as wireless tech uses a 
tremendous amount of power to at cell towers and always on 24x7.    
All the constant charging of electric cars, phones, tablets, ear pods, fit bits, speakers, etc.. is 
a huge carbon emission as well as the power to all the demand the towers have.. They use a 
tremendous amount of power.  Wired solutions do not nearly use the same amount of power. 
We also need EMS or EHS (Electromagnetic Hypersensitivity) to be accommodated  
so they can have a life again.  We are being isolated and it's a burden on the entire 
country when we can't work or participate in society.  
Please do more to make a wired future possible so that we all may be healthy and 
safe.  It is happening to all biologic life (trees, plants, animals, birds, insects, and 
humans).  Microwave radiation does not discriminate.  It weakens and sickens every 
living thing over time.  You may not feel it, but the damage is being done.  
Finally, RF effects are also likely the cause of so many emotional issues such as 
anxiety, depression, violence, and accidents as people cannot think clearly in high RF 
environments.   Environmental doctor William Rea of the Dallas Environmental 
Health Center was concerned when he saw more and more towers going up in the 
early 2000s. He said the more towers going up were likely to be a cause for more and 
more mass shootings.  RF signals cause the brain to get stuck in fight flight and 
freeze.  Many people react with anger like road rage and then we all see how many 
shootings are happening every day in this country.  Why?   The United States has one 
of the highest allowable RF limits in the world and we are seeing the consequences.    
My wife says "No one should ever feel as bad as I do from head to toe" and she begs 
her loved ones to please listen and avoid using anything wireless.  Sadly, people just 
don't believe it until it happens to them.  I know what happened to her and I saw it 
happen over time.  It's like the frog slowly being boiled in warm water. 
Please protect your citizens from heading down the path to this painful and sad 
existence.  Please do all you can to lower RF emissions and keep Maine healthy.   
Side note - Just read about whales and other sea life washing up along the coast from 
MA to NJ and they are attributing to the underwater frequencies being used by ships 
and building the wind farms....  We are in a dangerous point in the planet's history.  
There is no time to waste to slow and reverse this decline.   
