Keith Anoe
LISBON
LD 697
SUBMITTED BY: Keith Anoe, Amateur Radio Station KE4UCW, President, 
Androscoggin Amateur Radio Club; Maine Section Emergency Coordinator, and 
Androscoggin Amateur Emergency Coordinator for ARRL, the national association 
for amateur radio.
As an Army veteran specializing in radio communications to an FCC-licensed 
Amateur Radio operator, I have concerns about the text of HP 466/LD-697. In my 
experience with radio communications, most do not understand the profession, hobby,
and radio theory. This concern has been fueled by legislation outside Maine that used 
language like “radio frequency emissions” that would include the Amateur Radio 
Frequency spectrum when it should not.  
As the Maine Section Emergency Coordinator, and Androscoggin Amateur 
Emergency Coordinator, I work with other Licensed Amateur Operators, HAMS, to 
support Emergency Communications all over the state with 12 Amateur Radio 
Emergency Services (ARES) with over 130 dedicated HAMs at the county level as 
well as the total statewide HAM population of 4,500. We work directly with The 
county Emergency Management Agency (EMS), doing emergency drills, search and 
rescue, and supporting local events like the TD Beach to Beacom, Dempsey 
Challenge, etc.
First responders, military, commercial, private, and other agencies rely upon the radio
frequency (RF) spectrum, including many of the frequency segments used by 3G, 5G,
etc. If such RF emissions were severely regulated or limited more than they already 
are, it would have a negative impact on local, state, and national communications and 
disaster preparedness.
Implementing legislation that restricts, prohibits, or otherwise regulates such 
emissions should exempt the Amateur Radio Service, which has been part of our 
community, supporting events and emergency responses when needed. 
I’m also a beekeeper
Thank you for your time
Keith E. Anoe
KE4UCW
Maine Section Emergency Coordinator (SEC) 
Androscoggin County Emergency Coordinator (EC)
Androscoggin Amateur Radio Club President
(207)629-7197

