 
 College of Engineering and Physical Sciences  
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering  
Kingsbury Hall  
33 Academic Way  
Durham, NH  03824 -2619  
V: 603.862. 1357  
F: 603.862. 1832  
TTY: 7. 1.1 (Relay NH)  
www.ceps.unh.edu/ece                   ece.dept@unh.edu  
  
 
 
March 12, 2023  
 
Rep. Tracy Quint  
Maine Hou se of Representatives  
 
Re: Input from New Hampshire Commission Pertaining to  LD 697  
 
 
Dear Rep . Quint:   
 
I am writing as a former member of a New Hampshire Commission that was convened to 
answer questions regarding the safety of wireless radiation both in terms of human health 
and the environment. The Commission was formed through  bipartisan legislation  that was 
passed by both houses of the legislature and was signed by the Governor. The primary 
question posed to the Commission was whether wireless radiation is harmful , which is a 
somewhat c ontentious question because  the telecom  industry claims  that the radiation 
posed no harm while many people  claim  that they are being  significantly  harmed  by expo-
sure . To ensure that the findings of the Commission would be credible , its members hip was 
comprised of independent experts in fields relating to wireless radiation and health. I was 
asked to serve on the Commission because of my background in Biomedical and Radiofre-
quency Engineering.  
 
I will not go into detail about the activities of the Commission except to say that we per-
formed a thorough exploration  of the relevant peer -reviewed literature and that we 
brought in internationally recognized experts  familiar with wireless radiation and health 
effects  to speak to us . At the end of our year -long investigation we published our final re-
port , and what is relevant to your legislation (LD 697 ) is that our Commission found wire-
less radiation to be harmful to both human health and the health of plants and wildlife.  
 
The New Hampshire Commission also discovered why the Federal Communications Com-
mission , the agency that is supposed to protect people against harmful radiation, has not 
done their job. What we found out is that  they are a captured agency  that is controlled by 
the industry that they are  tasked with regulating. Because of this, they maintain radiation 
guidelines that are beneficial to industry and harmful to people’s health and the environ-
ment. Those guide lines were set in the 1980s and were based on short -term ( around  an 
hour) animal studies  that were on ly based on  the heating effects caused by radiation expo-
sure. Clearly, such studies are inadequate to assess the long -term effects we  exposed to to-
day.  
 
One positive  finding of the Commission was th at much of the harm of radiation exposure 
can be greatly reduced through the proper siting of cell towers , improved designs for cell-
phones, and the greater use of wired technologies such as fiber optics. The research study 
 
 proposed in your legislation shou ld help to identify approaches that can be taken in Maine 
to protect its citizens  against wireless radiation. I would be happy to meet with people car-
rying out that research if your legislation proves to be successful.  
 
Because of my experience on the New Hampshire Commission, in addition to what I have 
learned since serving, I strongly encourage you to pursue  LD 697 , or legislation similar to 
it. I am happy to meet with you and your committee to discuss  the New Hampshire Com-
mission  findings as well as to answer questions you might have about wireless technolo-
gies and ways to protect people against the harms caused by wireless radiation  exposure .  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Kent Chamberlin , PhD  
Professor & Chair Emeritus  
Fulbright Distinguished Chair  
Vice -Chair, International Commission on the  Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Field s 
 

