lendri purcell
petaluma, CA
LD 697
To: Members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee
From: Lendri Purcell, CoChair Jonas Philanthropies
RE: LD 697 - Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect 
Populations and the Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children.
Jonas Philanthropies is a family foundation which funds nursing education, veterans 
programs, vision services and environmental health programs especially those focused on 
children.
It has come to our attention that you will be considering a resolution to study the effects of 5G
technology on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations and the Effects of Long-term Exposure on 
Children.
Non-ionizing wireless radiation is a danger to all of the categories in the resolve. There are 
thousands of peer reviewed articles authored by independent scientists (who have not ties 
direct or indirect to the telecom industry) showing: oxidative stress, DNA damage, and ill 
effects of exposure over time.
It's similar to smoking in many ways. Big tobacco knew that cigarettes cause cancer and hid 
the findings. They created million dollar advertising schemes that tobacco was safe and even 
enlisted health professionals in their efforts to addict both adults and young people. The 
immediate effects of tobacco were not noticed. Over time it became clear that pulmonary 
illness including lung cancer was directly linked to tobacco. We are still paying the price of 
tobacco addiction.
The telecom industry knows and has known that non-ionizing wireless radiation causes 
dangerous human and biological effects that may not be apparent until multiple chronic low 
dose exposures have occurred.  They have successfully engaged in advertising to addict us 
to devices and to the latest Generation (5G) of wireless. They have one of the most powerful 
lobbying operations in the US at all levels of government local, state and national.
Those of us who seek to protect  bird, bees insect and BIRD populations as well as children 
have only scientists, concerned health professionals, people who have been diagnosed with 
disabling Electronic Health Sensitivity and parents to lobby policy makers to protect the most 
vulnerable.
I will not repeat the research here but am happy to forward a reference list, suffice to say 
invertebrates are damaged because the absorbion of wireless radiation (5G in particular) 
goes through them.  Children because their bodies: organs, skulls and brains are not fully 
developed until they are in their 20s and because by volume they are largely water, wireless 
radiation travels deeper into their bodies and damages DNA. Longitudinal research from 
prenatal exposure shows: ADD, asthma and impaired learning. 
The big difference: the Telecom industry is not only addicting young adults and adults, it's 
addicting children and NONE of this radiation or these devices have been premarket tested.
Please proceed with protective caution. This is our future you have in your hands.
Sincerely
Lendri Purcell
Jonas Philanthropies, CoChair 
