Lisa Smith and Timothy Frankenberger
March 6, 2023
To Whom It May Concern,
In the Summer of 2019, our 12 year-old daughter started to have very itchy rashes on her torso, inner 
elbows, and the back of her legs.  After a series of tests, our doctors thought it might be eczema, some 
kind of allergy, or even a thyroid disorder.  They recommended dietary changes, anti-histamines and 
anti-fungal medication.  None of this helped.  A few months later, with no change in her condition, we 
started wondering if something in our house was causing the problem.  
We had heard about electromagnetic fields (EMFs) but knew very little.  We did some reading about it, 
including about the symptoms of wireless radiation exposure, and realized that our daughter had been 
sitting on the couch six feet away from our wi-fi router for two hours a day on school days and more on 
the weekends.  She would sit there for her “screen time,” propping her iPad on her stomach.  We had 
just purchased a new super strong wi-fi router in January, a Netgear Nighthawk X3 Tri-Bank wi-fi router.  
The first symptoms appeared just months after that.
As our daughter’s condition worsened into painful, scabby sores and skin discoloration (and we 
reviewed more of the science on wireless radiation health effects), we decided to turn off the wireless 
function of the router and only use wired ethernet connections in our house to see if it would clear up.  
After doing this, and with the help of daily castor oil and supplements, we started to see some healing.  
Six months later it was all cleared up. 
We were lucky that at the time our daughter’s school had no wi-fi.  After the COVID-19 pandemic 
started, wi-fi was installed to support distance learning.  But our daughter was not exposed to it very 
much because the in-school learning time was short and much of the time classes were held outside.  
So, she was mostly radiation-free both at school and at home.  Every once in a while she would start to 
develop the itching again, when she stayed overnight at a friend’s house for example, but it would go 
away after being back at our house.   
We weren’t sure how it would go, but for High School she first went to a very large school with wi-fi 
everywhere and several cell towers on campus. Sure enough, the itching and rashes started up again 
and she also had worrying episodes of brain fog and memory loss—sometimes she told us she just 
couldn’t understand or remember anything the teacher was saying.  At considerable expense, we did 
everything we could to protect her at our house, including putting special materials on her bedroom 
roof and windows to shield her from the radiation from a macro cell tower a few blocks from our house.  
After that, a 5G small-cell pole was installed just a block and a half from our house, and we’ve found 
that radiation from this and other 5G cell towers in our neighborhood is entering our house.  There is 
only so much you can do to shield from this.  
A doctor who specializes in Environmental Illness has now diagnosed our daughter with Electromagnetic 
Sensitivity, called by the World Health Organization “idiopathic environmental intolerance attributed to 
electromagnetic fields” for assignment of ICD-10 codes (her diagnosis codes are W90.0 and W90.8XXS).  
We hope that proper safety guidelines and warnings about wireless radiation will be developed so other 
families don’t have to go through the same stressful experience we have had (and are still having) and, 
most importantly, so children and teens don’t have to suffer in pain and discomfort like our daughter 
has.  Good solutions are to have wired, ethernet connections in schools rather than wi-fi, and to keep 
cell towers away from homes and schools.
