Please support LD 697 , Resolve , to Study the Effects of 5G Technology  on Bird, Bee 
and Insect Populations and the  Effects of Long -term Exposure on Children . 
 
I became aware  of the effects of  wireless radiation when my employer went wireless in 
the conference rooms.  My initial symptoms ranged from agitation, fidgetiness , inability 
to focus, head pressure to loss of manual dexterity in my left hand.  Hind s ight sleep 
disturbances that I had attributed to menopause where caused by the automatic  meter 
reader on my power pole.  Once I had that removed my sleep immediately i mproved.  
When m y employer  upgraded company cell phones to 4G (of which I do not use) 
working in the office became unbearable.  I have been working under a full time 
telework agreement as an ADA accommodation .   
 
I have also experienced thyroid abnormalities, erratic  blood sugar , excessive fatigue 
during exposure and an inability to sleep after, rapid heart rate  and palpitations.  
It is noteworthy that m y first abnormal thyroid ultrasound occurred shortly after my 
employer went wireless in the conference rooms, over the next sev eral years it 
continued to get worse, then within months of reducing my wireless radiation exposure 
through ADA accommodation an ultrasound of my thyroid showed marked 
improvement.   
 
Many people are relying on the FCC guidelines for wireless radiation  but few know that 
these guidelines only address the thermal effects.  The FCC has set no standards for 
the non -thermal biolog ical effects.   
 
New Hampshire is the first legislature in the natio n to do an independent investigation 
into the health and environmental impact of today's wireless technology.  
 
Their  final commission report  documents conflicts of interest between industry and our 
federal agencies, reveals solid peer -reviewed science showing extensive harm, and 
recommends hard -wired technology in our c ommunities, homes and schools.    
 
Respectfully submitted,  
Lori Vanderhider  
Ogema, MN  
 
  
Lori Vanderhider
Ogema
LD 697
See attached.
