Martha Fenn King
York
LD 697
Sen. Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the EUT Committee: 
My name is Martha Fenn King and I live in York, Maine. I have been a member of a 
grassroots effort that, for several years, has tried to enlighten and bring the newest 
info concerning EMF's to the York Water District, First Parish Church and the Town 
of York.
Of note:  We are not against technology and cell phone usage. This is about safe and 
smart planning for the placement of towers, monopoles and small cell antennas in our 
towns, communities and cities. 
The 1996 FCC regulations and standards of the  Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers or IEEE are intertwined The IEEE studies conducted were three days long 
with (quote) "no consistent evidence of an adverse effect of low level RF exposure on
the nervous system." In the same paragraph it reads:  "However, because of the 
variety of different effects reported by some investigators and many contradictory 
reports, research in this area continues."  AND they could not establish the absence of
a hazard. In the scope of the IEEE they reference that people with implanted devices 
(heart pacemakers for example, other devices are vagal nerve stimulators, insulin 
pumps, etc.) might have interference making them susceptible to electromagnetic 
interference. These are decade old studies that lasted only for 72 hours. This 
information is simply outdated.
Dr. Paul Heroux PhD from McGill University - an epidemiologist, Biostatician, 
Electrotechnology Lab worker and a Toxicologist has carried out studies on EMF's that have 
lasted for two years in length.  He found adverse cellular changes in the non-ionized rats.
Non ionizing wireless radiation affects people 24/7; day in and day out. 
For the sake of our children and generations to come, we need to make the right 
decision. Maine needs to get this right. If the bill needs to be modified then please do 
it. An independent, objective study is imperative. The good health of our children, 
bees and animals is of utmost importance for all of Maine and beyond. Thank you.

