Nilka (nicky) Samilian
PONTE VEDRA, FL
LD 697
I am a 72 yr old lady ( with no medical history ) who have noted electromagnetic symptoms as
far back as 2017 but did not realized what was the cause. I experienced periods of 
gastrointestinal problems, anxiety,tremulousness,  unexplained fatigue upon waking up daily. 
As time has gone by up till now i also have experienced periods of dizziness,  heart 
palpitations, some nausea ( besides symptoms noted above).All these symptoms continue to 
come and go and depending on levels of EMF exposure at the location ( like in a basket ball 
game with many people with many iphones going and scoring boards/ electronics with wi fi 
going etc.) A friend of mine told me to discontinue the use of i phone as much as possible as 
well as use of  wifi and disconnect all electricity in my bedroom ( for sleep hours)  and  i was 
able to sleep fine from that evening on.
Lately when i am in public places my symptoms ( yr 2023 )  can  increase to include 
headaches, jaw clenching ( weird )  fast heart palpitations , some thumb spams - weird) 
burning in different places in skin, dizziness, and pressure in my head.   All these symptoms 
fluctuate in severity and on/ off cycles depending on proximity to multiple sources of radio 
magnetic forces. I cannot tolerate even wi fi in my house( presently none)  and hardly use my 
i phone except in  emergencies  ( i use hard wire phone line as much as possible) . My 
present laptop ( this one) is hard wired and shielded.
I have a meter that measures these vicious frequencies and many times i do not even need a 
meter to recognize how close i might be to these by knowing how sick i can get.  I pray you 
realize these symptoms are going to affect our children including any you might have in your 
family. These are symptoms that can develop overtime and will manifest in various forms but 
the worst can be  Cancer and other types of medical conditions ( please do your research) . 
This is something many people do not realize they have but do show illnesses they cannot 
explain. Seems to me these "radio magnetic" attacks on the citizens are getting worst as i 
notice how these can attack me in my body ( even worst than 2-3 yrs back). As  i understand 
those obviously affected like me are like " canaries in the coldmine" and are giving you signs 
of what is to come including our children and grandchildren who are going to experience 
these symptoms in far greater degree as the effects are cumulative and over a period of 10 
years or so. Statics note about 3% ( worldwide) of us are presently fully affected and 4-5 % 
are having presently symptoms but do not know why and 6% or more are not having 
symptoms but will be manifested as the viciousness of these electromagnetic waves and 
devices are made stronger and with no restraint or ACCOUNTABILITY to the public. 
There are measures that can be taken and also education to the people  such as way to 
shield themselves ( ie- use a laptop that has been hard wired for example; also the public can
be aware how to carry the iphone with them but not touching their body).  Europe is far more 
ahead than us in already taking measures to protect citizens. 
I am afraid there are economic incentives that are holding us back from protecting our citizens
but more so from protecting our most vulnerable.
What keeps me going is my deep believe in my Savior Jesus Christ and knowing He will 
come for those  that wait on HIM and saved by  HIM.
Hope you can help our chidren and our citizens. Hope you do your research and look for 
independent studies to proof how harmful this EMF is and not be swayed by the ones that are
money driven. Do not delay; people are getting sick and it can get worst.
Nicky Samilian
Ponte Vedra, FL
