Comment of: Patricia Burke   8 Eden Street, Millis MA 02054 (Working with Safe Tech International) 
(Formerly of HaltMAsmartmeters.org, Stop Smart Meters Massachusetts, and Worcester Opts Out)
Re: LD 697, the Resolve to Study 5G and other RFR Effects on People and Wildlife
For:  Maine Energy, Utilities, and Technology Committee
Background: What We Didn’t Learn A Decade Ago: Smart Meters and Health Harm
I am a journalist and health advocate, and write widely on the issues of EMR/RF/5G. 
I currently reside in Massachusetts. 
During the Obama administration, some states accepted stimulus funding and began rolling out wireless 
smart utility meters to support a smart grid, (including Maine).
Massachusetts initiated a controversial smart meter pilot program in Worcester, MA in 2013, and 
engaged citizens launched a website HaltMAsmartmeters.org, nearly ten years ago,
Marguerite from Maine
The son of “Marguerite from Maine” was one of the first individuals to contact us for help, and we 
posted the correspondence on our site for others to learn first-hand how the technology was causing 
harm.  Although the site is no longer active, the page was here; 
https://www.haltmasmartmeters.org/health/my_name_is_marguerite/
Marguerite’s son wrote to us, and then Marguerite sent a letter.  We also spoke on the phone with both 
households more than once.
 I believe Marguerite was 81 at the time. As her son reported, when the grid infrastructure was 
activated, she collapsed in her kitchen, and she kept falling. This had never happened before. 
Around that time, a young man in Maryland with M.S was reporting that he could no longer balance and 
walk when the meters were installed. 
Reports of a dramatic downturn in health were emerging, from both patients and health care providers 
(including Dr. Deitrich Klinghardt) who had monitored patients over time, for chronic conditions 
including Parkinson’s, M.S., M.C. S., and Lyme.
 In addition some ratepayers were reporting the acute onset of disabling sensitivity to electromagnetic 
fields.  
Marguerite and others like her should not have needed to helplessly reach out to volunteer activists in 
another state for support around this apparent assault on health.  
Many of those in positions of responsibility and authority failed the public, because they did not believe 
that the technology was actually causing harm. Decision-making bodies simply keep repeating safety 
claims, and discounted reported harm, injury, and disability.  Instead, the reports of harm should have 
been investigated to seek to understand the mechanisms of harm, as was done at the Environmental 
Health Center in Dallas Texas by Dr. William Rea. 
More Harm to Health from More Inadequate Oversight and Regulation from Even More Infrastructure
If the FCC has done its due diligence and if the nation had heeded the late lessons from early warnings 
ten years ago, Maine would not need to be debating LD 697, the Resolve to Study 5G and other RFR 
Effects on People and Wildlife. 
Nor would health-vulnerable individuals continue to be harmed by ineffective regulation of a damage-
inflicting industry. 
But unfortunately, the FCC, utilities and telecom industry ignored and marginalized the reported  harm. 
The bill in Maine is about far more than the question of studying 5G.
Thus far, the U.S. has allowed the industry to keep kicking the can down to road, hiding their heads in 
the sand, and leaving the consequences of inadequate safety protection to future generations, even as 
more infrastructure is being forcefully imposed on communities. 
The FCC, ADA, and EHT/CHD Lawsuit
The fact that the FCC is not being held accountable, and is operating within a regulatory gap, is clear 
when reviewing the status of the FCC lawsuit.
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled (in EHT/CHD et al. v. the 
FCC) that the 2019 decision by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to retain its 1996 safety 
limits for human exposure to wireless radiation was “arbitrary and capricious” and “not evidence-
based.”
The Court ruled that the FCC failed to address impacts of long term wireless exposure, impacts to 
children, testimony of people injured by wireless radiation, and impacts to wildlife and the environment
See https://ehtrust.org/in-historic-decision-federal-court-finds-fcc-failed-to-explain-why-it-ignored-
scientific-evidence-showing-harm-from-wireless-radiation/ and 
https://childrenshealthdefense.org/defender/landmark-5g-case-against-fcc-hearing-set-jan-25/
In addition, the 1999-2000 judicial challenge to the FCC’s 1996 rules has never reached the issue of 
“electrosensitivity” as a cognizable disability under the Americans with Disabilities Act, as noted in 2013 
joint testimony by the Cities of Boston and Philadelphia to the FCC. https://www.prlog.org/12245111-
everything-you-wanted-to-know-about-cell-phone-radiation.html
Also here: https://ehtrust.org/submissions-to-fcc-on-human-exposure-to-5g-higher-frequencies-docket-
19-226/
Fortunately for Maine, Representative Tracy Quint is addressing the question of the effects on children 
and on the nature environment. 
Maine also has considerable expertise available at the Maine Coalitiion to Stop Smart Meters. 
https://www.mainecoalitiontostopsmartmeters.org/
Conclusion
Marguerite was a precious and kind elderly woman, and obviously cherished in her community.  Her 
entire neighborhood lobbied to opt out of the meters, in order to protect their neighbor, even if a  
punitive surcharge was demanded.  
They could clearly see that there were right and wrong choices that could be made, and they were on 
the right side of history. 
Inhumane decisions have been made on the basis of outdated and compromised scientific approaches.  
This has occurred in the case of other industries, including tobacco, and sustained for decades by 
unscrupulous individuals and agencies. 
The residents of Maine have every right to expect that their elected leaders will hold the government 
accountable for addressing the regulatory gap regarding RF safety at the federal level.  
The Environmental Health Trust outlined excellent strategies in its correspondence to the Biden 
administration.  https://ehtrust.org/wp-content/uploads/Letter-to-Biden-on-Infrastructure_-FCC-
Environmental-Health-Trust-.pdf
There are many sincere, earnest independent researchers and groups that will be happy to assist Maine 
in accepting the responsibility to make certain that the state can be protected as well as connected. 
And adding binding financial costs for any future health and environmental harm would stop the 
industry in its tracks. 
Thank you for your kind attention,
Patricia Burke
Safe Tech International
https://www.naturalblaze.com/tag/patricia-burke
