TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF H.P. 466 – RESOLVE TO STUDY THE EFFECTS OF 5G 
TECHNOLOGY ON BIRD, BEE, AND INSECT POPULATIONS AND THE EFFECTS OF 
LONG-TERM EXPOSURE ON CHILDREN
SUBMITTED BY: Patrick Abrami- six term NH State Representative and Chair of 
the New Hampshire Commission to Study the Environmental and Health Effects 
of Evolving 5G Technology
The negative health effects of ionizing radiation (from x-rays for instance) are well 
known. With the proliferation of cell phone technology as well as all things 
wireless (the internet of things) there is a soup of non-ionizing radiation that has 
grown exponentially all around us. Radio frequency (RF) radiation is emitted from 
cell tower antennas, antennas mounted on other structures, 5G small cell towers, 
cell phones, smart meters on homes, routers, smart appliances, and many other 
devices. The industry declares this non-ionizing radiation safe. Most would agree 
since they cannot sense its presence. However, there are those among us who are 
sensitive to RF-radiation. They are our canaries in the coal mine. One such person 
turned me onto this issue. Upon an intial literature review, I discovered 1,000s of 
peer reviewed papers citing growing evidence of health effects due to non-
ionizing radiation or the RF radiation that is around us. As a legislator, I took it 
upon myself to file a bill to create a commission to study this issue. My bill was 
entitled, “Commission to Study the Environmental and Health Effects of Evolving 
5G Technology”.
This commission had 13 members with legislators, physicians, a legal expert, 
electrical engineers, industry experts, a physics expert, and a toxicologist. The 
Commission commenced its work in September of 2019 and submitted its final 
report on November 1, 2020. During that period, we heard testimony from a wide 
range of experts in this field. The Commission learned quickly that 5G (Fifth 
Generation) meant something different to each cell company and really was a 
marketing term. The real issue we concluded was RF-Radiation, whether 3G, 4G, 
5G or the next generation that will be coming. Our discussion focused on the 
interactions of the energy from all these antennas that are around us today. 
Another intial discovery was the impact of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 
that in effect gave the cell industry the ultimate final authority on placement of 
their antennas as well as the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) the role 
to examine safety and setting safety standards even though their real role is to 
auction off bandwidth along the electromagnetic spectrum. The result of this is 
that today health cannot be a reason for not placing a telecommunication tower 
(antenna) and the United States has the loosest standards, meaning we will 
tolerate higher levels of non-ionizing radiation than most countries. The 
Commission concluded that we needed to educate the public, take steps to 
mitigate potential harm (such as enacting cell tower setbacks), and to come up 
with sample ordinances for our cities and towns to fight for safety without 
violating Federal Law. The final report lays out 15 recommendations.
The Commission also discovered this is a world-wide issue with cities and towns 
around the world fighting for greater safety when it comes to RF-radiation. 
Through the course of the Commissions work, I received emails from not only 
across the U.S. but from around the world, from scientists and concerned people 
alike, thanking this Commission for its work. As chair of this Commission, I 
strongly support Maine forming its own Commission or Study group to look at this 
very important issue. I hope you will be able to build upon the work we have done 
and help move the needle forward, especially at the Federal level. I know your bill 
title to form your own Study also includes the impact on bird, bee, and insect 
populations. Our Commission dealt with these impacts as well. There are 
numerous studies showing impacts on bird migration and bees finding their way 
back to their hives that are impacted by RF-radiation being emitted at even 
greater levels year after year.
If this Study is approved, please use our Commission report as a starting point for 
your work. Please reach out, as I will be willing to assist in any way I can, along 
with other Commission members. As we say in the NH legislature, “push the 
green button” to support this Study. 
