Environmental Research xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: Paul Ben Ishai, Environmental Research , https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2022.1150380013-9351/© 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Problems in evaluating the health impacts of radio frequency radiation 
Paul Ben Ishaia,*, Devra Davisb,c, Hugh Taylord, Linda Birnbaume,1 
aDepartment of Physics, Ariel University, Ariel, 4070000, Israel 
bEnvironmental Health Trust, Washington, DC, 20002, USA 
cSchool of Medicine,Ondokuz-Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey 
dYale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 05620, USA 
eNational Institute of Environmental Health Sciences and National Toxicology Program, Durham, NC, 27709, USA   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Mobile communications 
Electromagnetic radiation exposure 
Precautionary principle 
NTP 
EHS 
Non-thermal effects 
FCC 
ICNIRP ABSTRACT  
In an effort to clarify the nature of causal evidence regarding the potential impacts of RFR on biological systems, 
this paper relies on a well-established framework for considering causation expanded from that of Bradford Hill, 
that combines experimental and epidemiological evidence on carcinogenesis of RFR. The Precautionary Prin-
ciple, while not perfect, has been the effective lodestone for establishing public policy to guard the safety of the 
general public from potentially harmful materials, practices or technologies. Yet, when considering the exposure 
of the public to anthropogenic electromagnetic fields, especially those arising from mobile communications and 
their infrastructure, it seems to be ignored. The current exposure standards recommended by the Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) and International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection 
(ICNIRP) consider only thermal effects (tissue heating) as potentially harmful. However, there is mounting ev-
idence of non-thermal effects of exposure to electromagnetic radiation in biological systems and human pop-
ulations. We review the latest literature on in vitro and in vivo studies, on clinical studies on electromagnetic 
hypersensitivity, as well as the epidemiological evidence for cancer due to the action of mobile based radiation 
exposure. We question whether the current regulatory atmosphere truly serves the public good when considered 
in terms of the Precautionary Principle and the principles for deducing causation established by Bradford Hill. 
We conclude that there is substantial scientific evidence that RFR causes cancer, endocrinological, neurological 
and other adverse health effects. In light of this evidence the primary mission of public bodies, such as the FCC to 
protect public health has not been fulfilled. Rather, we find that industry convenience is being prioritized and 
thereby subjecting the public to avoidable risks.   
1.Introduction 
The perennial question of the biological impacts of Radio Frequency 
Radiation (RFR) constitutes an especially challenging matter that has 
come to the fore recently, in part driven by public concerns over the 
introduction of 5G mobile communications. 5G Small Cell base stations 
are permitted to be sited as close as 3 m from the ground in proximity to 
homes, schools and offices in many locales in the US. In the U.S. alone, 
the industry estimates that up to one million new antennas will be 
required. 5G ranges broadly from 800 MHz to 100 GHz (Document ). As 
Lin (2022a) has noted, for the higher mm-wave bands, wider spectrum is 
only accessible over short distances and will depend on the construction 
of numerous new cells in the dense urban environment. Despite Industry claims (5G, EMF Exposure and Safety, 2020 ), an increase in the number 
of transmitters is expected to lead to much higher levels of exposure for 
the general public (Blackman and Forge, 2019 ). This has provoked 
public concerns regarding the potential health impacts of RFR. 
For nearly a century, well-established controlled bioassay protocols 
have traditionally formed the foundation for predicting and setting 
limits for public health exposures to pharmaceuticals, pesticides, radi-
ation, and other agents. Yet as regarding the potential impacts of RFR, 
positive adverse experimental findings on RFR-induced carcinogenicity 
that have historically provided guidance for preventive policies, have 
been subjected to extraordinary and unprecedented attacks. The same 
can be said for studies of individuals exposed to RFR that solely confirm 
whether or not past harm has taken place. Research and training in this 
*Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: paulbi@ariel.ac.il (P. Ben Ishai).   
1 Scientist Emeritus and former Director. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Environmental Research 
journal homepag e: www.el sevier.com/loc ate/envre s 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2022.115038 
Received 30 September 2022; Received in revised form 6 December 2022; Accepted 8 December 2022   
Environmental Research xxx (xxxx) xxx
2multidisciplinary field of bioelectromagnetics are currently not a fund-
ing priority. Further, human studies are especially problematic in light 
of the widespread use of these technologies, the lack of suitable control 
groups, the general failure to fund relevant studies, and the recent 
publication of a few limited or fundamentally flawed, yet widely pub-
licized, reports purporting to show no health risks (Casta ˜no-Vinyals 
et al., 2022 ; Grimes, 2021 ; Karipidis et al., 2021 ; Schüz et al., 2022 ; Wu 
et al., 2015 ), some of which will be reviewed below. 
In 2011, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) 
concluded, largely based on epidemiological evidence, that mobile 
phone radiation–a form of RFR–constituted a possible human carcin -
ogen. In 2018, the U.S. National Toxicology Program (NTP) reported the 
largest animal study ever conducted on this topic (National Toxicology 
Program (NTP), 2018); the data provided clear evidence that mobile 
phone radiation caused cancer in male rats, along with cardiac and other 
systemic damage, as well as DNA damage in multiple organs in both rats 
and mice. Despite this evidence, a number of recent widely publicized 
reports have rejected and discredited the NTP findings as well as a 
substantial toxicological literature demonstrating a range of health im-
pacts. (Brzozek et al., 2021 ; Casta ˜no-Vinyals et al., 2022 ; Grimes, 2021 ; 
Karipidis et al., 2021 ). These critics contend that the weight of evidence 
does not support a finding of significant negative impacts of RFR. 
(Momoli et al., 2017 ; Peres, 2010 ; Schüz et al., 2022 ), even though the 
results of the NTP report and parallel findings (Falcioni et al., 2018 ; 
Vornoli et al., 2019 ) from the Ramazzini Institute study of lower levels of 
exposure have not been disproven. For instance, Grimes (2021) dis-
misses the NTP finding by insisting that the exposure SAR level was too 
high and that this would cause internal heating of the animals. As we 
note below, a preliminary study was conducted to ensure that the 
exposure level used would not result in internal heating (M. E. Wyde 
et al., 2018 ). Karipidis criticized that whole body exposures were used 
and that the animals were free to roam (Karipidis et al., 2021 ). We point 
out that there is an inherent difficulty in persuading animals to make 
mobile phone calls and so whole-body exposures are employed. These 
exposures are more akin to the real world situation that people experi -
ence every day. 
It is important to note that such dismissive studies presume that the 
sole biological impact of RFR is a consequence of heating. This pre-
sumption ignores a substantial body of independent studies finding that 
RFR induces numerous adverse biochemical changes affecting the for-
mation of free radicals, the rates of cell growth and death, and cellular 
membrane transport. These changes are widely reported in organisms as 
diverse as plants, animals, and humans. Furthermore, the Directorate- 
General for Parliamentary Research Services (Belpoggi, 2021 ) of the 
European Union, and an independent Swiss government scientific 
advisory group (BERENIS) reaches similar conclusions, adding that 
“EMF (Electromagnetic Fields) are probably carcinogenic for humans , in 
particular related to gliomas and acoustic neuromas. ” In addition, they 
add that “… … 450–6000 MHz: these frequencies clearly affect male 
fertility and possibly female fertility too. They may have adverse effects 
on the development of embryos, fetuses and newborns ”. This indicates 
that EMF/RF functions like a classic endocrine disruptor impairing both 
male and female reproductive functions. 
In an effort to clarify the nature of causal evidence regarding the 
potential impacts of RFR on biological systems, this paper relies on a 
well-established framework for considering causation with respect to 
experimental and epidemiological evidence on carcinogenesis of RFR. 
Originally developed for the evaluation of infectious agents, Koch ’s 
postulates constitute the classic means of assessing causal evidence in 
medicine (Grimes, 2006 ). They rest on the requirement that ill animals 
or persons display evidence of exposure to a particular infectious agent 
prior to developing illness, such as the tuberculosis bacterium, and those 
that are not ill do not. Further support for inferring causation comes 
from studies finding that exposure to the specific agent in the healthy 
can induce illness. It is generally recognized that such postulates must be 
modified for the study of cancer, especially considering that infectious agents such as Epstein-Barr and Human Papilloma viruses can, but do 
not necessarily, induce the disease (Garcion et al., 2009 ; Moore and 
Chang, 2014 ). 
For the study of causation for multiply caused, multi-stage chronic 
illnesses such as cancer, Sir Austin Bradford (Hill, 1965 ) adapted the 
Koch paradigm to include principles for inferring the existence of a 
causal relationship: strength, consistency, specificity, temporality, and 
biological gradient for evidence of increased risk. One recent assessment 
(Carlberg and Hardell, 2017 ) applied these considerations to epidemi -
ological and experimental evidence on the potential carcinogenicity of 
RFR, and concluded that as of 2017, the record established compelling 
indications of causation, a position also expressed by the Israel Institute 
for Advanced Study international expert forum the same year (“Wireless 
Radiation and Health, ” 2017 ). Recent experimental and epidemiological 
studies have added considerably to the record and have led Miller et al., 
2018 to conclude that on the basis of evidence amassed as of 2018 RFR 
constitutes a class one proven human carcinogen. Another more recent 
report concurred (Hardell and Carlberg, 2020 ), as do the recent publi -
cations by Lin (2022b) and the (International Commission on the Bio-
logical Effects of Electromagnetic Fields (ICBE-EMF), 2022 ). This paper 
builds further on those records and provides an update on the science 
applying the principles for deducing a causal relationship between RFR 
and cancer. 
These conclusions regarding the carcinogenic and other potential 
adverse effects of RFR are not shared equally, with strong dissent pro-
vided by a vocal number of industry-affiliated scientists (Foster et al., 
2000 , 2022 ; Grimes, 2021 ; Repacholi, 2010 ). While some that have 
questioned the causal nature of the relationship may be well-meaning, a 
disproportionate number of those who discount the data are in the direct 
or indirect employ of the affected telecom industries. As a result, the 
ability to carry out independent analysis of the matter remains 
hampered, fueled in no small part by the genuine complexity of the topic 
and by a well-organized effort to ‘manufacture doubt ’ (Alster, 2015 ; 
Weller et al., 2022 ). 
Given the unprecedented and exponentially rising growth in world -
wide exposures to this technology, the lack of a vibrant well-funded 
program of training and research constitutes a major problem. Since 
the 1990s, panels of government and other experts have repeatedly 
examined the scientific evidence, found it wanting and called for more 
research to be conducted. Although the call for further research con-
stitutes the one matter on which all are agreed, funding for this work 
remains quite limited. Thus, the principal output of such inquiries is to 
recommend research but has not resulted in major ongoing funding for 
such research. By the end of the 1990s, Motorola had closed its world- 
class bioelectromagnetics laboratory. The U.S. government programs 
on the subject were defunded by Congress at the same time. Thus, on this 
matter the absence of evidence is not proof of safety. Rather it is an 
indication of the intense struggle that has led to a lack of funding with 
respect to critical research questions, the failure to monitor human and 
environmental health impacts, and the ongoing manufacturing of doubt 
that has been documented by a number of experts (Davis, 2010 ). 
Both the IARC (IARC, 2013 ) and the formatting (M. Wyde et al., 
2018 ) carried out intensive evaluations of the health impacts of RFR in 
the past decade. Since these publications, a growing experimental 
literature has noted both negative and positive biological impacts of RFR 
in systems as far-ranging as plants, C. elegans , vertebrates and human 
public health (Levitt et al., 2021a , 2021b , 2022 ). Disputing these and 
other similar findings, Grimes (2021) claimed that there is no evidence 
supporting a causal link between RFR and carcinogenesis and that weak 
nonthermal levels of millimeter waves of 5G cannot possibly have any 
biological effect. He and others often ignore the full spectrum coverage 
of the 5 generation of mobile communications. The term 5G covers 5G 
NR (660 MHz –3500 MHz), 5G C band (3500 MHz –5000 MHz) and 5G 
High band (24 GHz –40 GHz), occupying frequency bands previously 
held by 3G and 4G mobile communications (5G Frequency Bands & 
Spectrum Allocations ). Grimes asserted that the NTP study was so P. Ben Ishai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Environmental Research xxx (xxxx) xxx
3deeply flawed that it did not constitute a valid finding. More recently, 
several senior advisors to the World Health Organization have reviewed 
studies published since the NTP, 2018 determinations and have 
concluded that if RFR were evaluated based on more current studies, it 
would be upgraded to a probable if not confirmed human carcinogen 
(Hardell and Carlberg, 2020 ; Miller et al., 2018 , Lin, 2022a ). 
To clarify the matter, this four-part review evaluates the epistemo -
logical foundations for concluding that RFR is carcinogenic in animals 
and humans. First, we explore possible mechanisms of action underlying 
biological impacts of non-ionizing RFR. Then we assess recent key 
experimental findings including detailed reports from the genetic toxi-
cology component of the National Toxicology Program (NTP) study (M. 
Wyde et al., 2018 ). We also evaluate evidence from evaluations of 
exposed human populations obtained through case-control and 
population-based studies. Finally, we consider the weight of evidence 
that RFR constitutes a carcinogen and also promotes other negative 
health effects. 
2.A discussion of relevant mechanisms 
Historically agencies involved in evaluating RFR assumed that, apart 
from direct EM heating, there were only two possible mechanisms of 
RFR/tissue interaction that can lead to DNA damage, both of which 
involve ionization caused by an impinging photon (Grimes, 2021 ). The 
first is by a direct ionization of DNA by an RFR photon. The second, 
indirect route, is by the ionization of cellular water, leading to an excess 
of reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as OH and O 
2, that can induce 
DNA damage (G¨orlach et al., 2015 ). However, the wavelength of RFR 
photons is at least three orders of magnitude too long to contain energy 
sufficient to produce ionization. Despite this, there are a number of 
alternative routes by which RFR can indirectly lead to cellular damage. 
An extensive literature has identified a number of other potentially 
relevant mechanisms of action that could underlie electromagnetic ra-
diation impacts. For instance, a number of publications indicate that 
RFR disturbs the balance of cellular ROS, indirectly damaging DNA (Luo 
et al., 2020 ; Smith-Roe et al., 2020 ), and interferes with cellular mem-
brane integrity (Desai et al., 2009 ; Gautam et al., 2019 ; Zhao et al., 
2007 ). Through these and other mechanisms, RFR can reasonably be 
expected to increase the risk that cancer and other degenerative diseases 
could develop (Prasad et al., 2017 ). 
The production of ROS in the interior of a cell is a natural byproduct 
of cellular metabolic processes (Forrester et al., 2018 ; Ray et al., 2012 ) 
and its regulation is critical for cell homeostasis (He et al., 2017 ). An 
imbalance of ROS leads to Oxidative Stress (OS) and has been linked to 
inflammatory diseases in general and cancer in particular (Panieri and 
Santoro, 2016 ; Yang and Lian, 2020 ). RFR has also been shown to cause 
the perturbation of Voltage Gated Calcium Channels (VGCC) (Brieger 
et al., 2012 ; Pall, 2013 , 2022 ; Panagopoulos, 2019 ; Panagopoulos et al., 
2021 ; Ullrich and Apell, 2021 ) and to promote the activation of mitogen 
activated protein kinase (MAPK) activity (Friedman et al., 2007 ). VGCC 
are a class of membrane protein structures responsible for the transport 
of Ca2+ions across the cellular membranes for electrical signaling and 
the initiation of many different cellular events (Catterall, 2011 ). Integral 
to these processes are ROS. The interplay between intercellular calcium 
and ROS for signaling and regulation is well established (G¨orlach et al., 
2015 ; Mazars et al., 2010 ). 
To paraphrase the title of one research paper – ROS and Ca2+- 
partners in sickness and in health (Ambudkar and Muallem, 2016 ), a 
recent review of the literature (Panagopoulos et al., 2021 ) pointed out 
that there is a plethora of studies demonstrating experimentally the 
disruption of VGCC by RFR at low intensities. A large number of these 
studies note that the pulsed nature of many RFR transmissions plays a 
vital role in affecting this interaction. A well-developed physical 
mechanism, known as the forced ion oscillation model, may account for 
why pulsed RFR is so bioactive (Panagopoulos et al., 2000 , 2021 ). 
Simply put, the forced oscillation of free ions in or near the VGCC protein complex triggers its activation when the time period (the 
reciprocal of the oscillation frequency) of the oscillation is close to the 
characteristic time for the opening and closing of the gate. Under normal 
circumstances the gate would be activated by the membrane potential 
caused by differing concentrations of ions on each side of the membrane. 
External pulsed electric fields, even though they are of low intensity, 
such as those used in telecommunications, can be a driving force acting 
on these gate ions precisely because they mimic the membrane potential 
(Pall, 2013 ; Panagopoulos et al., 2000 , 2021 ). It is unfortunate that their 
modulation frequency (not the carrier frequency) is in the widely 
employed region of 100 s Hz – 1 kHz (3G/4G MT, DECT, 5G (“Chapter 2: 
Radio Transmission — 5G Mobile Networks: A Systems Approach 
Version 1.1-dev documentation, ” n.d.)), close to the characteristic time 
of the VGCC (Panagopoulos et al., 2021 ). The same is true for other 
membrane ion gates (Panagopoulos, 2019 ). 
Fig. 1, reproduced and adapted from ref. (Panagopoulos et al., 2021 ), 
graphically represents the limits of the bioactivity herein described. 
Note that all mobile phone transmissions are bioactive. The effect of this 
disruption is minor but cumulative, leading to long term oxidative stress 
(OS) in the cell interior. Recent detailed biochemical studies of serum 
reported significantly heightened levels of OS in people living in the 
immediate vicinity (less than 80 m) of a cell phone base station, 
compared with those living far away (greater than 300 m) (Zothansiama 
et al., 2017 ). Furthermore, the expert advisory group, BERENIS, to the 
Swiss Federal Office for the Environment (FOEN) (FOEN, n.d.) recently 
reviewed evidence from the last 10 years for OS originating from RFR 
(Mevissen and Schürmann, 2021 ) concluding that “the majority of the 
animal and more than half of the cell studies provided evidence of 
increased oxidative stress caused by RF-EMF (Radio Frequency Electro -
magnetic Fields ) or ELF-MF (Microwave Fields ).” This, coupled with ample 
in-vitro studies (Belpomme et al., 2018 ; Belyaev, 2019 ; Chowdhury et al. 
n.d.; Durdik et al., 2019 ; Kostoff et al., 2020 ; Schuermann and Mevissen, 
2021 ; Yakymenko et al., 2014 ) lends credence to the negative effects on 
human populations from exposure to RFR (Kivrak et al., 2017 ). Effects 
have been shown to vary depending on polarity, frequency, 
power-density, and a number of other parameters of RFR that are not 
well-studied. 
However, not everyone has been convinced by this evidence. Con-
sales et al. (Consales et al., 2012 ) in 2012 concluded that there was no 
incontrovertible evidence for a linkage between RFR and OS. This study 
did note that the generation of extracellular ROS responses varied with 
different cell lines, stimulating cell membrane nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide (NADH) oxidase in Rat1 and HeLa cells. The fact that RFR 
can have synergistic effects as well as both negative and positive impacts 
on ROS in various organs and species also adds to confusion regarding 
efforts to estimate its overall effect on carcinogenicity. While acknowl -
edging that specific relevant biological endpoints can be altered by RFR, 
the study questioned the generality of these responses, noting that, 
“Differences in cell lines and experimental methods, used for both in 
vitro and in vivo exposure, might explain, in part, these still conflicting 
findings ”. We concur that differences in measures of RFR as well as cell 
lines studies constitute important parameters that should be evaluated 
more carefully under any circumstance. 
More recently, Karipidis et al. (2021) published a review stating that 
there is no confirmed evidence that RFR is hazardous to health, espe-
cially for the emerging 5G technologies. They rejected most published 
experimental studies for failures to provide detailed information on 
exposures, while also not providing that same information for their 
definition of “low-level ” conditions. They also reported positive findings 
of increased cancer mortality in Belgium studies of military radar 
workers (exposed to higher frequencies occupationally), but not from 
other country-based studies. They noted that this could reflect the 
“healthy worker ” effect, as military personnel are in general healthier 
than the general public. When the general population is employed as the 
comparison group in occupational studies of mortality, the risk ratio for 
death will tend to be underestimated because that group includes the P. Ben Ishai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Environmental Research xxx (xxxx) xxx
4unemployable who may have a higher rate of disease than the unex-
posed workforce. 
In fact, both studies used overly stringent criteria that would exclude 
most critical studies. Effectively, they select which studies are to be 
accorded valid concerns and reject those that do not comport with their 
views and they have been criticized for such (Panagopoulos et al., 2021 ). 
Even so, both Karipidis and Consales recommend further intense study 
to resolve the uncertainty. 
In a similar vein, Grimes (2021) published a review of cancer and 
RFR that discounted any possible link between the two and ignored 
more recent papers countering his conclusion. This “review ” also 
applied criteria for inclusion that effectively eliminated a number of 
widely regarded experimental studies including the multi-year, thirty 
million dollar NTP evaluations in rats and mice and the Ramazzini 
Institute report of even lower levels of exposures such as those typically 
emitted by base stations. This rejection of these state-of-the-art studies 
rests on the presumption that the exposure conditions do not reflect 
human experience. In fact, the exposure chambers in these studies were 
constructed and reviewed at several stages of these projects in consul -
tation with the renowned Swiss National Institute for Electrical Engi-
neering. Consequently, we conclude that experimental evidence 
corroborates the link between ROS, OS, and cancer is well established 
and the link between them and excessive RFR exposure is clearly illus-
trated in the literature. 
3.Epidemiology 
The recent and widely read publication by Grimes in JAMA Oncology 
(Grimes, 2021 ) reviewed several epidemiological studies that he 
claimed found no association between RFR and cancer. These are the 
case-control studies of INTERPHONE study (The INTERPHONE Study 
Group, 2010 ), the Danish Cohort study (Frei et al., 2011 ), the CERENAT 
case-control study (Coureau et al., 2014 ), and the population-based 
Million Women study (Benson et al., 2013 ). All were completed be-
tween 2010 and 2013. A recent update of the Million Woman Study also 
reported a null result (Schüz et al., 2022 ). In one of these studies, the 
CERENAT study (Coureau et al., 2014 ) did indeed find an association of 
heavy mobile phone use with significantly increased risk of glioma. A more recent study attempting to find a link between cellphone radiation 
and gliomas in children also produced a null result (Casta ˜no-Vinyals 
et al., 2022 ). However, all of these studies have been shown to suffer 
from problematic definitions or incomplete cohorts and inaccurate 
exposure information, effectively biasing them in favor of the null result 
(Choi et al., 2020 ). For instance, Grimes cites the Million Women study 
as demonstrating no impact of cell phone radiation on cancer risk. That 
study relied on a single question about cell phone use put to fewer than 
750,000 women in 2001 and 2011, asking if they “never ”, “ever ” or 
“daily ” used a cell phone. Undertaken to evaluate the risk of breast 
cancer for post-menopausal women taking hormone replacement ther-
apy, this was not the age group that were first adopters of cell phone use 
in the 1990s, when that study was begun. Only 18% of all these women 
reported any use of phones. As the study obtained no detailed infor-
mation on type of cellphone use, nor use of cordless phones, that can 
emit substantial microwave radiation, the absence of a positive finding 
may reflect exposure misclassification as well as the fact that this age 
group reported relatively little use of phones. Women who used the 
phone once a day were lumped together with women who used the 
phone for hours a day. Most of the women reported cell phone use under 
30 min or more a week. When this group of cellphone users was 
compared to those who reported never using a phone, no statistically 
significant associations were detected between phone use and brain 
cancer. In contrast, the CERENAT study did find increased brain cancer 
in several of their subgroups. It is the Grimes evaluation that ignored it. 
In an analysis of nine epidemiological studies of brain cancers and 
mobile phones, Miller et al. (2018) noted increased risks. Vienne-Ju -
meau et al. (2019) while not observing heightened instances of brain 
tumor, did find robust epidemiological evidence of acoustic neuroma. 
Mialon and Nesson (2020) found mobile subscription rates significantly 
and positively associated with death rates from brain cancer 15–20 years 
later. Pareja-Pe ˜na et al. (2020) similarly found clear evidence that 
epidemiological studies detect a causal association between the expo-
sure to RFR and the incidence of brain neoplasms. Boileau et al. (2020) 
found that use of a mobile phone for more than 30 min per day by 
expectant mothers impaired fetal growth. Choi et al. (2020) carried out a 
systematic review and meta analysis of case control studies and found 
evidence that cell phone use increased the risk of tumors. Although 
Fig. 1.Depicting the combinations between Electro -
magnetic Field strength and modulation frequency of 
pulses carried on the base transmission frequency of 
the signal that can disrupt VGCCs in the membrane. 
The scales of the axes are logarithmic The Y axis is the 
E-field strength and is related to power density (PD) 
of the signal by PD=E2
377, where 377 Ω is the 
impedance of free space. The red areas represent the 
combination of field strengths and frequencies of 
some common telecommunication protocols. The 
maximum power density for the base transmission 
frequency allowed by the FCC and ICNIRP is PD =10 
W/m2 (Wu et al., 2015 ). The black line represents the 
limit above which an oscillating field of frequency 
and strength represented by the line will disrupt a 
membrane ion channel. The red line is the same, but 
for continuous fields. The frequency limits of bioac -
tivity are marked on the graph. (Reproduced and 
adapted with permission from (Panagopoulos et al., 
2021 )). (For interpretation of the references to colour 
in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web 
version of this article.)   P. Ben Ishai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Environmental Research xxx (xxxx) xxx
5challenged by de Vocht and R¨o¨osli (de Vocht and R¨o¨osli, 2021 ) and by 
Brzozek et al. (2021) , the replies of Choi et al. (Moskowitz et al., 2021 ; 
Myung et al., 2021 ) effectively establish the validity of their findings. De 
Vocht ’s contention was that Choi et al. had unfairly combined different 
cancer types in their meta-analysis and that they had relied too heavily 
on the work by Hardell et al. (Hardell et al., 2013 ; Hardell and Carlberg, 
2009 ). The reply, drafted by Myung (Myung et al., 2021 ), pointed out 
that such an approach was fair if the intention was to show the possi -
bility of cancer formation, rather than the instance of a particular type of 
cancer. They also pointed out that this approach was perfectly accept -
able when discussing other cancer risks. Furthermore, they addressed 
the high quality of the work done by the Hardell group as a reason to rely 
on their results. Hardell and Carlberg have also recently published 
studies demonstrating a causal link (Hardell and Carlberg, 2020 , 2021 ). 
This list of studies represents only a portion of the published work 
produced during just the last two years. 
4.Population studies 
An interesting study recently published by Sato (Sato et al., 2019 ) 
explained that because of the long latency of brain tumors (up to 4 de-
cades) the effect of cellphone radiation induced changes should only 
become evident now in population studies. 
A case-control study from Connecticut between 2010 and 2011 by 
Luo et al. (2020) included 440 thyroid cancer cases and 465 
population-based controls with genotyping information for 823 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 176 DNA genes. Using multivariate 
unconditional logistic regression models, they determined 
genotype-environment interaction between each SNP and cell phone use 
and estimated the association with cell phone use in populations ac-
cording to SNP variants. While in the most common homozygote groups, 
no association was observed with cell phone use, ten SNPs showed 
highly significant interactions in all thyroid cancers and cell phone use, 
P <0.01. In small tumors, increased risk was observed for 5 SNPs 
(rs1063639, rs1695147, rs11070256, rs12204529 and rs3800537). In 
large tumors, increased risk was observed for 3 SNPs (rs11070256, 
rs1695147, and rs396746). The authors conclude that their results 
indicate that genetic susceptibilities modify the associations between 
cell phone use and risk of thyroid cancer and provide further evidentiary 
support for determining that RFR is carcinogenic to humans. 
4.1. Possible implications of pregnancy 
Experimental studies finding prenatal effects of microwave radiation 
on behavior, brain, and other organ development of progeny are 
corroborated by some human studies as well. 
Divan et al. (2008) evaluated mothers of 13,159 children that 
self-reported cell phone use during pregnancy and afterwards. They 
reported significantly increased odds ratios for behavioral problems for 
children who had possible prenatal exposures to cell phones. After 
adjustment for potential confounders, the odds ratio for a higher overall 
behavioral problems score was 1.80 (95% confidence interval =
1.45 –2.23) in children with both prenatal and postnatal exposure to cell 
phones. Exposure to cell phones prenatally-and, to a lesser degree, 
postnatally-was associated with behavioral difficulties such as 
emotional and hyperactivity problems. 
Birks et al. (2017) found that, “38.8% of mothers from the Danish 
cohort, reported no cell phone use during pregnancy, and these mothers 
were less likely to have a child with overall behavioral, hyper -
activity/inattention or emotional problems ” (Birks et al., 2017 ). 
Mothers self-reporting medium and high frequency cell phone use had 
OR (odds ratio) of 1.28 (95% CI 1.12, 1.48) for having a child with 
increased risks of hyperactivity/inattention. In addition, the association 
of cell phone usage with behavioral problems appeared consistent be-
tween and across cohorts. 
As early as 2012 it was noted that EMF originating from cellphones operating at 800–1600 MHz could lead to developmental deficiencies in 
mouse models (Aldad et al., 2012 ). Mice exposed in utero were hyper -
active and suffered from impared memory. A recent study studied EMF 
exposure on the placenta of pregnant rats (Kim et al., 2021 ). While it did 
find significant increases of cortisol in maternal circulating blood, these 
did not seem to be carried over to placental blood. However, one notes 
that the radiation source used in the reverberation chamber was an RFID 
source, rather than a cellphone. In the aforementioned studies the ani-
mals were exposed to SAR values of 1.6 and 4 W/kg respectively. 
Finally, a recent review of the literature pertaining to possible EMF 
exposure effects on human pregnancy did find significant impacts (El 
Jarrah and Rababa, 2022 ). These included, heightedned risks of 
miscarriage, changes to fetal temperature, variations in fetal heart rate 
variability, and changes in infant anthropometric measurements. How-
ever, the same study cautioned that there was wide variability in 
assessing exposure in cohort studies, in the type and duration of expo-
sures involved. The authors, while concluding that there is a negative 
impact of EMF exposure on fetal development, called for more studies to 
be carried out. 
4.1.1. In vivo experiments 
In addition to the NTP and Ramazzini studies, a large body of in vivo 
animal studies has been published that demonstrate adverse effects from 
RFR. Frequently these studies are dismissed, principally because whole 
body exposures are used, rather than localized exposures. In fact, there is 
no way to have rodents simulate local exposures that take place during 
phone calls. The Federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) review of 
literature 2008 –2018 (FDA U.S, 2020 ) provided an especially restrictive 
overview of the topic (Balmori et al., 2020 ; Leach, 2020 ). Out of a 
possible 55 animal studies that could have been considered, the FDA 
report only used 37, of which 23 concluded that there was genotoxicity 
from RF exposure (Leach, 2020 ). The FDA report concluded that 
“Overall, based on certain limitations, these studies have not produced any 
clear evidence that RFR exposure has any tumorigenic effect. ” In rejecting 
many animal studies, the main concern of the FDA was that most of these 
reports did not measure the animal ’s internal temperature. 
The principal assumption of the FDA is that thermal damage is the 
reason for any carcinogenic effect and this only arises when the animal 
whole body temperature rises more than a single degree Centigrade–a 
rise that may occur under current limits. In fact, hyperthermia is 
currently an accepted treatment for some forms of cancer, as heat is 
recognized as being anti-carcinogenic. This reasoning is shared by such 
august bodies as the WHO EMF Project and ICNIRP in the establishment 
of their exposure limits (Grigoriev, 2010 ). However, recent research 
demonstrated that at levels of exposure to RFR considered to be 
non-thermal, there is indeed an elevation of body temperature of mice 
and that this is a physiological reaction to stress and not heating (Mai 
et al., 2020 ). This work used implanted Anipill temperature loggers 
(BodyCap (“e-Celsius Medical -,” n.d.), Paris, France) to record core 
temperature of mice during exposure to 900 MHz CW signal for 1 h 
periods. The results show a consistent temperature elevation of ΔT∼
0.1to0.3◦C due to exposure, well within physiological limits. As the 
authors pointed out, the traditional method of gauging core tempera -
ture, as favored by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 
leads to elevated core temperatures due to physical discomfort and stress 
(Mai et al., 2020 ) of the animal. 
As part of the NTP study, to ensure that internal temperatures were 
not disrupted by exposures to cell phone radiation comparable to those 
that humans can receive, Wyde et al. (M. E. Wyde et al., 2018 ) also used 
implanted probes to gauge the effect of RFR exposure on animals due to 
mobile transmissions. They also found little variation of core tempera -
ture in rats exposed to GSM- and CDMA-modulated RFR signals even up 
to SAR values of 6 W/kg. In short, the criticism of FDA that in most in 
vivo experiments that core temperatures were not measured and so are 
not valid, is unfounded. P. Ben Ishai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Environmental Research xxx (xxxx) xxx
64.2. The NTP study is inaccurately depicted 
In evaluating the carcinogenicity of current levels of RFR from 
phones and other devices, the NTP study employed validated state-of- 
the-art methods that have been honed over more than four decades 
with the concurrence of the FDA, EPA, and other federal agencies. To 
date, the NTP has produced several hundred carcinogenicity assess -
ments employing standard protocols. Despite this robust history, some 
pundits have dismissed many of the findings of the National Toxicology 
Program (NTP) Cell Phone Radio Frequency Radiation study (National 
Toxicology Program (NTP), 2018; Smith-Roe et al., 2020 ; M. Wyde et al., 
2018 ; M. E. Wyde et al., 2018 ). Despite being approved at every stage of 
planning and operation by the FDA, some reject its findings claiming 
that they rely on “low power and questionable methods ” (Grimes, 2021 ). 
The NTP study was a toxicology study of rats and mice to clarify the risks 
of disease from exposure to RFR (Gong et al., 2017 ). A similar study 
(Falcioni et al., 2018 ; Vornoli et al., 2019 ) was carried out by the Italian 
Ramazzini Institute and concluded that “there is now clear evidence that 
RFR causes cancer in experimental animals. ” RFR re-evaluation has also 
been listed as a priority by IARC (Vornoli et al., 2019 ). 
Among the principal critiques of the NTP study are those from the 
anonymous FDA report (FDA U.S, 2020 ) and the International Com-
mission on Non Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) (Protection 
(ICNIRP)1, 2020 ), both of which were disputed in considerable detail 
(Melnick, 2019 , 2020 ). It must be noted that the NTP study was 
commissioned by the FDA at the behest of the FCC (Federal Communi -
cations Commission), reviewed, and approved by them (Melnick, 2019 ). 
The study was funded to the tune of $30 million and lasted 5 years. It 
was specifically designed to test the null hypothesis that cell phone ra-
diation at non-thermal exposure intensities could not cause adverse 
health effects. By the definition of the FCC and ICNIRP “non-thermal ” 
exposure intensities means that there is no more than a 1◦rise in core 
body temperature resulting from acute exposures (Melnick, 2020 ; “OET 
- Bulletin No. 65 (August 1997), ” 2011 ). The NTP carried out initial 
studies to find the exposure limit for rats and mice in terms of SAR to 
maintain this limit and found that the maximum whole body exposure 
for such would be a SAR value of 6 W/kg (M. E. Wyde et al., 2018 ). One 
notes that the FCC limit for local exposure for the human head is 1.6 
W/kg averaged over 6 min (Proposed FCC changes to measuring and 
evaluating human exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields 
and wireless power transfer devices are flawed: need for 
biologically-based standards, 2020 ) with the phone 25 mm from the skin 
surface (Gandhi, 2019 ). In real life scenarios the cell phone is usually in 
contact with the skin during a conversation. Using the Standard 
Anthropometric Model (SAM), the National Agency ANFR of France 
routinely measured SAR values of 5 W/kg and above for over 450 
mobile phone models (Gandhi, 2019 ) held in contact with the skin 
surface. In other words, claims, including those made by Grimes 
(2021) , that the exposure limit fixed for the NTP study were too high 
are not valid. The criticism of the findings of the NTP study were 
adequately answered by Melnick (2019) and by Leach (2020) . In 
particular the claim that whole body SAR was used instead of local 
SAR is invalid. Extensive care was taken in this study to assess the 
dosimetry for the animal assays (Gong et al., 2017 ). Further, there are 
no acceptable means of strapping a cellphone to the head of a rodent. 
Furthermore, Whole-body SAR provides little information on organ 
specific exposure levels (IARC, 2013 ) and the correct comparison is 
indeed the localized human head exposure level as defined above. The 
results of the NTP study were unequivocable. The null hypothesis that 
non-thermal RFR is incapable of causing harm was disproved! The study 
found cancers like glioma in the brain increased by 3% for GSM type 
signals, at all powers, and by 3.3% for CDMA type signals at 6 W/kg 
(National Toxicology Program (NTP), 2018; M. Wyde et al., 2018 ). Glial 
cell hyperplasia increased by 2–3% for both types of signal and for all 
signal strengths. Surprisingly, these changes occurred almost exclusively 
in male rats. For schwannomas of the heart, there was an increase of 2–5% for GSM type signals and an increase of 2–6% for CDMA type 
signals (M. Wyde et al., 2018 ). Genotoxicity was found in the frontal 
cortex of male mice (both modulations), leukocytes of female mice 
(CDMA only), and hippocampus of male rats (CDMA only) (Smith-Roe 
et al., 2020 ) and other effects. In short, criticism of the NTP study was 
unfounded. 
4.2.1. Other avenues of negative health impacts 
While the carcinogenicity of RFR has garnered considerable atten -
tion in the perennial debate over its health impacts, it is quite possible 
that other forms of damage dominate. Electromagnetic Hypersensitivity 
(EHS), a syndrome in which the sufferer experiences a number of 
debilitating conditions, ranging from tinnitus to headaches and even to a 
complete inability to function as a result of exposure to anthropogenic 
EMF, is thought to affect up to 10% of the population in some countries 
(Dieudonn ´e, 2020 ; Genuis and Lipp, 2012 ). However, due to the 
amorphous nature of what can be considered as an EHS symptom, some 
researchers feel that the number is actually closer to 1.5% of the pop-
ulation (Tato ´n et al., 2021 ). A comprehensive review of its symptoms 
and its grounding as a physiological response to exposure to EMF was 
recently published (International Commission on the Biological Effects 
of Electromagnetic Fields (ICBE-EMF), 2022) by the International 
Commission on the Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Fields (ICBE), 
an independent NGO. They note that there are now guidelines for the 
diagnosis and management of EHS and that this syndrome can have 
measurable biomarkers, such as elevated oxidative stress, inflammatory 
markers and changes in cerebral blood flow. 
The nature of EHS has long been disputed, with many researchers 
feeling that it is a nocebo effect rather than a physiological malady 
(Baliatsas et al., 2015 ; Br¨ascher et al., 2020 ; McCarty et al., 2011 ). 
However, EHS has been recognized in Sweden as a disability since 2001 
(Johansson, 2010 ) and there is increasing evidence that the nocebo 
explanation cannot stand as the main cause, even if one accepts that 
there are psychosomatic aspects to the phenomena (Dieudonn ´e, 2020 ; 
Johansson, 2006 , 2010 ; Singh and Kapoor, 2014 ). Recent research has 
placed its physiological origins on a firmer footing. Belpomme et al. 
have identified specific neurological pathological disorders that can be 
linked to EHS (Belpomme and Irigaray, 2020 ). Johansson et al. has also 
detected subtle changes in the neuronal systems of the skin that can be 
associated with EHS (Johansson, 2010 ). However, in a recent and 
exhaustive review of the literature regarding EHS research, Leszczynski 
(2021) points out that there are inherent problems with the greater 
majority of studies either demonstrating or denying a correlation be-
tween the exposure to RFR and the existence of symptoms associated 
with EHS. He reports a number of problems including; widely disparate 
definitions of the symptoms (up to 71 in one study), in the reliance of a 
subjective measure, either from the subjects of the study or the research 
team involved, a lack of objective exposure measurements and the small 
statistical weight of most studies. As he points out, one cannot deny EHS 
based on these studies, as some do, but that it may well be better to 
consider it as a syndrome, encompassing a variety of effects induced by 
exposure and mitigated by the existence of cofactors in the subject ’s 
environment. Consequently, what may induce EHS in one person may 
have no effect on another, even if they too claim to suffer from EHS. The 
complexity of the situation requires individual studies of sufferers that 
include biochemical and physiological markers, in an effort to identify 
distinct physio/bio markers that can then be used in large scale studies 
(Leszczynski, 2021 ). Not everyone agrees with this assessment of the 
state of research (International Commission on the Biological Effects of 
Electromagnetic Fields (ICBE-EMF), 2022), with strong contrary com-
ments from Dieudonn ´e (2022) and from Oftedal et al. (2021) . 
Despite these disagreements, the existence of EHS as a real debili -
tating syndrome affecting millions worldwide is not in dispute. As the 
level exposure to RFR is expected to drastically increase as 5G systems 
begin to dominate our urban environments, one may assume that the 
instances of EHS will only rise, along with its economic and personal P. Ben Ishai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Environmental Research xxx (xxxx) xxx
7impacts. 
5.Discussion 
Industry and regulatory authorities should have the safety of the 
public as their paramount concern. However, the boundaries separating 
the regulator from the regulated are frequently blurred. In 2020 the FCC 
(“FCC Maintains Current RF Exposure Safety Standards,” 2019; Pro-
posed FCC changes to Measuring and Evaluating Human Exposure to 
Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields and Wireless Power Transfer 
Devices are Flawed: need for biologically-based standards, 2020) 
extended the current allowed levels of exposure to the frequency 
region 3 GHz–300 GHz, effectively preparing the legal framework 
necessary for the whole-scale deployment of 5G C band and 5G High 
Frequency mobile communications infrastructure. Concurrently, 
ICNIRP published its recommended levels of exposure, confirming a 
standard that is already 27 years old (Protection (ICNIRP)1, 2020). 
We concur with Hardell (Hardell and Carlberg, 2020) and Miller 
(Miller et al., 2018) that the grounds for inferring causation established 
by Sir Bradford Hill (1965) have generally been fulfilled regarding the 
capacity of RFR to induce cancer and other adverse health effects. 
Experimental and epidemiological evidence both indicate that with 
greater exposures there are greater responses. Further the biological 
foundation for concluding that such exposures are causal have been 
plausibly elucidated by several authorities to emanate from the capacity 
of RFR to induce OS along with other properties. The lack of consistency 
of studies is noteworthy, nonetheless. Regarding these inconsistencies, it 
should be added that several commenters have documented substantial 
conflicts of interest in institutions such as ICNIRP that have reached 
contrary views. Even so, the situation has been exacerbated by a failure 
to standardize nomenclature, by a lack of consistency in signal types, 
frequencies, polarity and other EM properties. To compound this some in 
vitro studies have not used standardized cell cultures. Evidence has 
mounted that pulsed lower-power signals can be highly disruptive, 
especially for immature stem cells (Durdik et al., 2019; Romeo et al., 
2022). 
The Precautionary Principle is defined by the United Nations Rio 
Earth Summit in 1992, in article 15 of the Rio Declaration as follows: “In 
order to protect the environment, the precautionary approach shall be 
widely applied by States according to their capabilities. Where there are 
threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty 
shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to 
prevent environmental degradation.” (Robbins, 2007). While it was 
initially invoked for environmental concerns, the Precautionary Princi -
ple has become the yardstick with which to gauge the impact of indus -
trial and technological advancement on human and societal health. 
Since its inception it has become part of the regulatory scene (Hanson, 
2018), adopted by the European Union in 2000, Australia in 1991 and a 
number of U.S. states. It has consequently drawn the ire of those who 
feel that it is overly restrictive and stifles advancement (Hansson, 2020; 
Peterson, 2007; Turner and Hartzell, 2004). Notwithstanding, the 
notion of preventing harm rather than proving damage has already 
occurred is a cardinal principle of public health that forms the founda -
tion of policies to employ bike helmets, seat belts, and air bags. In those 
instances, indications of the clear benefits of safety led to their global 
implementation. The grounds for taking action to prevent harm rests on 
scientific foundations that specific actions can reduce or mitigate those 
harms. In the matter of RFR no such approach is evident, although we 
believe that one is sorely needed. 
As pointed out by Prof. Butler in his working paper (Butler, n.d.), the 
ICNIRP Guidelines reject non-thermal health effects, despite a wealth of 
evidence including epidemiological, in vitro, and animal studies to the 
contrary, and that this is prevailing institutional logic amongst the world 
regulatory bodies who take their cue from ICNIRP (Butler, n.d.; Hardell 
and Carlberg, 2020). Given the weight of scientific evidence, only some 
of which is outlined above, it is clear that the Precautionary principle is being ignored. A recent commentary by Lin concurs with this statement 
(Lin, 2022b). 
Oversight by the FCC is concerning. It has frequently been pointed 
out that the routine employment of officials by a regulatory body from 
the industry it must regulate, constitutes an inherent conflict of interest. 
This is evident in the relationship between the FCC and the Mobile 
Phone Industry. As pointed out by Alster in his book “Captured Agency” 
(Alster, 2015), “But with the overwhelming application of money and 
influence, information and communications technologies have almost 
totally escaped political scrutiny, regulatory control, and legal 
discipline.” 
6.Conclusion 
There is a plethora of both experimental and epidemiological evi-
dence establishing a causal relationship between EMF and cancer and 
other adverse health effects including adverse effects on fetal develop -
ment and the endocrine system. Increases in biochemical alterations 
such as DNA damage, increased production of free radicals and other 
signals found to be predictive of cancer and other degenerative diseases 
have been clearly demonstrated. While the evidence is not consistent, 
the reasons for that inconsistency merit independent review and 
assessment. A number of industry-affiliated scientists have offered crit-
icisms that are subject to bias, as we have outlined here. If progress is to 
be made in improving the public understanding of this complicated 
issue, it is imperative to insist on a complete picture of the evidence that 
relies on independent science. 
While we may disagree strongly with the conclusions some critics 
have provided, we concur wholeheartedly that there is a need for a 
serious concerted program of research. No such program exists with 
support from National governments in the United States and Canada. 
The job of the government is to ensure the protection of Public Health. 
We earnestly hope that as the situation evolves, those in positions to 
create the training and funding for major interdisciplinary research 
programs in engineering, medicine, toxicology, and bioelectromagnetics 
will do so. In the meantime, we add our voices to those of more than four 
hundred experts in the field calling for discussion of a moratorium on 
5G. Without such a program we are effectively conducting an uncon -
trolled experiment on ourselves, our families, and our children. 
Indeed, the subject of RFR and carcinogenicity remains truly com-
plex. Studies have to simulate intricate exposures that are taking place 
every day to billions of people around the world. Given the ubiquity of 
the technology, as we move ahead it will not be possible to find an 
unexposed control group in the modern world. The inarguable intricacy 
of the technology can easily become a way of confusing rather than 
clarifying the matter. The subject of the impact of RFR on human health 
is one of the most important topics of our age. It is one in which the 
general public seeks clear answers to a collective, but poorly defined 
angst. It is the job of experts to present the state of knowledge in clear 
and concise language that the layman can understand. The numerous 
omissions and distortions in recent articles originating from the industry 
perspective do not meet this criteria. The medical and public health 
communities deserve the whole story, no matter how complicated or 
unpalatable it may be. There is an abundance of evidence pointed to-
wards deleterious effects of RFR exposure on human health. Further, the 
growing applications of low levels of RF in medicine through electro -
ceuticals constitutes evidence per se of biological impacts (Mishra, 
2017). Any agent that can be beneficial, whether aspirin or oncology 
drugs, can also have negative impacts. Consequently, it is imperative to 
insist on a complete picture of the evidence and not the whitewashed or 
distorted version currently promoted. The need to take into account the 
complete weight of the evidence in devising regulatory policies is widely 
ignored to our detriment. It is time that the Precautionary Principle be 
applied to RFR. P. Ben Ishai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Environmental Research xxx (xxxx) xxx
8Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re-
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
Guest Editor for Environmental Research P.B.I. Provided scientific 
opinion for the Environmental Health Trust P.B.I. 
Data availability 
No data was used for the research described in the article. 
References 
Aldad, T.S., Gan, G., Gao, X.-B., Taylor, H.S., 2012. Fetal radiofrequency radiation 
exposure from 800-1900 Mhz-rated cellular telephones affects neurodevelopment 
and behavior in mice. Sci. Rep. 2 (312) https://doi.org/10.1038/srep00312 . 
Alster, N., 2015. Captured Agency: How the Federal Communications Commission Is 
Dominated by the Industries It Presumably Regulates. Safra Center for Ethics, 
Harvard University, Cambridge MA, 02138 .  
Ambudkar, I.S., Muallem, S., 2016. ROS and Ca2+—partners in sickness and in health. 
Cell Calcium. Ca signaling and ROS (Part A) 60, 51–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ceca.2016.06.003 . 
Baliatsas, C., Bolte, J., Yzermans, J., Kelfkens, G., Hooiveld, M., Lebret, E., van Kamp, I., 
2015. Actual and perceived exposure to electromagnetic fields and non-specific 
physical symptoms: an epidemiological study based on self-reported data and 
electronic medical records. Int. J. Hyg Environ. Health 218, 331–344. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2015.02.001 . 
Balmori, A., Hardell, L., Heroux, P., Davis, D., Richter, Eliyahu, D., David, O., Dasdag, 
Suleyman, de Salles, Alvaro, Arazi, Marc, Markov, Marko, Pall, Martin, Hinrikus, 
Hiie, Carpenter, 2020. CFS-Filing Details, OET 19-226 (https://www.fcc.gov/ecfs/ 
search/search-filings/filing/1061383854989 ). 
Belpoggi, F., 2021. Health Impact of 5G (Parlimentary Report No. PE 690.012). European 
Parliment, Brussels .  
Belpomme, D., Irigaray, P., 2020. Electrohypersensitivity as a newly identified and 
characterized neurologic pathological disorder: how to diagnose, treat, and prevent 
it. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, E1915. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21061915 . 
Belpomme, D., Hardell, L., Belyaev, I., Burgio, E., Carpenter, D.O., 2018. Thermal and 
non-thermal health effects of low intensity non-ionizing radiation: an international 
perspective. Environ. Pollut. 242, 643–658. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envpol.2018.07.019 . 
Belyaev, I., 2019. Main regularities and health risks from exposure to non-thermal 
microwaves of mobile communication, in: 2019 14th international conference on 
advanced technologies, systems and Services in telecommunications (℡SIKS). In: 
Presented at the 2019 14th international conference on advanced technologies, 
systems and Services in telecommunications (℡SIKS), pp. 111–116 https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/ ℡SIKS46999.2019.9002324 .  
Benson, V.S., Pirie, K., Schüz, J., Reeves, G.K., Beral, V., Green, J., Collaborators, for the 
M.W.S, 2013. Mobile phone use and risk of brain neoplasms and other cancers: 
prospective study. Int. J. Epidemiol. 42, 792–802. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/ 
dyt072 . 
Birks, L., Guxens, M., Papadopoulou, E., Alexander, J., Ballester, F., Estarlich, M., 
Gallastegi, M., Ha, M., Haugen, M., Huss, A., Kheifets, L., Lim, H., Olsen, J., Santa- 
Marina, L., Sudan, M., Vermeulen, R., Vrijkotte, T., Cardis, E., Vrijheid, M., 2017. 
Maternal cell phone use during pregnancy and child behavioral problems in five 
birth cohorts. Environ. Int. 104, 122–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envint.2017.03.024 . 
Blackman, C., Forge, S., 2019. 5G Deployment: State of Play in Europe, USA and Asia (In- 
Depth Analysis No. PE 631.060), Requested by the ITRE Committee. Policy 
Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies Directorate-General 
for Internal Policies. European Parliment . 
Boileau, N., Margueritte, F., Gauthier, T., Boukeffa, N., Preux, P.-M., Labrunie, A., 
Aubard, Y., 2020. Mobile phone use during pregnancy: which association with fetal 
growth? J. Gynecol. Obstetrics Human Reproduct. 49, 101852 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jogoh.2020.101852 . 
Br¨ascher, A.-K., Schulz, S.M., Van den Bergh, O., Witth ¨oft, M., 2020. Prospective study of 
nocebo effects related to symptoms of idiopathic environmental intolerance 
attributed to electromagnetic fields (IEI-EMF). Environ. Res. 190, 110019 https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.110019 . 
Brieger, K., Schiavone, S., Miller Jr., F.J., Krause, K.-H., 2012. Reactive oxygen species: 
from health to disease. Swiss Med. Wkly. 142, w13659. https://doi.org/10.4414/ 
smw.2012.13659 . 
Brzozek, C., Abramson, M.J., Benke, G., Karipidis, K., 2021. Comment on Choi et al. 
Cellular Phone Use and Risk of Tumors: systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Int. J. 
Environ. Res. Public Health 2020, 17, 8079. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health 18, 5459. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18105459 . 
Carlberg, M., Hardell, L., 2017. Evaluation of mobile phone and cordless phone use and 
glioma risk using the Bradford Hill viewpoints from 1965 on association or 
causation. BioMed Res. Int. 2017, 9218486 https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/ 
9218486 . 
Casta ˜no-Vinyals, G., Sadetzki, S., Vermeulen, R., Momoli, F., Kundi, M., Merletti, F., 
Maslanyj, M., Calderon, C., Wiart, J., Lee, A.-K., Taki, M., Sim, M., Armstrong, B., 
Benke, G., Schattner, R., Hutter, H.-P., Krewski, D., Mohipp, C., Ritvo, P., Spinelli, J., Lacour, B., Remen, T., Radon, K., Weinmann, T., Petridou, E.T., Moschovi, M., 
Pourtsidis, A., Oikonomou, K., Kanavidis, P., Bouka, E., Dikshit, R., Nagrani, R., 
Chetrit, A., Bruchim, R., Maule, M., Migliore, E., Filippini, G., Miligi, L., Mattioli, S., 
Kojimahara, N., Yamaguchi, N., Ha, M., Choi, K., Kromhout, H., Goedhart, G., ’t 
Mannetje, A., Eng, A., Langer, C.E., Alguacil, J., Aragon ´es, N., Morales-Su ´arez- 
Varela, M., Badia, F., Albert, A., Carretero, G., Cardis, E., 2022. Wireless phone use in 
childhood and adolescence and neuroepithelial brain tumours: results from the 
international MOBI-Kids study. Environ. Int. 160, 107069 https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.envint.2021.107069 . 
Catterall, W.A., 2011. Voltage-Gated Calcium Channels. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 
3, a003947. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a003947 . 
Chapter 2: Radio Transmission — 5G Mobile Networks: A Systems Approach Version 1.1- 
dev documentation. n.d. URL. https://5g.systemsapproach.org/primer.html . 
accessed 1.10.22).  
Choi, Y.-J., Moskowitz, J.M., Myung, S.-K., Lee, Y.-R., Hong, Y.-C., 2020. Cellular phone 
use and risk of tumors: systematic review and meta-analysis. Int. J. Environ. Res. 
Publ. Health 17, 8079. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17218079 . 
Butler, T., n.d. Wireless Technologies and the Risk of Adverse Health Effects in Society: A 
Retrospective Ethical Risk Analysis of Health and Safety Guidelines. URL chrome- 
extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://ehtrust.org/wp- 
content/uploads/Wireless-Technologies-Ethical-Risk-Analysis-Working-Paper- 
2021.pdf . 
Chowdhury, A., Singh, Y., Das, U., Waghmare, D., Dasgupta, R., Majumder, S.K., n.d. 
Effects of mobile phone emissions on human red blood cells. J. Biophotonics n/a, 
e202100047. https://doi.org/10.1002/jbio.202100047 . 
Consales, C., Merla, C., Marino, C., Benassi, B., 2012. Electromagnetic fields, oxidative 
stress, and neurodegeneration. Int. J. Cell Biol. 2012, e683897 https://doi.org/ 
10.1155/2012/683897 . 
Coureau, G., Bouvier, G., Lebailly, P., Fabbro-Peray, P., Gruber, A., Leffondre, K., 
Guillamo, J.-S., Loiseau, H., Mathoulin-P ´elissier, S., Salamon, R., Baldi, I., 2014. 
Mobile phone use and brain tumours in the CERENAT case-control study. Occup. 
Environ. Med. 71, 514–522. https://doi.org/10.1136/oemed-2013-101754 . 
Davis, D., 2010. Disconnect: the truth about cell phone radiation, what the industry is 
doing to hide it, and how to protect your family. Penguin, New York.  
de Vocht, F., R¨o¨osli, M., Comment on Choi, Y.-J., et al., 2021. Cellular phone use and risk 
of tumors: systematic review and meta-analysis. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 
2020, 17, 8079. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 
18, 3125. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18063125 . 
Desai, N.R., Kesari, K.K., Agarwal, A., 2009. Pathophysiology of cell phone radiation: 
oxidative stress and carcinogenesis with focus on male reproductive system. Reprod. 
Biol. Endocrinol. 7, 114. https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-7827-7-114 . 
Dieudonn ´e, M., 2020. Electromagnetic hypersensitivity: a critical review of explanatory 
hypotheses. Environ. Health 19, 48. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-020-00602-0 . 
Dieudonn ´e, M., 2022. Comments on the Review of the scientific evidence on the 
individual sensitivity to electromagnetic fields (EHS) by Dariusz Leszczynski. 
Reviews on Environmental Health. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2022-0002 . 
Divan, H.A., Kheifets, L., Obel, C., Olsen, J., 2008. Prenatal and postnatal exposure to cell 
phone use and behavioral problems in children. Epidemiology 19, 523–529. https:// 
doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0b013e318175dd47 . 
Durdik, M., Kosik, P., Markova, E., Somsedikova, A., Gajdosechova, B., Nikitina, E., 
Horvathova, E., Kozics, K., Davis, D., Belyaev, I., 2019. Microwaves from mobile 
phone induce reactive oxygen species but not DNA damage, preleukemic fusion 
genes and apoptosis in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. Sci. Rep. 9, 16182. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-52389-x e-Celsius Medical -, n.d. URL. https 
://www.bodycap-medical.com/ecelsius-medical-medical-device-for-a-continuous-c 
ore-temperature-monitoring-telemetric-pills/ . accessed 1.12.22.  
El Jarrah, I., Rababa, M., 2022. Impacts of smartphone radiation on pregnancy: a 
systematic review. Heliyon 8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e08915 . 
Falcioni, L., Bua, L., Tibaldi, E., Lauriola, M., De Angelis, L., Gnudi, F., Mandrioli, D., 
Manservigi, M., Manservisi, F., Manzoli, I., Menghetti, I., Montella, R., Panzacchi, S., 
Sgargi, D., Strollo, V., Vornoli, A., Belpoggi, F., 2018. Report of final results 
regarding brain and heart tumors in Sprague-Dawley rats exposed from prenatal life 
until natural death to mobile phone radiofrequency field representative of a 1.8 GHz 
GSM base station environmental emission. Environ. Res. 165, 496–503. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.envres.2018.01.037 . 
FCC Maintains Current RF Exposure Safety Standards, 2019. Federal Communications 
Commission. WWW Document URL. https://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-maintains- 
current-rf-exposure-safety-standards . accessed 5.20.20.  
FOEN, F.O. for the E., n.d. BERENIS - Swiss expert group on electromagnetic fields and 
non-ionising radiation [WWW Document]. URL https://www.bafu.admin.ch/bafu/ 
en/home/themen/thema-elektrosmog/newsletter-beratende-expertengruppe- 
nis–berenis-/beratende-expertengruppe-nis-berenis.html (accessed 1.10.22). 
Forrester, S.J., Kikuchi, D.S., Hernandes, M.S., Xu, Q., Griendling, K.K., 2018. Reactive 
oxygen species in metabolic and inflammatory signaling. Circ. Res. 122, 877–902. 
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.311401 . 
Foster, K.R., Vecchia, P., Repacholi, M.H., 2000. Science and the precautionary principle. 
Science 288, 979–981. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.288.5468.979 . 
Foster, K.R., Ziskin, M.C., Balzano, Q., 2022. Three quarters of a century of research on 
RF exposure assessment and dosimetry —what have we learned? Int. J. Environ. Res. 
Publ. Health 19, 2067. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19042067 . 
Frei, P., Poulsen, A.H., Johansen, C., Olsen, J.H., Steding-Jessen, M., Schüz, J., 2011. Use 
of mobile phones and risk of brain tumours: update of Danish cohort study. BMJ 343, 
d6387. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.d6387 . 
Friedman, J., Kraus, S., Hauptman, Y., Schiff, Y., Seger, R., 2007. Mechanism of short- 
term ERK activation by electromagnetic fields at mobile phone frequencies. 
Biochem. J. 405, 559–568. https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20061653 . P. Ben Ishai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Environmental Research xxx (xxxx) xxx
9Gandhi, O.P., 2019. Microwave emissions from cell phones exceed safety limits in europe 
and the US when touching the body. IEEE Access 7, 47050 –47052. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2906017 . 
Garcion, E., Naveilhan, P., Berger, F., Wion, D., 2009. Cancer stem cells: beyond Koch ’s 
postulates. Cancer Lett. 278, 3–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2008.09.006 . 
Gautam, R., Singh, K.V., Nirala, J., Murmu, N.N., Meena, R., Rajamani, P., 2019. 
Oxidative stress-mediated alterations on sperm parameters in male Wistar rats 
exposed to 3G mobile phone radiation. Andrologia 51, e13201. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/and.13201 . 
5G,EMF Exposure and Safety (Frequently Asked Questions, 2020. GSMA, Floor 2, The 
Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook, London EC4N 8AF UK. 
Genuis, S.J., Lipp, C.T., 2012. Electromagnetic hypersensitivity: fact or fiction? Sci. Total 
Environ. 414, 103–112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.11.008 . 
Gong, Y., Capstick, M.H., Kuehn, S., Wilson, P.F., Ladbury, J.M., Koepke, G., 
McCormick, D.L., Melnick, R.L., Kuster, N., 2017. Life-time dosimetric assessment for 
mice and rats exposed in reverberation chambers for the two-year NTP cancer 
bioassay study on cell phone radiation. IEEE Trans. Electromagn C. 59, 1798 –1808. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEMC.2017.2665039 . 
G¨orlach, A., Bertram, K., Hudecova, S., Krizanova, O., 2015. Calcium and ROS: a mutual 
interplay. Redox Biol. 6, 260–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2015.08.010 . 
Grigoriev, Y., 2010. Electromagnetic fields and the public: EMF standards and estimation 
of risk. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 10, 12003. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755- 
1315/10/1/012003 . 
Grimes, D., 2006. Koch ’s postulates — then and now. Microbe 1, 223–228. https://doi. 
org/10.1128/microbe.1.223.1 . 
Grimes, D.R., 2021. Radiofrequency radiation and cancer: a review. JAMA oncology. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.2021.5964 . 
Hanson, J., 2018. Precautionary principle: current understandings in law and society. In: 
Dellasala, D.A., Goldstein, M.I. (Eds.), Encyclopedia of the Anthropocene. Elsevier, 
Oxford, pp. 361–366. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809665-9.10451-3 . 
Hansson, S.O., 2020. How extreme is the precautionary principle? Nanoethics 14, 
245–257. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11569-020-00373-5 . 
Hardell, L., Carlberg, M., 2009. Mobile phones, cordless phones and the risk for brain 
tumours. Int. J. Oncol. 35, 5–17. https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo_00000307 . 
Hardell, L., Carlberg, M., 2020. Health risks from radiofrequency radiation, including 5G, 
should be assessed by experts with no conflicts of interest. Oncol. Lett. 20 (15) 
https://doi.org/10.3892/ol.2020.11876 . 
Hardell, L., Carlberg, M., 2021. Lost opportunities for cancer prevention: historical 
evidence on early warnings with emphasis on radiofrequency radiation. Rev. 
Environ. Health 36, 585–597. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2020-0168 . 
Hardell, L., Carlberg, M., Hansson Mild, K., 2013. Use of mobile phones and cordless 
phones is associated with increased risk for glioma and acoustic neuroma. 
Pathophysiology 20, 85–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pathophys.2012.11.001 . 
He, L., He, T., Farrar, S., Ji, L., Liu, T., Ma, X., 2017. Antioxidants maintain cellular redox 
homeostasis by elimination of reactive oxygen species. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 44, 
532–553. https://doi.org/10.1159/000485089 . 
Hill, A.B., 1965. The environment and disease: association or causation? Proc. Roy. Soc. 
Med. 58, 295–300. https://doi.org/10.1177/003591576505800503 . 
5G Frequency Bands & Spectrum Allocations [WWW Document], n.d.. CableFree. URL 
https://www.cablefree.net/wirelesstechnology/4glte/5g-frequency-bands-lte . 
IARC, 2013. Non-ionizing radiation, Part 2: radiofrequency electromagnetic fields, IARC 
working group on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans. Int. Agency Res. 
Cancer . 
International Commission on the Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Fields (ICBE- 
EMF), 2022. Scientific evidence invalidates health assumptions underlying the FCC 
and ICNIRP exposure limit determinations for radiofrequency radiation: implications 
for 5G. Environ. Health 21 (92). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-022-00900-9 . 
Johansson, O., 2006. Electrohypersensitivity: state-of-the-art of a functional impairment. 
Electromagn. Biol. Med. 25, 245–258. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
15368370601044150 . 
Johansson, O., 2010. Aspects of studies on the functional impairment 
electrohypersensitivity. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 10, 12005. https://doi. 
org/10.1088/1755-1315/10/1/012005 . 
Karipidis, K., Mate, R., Urban, D., Tinker, R., Wood, A., 2021. 5G mobile networks and 
health-a state-of-the-science review of the research into low-level RF fields above 
6GHz. J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 31, 585–605. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41370-021-00297-6 . 
Kim, H.S., Choi, H.-D., Pack, J.-K., Kim, N., Ahn, Y.H., 2021. Biological effects of 
exposure to a radiofrequency electromagnetic field on the placental barrier in 
pregnant rats. Bioelectromagnetics 42, 191–199. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
bem.22322 . 
Kivrak, E.G., Yurt, K.K., Kaplan, A.A., Alkan, I., Altun, G., 2017. Effects of 
electromagnetic fields exposure on the antioxidant defense system. J. Micros. 
Ultrastruct. 5 (167) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmau.2017.07.003 . 
Kostoff, R.N., Heroux, P., Aschner, M., Tsatsakis, A., 2020. Adverse health effects of 5G 
mobile networking technology under real-life conditions. Toxicol. Lett. 323, 35–40. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.toxlet.2020.01.020 . 
Zothansiama, Zosangzuali, M., Lalramdinpuii, M., Jagetia, G.C., 2017. Impact of 
radiofrequency radiation on DNA damage and antioxidants in peripheral blood 
lymphocytes of humans residing in the vicinity of mobile phone base stations. 
Electromagn. Biol. Med. 36, 295–305. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
15368378.2017.1350584 . 
Leach, V., 2020. Victor Leach of ORSAA: critical review of the FDA 2020 report. BRHP - 
Between a Rock and a Hard Place. URL. https://betweenrockandhardplace.wordpre 
ss.com/2020/04/27/victor-leach-of-orsaa-critical-review-of-the-fda-2020-report/ . Leszczynski, D., 2021. Review of the scientific evidence on the individual sensitivity to 
electromagnetic fields (EHS). Rev Environ Health. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh- 
2021-0038 . 
Levitt, B.B., Lai, H.C., Manville, A.M., 2021a. Effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic 
fields on flora and fauna, Part 2 impacts: how species interact with natural and man- 
made EMF. Rev Environ Health. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2021-0050 . 
Levitt, B.B., Lai, H.C., Manville, A.M., 2021b. Effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic 
fields on flora and fauna, Part 3. Exposure standards, public policy, laws, and future 
directions. Reviews on Environmental Health. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2021- 
0083 . 
Levitt, B.B., Lai, H.C., Manville, A.M., 2022. Effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic 
fields on flora and fauna, part 1. Rising ambient EMF levels in the environment. Rev. 
Environ. Health 37, 81–122. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2021-0026 . 
Lin, J.C., 2022a. Health safety guidelines and 5G wireless radiation [health matters]. 
IEEE Microw. Mag. 23, 10–17. https://doi.org/10.1109/MMM.2021.3117307 . 
Lin, J.C., 2022b. Carcinogenesis from chronic exposure to radio-frequency radiation. 
Front. Public Health 10. 
Luo, J., Li, H., Deziel, N.C., Huang, H., Zhao, N., Ma, S., Ni, X., Udelsman, R., Zhang, Y., 
2020. Genetic susceptibility may modify the association between cell phone use and 
thyroid cancer: a population-based case-control study in Connecticut. Environ. Res. 
182, 109013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2019.109013 . 
Mai, T.C., Delanaud, S., Bach, V., Braun, A., Pelletier, A., de Seze, R., 2020. Effect of non- 
thermal radiofrequency on body temperature in mice. Sci. Rep. 10, 5724. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-62789-z . 
Mazars, C., Thuleau, P., Lamotte, O., Bourque, S., 2010. Cross-talk between ROS and 
calcium in regulation of nuclear activities. Mol. Plant 3, 706–718. https://doi.org/ 
10.1093/mp/ssq024 . 
McCarty, D.E., Carrubba, S., Chesson, A.L., Frilot, C., Gonzalez-Toledo, E., Marino, A.A., 
2011. Electromagnetic hypersensitivity: evidence for a novel neurological syndrome. 
Int. J. Neurosci. 121, 670–676. https://doi.org/10.3109/00207454.2011.608139 . 
Melnick, R.L., 2019. Commentary on the utility of the National Toxicology Program 
study on cell phone radiofrequency radiation data for assessing human health risks 
despite unfounded criticisms aimed at minimizing the findings of adverse health 
effects. Environ. Res. 168, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2018.09.010 . 
Melnick, R., 2020. Regarding ICNIRP ’S evaluation of the national toxicology program ’s 
carcinogenicity studies on radiofrequency electromagnetic fields. Health Phys. 118, 
678–682. https://doi.org/10.1097/HP.0000000000001268 . 
Mevissen, M., Schürmann, D.. Is there evidence for oxidative stress caused by 
electromagnetic fields? (Newsletter - special Issue). BERENIS - the Swiss expert 
group on electromagnetic fields and non-ionising radiation, Basel. https://www.baf 
u.admin.ch/dam/bafu/en/dokumente/elektrosmog/fachinfo-daten/newsletter_bere 
nis_sonderausgabe_januar_2021.pdf.download.pdf/Newsletter%20BERENIS%20-% 
20Special%20Issue%20January%202021.pdf . 
Mialon, H.M., Nesson, E.T., 2020. The association between mobile phones and the risk of 
brain cancer mortality: a 25-year cross-country analysis. Contemp. Econ. Pol. 38, 
258–269. https://doi.org/10.1111/coep.12456 . 
Miller, A.B., Morgan, L.L., Udasin, I., Davis, D.L., 2018. Cancer epidemiology update, 
following the 2011 IARC evaluation of radiofrequency electromagnetic fields 
(Monograph 102). Environ. Res. 167, 673–683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envres.2018.06.043 . 
Mishra, S., 2017. Electroceuticals in medicine - the brave new future. Indian Heart J. 69, 
685–686. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ihj.2017.10.001 . 
Momoli, F., Siemiatycki, J., McBride, M.L., Parent, M.-´E., Richardson, L., Bedard, D., 
Platt, R., Vrijheid, M., Cardis, E., Krewski, D., 2017. Probabilistic multiple-bias 
modeling applied to the Canadian data from the interphone study of mobile phone 
use and risk of glioma, meningioma, acoustic neuroma, and parotid gland tumors. 
Am. J. Epidemiol. 186, 885–893. https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwx157 . 
Moore, P.S., Chang, Y., 2014. The conundrum of causality in tumor virology: the cases of 
KSHV and MCV. Semin. Cancer Biol. 4–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
semcancer.2013.11.001 . 
Moskowitz, J.M., Myung, S.-K., Choi, Y.-J., Hong, Y.-C., 2021. Reply to Brzozek et al. 
Comment on “Choi, et al. Cellular Phone Use and Risk of Tumors: systematic Review 
and Meta-Analysis. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 18, 5581. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/ijerph18115581 . 
Myung, S.-K., Moskowitz, J.M., Choi, Y.-J., Hong, Y.-C., 2021. Reply to Comment on 
Choi, Y.-J., et al. Cellular Phone Use and Risk of Tumors: systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020, 17, 8079. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 18, 3326. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/ijerph18063326 . 
National Toxicology Program (NTP), 2018. NTP technical report on the toxicology and 
carcinogenesis studies in hsd:sprague dawley SD rats exposed to whole-body Radio 
frequency radiation at a frequency (900 MHz) and modulations (GSM and CDMA) 
used by cell phones (No. 595). https://doi.org/10.22427/NTP-TR-595 . 
OET - Bulletin No. 65 (August 1997), 2011. 
Oftedal, G., Driessen, S., Schmiedchen, K., 2021. Comments on the article by dariusz 
Leszczynski: review of the scientific evidence on the individual sensitivity to 
electromagnetic fields (EHS). Rev environ health 2021. Reviews on environmental 
health 000010151520210113. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2021-0113 . 
Pall, M.L., 2013. Electromagnetic fields act via activation of voltage-gated calcium 
channels to produce beneficial or adverse effects. J. Cell Mol. Med. 17, 958–965. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcmm.12088 . 
Pall, M.L., 2022. Low intensity electromagnetic fields act via voltage-gated calcium 
channel (VGCC) activation to cause very early onset alzheimer ’s disease: 18 distinct 
types of evidence. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 19, 119–132. P. Ben Ishai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Environmental Research xxx (xxxx) xxx
10Panagopoulos, D.J., 2019. Comparing DNA damage induced by mobile telephony and 
other types of man-made electromagnetic fields. Mutat. Res. Rev. Mutat. Res. 781, 
53–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrrev.2019.03.003 . 
Panagopoulos, D.J., Messini, N., Karabarbounis, A., Philippetis, A.L., Margaritis, L.H., 
2000. A mechanism for action of oscillating electric fields on cells. Biochem. 
Biophys. Res. Commun. 272, 634–640. https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2000.2746 . 
Panagopoulos, D.J., Karabarbounis, A., Yakymenko, I., Chrousos, G.P., 2021. Human- 
made electromagnetic fields: ion forced-oscillation and voltage-gated ion channel 
dysfunction, oxidative stress and DNA damage. submitted for publication Int. J. 
Oncol. 59, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo.2021.5272 . 
Panieri, E., Santoro, M.M., 2016. ROS homeostasis and metabolism: a dangerous liaison 
in cancer cells. Cell Death Dis. 7, e2253. https://doi.org/10.1038/cddis.2016.105 
e2253.  
Pareja-Pe ˜na, F., Burgos-Molina, A.M., Sendra-Portero, F., Ruiz-G ´omez, M.J., 2020. 
Evidences of the (400 MHz – 3 GHz) radiofrequency electromagnetic field influence 
on brain tumor induction. Int. J. Environ. Health Res. 1–10. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/09603123.2020.1738352 . 
Peres, J., 2010. One conclusion emerges from interphone study: controversy will 
continue. JNCI: J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 102, 928–931. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/ 
djq263 . 
Peterson, M., 2007. The precautionary principle should not be used as a basis for 
decision-making. Talking Point on the precautionary principle. EMBO Rep. 8, 
305–308. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7400947 . 
Prasad, M., Kathuria, P., Nair, P., Kumar, A., Prasad, K., 2017. Mobile phone use and risk 
of brain tumours: a systematic review of association between study quality, source of 
funding, and research outcomes. Neurol. Sci. 38, 797–810. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10072-017-2850-8 . 
Proposed FCC changes to measuring and evaluating human exposure to radiofrequency 
electromagnetic fields and wireless power transfer devices are flawed: need for 
biologically-based standards (comment No. ET docket No. 19–226; FCC 19–126; FRS 
16618. Federal Commun. Commission., 2020 https://www.bafu.admin.ch/dam/baf 
u/en/dokumente/elektrosmog/fachinfo-daten/newsletter_berenis_sonderausgabe_ja 
nuar_2021.pdf.download.pdf/Newsletter%20BERENIS%20-%20Special%20Issue% 
20January%202021.pdf . 
Protection (ICNIRP)1, I.C. on N.-I.R, 2020. ICNIRP note: critical evaluation of two 
radiofrequency electromagnetic field animal carcinogenicity studies published in 
2018. Health Phys. 118, 525–532. https://doi.org/10.1097/ 
HP.0000000000001137 . 
Ray, P.D., Huang, B.-W., Tsuji, Y., 2012. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis and 
redox regulation in cellular signaling. Cell. Signal. 24, 981–990. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.01.008 . 
Repacholi, M., 2010. Science and precautionary measures in EMF policy. IOP Conf. Ser. 
Earth Environ. Sci. 10, 12001. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/10/1/012001 . 
Review of Published Literature between 2008 and 2018 of Relevance to Radiofrequency 
Radiation and Cancer. FDA U.S, 2020. Food and Drug Administration. https://www. 
fda.gov/media/135043/download . 
Robbins, P., 2007. Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, in: Encyclopedia 
of Environment and Society. SAGE Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, 
pp. 1513 –1514. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781412953924 . 
Romeo, S., Zeni, O., Scarfì, M.R., Poeta, L., Lioi, M.B., Sannino, A., 2022. Radiofrequency 
electromagnetic field exposure and apoptosis: a scoping review of in vitro studies on 
mammalian cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 2322. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23042322 . 
Sato, Y., Kojimahara, N., Yamaguchi, N., 2019. Simulation of the incidence of malignant 
brain tumors in birth cohorts that started using mobile phones when they first 
became popular in Japan. Bioelectromagnetics 40, 143–149. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/bem.22176 . 
Schuermann, D., Mevissen, M., 2021. Manmade electromagnetic fields and oxidative 
stress —biological effects and consequences for health. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22 (3772) 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22073772 . Schüz, J., Pirie, K., Reeves, G.K., Floud, S., Beral, V., for the Million Women Study 
Collaborators, 2022. Cellular telephone use and the risk of brain tumors: update of 
the UK million women study. JNCI: J. Nat. Cancer Inst. https://doi.org/10.1093/ 
jnci/djac042 . 
Singh, S., Kapoor, N., 2014. Health implications of electromagnetic fields, mechanisms of 
action, and research needs. Adv. Biol. 2014, e198609 https://doi.org/10.1155/ 
2014/198609 . 
Smith-Roe, S.L., Wyde, M.E., Stout, M.D., Winters, J.W., Hobbs, C.A., Shepard, K.G., 
Green, A.S., Kissling, G.E., Shockley, K.R., Tice, R.R., Bucher, J.R., Witt, K.L., 2020. 
Evaluation of the genotoxicity of cell phone radiofrequency radiation in male and 
female rats and mice following subchronic exposure. Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 61, 
276–290. https://doi.org/10.1002/em.22343 . 
Tato ´n, G., Kacprzyk, A., Rok, T., Pytlarz, M., Pawlak, R., Rokita, E., 2021. A survey on 
electromagnetic hypersensitivity: the example from Poland. Electromagn Biol Med 
1–8. https://doi.org/10.1080/15368378.2021.1995873 . 
The INTERPHONE Study Group, 2010. Brain tumour risk in relation to mobile telephone 
use: results of the INTERPHONE international case–control study. Int. J. Epidemiol. 
39, 675–694. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyq079 . 
Turner, D., Hartzell, L., 2004. The lack of clarity in the precautionary principle. Environ. 
Val. 13, 449–460. 
Ullrich, V., Apell, H.-J., 2021. Electromagnetic fields and calcium signaling by the 
voltage dependent anion channel. Open J. Vet. Med. 11, 57–86. https://doi.org/ 
10.4236/ojvm.2021.111004 . 
Vienne-Jumeau, A., Tafani, C., Ricard, D., 2019. Environmental risk factors of primary 
brain tumors: a review. Rev. Neurol. 175, 664–678. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neurol.2019.08.004 . 
Vornoli, A., Falcioni, L., Mandrioli, D., Bua, L., Belpoggi, F., 2019. The contribution of in 
vivo mammalian studies to the knowledge of adverse effects of radiofrequency 
radiation on human health. Int. J. Environ. Res. Publ. Health 16 (3379). https://doi. 
org/10.3390/ijerph16183379 . 
Weller, S., May, M., McCredden, J., Leach, V., Phung, D., Belyaev, I., Comment on “5G 
mobile networks and health-a state-of-the-science review of the research into low- 
level RF fields above 6 GHz ” by Karipidis et al, 2022. J expo sci environ epidemiol 
1–4. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41370-022-00497-8 . 
Wireless radiation and health: expert forum on environmental health research and policy 
priorities [WWW document. URL. https://iias.huji.ac.il/event/wireless-radiation-a 
nd-health-expert-forum-environmental-health-research-and-policy . accessed 6.5.22.  
Wu, T., Rappaport, T.S., Collins, C.M., 2015. Safe for generations to come. IEEE Microw. 
Mag. 16, 65–84. https://doi.org/10.1109/MMM.2014.2377587 . 
Wyde, M., Cesta, M., Blystone, C., Elmore, S., Foster, P., Hooth, M., Kissling, G., 
Malarkey, D., Sills, R., Stout, M., Walker, N., Witt, K., Wolfe, M., Bucher, J., 2018. 
Report of partial findings from the national toxicology program carcinogenesis 
studies of cell phone radiofrequency radiation in hsd: sprague Dawley ® SD rats 
(whole body exposure). bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/055699 . 
Wyde, M.E., Horn, T.L., Capstick, M.H., Ladbury, J.M., Koepke, G., Wilson, P.F., 
Kissling, G.E., Stout, M.D., Kuster, N., Melnick, R.L., Gauger, J., Bucher, J.R., 
McCormick, D.L., 2018. Effect of cell phone radiofrequency radiation on body 
temperature in rodents: pilot studies of the National Toxicology Program ’s 
reverberation chamber exposure system: effect of RFR on Body Temperature in 
Rodents. Bioelectromagnetics 39, 190–199. https://doi.org/10.1002/bem.22116 . 
Yakymenko, I., Sidorik, E., Henshel, D., Kyrylenko, S., 2014. Low intensity 
radiofrequency radiation: a new oxidant for living cells. Oxidants Antioxidant Med. 
Sci. 3, 1–3. 
Yang, S., Lian, G., 2020. ROS and diseases: role in metabolism and energy supply. Mol. 
Cell. Biochem. 467, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11010-019-03667-9 . 
Zhao, T.-Y., Zou, S.-P., Knapp, P.E., 2007. Exposure to cell phone radiation up-regulates 
apoptosis genes in primary cultures of neurons and astrocytes. Neurosci. Lett. 412, 
34–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2006.09.092 . P. Ben Ishai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Paul  Ben Ishai PhD
LD 697
Testimony on “Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect 
Populations and the Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children”  from 
Dr. Paul Ben Ishai,  Senior Lecturer with the Department of Physics, Ariel University, Ariel, 
Israel, and the Head of the Laboratory of Terahertz Dielectric Spectroscopy.  
Please see a few of my attached research studies as well as my op-ed below published
in a Montgomery County Maryland newspaper when the community was considering 
the issue of 5G. 
What are the health implications to residents?
Long term exposure to low intensity electromagnetic radiation originating from cellphones and
their infrastructure is recognized as having a detrimental impact on health.  These impacts 
can take place at the level of cells and sub-cellular structures, including mitochondrial 
processes critical to cellular energy and metabolism.  On the microscopic cellular level 
harmful effects on both the structures and functions of cells have been demonstrated to arise 
from mobile phone radiation; these include effects on protein expression, transcription and 
stability mediated by the MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) cascades, enzyme activity,
ovarian follicle development and increased reactive oxygen species in stem cells. These 
studies are representative of a large body of work - more than 3000 studies according to EMF
Portal and the ORSAA) database of studies demonstrating non-thermal effects at the cellular 
level.  Another noted pathway to cellular damage has been the effect of mobile EMF 
exposure on cell metabolism and membranes termed Voltage-Gated Calcium Channels 
(VGCC).  VGCCs are a class of membrane proteins responsible for the transport of calcium 
and other ions into and out of the cellular interior. One of the roles played by these ions is the 
control of reactive oxygen species (ROS).  ROS can lead to the production of free radicals 
that have the capacity to damage DNA and to destroy essential cellular components.  Further,
ROS have been identified as important precursors or early biological markers for a number of 
chronic neurological and other diseases as well as indicators of harmful effects on 
reproduction.
On the tissue  level of the organism (human being), EMF exposure has been linked to 
degradation of the antioxidant defence system. A common argument against the relevance of 
this body of work is that it is mainly in - vitro and therefore not applicable to the “real world” 
situation of mobile phone use, although the “real world” use of cellphones shows that they 
consistently violate allowed exposure levels. However, recent studies of people living in 
proximity to mobile base stations have found evidence for ROS  in their blood, which is 
recognized as a biochemical indicator of stress that has been associated with increased risks 
of cancer and other chronic diseases.  Another important 2015 review of existing studies on 
radio frequency radiation (RFR) effects was published by the National Academy of Sciences 
in the Ukraine, Indiana University, and the University of Campinas in Brazil. Based on 93 out 
of 100 peer-reviewed studies, that paper concluded that low-intensity RFR is an oxidative 
agent for living cells with a high pathological potential. The oxidative stress induced by RFR 
exposure explains a range of RFR health impacts, both cancer and non-cancer illnesses. In 
addition to chronicling illnesses, this study outlines 6 different biological mechanisms that may
explain these RFR effects in the body. To quote this source: “In conclusion, our analysis 
demonstrates that low-intensity radio frequency radiation (RFR) is an expressive oxidative 
agent for living cells with a high pathogenic potential and that the oxidative stress induced by 
RFR exposure should be recognized as one of the primary mechanisms of the biological 
activity of this kind of radiation.” 
Studies have also found that nonthermal cellphone radiation and laptop radiation can damage
human sperm, reducing sperm quantity and quality, impair mitochondrial DNA of sperm, and 
appear to play a role in testicular dysgenesis and erectile dysfunction. We should note, as 
have other commentators, that male infertility clinics in Australia, the United States and India 
regularly advise men having difficulty impregnating their partners to remove all wireless 
devices from their bodies. This advice is consistent with studies showing that current levels of
cell phone radiation can damage mitochondrial DNA of sperm, increase reactive oxygen 
species (ROS), and reduce sperm quantity and quality.
There exist ample proof of detrimental effects to human health in epidemiological studies. I 
list a few here:
 Miller et al. states“recent case-control studies from Sweden and France corroborate findings 
of earlier studies in providing support for making a causal connection between cell phone use 
and brain cancer, as well as acoustic neuroma, also called Vestibular Schwannoma. Hardell 
and Carlberg (2013) concluded that the Bradford Hill criteria for causality have now been 
fulfilled. It is notable that three recent meta-analyses all confirm significant increased risk of 
glioma after 10 or more years of use of cell phones (Bortkiewicz et al., 2017; Prasad et al., 
2017; Yang et al., 2017).”
  Luo et al. also noted the carcinogenicity of cellphone radiation increased the incidence of 
thyroid cancers when genetic susceptibility was taken into account.
The incidence of ROS in in-vivo studies was summarized by Dasdag and Akdag and listed 
over 50 in-vivo studies demonstrating adverse ROS stress as a result of cellphone radiation. 
 In a meta study by Belpomme et al. it was shown that in case -controlled studies there is a 
consistent increased risk (40%) for glioma and acoustic neuroma associated with mobile 
phone use. These results are backed by results from animal studies that show 
co-carcinogenic and tumor promoting effects.  The conclusions are further confirmed by 
studies by Vornoli et al. and Falcioni et al.
T A significant increase in Electromagnetic Hypersensitivity has also been reported by 
Belpomme, based on epidemiological studies.
TA statistically significant increase in heart malignant schwannoma in rats subject to life time 
exposure to 1.8 GHz GSM transmission was reported by Soffritti an Giuliani as well as by the 
National Toxicology Program of the NIH.
Significant DNA damage, caused by exposure to real life exposure to mobile phones 
was found by Panagopoulos.
These studies represent a small portion of the epidemiological studies and in-vivo studies 
documenting substantiated increases in cancer rates that can be attributed to the use of and 
exposure to cellphone radiation at levels similar to those expected under this Zoning 
Ordinance, ZTA 19-07.
 
Why Should Cellphone Providers Not Be Allowed to Override Zoning laws?
The basic goal of a cellphone provider is to make money for its investors, despite 
whatever their publicity may claim.  They have no vested interest in public health.  
Their primary objective is to provide service to their customers for profit. As outlined 
above, the public level  of exposure, especially inside peoples homes will 
dramatically increase, along with an expected detrimental effect on their health.  That 
the residents have no say in the matter is fundamentally undemocratic and a violation 
of their basic right to health.  
ZTA 19-07 will be voted on by the Montgomery County Council on Tuesday the 27th. 
Given the wealth of scientific evidence as listed above, the power to site and install antenna 
in the residential domain cannot be the prerogative of a commercial company only.
Dr. Paul Ben Ishai is a Senior Lecturer with the Department of Physics, Ariel University, Ariel, 
Israel, and the Head of the Laboratory of Terahertz Dielectric Spectroscopy.  
[1] , where Gis the gain in linear scale, Pis the power in Watts and Ris the distance from the 
antenna.
References
[1]        T. Wu, T. S. Rappaport, and C. M. Collins, “Safe for Generations to Come,” IEEE 
Microw Mag, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 65–84, Mar. 2015, doi: 10.1109/MMM.2014.2377587.
[2]        A. M. El-Hajj and T. Naous, “Radiation Analysis in a Gradual 5G Network Deployment 
Strategy,” in 2020 IEEE 3rd 5G World Forum (5GWF), Sep. 2020, pp. 448–453. doi: 
10.1109/5GWF49715.2020.9221314.
[3]        IBN-Team, “Standard of Building Biology Testing Methods SBM – 
buildingbiology.com,” https://buildingbiology.com/. 
https://buildingbiology.com/building-biology-standard/ (accessed Jul. 22, 2021).
[4]        J. Friedman, S. Kraus, Y. Hauptman, Y. Schiff, and R. Seger, “Mechanism of 
short-term ERK activation by electromagnetic fields at mobile phone frequencies,” Biochem. 
J., vol. 405, no. 3, pp. 559–568, Aug. 2007, doi: 10.1042/BJ20061653.
[5]        A. A. Warille et al., “Skeptical approaches concerning the effect of exposure to 
electromagnetic fields on brain hormones and enzyme activities,” J Microsc Ultrastruct, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 177–184, Dec. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.jmau.2017.09.002.
[6]        F. Azimipour, S. Zavareh, and T. Lashkarbolouki, “The Effect of Radiation Emitted by 
Cell Phone on The Gelatinolytic Activity of Matrix Metalloproteinase-2 and -9 of Mouse 
Pre-Antral Follicles during In Vitro Culture,” Cell J, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1–8, Apr. 2020, doi: 
10.22074/cellj.2020.6548.
[7]        M. Durdik et al., “Microwaves from mobile phone induce reactive oxygen species but 
not DNA damage, preleukemic fusion genes and apoptosis in hematopoietic stem/progenitor 
cells,” Sci Rep, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 16182, Nov. 2019, doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-52389-x.
[8]        “ORSAA Database,” OCEANIA RADIOFREQUENCYSCIENTIFIC ADVISORY 
ASSOCIATION (ORSAA). https://www.orsaa.org/orsaa-database.html (accessed May 18, 
2020).
[9]        V. Leach, S. Weller, and M. Redmayne, “A novel database of bio-effects from 
non-ionizing radiation,” Reviews on Environmental Health, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 273–280, Sep. 
2018, doi: 10.1515/reveh-2018-0017.
[10]      M. L. Pall, “Electromagnetic fields act via activation of voltage-gated calcium channels
to produce beneficial or adverse effects,” J. Cell. Mol. Med., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 958–965, Aug. 
2013, doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12088.
[11]      A. Görlach, K. Bertram, S. Hudecova, and O. Krizanova, “Calcium and ROS: A mutual 
interplay,” Redox Biol, vol. 6, pp. 260–271, Dec. 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2015.08.010.
[12]      A. A. Alfadda and R. M. Sallam, “Reactive Oxygen Species in Health and Disease,” 
Journal of Biomedicine and Biotechnology, 2012. 
https://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2012/936486/ (accessed May 06, 2020).
[13]      I. Yakymenko, O. Tsybulin, E. Sidorik, D. Henshel, O. Kyrylenko, and S. Kyrylenko, 
“Oxidative mechanisms of biological activity of low-intensity radiofrequency radiation,” 
Electromagn Biol Med, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 186–202, 2016, doi: 
10.3109/15368378.2015.1043557.
[14]      I. Yakymenko, E. Sidorik, D. Henshel, and S. Kyrylenko, “Low intensity radiofrequency
radiation: a new oxidant for living cells,” Oxidants and Antioxidants in Medical Science, vol. 3, 
no. 1, pp. 1–3, 2014.
[15]      M. Sepehrimanesh and D. L. Davis, “Proteomic impacts of electromagnetic fields on 
the male reproductive system,” Comp Clin Pathol, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 309–313, Mar. 2017, doi:
10.1007/s00580-016-2342-x.
[16]      E. G. K vrak, K. K. Yurt, A. A. Kaplan, I. Alkan, and G. Altun, “Effects of 
electromagnetic fields exposure on the antioxidant defense system,” J Microsc Ultrastruct, 
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 167–176, Dec. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.jmau.2017.07.003.
[17]      O. P. Gandhi, “Microwave Emissions From Cell Phones Exceed Safety Limits in 
Europe and the US When Touching the Body,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 47050–47052, 2019, 
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2906017.
[18]      “OPINION of the French Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health & 
Safety on the possible health effects associated with high specific absorption rate values from
mobile telephones carried close to the body,” ANSES, Opnion 2017-SA-0229, Jul. 2019. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.anses.fr/en/system/files/AP2017SA0229EN.pdf
[19]      Zothansiama, M. Zosangzuali, M. Lalramdinpuii, and G. C. Jagetia, “Impact of 
radiofrequency radiation on DNA damage and antioxidants in peripheral blood lymphocytes of
humans residing in the vicinity of mobile phone base stations,” Electromagn Biol Med, vol. 36,
no. 3, pp. 295–305, 2017, doi: 10.1080/15368378.2017.1350584.
[20]      L. Slesin, “Time to Clean House,” Microwave News, Apr. 07, 2020. 
https://microwavenews.com/news-center/time-clean-house (accessed May 20, 2020).
[21]      N. R. Desai, K. K. Kesari, and A. Agarwal, “Pathophysiology of cell phone radiation: 
oxidative stress and carcinogenesis with focus on male reproductive system,” Reprod Biol 
Endocrinol, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 114, 2009, doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-114.
[22]      A. B. Miller, L. L. Morgan, I. Udasin, and D. L. Davis, “Cancer epidemiology update, 
following the 2011 IARC evaluation of radiofrequency electromagnetic fields (Monograph 
102),” Environmental Research, vol. 167, pp. 673–683, Nov. 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.envres.2018.06.043.
[23]      L. Hardell and M. Carlberg, “Using the Hill viewpoints from 1965 for evaluating 
strengths of evidence of the risk for brain tumors associated with use of mobile and cordless 
phones,” Rev Environ Health, vol. 28, no. 2–3, pp. 97–106, 2013, doi: 
10.1515/reveh-2013-0006.
[24]      A. Bortkiewicz, E. Gadzicka, and W. Szymczak, “Mobile phone use and risk for 
intracranial tumors and salivary gland tumors - A meta-analysis,” Int J Occup Med Environ 
Health, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 27–43, Feb. 2017, doi: 10.13075/ijomeh.1896.00802.
[25]      M. Prasad, P. Kathuria, P. Nair, A. Kumar, and K. Prasad, “Mobile phone use and risk 
of brain tumours: a systematic review of association between study quality, source of funding,
and research outcomes,” Neurol Sci, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 797–810, May 2017, doi: 
10.1007/s10072-017-2850-8.
[26]      M. Yang et al., “Mobile phone use and glioma risk: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis,” PLOS ONE, vol. 12, no. 5, p. e0175136, May 2017, doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0175136.
[27]      J. Luo et al., “Genetic susceptibility may modify the association between cell phone 
use and thyroid cancer: A population-based case-control study in Connecticut,” 
Environmental Research, vol. 182, p. 109013, Mar. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2019.109013.
[28]      S. Dasdag and M. Z. Akdag, “The link between radiofrequencies emitted from wireless
technologies and oxidative stress,” J. Chem. Neuroanat., vol. 75, no. Pt B, pp. 85–93, 2016, 
doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2015.09.001.
[29]      D. Belpomme, L. Hardell, I. Belyaev, E. Burgio, and D. O. Carpenter, “Thermal and 
non-thermal health effects of low intensity non-ionizing radiation: An international 
perspective,” Environmental Pollution, vol. 242, pp. 643–658, Nov. 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.envpol.2018.07.019.
[30]      T. Tillmann et al., “Indication of cocarcinogenic potential of chronic UMTS-modulated 
radiofrequency exposure in an ethylnitrosourea mouse model,” International Journal of 
Radiation Biology, vol. 86, no. 7, pp. 529–541, Jul. 2010, doi: 10.3109/09553001003734501.
[31]      A. Vornoli, L. Falcioni, D. Mandrioli, L. Bua, and F. Belpoggi, “The Contribution of In 
Vivo Mammalian Studies to the Knowledge of Adverse Effects of Radiofrequency Radiation 
on Human Health,” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 
16, no. 18, Art. no. 18, Jan. 2019, doi: 10.3390/ijerph16183379.
[32]      L. Falcioni et al., “Report of final results regarding brain and heart tumors in Sprague-Dawley 
rats exposed from prenatal life until natural death to mobile phone radiofrequency field representative 
of a 1.8 GHz GSM base station environmental emission,” Environmental Research, vol. 165, pp. 
496–503, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2018.01.037.
[33]      M. Soffritti and L. Giuliani, “The carcinogenic potential of non-ionizing radiations: The 
cases of S-50 Hz MF and 1.8 GHz GSM radiofrequency radiation,” Basic & Clinical 
Pharmacology & Toxicology, vol. 125, no. S3, pp. 58–69, 2019, doi: 10.1111/bcpt.13215.
[34]      S. L. Smith‐Roe et al., “Evaluation of the genotoxicity of cell phone radiofrequency radiation 
in male and female rats and mice following subchronic exposure,” Environmental and Molecular 
Mutagenesis, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 276–290, 2020, doi: 10.1002/em.22343.
[35]      D. J. Panagopoulos, “Comparing DNA damage induced by mobile telephony and 
other types of man-made electromagnetic fields,” Mutation Research/Reviews in Mutation 
Research, vol. 781, pp. 53–62, Jul. 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2019.03.003.

