 
Attorney Peter L. Hatem Phone: (207) 885-8822 
200 U.S. Route One, Suite 210 Fax: (866) 702-3993 
Scarborough, Maine 04074-6003 peter@hatemlaw.com 
Admitted in Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts and Florida 
April 11, 2023 
 
Re: LD-697/HP-466  “Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations 
and the Effects of Long- term Exposure on Children.”  
 
To the Maine Legislature’s Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 
I am writing to you concerning LD-697/HP 466, “Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on 
Bird, Bee and Insect Populations and the Effects of Long- term Exposure on Children”, in opposition to the 
resolve. 
The text of the bill directs a study of “so-called 5G wireless technology” without any clear definition of 
what that technology entails.  Other state’s efforts to regulate “5G” have had the unintentional effect of 
entangling the Amateur Radio Service as well. 
Maine recently issued  a joint state legislative resolution recognizing the valuable contributions of the 
state’s approximately 4,500 FCC-licensed amateur (HAM) radio operators and all the contributions they 
routinely make to Maine’s communities and the State as a whole. 
Directing the University of Maine System to investigate the effects of “radio frequency emissions a 
thermal levels and pulsed and modulated radio frequency radiation at nonthermal levels for extended periods of 
time on children in educational setting,” as the bill states, could accidentally include amateur radio within its 
purview, and included in any resulting future legislation. 
The FCC already requires licensed amateur radio operators to conduct RF exposure surveys of their 
HAM radio stations and antenna systems.  Many of the frequencies proposed to be used in “5G” service are 
regulated by the FCC and as such, any state action on such a study would be likely be preempted by the FCC 
regulatory scheme. 
Please keep this in mind and if any related bills or action is taken, please ensure there is an exception for 
the Amateur Radio Service. 
Thank you for your consideration, and for your service to the State of Maine. 
   
 Sincerely,  
  
 Attorney Peter L. Hatem 
 FCC Call Sign: KC1HBM 

