 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent  
University of Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
DATE:   March 7, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                       samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   LD 697, Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect  
  Populations and the Effects of Long -term Exposure on Children  
 
Sen. Lawrence , Rep . Zeigler and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology : I write on behalf of the University of Maine System (UMS) to inform your 
consideration of LD 697, Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect 
Populations and the Effects of Long -term Exposure on Children.  
Our public universities  take seriously their responsibility to serve as a resource to the people of 
Maine, including by provi ding objective, nonpartisan research and analysis  for the Legislature . We 
are appreciative that Rep. Quint and LD 697’s co -sponsors  have recognized the contributions our 
faculty, staff and student experts can uniquely make to inform ing and improv ing public policy and 
human, plant and animal health.  
 
I have spoken with a University of Maine Professor of Ornithology whose research focu ses on how 
animal populations react to our dynamic planet so I can  learn  what a study like the one proposed by 
this Resolve would entail. He confirmed there is limited peer -reviewed scientific research on the 
effects of 5G technology on birds and insects . While bird and insect populations  and migration are 
heavily studie d, researchers most often focus on better understanding known impacts, chief among 
them habitat loss, climate change, and natural or manufactured endocrine disrupters. A 
comprehensive litera ture review could be undertaken by the university, and would likely require a 
modest appropriation to cover the faculty member’s time away from teach ing.  
 
For the university  to undertake a study  of its own  would be a costlier commitment, and research of 
this kind to study  the effects of long -term exposure could not be completed  by December of 2023 , 
especially if it were to include human subjects , which requires approval from formal review boards . 
While the now-R1 UMaine has world -class expertise in a number of subjects that most matter to 
Maine like aging, climate change and sustainability, forestry, marine science, engineering, advanced 
materials, and rural health and education, UMaine does not currently ha ve an eco -toxicologist on 
faculty. However, a  lab study could be approached by observing whether a single species of bird or 
insect can detect signals from 5G and at what ranges. If so, further research would need to examine 
if that detection impacts natur al behaviors in the wild , and how so . 
 
I would note that since 1935, UMaine has been part of a cooperative research unit that includes 
Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Geological 
Survey  and the Wildlife Management Institute  (an organization  established more than a century ago 
by sportsmen  concerned about the dramatic declines of wildlife populations ). This unit jointly 
undertakes research  deemed most relevant to fish and wildlife conservation in northern ecosystems. 
Concerns about 5G and other wireless technology ha ve not risen to the unit’s resea rch priority  areas, 
which include  ecological studies on species of State and Federal interest including native pollinators; 
management and habitat -related studies with special reference to the effects of land and water -use 
practices (e.g., forest harvest, dams) on fish and wildlife; and issues related to the effects of land 
management and forestry on aquatic and wetland systems, and fisheries management . 
 
I hope this information will be helpful to your consideration of LD 697. Please let me know if I can 
provide  additional information prior to your  work session.  
