Sharon Fogarty Trafton
York
LD 697
I testify in support of LD 697, a bill to study the effects of wireless radiation on bees, 
birds and children (change to humans?).  
This bill is a priority because:
1.  Regulations to protect public health and safety are inadequate, outdated & unacceptable 
as per 9th District court. 
2. There is no justification for this massive wireless densification. The build-out of millions of 
new wireless antennas to facilitate 5G is not necessary for national security or public safety. It
will not improve emergency responsiveness; its signals are weak inside structures.
3. The uncontrolled and rapid build-out of new wireless networks will exacerbate existing 
energy, cybersafety, & storm safety issues. 
4. Thousands of studies have already shown biological harm from exposure to radiofrequency
radiation ("wireless radiation") .
 - confirmed by the National Institutes of Health, 
 - admitted into evidence in 9th district court ruling against the CDC.
 - Major insurance companies will not insure wireless companies against personal injury 
claims from exposure to RF radiation. 
- Hundreds of medical and public health officials have provided warnings and guidance.
-Medicare has ICD codes for RF infuced illness.
In short, RF microwave radiation can affect all families at some dosage. 
With This in mind I would change the wording to INCLUDE not only children but 
ADULTS/HUMANS as they may have longer term data available in determining impacts on 
human health. 
5. The current federal law is being used by infrastructure companies to threaten small towns 
and boards into approving proposed wireless facilities that may be against the town 
ordinances causing costly lawsuits. Maine's home rule laws are being threaten and bullied by 
these big business without adequate un-biased research on the impacts of the current 
technology. 
We need a study and its recommendations, to create a bio-safe, fast, reliable, 
cyber-secure communications utility.
The NH Commission Report on 5G and RFR provides a great springboard for 
Maine’s proposed study. We can learn so much from the work of our neighboring 
state. 
