 
Shelley Wright 
Director, CE4ST 
shelleywright.ce4st@gmail.com  
 
 
Respectful safe tech  practices  and wired devices  foster optimal health and focused learning in 
Canadian classrooms. Wired technologies are inclusive , energy efficient and cost efficient. 
It promotes caring, responsible citizens, who respect themselves, others, and the environment.  
 
 
March 11, 2023 
 
 
Subject: LD 697 Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations 
and the Effects of Long-Term Exposure on Children.  
 
 
Dear Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee, 
 
My name is Shelley Wright (B.A., B.Ed.).  I am a retired teacher living in Ontario. I am the Director of a 
National, non-profit organization called Canadian Educators for Safe Technology. I am supporting a 
growing number of students and teachers who are now injured by wireless radiation. My husband, Brian 
Durkin is a Professional Engineer (PEng), my daughter an Environmental Engineer and my son a Website 
App Developer. We have learned that balancing technology and health is essential.  
Concern residents have requested my help. They are concerned about the proliferation of unnecessary 
small 5G antennas they don’t want in their community. The proximity of these antennas on the street, 
outside bedroom windows will expose everyone (including children) to low levels of biologically active 
radiation all day and all night.  
Vulnerable people in the community who are physician diagnosed with electromagnetic sensitivity (like 
me) will not be able to walk down their street or access essential services without being injured by these 
signals. These medically sensitive people do not consent to this unwanted radiation. These signals will 
also impact the public right of way. 
Communities depend on you to provide safe, adequate service for everyone while minimizing 
radiofrequency (RF) exposure.  
Fibre optics to the premises (FTTP) can safely, and sustainably boost internet services to provide 
superior signals without impacting people and wildlife (migratory species, pollinators, etc.) FTTP will 
provide superior service for communities. FTTP protects vulnerable infants, children, pregnant women, 
and medically sensitive people recovering from cancer, or who experienced accidental workplace 
chemical/electrical exposures (firefighters/electrical workers) and those who are sensitive to these 
microwave signals, or who are physician diagnosed with electromagnetically sensitivity. Additional 
wireless signals are convenient but pose health risks. 
 
 
Shelley Wright 
Director, CE4ST 
shelleywright.ce4st@gmail.com  
 
 
Respectful safe tech  practices  and wired devices  foster optimal health and focused learning in 
Canadian classrooms. Wired technologies are inclusive , energy efficient and cost efficient. 
It promotes caring, responsible citizens, who respect themselves, others, and the environment.  
 
I am aware that there are many health-related reasons for erring on the side of caution when it comes 
to exposures to radiofrequency/microwave radiation such as that emitted by the proposed Telus cell 
tower antennas. Among these concerns include evidence that this type of radiation is a cancer 
initiator1,2 as well as a cancer promotor3. However, in this letter I would like to confine most of my 
comments to my own personal experience, namely as someone with Electrosensitivity, also known as 
electromagnetic hypersensitivity (EHS)4, a type of environmentally induced illness5.  
Symptoms can include headaches, difficulty concentrating, memory lapses, disorientation, dizziness, 
vertigo, sleep disturbances (insomnia), nausea, excessive fatigue, tinnitus (ringing in the ears), irregular 
heartbeat/pressure in the chest, skin rashes and thyroid problems6. In the absence of wireless signals 
these symptoms disappear often within a few hours, but sometimes not for days and for those severely 
impacted, for weeks. The signal strength, distance from the wireless source and duration of the wireless 
exposure, have an impact on the severity and longevity of symptoms. 
I have physician diagnosed electromagnetic hypersensitivity (EHS), by the Director of the Environmental 
Clinic at Women’s College Hospital in Toronto7. Crippled by the pervasive use of wireless devices, I have 
become a strong advocate for accessibility in educational and health/medical facilities.  I’ve spoken to 
more than 800 teachers over the last eight years at meetings of the Elementary Teacher’s Federation of 
Ontario (ETFO)  and successfully worked to have motions passed to support teachers and students who 
become sick around wireless signals from cell towers and hubs/access points. I’ve also been a guest 
speaker at Women’s College Hospital at two medical EMF (electromagnetic fields) Symposiums which 
provided medical continuing education (CME) credits for physicians. 
 
 
1 Miller et al. 2018. Cancer epidemiology update, following the 2011 IARC evaluation of radiofrequency 
electromagnetic fields (Monograph 102 ), https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30196934/ 
2 Environmental Health Trust https://ehtrust.org/world-health-organization-scientists-recommend-wireless-be-
upgraded-for-cancer- causing-effects/ 
3 Lerchl et. Al (2015). Tumor promotion by exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields below exposure 
limits for humans.  https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25749340/ 
4 Electromagnetic Hypersensitivity (EHS) is an environmental disability recognized by Ontarians For Disabilities Act 
and our Canadian Human Rights Commission. EHS (Electromagnetic Hypersensitivity) is also recognized under the 
International Code of Diseases (ICD – 10). 
5 Belpomme and Irigaray (2020). Electrohypersensitivity as a Newly Identified and Characterized Neurologic 
Pathological Disorder: How to Diagnose, Treat, and Prevent It.  https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32168876/ 
6 https://phiremedical.org/ 
7 Bray (2020). PRELIMINARY Clinical Practice Guidelines in the Diagnosis and Management of Electromagnetic 
Field Hypersensitivity (EHS)  
https://www.womenscollegehospital.ca/assets/pdf/environmental/Preliminary%20Clinical%20Guidelines%20%20f
or%20EHS.pdf. 
 
Shelley Wright 
Director, CE4ST 
shelleywright.ce4st@gmail.com  
 
 
Respectful safe tech  practices  and wired devices  foster optimal health and focused learning in 
Canadian classrooms. Wired technologies are inclusive , energy efficient and cost efficient. 
It promotes caring, responsible citizens, who respect themselves, others, and the environment.  
 
My husband and I presented our concerns about a proposed cell tower to be located in our park and 
beach area where families go to relax and enjoy the outdoors.  Our Town Council listened to our 
concerns and moved the cell tower to the Water Treatment plant, 3 km away from the most densely 
populated area of our neighbourhood where there were daycares, schools, and our fire hall. Residents 
have also expressed concerns about 5G and want their tax dollars spent on FTTP. 
Our town understood that this cell tower move would support the health and wellness of vulnerable 
(children) and sensitive residents, provide safer technology for all residents, and provide choices for 
residents who wish to live farther away from a cell tower (concerned about property value, etc.).  This 
cell tower location still provided reliable cell phone coverage. 
5G antennas carry 4G signals which have well known, scientifically documented adverse health effects 
low levels. (see below) The proximity and duration of exposure from 5G antennas is particularly 
concerning. Most communities have enough wireless signals to operate devices on main roads 
(highways, etc.) 
Residents need superior, consistent signals to operate a variety of devices inside their homes. FTTP is 
energy efficient, (cheaper to operate) and provides more consistent service giving people options to 
use wireless or wired versions of data transmission. Assessing the medical needs of residents, using 
safer methods of data transmission (FTTP) and creating 1,000 metre setbacks for cell towers in school 
and daycare areas would achieve a number of health, wellness and accessibility goals for your 
community: 
- Reduce potential injury, create accessibility, and reduce costly trial and error (remember asbestos?). 
- Support the Precautionary Principle. There are more than 6,000 studies that indicate pervasive, less 
than 24/7 exposures to electromagnetic signals in the radiofrequency/microwave range can cause 
injury (leukemia, brain tumours, infertility, heart arrhythmia/failure, debilitating migraines, vertigo, 
etc.). Cardiologist, Dr. Sinatra claims these signals can cause heart failure in some children. 
- Reduce health risks of the potential impacts of long term, cumulative exposure for students and 
staff. 
- Likely avoid cluster cancers (500 meters may be even too close to children who are more 
vulnerable).  
- By just doubling the distance from the daycare, the signal strength will be reduced by 4 times! This is 
known as the “ square of the distance ”.  
- Protect children and pregnant staff (unborn children) who are more sensitive to wireless signals 
because these cumulative 24/7 signals penetrate more deeply in their rapidly growing brains.  
According to Devra Davis Ph.D., signals can have a significant impact on the development of thinking 
 
Shelley Wright 
Director, CE4ST 
shelleywright.ce4st@gmail.com  
 
 
Respectful safe tech  practices  and wired devices  foster optimal health and focused learning in 
Canadian classrooms. Wired technologies are inclusive , energy efficient and cost efficient. 
It promotes caring, responsible citizens, who respect themselves, others, and the environment.  
 
and memory cells in the fetal brain (causing “Environmental Autism”, ADHD, etc.). Brain studies 
reveal that radiofrequency exposures can spike glucose levels in the brain leading to ADHD, 
addictive behaviour, or other hormone disruptions which amplify mental health issues8.  (Dr. Davis 
was one of the main scientists responsible for having lead removed from gasoline.) 
- The American Academy of Pediatrics9 , the largest US medical association of pediatricians and 
pediatric specialists state, “ Children are disproportionately affected by environmental exposures, 
including cell phone radiation. The differences in bone density and the amount of fluid in a child’s 
brain compared to an adult’s brain could allow children to absorb greater quantities of RF 
(radiofrequency) energy deeper into their brains than adults.”  
- Support Health Canada guidelines for young children; According to Health Canada “Children are 
more sensitive to environmental agents”  (Health Canada, May 2019).   
- Support the ALARA Principle (As Low As Reasonably Achievable); providing students and staff with 
the signals needed to operate devices efficiently, while minimizing signal strength. (Following the 
Bioinitiative Report10 limits whenever possible.)  
- Support children and staff who are more sensitive to cell tower signals (Electromagnetic 
Hypersensitivity – EHS) and or those who can experience amplified injury; residents living with Lyme 
disease, Autism, MS, Parkinson’s, diabetes, and other neurodegenerative diseases, or others who 
experienced over-exposure to chemical/electrical signals and cannot tolerate additional signals 
which trigger debilitating symptoms. 
- Support children who are healing from cancer (there is evidence that radiofrequency radiation can 
act as a cancer promotor even if it is not the initiator).  
Fibre optics to the premises is less costly to run (sustainable), uses fewer precious metals (mainly glass 
and plastic), and provides consistent signals in weather adverse conditions.  
Migratory birds, and pollinators can also be adversely impacted by 5G antennas carrying 4G and 5G 
signals. Biodiversity is essential for our survival. FTTP will protect all wildlife, flora and fauna. 
Protect Birds, Bees and Trees: Include Anthropogenic Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Radiation 
in Canadian Environmental Protection Act  Amendments. White Paper. (Updated APRIL. 2022) by 
Prevent Cancer Now and Canadians for Safe Technology. 
https://preventcancernow.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/RF-EMRinCEPA-WhitePaper-inclAmendments-
PCNC4ST-UPDATED2022April7.pdf  
 
8 https://ehtrust.org/?s=adhd 
9 https://ehtrust.org/wp-content/uploads/AAP-Recommendations-Fact-Sheet-3.pdf 
10 https://bioinitiative.org/conclusions/ 
 
Shelley Wright 
Director, CE4ST 
shelleywright.ce4st@gmail.com  
 
 
Respectful safe tech  practices  and wired devices  foster optimal health and focused learning in 
Canadian classrooms. Wired technologies are inclusive , energy efficient and cost efficient. 
It promotes caring, responsible citizens, who respect themselves, others, and the environment.  
 
 
Please contact me if you have any questions, or if you would like to share with me your plans to support 
this initiative. I hope the students, parents and this school community can count on your support. 
Sincerely, 
Shelley Wright, B.A., B.Ed. 
shelwright@gmail.com 
 
 
At home where wireless electromagnetic radiation 
levels are low, I am free of symptoms.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Shelley Wright
Canadian Educators for Safe Technology
LD 697
Shelley Wright, Director, National, non-profit organization; Canadian Educators for 
Safe Technology. Please see the attached submission.
