  Date: 3-17-23 To: Maine Members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee:  I am writing in support of Bill 697: Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations and the Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children. I urge you to exercise due diligence to protect the people in your charge. Innumberable people in Pennsylvania, and around the globe, are suffering harm from exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic microwave radiation (RF-EMR), as it is ubiquitous. Most people do not even make the connection. A few examples of harm from RF-EMR from SW Pennsylvania include:  • Rebekah L. – Diagnosed with electromagnetic sensitivity by an MD in SW Pennsylvania. When she is near cell phones, computers, and wireless routers, she experiences severe, neuropathic facial pain, neck pain and fatigue. She has made strict modifications in her life to avoid exposure to electromagnetic devices.  • Mark S.’s daughter started having seizures when a “smart” meter was deployed on the outside of her bedroom wall. When removed, the seizures stopped.  • A meter reader from our electric company reported that his mother has seizures that were under control. When she moved to an apartment building, her seizures were more severe and they were no longer controlled. He said there were multiple “smart” meters on her building.  • Grace Z.’s (an elderly woman) family had several adverse experiences: - Grace and her husband had early cataracts, but were told it would be years until they needed surgery. However, after getting a collector “smart” meter they both needed surgery very quickly. The doctor did not understand why they both progressed with the cataracts so quickly and both needed surgery early.  - Her husband sat in a swing every day which was located by the collector “smart” meter. Her husband died a year after the meter was installed. His doctors reported to Grace that her husband was full of cancer. - Grace suffers with migraines, not sleeping, wakes during the night, feels vibrations going through her body, feels nervous. - Their pets suffer, too. One dog aged fast and died. Another dog is not doing well and is vomiting.   • Lee Ann L.’s family experienced numerous issues when a “smart” meter was deployed on their farm. She mentioned they have an extra piece on their meter which may increase the effects. - Lee Ann’s heart raced, and she would wake up at 4A every day in a sweat. She had many nosebleeds for weeks on end until the “smart” meter was moved off their home. - Her son is on the autism spectrum and is adversely affected as neurological conditions are exacerbated by RF-EMR.  - Spent $6000 to move the meter 50 feet away from the home.  • Rachel C. is a military veteran who developed a chemical sensitivity issue due to her exposure to burn pits during her service. Rachel has learned that people with extreme sensitivities to chemicals, like she has, also have issues with RF-EMR. Rachel filed a formal complaint to the Pennsylvania PUC against her electric utility to stop the deployment of a “smart” meter to avoid further issues, and thankfully she has a stay on her case.  • Michael R. lives in extremely close proximity to a tower which has multiple antennas. He has developed a cancerous lesion under his eye and his hair is falling out. He did not have this problem until the tower went up. 

 • One entire family is experiencing adverse effects: - The son’s seizures have been exacerbated from wireless towers, antennas, and “smart” meters in his neighborhood. He has had three separate epileptic episodes at their local hospital that has four multiple antennas, two single antennas, many other wireless devices, along with “smart” meters. He sits in a hotbed of RF-EMR 24/7 as they now have 14 towers and 57 antennas within a three-mile radius of their property which has exacerbated his seizures in number and also in severity. (The family does not have a “smart” meter on their home presently as there is a stay on their formal complaint before the PA PUC.) - The mother has multiple sclerosis and she is already experiencing extreme fatigue, brain fog, sleep disturbances, changes in her vision, and diabetes symptoms. These symptoms continue to worsen as more cell towers and antennas are deployed around their property.  - The husband has stage four colon cancer. Microwave radiation from wireless has profound biological effects on the body as it is made up of cells. Two such adverse effects are oxidative stress and DNA damage. Due to his having cancer, his cells have the propensity to have abnormal proliferation and this close proximity microwave radiation increases abnormal cell activity in his body.  • There are many more people in Pennsylvania who also have cases before the Pennsylvania PUC against the electric utilities because of the harm from the “smart” meters deployed on their homes. Case after case, doctors and scientists have confirmed that there are some individuals who suffer negative health effects as a result of “smart” meters on their homes. Every single case these Pennsylvanians have brought has been dismissed by the PUC administrative law judges and by the PUC itself. Many of these people are extremely ill and some of the people have needlessly died while waiting a decision from the PUC; or, they died when they were forced to have the “smart” meter reinstalled on their homes.   As time marches on, more and more research is proving biological harm from RF-EMR. One such recent paper, published by Beverly Rubik and Robert R. Brown, September 29, 2021 [1], noted adverse biological effects from exposure to RF-EMR to include: changes in erythrocytes which may contribute to hyper-coagulation; exacerbation of hypoxia; amplification of immune dysfunction (immunosuppression, autoimmunity, and hyperinflammation); increased cellular oxidative stress; production of free radicals which exacerbates vascular injury and organ damage; promotion of pro-inflammatory pathways; and worsened heart arrhythmias and cardiac disorders. (Taken from the Conclusion, p. 10-11.)   Wireless can no longer be considered safe because of the D.C. Circuit Court’s ruling in Environmental Health Trust, et al. v. FCC [2] on August 13, 2021. This decision, in effect, renders the FCC guidelines suspect at best. FCC and industry assurances of safety are also now questionable. There are 26 volumes [3] that record evidence and hundreds of testimonies that the FCC ignored in this case. Massive, overwhelming scientific evidence demonstrates that this microwave radiation is harmful – not only to humans, but to animals and the environment as well.  The American public desperately needs protection from the real and present danger from the adverse biological effects of RF-EMR, which is emitted by wireless technology. The overwhelming scientific evidence of harm should not be ignored. Safeguard people, birds, bees, and insects from the imminent harm of RF-EMR, the emissions of cell towers, antennas, “smart” meters and many other devices that utilize wifi and bluetooth technologies.   It is your duty to protect your constituents, not the telecommunications industry. Please vote in favor of Bill 697.  Respectfully Submitted,  Susan Jennings, Founder SW Pennsylvania for Safe Technology swpast@outlook.com 

[1] Rubik B, Brown RR. Evidence for a connection between coronavirus disease-19 and exposure to radiofrequency radiation from wireless communications including 5G. J Clin Transl Res. 2021 Sep 29;7(5):666-681. PMID: 34778597; PMCID: PMC8580522. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8580522/  [2] Court Judgement, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, Environmental Health Trust, et al. v. FCC, https://www.cadc.uscourts.gov/internet/opinions.nsf/FB976465BF00F8BD85258730004EFDF7/$file/20-1025-1910111.pdf.  [3] 26 Volumes of Evidence of Harm: Childrenshealthdefense.org. 2022. [online] Available at: https://childrenshealthdefense.org/wp-content/uploads/Volume-27.pdf 
Susan Jennings
Mount Pleasant, PA
LD 697
I am writing in support of Bill 697: Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology 
on Bird, Bee and Insect Populations and the Effects of Long-term Exposure on 
Children. 
I want to apologize for submitting my first testimony with "Massachusetts" in the 
body of my document. I was working on another document to submit here which 
included information from Massachusetts. I have attached a corrected copy of my 
testimony.
Thank you!
