Theodora  Scarato
Environmental Health Trust 
LD 697
Maryland State Commission on Children and Environmental Health Protection 
Guidelines to Reduce Wireless Electromagnetic Radiation Exposure  
Maryland State Children’s Environmental Health and Protection Advisory Council Releases 
Factsheet on How to Reduce Children’s Exposure to Wireless at Home. 
The Maryland State Children’s Environmental Health and Protection Advisory Council 
(CEHPAC) has released an informational factsheet on how to reduce children’s wireless 
exposures entitled “Guidelines to Reduce Electromagnetic Field Radiation”. 
CEHPAC is a state expert body made up of top environmental health experts including 
Governor appointed doctors and public health experts as well as Maryland State 
House/Senate appointees and representatives of the Department of Education, Department 
of Health, Secretary of Housing & Community Development,  Secretary of Human Services, 
State Superintendent of Schools. The Council identifies environmental health issues for 
children and seeks to protect children in Maryland from exposure to environmental hazards. It
also advises the General Assembly on legislation and recommends uniform guidelines for 
State agencies to help reduce and eliminate children’s exposure to environmental hazards. 
The Council reviews rules, regulations, and standards to ensure that the health of children in 
Maryland is adequately protected. Information also is disseminated by the Council on how to 
reduce, treat, and eliminate children’s exposures to hazardous substances and alert the 
public to potential toxicants which may affect children. (CEHPAC website)
The new electromagnetic radiation factsheet includes recommendations by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics who has long called on the United States government to strengthen 
wireless exposure regulations to protect children and pregnant women.
“If you plan to watch a movie on your device, first download it, then switch to airplane mode 
while you watch in order to avoid unnecessary radiation exposure,” recommends the 
American Academy of Pediatrics. 
DOWNLOAD: Guidelines to Reduce Electromagnetic Field Radiation. 
“We applaud the Council in issuing practical advice for parents on ways to reduce wireless 
exposures. Children deserve safe technology and a healthy environment. Every state should 
have an expert Council like Maryland solely focused on protecting children’s future,” stated 
Theodora Scarato  MSW, executive director of the scientific think tank Environmental Health 
Trust, who first brought the issue to the Council’s attention in 2014 and has played a pivotal 
role in supporting the educational efforts of the Council on wireless radiation for years. 
The new factsheet reviews how to reduce radiation exposure from cell phones, laptops and 
other home technology. The sheet has a section on steps to reduce wireless radiation at night
and explains when phones and devices go to higher power, emitting more RF radiation.
A few years prior, in 2017, the Maryland State Advisory Council issued a Report on Wi-Fi in 
school advising the Department of Education to recommend local school districts reduce 
classroom wireless radiation exposures by providing wired—rather than wireless—internet 
connections. Several countries, such as France, Israel and Cyprus, already have protective 
measures minimizing school wireless radiation exposures as national policy. CEHPAC also 
has written to the FCC requesting they update their human exposure limits. 
