Myth Fact on Statements Made to New Hampshire Legislature and New York City
Community Boards
Working Draft April 16, 2022
The State of New Hampshire is considering a proposed bill that would set a 1640-foot setback
between cell towers and homes, schools and nurseries.
The CTIA Wireless Industry sent New Hampshire lawmakers
testimony for the bill
which we
believe to be riddled with inaccurate and misleading information.  In addition, Josiah Bartlett
also included numerous myths in a
blog post about
New Hampshire cell tower legislation
.
This document compiles the inaccurate statements put forth by the CTIA wireless industry and
documents the facts in a comprehensive detailed list with links to sources. The New Hampshire
Commission 5G Report also covers a significant amount of these facts. Please see
New
Hampshire State Commission 5G Report
. In the interest
of time everything is sourced with
hyperlinks. Please view this online to see references.
MYTHS
Click on the underlined myth to go to the section.
List of Myths
Myth: There is a scientific consensus for 5G, cell tower and wireless safety.
GOVERNMENT AGENCIES
1.
Myth: The scientific consensus of U.S. federal health and safety agencies is that wireless
networks and base stations compliant with the FCC's exposure levels are safe.
2.
Myth: The National Cancer Institute has determined that cell towers, 5G and cell phone
radiation is safe.
3.
Myth: The American Cancer Society  (ACS) has determined that cell towers and cell
phones are safe.
4.
Myth: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has concluded 5G, cell
towers and cell phones are safe.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

5.
Myth: The Environmental Protection Agency has evaluated the science and deemed 5G
and wireless networks as safe.
6.
Myth: The Food And Drug Administration (FDA) has reviewed the science on 5G and cell
towers and determined the radiation is safe and FCC limits protect public health
.
7.
Myth: The World Health Organization webpages confirm there are no health effects for
cell towers or cell phones
RADIATION EXPOSURES
1.
Myth: 5G will not increase RF radiation levels in your neighborhood because the power
levels of 5G antennas are much much lower than large tall cell towers.
SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE
1.
Myth: There is no scientific evidence that 5G, cell towers or cell phones are harmful to
health.
2.
Myth: The majority of studies on RF show no harm. The WHO found only 5% of 25,000
studies showed harmful effects but that is the false positive rate.
3.
Myth: Wireless radiation is not a carcinogen. The classification by the WHO International
Agency for Research in Cancer of wireless radio frequency as a Class 2B “Possible
Carcinogen” simply means wireless radiation like talcum powder or picked vegetables.
4.
Myth: There is no cumulative health or biological effect from cell tower or radiofrequency
radiation.
5.
Myth: An Australian study found “no confirmed evidence that low-level RF fields above
6 GHz such as those used by the 5 G network are hazardous to human health,” so 5G is
safe.
6.
Myth: Reports suggesting harmful effects of RF to non-humans, including birds, honey
bees, and other insects have been largely discredited.
FCC LIMITS
●
Myth: The FCC has “been reviewed repeatedly over the years” and repeatedly found its
limits are safe.
●
Myth: Federal government safety standards have such wide safety margins that they
protect everyone, including children.
●
Myth: FCC limits have a large safety margin- a 50 times safety factor.
●
Myth: Professor Swanson’s brain, the sun and his hot water bottle violate FCC limits.
●
Myth: FCC limits for cell tower radiation emissions are very strict and as Professor
Swanson states, “protect us very well.”
●
Myth: The FCC “has commanded” local and state governments to streamline 5G small
cells in front of homes and there is nothing we can do.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Myth:
There is a scientific consensus for 5G, cell
tower and wireless safety.
Myth:
There is a scientific consensus that there are
no known adverse health risks from 5G and
wireless networks. The scientific consensus is that wireless networks are safe.
Example of the Myth Asserted by the CTIA Wireless Industry to New Hampshire
lawmakers:
“The consensus of the US and international scientific community is that there are no
known adverse health risks from the levels of RF energy emitted at the frequencies used
by wireless devices (including cell phones) and facilities (including small cells).”
LINK
Fact:
There is not a scientific consensus for safety.
There are thousands of scientists, doctors
and medical professionals cautioning that wireless technology can cause harm. Numerous
expert reports recommend more accountability by governments to protect the public. Hundreds
of researchers who have published research in the field of bioelectromagnetics are calling for
urgent policy action due to the mounting scientific evidence confirming adverse effects.
●
255 scientists who have published in the field
signed
the
EMF Scientists Appeal
which states “numerous recent scientific publications have shown that EMF affects living
organisms at levels well below most international and national guidelines. Effects include
increased cancer risk, cellular stress, increase in harmful free radicals, genetic damages,
structural and functional changes of the reproductive system, learning and memory
deficits, neurological disorders, and negative impacts on general well-being in humans.
Damage goes well beyond the human race, as there is growing evidence of harmful
effects to both plant and animal life.”
●
419 scientists and doctors
have signed the
European
Union 5G Appeal
which states,
“5G will substantially increase exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields
(RF-EMF) on top of the 2G, 3G, 4G, Wi-Fi, etc. for telecommunications already in place.
RF-EMF has been proven to be harmful for humans and the environment.”
●
Over 3,500 medical doctors
signed onto a 2020 Consensus
statement that wireless RF
has been proven to damage biological systems at intensities below government limits
(
See signatures here
,
PDF of Consensus Statement
).
●
Examples of Numerous Appeals by Medical Professionals:
International Society of
Doctors for Environment
,
Cyprus Medical Association,
the Vienna Austrian Medical
Chamber and the Cyprus National Committee on Environment and Children’s Health
,
Belgium Doctors Appeal,
Canadian Doctors,
Cyprus Medical
Association
,
Physicians of
Turin, Italy,
the German Doctors Appea
l,
International
Appeal to Stop 5G on Earth and
Space
,
Letter to President Trump
,
Letter to President
Biden
and
Chilean Doctors.
There have been appeals and position statements for decades.
Read a full list here.
●
Numerous expert reports conclude that safety is not assured.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

○
The
New Hampshire State Commission 5G Report
has 15 recommendations to
protect the public
○
The Pittsburgh Law Review:
The FCC Keeps Letting Me
Be: Why
Radiofrequency Radiation Standards Have Failed to Keep Up With Technology
explains how the FCC and FDA have failed to develop adequate safety limits.
○
The Harvard Press Book “
Captured Agency: How the Federal
Communications
Commission is Dominated by the Industries it Presumably Regulates
”  details
how wireless companies are using the Big Tobacco playbook and how the FCC is
a captured agency.
Fact: Groups often referenced as “authorities” that downplay health risks or say that
health risks are “not established” are often small with documented conflicts of interest.
●
The International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) for
example, is an under 13 member private group
with
documented conflicts of interest.
Many ICNIRP members have a long history in wireless industry ties. The Journal of
Cancer Science and Clinical Therapeutics published
Aspects on the International
Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) 2020 Guidelines on
Radiofrequency Radiation
” and a report commissioned
by two European Parliament
Members published in June 2020 entitled “
The International
Commission on
Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection: Conflicts of Interest, Corporate Capture and the Push
for 5G
” which documents these conflicts.
●
The IEEE’s
International Committee on Electromagnetic
Safety ICES TC95,
which
develops safety limits and is referred to as supporting and being used in the FCC’s
human exposure “safety” limits has long been led by industry tied engineer. For example,
the Chair has long been CK Chou- longtime Motorola Chief EME Scientist, the Director
of Corporate EME Research Laboratory, responsible for RF product safety, now retired.
(
See ICES leadership here
). Meetings are sometimes
held at
Motorola headquarters
.
○
In 2016 ICES TC95 Chairman CK Chou gave a presentation at the Mobile
Manufacturers Forum sponsored
IEEE ICES Exposure Limits
Above 6 GHz
. “No
adverse effects have been established from low-level exposures despite 50 years
of research…The committee is unaware of any more recent studies that would
change the conclusions reached in the 2005 version of the standard (June
2011).” (despite the NTP results.) “The development of this standard is based on
protection against...established adverse health effects:”
○
You also can watch
a 2017 presentation by CK Chou
here
to see what Chou
presents.
●
WHO EMF Project Director confirms there is no consensus
:
According to Dr. Emilie
van Deventer, Head of the World Health Organization’s EMF Project as quoted in
The
Daily Princetonian in 2015,
“The data is gray. It’s
not black and white...There is no
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

consensus, it’s true.”  (Note, the WHO EMF project is different from the WHO
International Agency for Research on Cancer and the EMF Project is also
documented
to have transparency issues and numerous conflicts of interest.)
Additional Documentation
●
“Appeals that matter or not on a moratorium on the deployment of the fifth generation,
5G, for microwave radiation”
published in Clinical
and Molecular Oncology documents
the numerous appeals by independent scientists and states,
“It is striking that 5G is
deployed without previous scientific evaluation of health risks. Not only cancer risks, but
also other health effects such as fertility, cognitive and neurobehavioral effects, oxidative
stress and electromagnetic hypersensitivity (EHS) have been associated with RF
exposure.”
Fact: Numerous countries have taken steps to reduce cell phone, wireless and cell tower
radiation exposure to the public. If there were a scientific consensus for safety why
would these countries have such policies?
1.
Countries that have set RF exposure limits and regulatory schemes for cell tower
networks far more stringent than the FCC and ICNIRP  include China, Russia,
Canada, Israel, Turkey , Bulgaria, Brussels Belgium, Chile, Belarus, Serbia,
Slovenia, Croatia, Montenegro, Italy , Switzerland, Greece, India, Liechtenstein,
Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,  Ukraine, Kuwait, Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg, Bosnia Herzegovina, Georgia, Uzbekistan, Republic of Moldova,
Iraq,
(
ITU-D Study Group 2, 2017
;
Madjar , 2016
;
Redmayne,
2016
;
Repacholi et
al., 2012
,
GSMA  Website
)
.
2.
Over a dozen public health bodies of various governments have issued
recommendations on their websites or educational materials and brochures that
the public and/or children should reduce exposure to their brain by keeping the
phone away from their head. The recommendations
do
not say
“if you are
worried” but instead they clearly recommend reducing exposure. (A  full list with
direct links to sources can be found at Environmental Health Trust (
EHT, 2021
).
Examples include:
○
Belgium: “Experts – including those on the Superior Health Council –
advise everyone to limit their exposure to mobile phone radiation states
the
Health Food Environment Agency of Belgium
(
Belgian
Federal
Government, 2016
)
○
Ireland: “Advice from the Chief Medical Of ficer on mobile phone use: W e
may not truly understand the health ef fects of mobile phones for many
years. However , research does show that using mobile phones af fects
brain activity . There is general consensus that children are more
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

vulnerable to radiation from mobile phones than adults. Therefore the
sensible thing to do is to adopt a precautionary approach rather than wait
to have the risks confirmed.In the light of these findings, the Chief Medical
Officer of the Department of Health and Children strongly advises that
children and young people who do use mobile phones, should be
encouraged to use mobile phones for “essential purposes only
(
Government of Ireland Department of Health, 2019
).
●
U.S. Public health authorities have issued recommendations.
○
The California Department of Health released an advisory on how to
reduce cell phone radiation stating,  "Parents should consider reducing the
time their children use cell phones and encourage them to turn the
devices of f at night” (
California Department of Public
Health, 2021
) and
(
California Department of Public Health, 2017
).
○
The Connecticut Department of Public Health states it is “wise” to reduce
RFR to one’ s brain (
Connecticut Department of Public
Health, 2015
). The
North Carolina Public Health Department’ s Occupational health
Department lists the full cancer findings of the NTP  study , the FDA  stance
and also the American Academy of Pediatrics recommendations to reduce
cell phone radiation stating “there is some concern that exposure to
non-ionizing radiation, also called radio frequency radiation, that is emitted
by cell phones may result in an increased risk of cancer or other health
effects” (
North Carolina Department of Health and
Human Services,
2020
).
○
The Maryland State Children’ s Environmental Health And Protection
Advisory Council, whose 19 member Commission includes experts in
public health issued a report recommending reducing RFR to children in
schools (
Environmental Health Trust Posted Friday ,
2017
).
●
Several countries have laws in place to reduce exposure, in addition to their
public health campaigns. For example, France, Belgium, and French Polynesia
have bans on mobile phone ads targeted to children and bans on the sale of
phones designed for children. Several countries limit Wi-Fi RFR in classrooms
including France, Israel, French Polynesia and Cyprus (
Environmental Health
Trust, n.d.
).
●
A 2019 French government Order of the
Minister for
Solidarity and Health and
the Minister for the Economy and Finance,
stated consumers
should be informed
that they should use speakerphone to keep the phone away from their head, limit
frequency and duration of cell phone calls for children and phones have
instructions that state “keep away from the belly of pregnant women, Keep away
from the lower abdomen of adolescents” (
Order of 15
November 2019 Relating to
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

the Display of the Specific Absorption Rate of Radio Equipment and to Consumer
Information, 2019
). Several other countries have laws
and orders in place to
inform consumers about the RFR from the device and educate the public to
reduce exposure.
Myth: 5G will not increase RF radiation levels in your neighborhood
because the power levels of 5G antennas are much much lower than large
tall cell towers.
Myth in CTIA Statement to New Hampshire Legislatures
“Furthermore, a recent study demonstrated that 5G antenna densification does not increase the
level of exposure” in contrast to a very popular belief. On the contrary, antenna densification
does not change the exposure levels for the majority of the population, while, at base station
proximity, a huge radiation decrease is experienced when more base stations are deployed in
the same territory.” (Footnote goes to
Chiaraviglio
2021
)
Professor Swanson asserted that 5G would result in lower exposure, “There is less immediate
exposure when you make it low power…” and “they are very low power to all of our benefit
Typically a block apart, again typically they are very low power, to our benefit, higher more
reliable communication and less exposure.” (
Listen
to Professor Swanson state 5G will lower
exposure
.)
Fact
:  It is a fact that ambient environmental RF
levels will increase from the densification of
small cell wireless facilities. 5G deployment goes hand in hand with the proliferation of small
cell antennas and, in addition, more macro (tall) cell towers.  5G relies on 4G as its
backbone so the current built companies are engaged in includes 5G
and
4G. The antennas
emit low, mid and high band frequencies.
Fact:
Studies have shown an increase in RF in neighborhoods
where dense small cell
networks are deployed. The fact is that the closer you are to an antenna, the higher the RF.
For people in close vicinity to a cell antenna, the RF levels will go up. The wireless industry
statements that a small cell emits less than a large cell tower is technically correct but a
misleading half truth. A person living in a neighborhood where small cell networks are
deployed will likely have an increased ambient exposure, compared to their exposure
before the small cell deployment. The person living with the cell antenna in front of their
home will have a mich higher exposure.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Even though each individual “small” cell has less power than a macro tower, remember that
there will be thousands of new 5G and 4G antennas, each increasing RF, in the vicinity of
the new towers. Some communities will have several carriers and wireless facilities
on each
block
.
A
2021 report
by the French government on 5G analyzing
more than 3,000 measurements
found that RF levels had not significantly increased yet but this was due to the lack of 5G traffic.
So they did additional measurements specific to 5G in the 3500 MHz band  with artificially
generated traffic and concluded, “initial results suggest an eventual increase of about 20% in
overall exposure.”
Additional research clearly documents the increase in environmental RF to people in close
proximity to antennas.
●
A
2018 study
published in Annals of Telecommunications
found small cell LTE networks
in two European urban cities increased the radio emissions from base stations - ambient
exposures- by a factor of 7–46.
●
A
2020 paper
“Radiation Analysis in a Gradual 5G Network
Deployment Strategy,”
presented at the IEEE 3rd 5G World Forum documents how engineers found significant
increases in  RF levels if a mmWave-based 5G network was fully deployed in Austin
Texas.
●
A
study
published in Environmental Research created
heat maps of RF from the
proliferation of cell antennas mounted close to the ground on buildings and poles and
the researchers found increasing RF levels.
●
Countries that monitor RF (unlike the US) have found increases from 5G. For example,
in Australia the
telecom companies report
RF levels
with the proposals of new networks.
Examples include
6.44% to 14.22%
,
1.67% to 3.39%
and
11% to .42%
of the limit. A
Russell Street Melbourne 5G
network increased the
level from .09% to .75% of the limit.
The CTIA letter references research that does demonstrate how people closer to 5G
antennas
will have higher RFR, compared to those further
away of the the 5G antenna. The
reference does not consider 5G networks in the context of real world exposure.
CTIA cites as a reference for the conclusion that
5G antenna densification “does not increase
the level of exposure” the study
Chiaraviglio 2021
which states, “Finally, specific groups of
people may still receive a higher amount of exposure from a dense 5G deployment with
respect to a sparse one. For example, cell phone providers may install small cells on utility
poles close to buildings, and therefore, people working/living in close proximity to the small
cells may receive exposure levels that e
xceed those
from macrocells.”  Although the
researchers state that “beyond the compliance distance (e.g., around a meter from a small cell)
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

will be far below accepted safety limits,” the reality is that safety limits have not been set to
protect against cancer, DNA damage or oxidative stress. Government safety limits are not
scientifically substantiated with an up to date science review.  Importantly, what protections are
in place for people close to the cell antennas.
Importantly, 5G networks will not exist on their own. As the paper describes, 5G networks will
exist in addition to 4G networks, with an untold ever increasing amount of of new wireless
devices and networks. The paper states, “In addition, any commercial 5G dense deployment
has to coexist with base stations implementing other technologies (e.g., 4G)—which may be
colocated or not over the same sites hosting 5G base stations—and base stations owned by
other operators simultaneously covering the same area. In this case, the composite exposure
resulting from all the base stations in the territory has to be always ensured below the maximum
limits enforced by laws.” Macro towers with networks using lower frequencies will co-exist with
new 5G networks for the time being. Thus there will be an exposure to a person that is a
combination of all these networks- a composite exposure-  not just exposure from the new 5G
network.
B
ecause 5G mm-Wave band networks have not
been widely deployed, more
measurement studies and trials are needed to quantify the actual exposures from deployment.
The critical question is - to  what degree does the densification of 5G and
wireless networks in
a neighborhood impact real world exposure? Only measuring 5G without looking at real
world scenarios is not adequate.
These 5G networks
will be situated among the real world
with trees and other obstructions which can impact the signal for higher frequencies. In turn
the power of the device will increase.
The reference provided by the CTIA does not ensure that a persons composite RF
exposure will decrease with 5G. There are numerous real world variables that can only be
evaluated in the actual world with proper
before and
after
measurements. The reality is
that current research shows that exposures are increasing.   As described earlier in this
document, when small cell networks are densified, the real world exposure measurements
show an increase in ambient environmental exposures in the community.
This is why there is a need for companies to prioritize and promote safer wired technologies
whenever possible in order to decrease the need to add more and more wireless networks.
Fact:
Companies themselves state that new
4G
and
5G
network antennas will
increase
the
wireless radiation levels in the area so much that they are working to loosen several
governments’ radiation limits in order to roll it out. They claim they can't build out new networks
unless the government changes the law to allow more RF.
If 5G and 4G did not increase RF levels in neighborhoods, then why would industry pressure
governments to change their laws to allow more RF in order to deploy 4G and 5G?
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Why does industry state that it is harder to rollout 4G and 5G in countries with strict RF limits?
●
The ITU Report “
The impact of RF-EMF exposure limits
stricter than the ICNIRP or IEEE
guidelines on 4G and 5G mobile network deployment
”
reviews how 5G deployment is
“constrained” by these countries’ limits.
●
The
GSMA report
discusses how strict exposure limits
are problematic for 4G LTE.
●
A powerpoint presentation by Ericsson  “
Impact of
EMF limits on 5G network roll-out”
that states the 5G rollout is “a major problem or impossible” due to some countries'
precautionary RF limits.
●
Industry lobbied
Poland,
Lithuania,
I
taly,
Switzerland
and
Brussels Belgium
to weaken
their regulations  in order to allow more radiation for 5G. In 2020,
industry succeeded
in
Lithuania and Poland.
Italy
and
Switzerland
voted
no. Brussels Belgium loosened their
limits but they are still more stringent than ICNIRP. The
maximum limit in Brussels
Belgium
will increase to 14.5 volts per meter, from
the 6 V/m.  Now industry has its eyes
on
Russia
, which along with several countries such
as China and India  has RF limits
much stricter lower than the USA.
Myth by Peter Valberg,
a scientist also supported
by tobacco companies, “with each new
generation transmission strengths have declined and with it radio frequency exposures.”
Myth: The scientific consensus of U.S. federal health and safety agencies
is that wireless networks and base stations compliant with the FCC's
exposure levels are safe.
Example of the Myth Asserted by the CTIA Wireless Industry to New Hampshire
Lawmakers in
CTIA Testimony
“The scientific consensus as evaluated by expert international standard setting bodies, and
federal health and safety agencies is that wireless devices and base stations at the FCC's
exposure levels are safe.”
The wireless industry promotes the myth that FCC limits are based on a science based up to
date review by numerous federal agencies and authoritative entities- despite the fact that in
reality none of them have done an up to date research review on the totality of the science.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

As another example,
AT &T has a “Small Cells and 5G: What People are Saying
” factsheet that
states, “
the FCC’s RF exposure limits are based on
research and recommendations from
leading public and private experts. Specifically, the FCC consults with experts from the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA), the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP), the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Inc. (IEEE).”
Fact
: Federal regulatory agencies with health and
safety expertise have NOT evaluated the
totality of up to date science to make any such determination. If anyone believes our federal
agencies have performed an evaluation of FCC limits and the scientific evidence, please ask
them to locate the research review or report that supports this conclusion.
Such a report simply
does not exist.
Fact:
The
Centers for Disease Control
,
National Cancer
Institute
,
American Cancer Society
,
Food And Drug Administration
, the National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health, the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and
Environmental Protection Agency
have not
evaluated the latest science on 5G or cell tower exposures to issue a safety determination.
Their website pages provide no substantiated proof of safety and some were drafted with
industry consultants. No US regulatory agency with health or environmental expertise has
completed a risk analysis or systematic review based on the latest evidence.
Click on the name for full documentation of the lack of scientific review by the federal agency or
organization.
●
Centers for Disease Control
●
National Cancer Institute
●
American Cancer Society
●
The CDC National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
●
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration
●
The National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP)
●
The American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
●
T
he Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
Inc. (IEEE)
●
The Food And Drug Administration
●
The Environmental Protection Agency
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Myth:
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE)
has
determined that cell towers, 5G and cell phone radiation is safe.
Fact: As discussed in numerous area of this report, the IEEE limits were created by industry tied
engineers, not medical or public health doctors. They issue a paper on safety thresholds that
they have determined,
but they have not published
a systematic review of the research.
They have not looked at the totality of the science. Their safety thresholds are not based on an
independent systematic review.
See research published in IEEE documenting the disproportionate RF exposures in children as
well as excessive RF exposures from phones in body contact.
●
O. P. Gandhi, "
Yes the Children Are More Exposed to
Radiofrequency Energy From
Mobile Telephones Than Adults,"
in IEEE Access on
childrens higher RF exposure
proportionate to adults.
●
C. E. Fernández-Rodríguez, A. A. A. De Salles and D. L. Davis,
"Dosimetric Simulations
of Brain Absorption of Mobile Phone Radiation–The Relationship Between psSAR and
Age,"
in IEEE Access regarding RF exposure to children
from cell phones and cell
phones n virtual reality positions.
●
Mohammed B, Jin J, Abbosh A, Bialkowski K, Manoufali M, Crozier S.
Evaluation of
children exposure to electromagnetic fields of mobile phones using age-specific head
models with age-dependent dielectric properties.
IEEE
Access on young childrens high
exposures proportionate to adults.
●
Gandhi, O. P. (2019).
Microwave Emissions From Cell
Phones Exceed Safety Limits in
Europe and the US When Touching the Body
published
in IEEE Access that finds
phones exceed limits in body contact positions and can violate FCC limits up to 11 times.
Documentation on industry tied leadership of IEEE TC95 Committee
●
The IEEE’s
International Committee on Electromagnetic
Safety ICES TC95,
human
exposure “safety” limits has long been led by an industry tied engineer CK Chou-
longtime Motorola Chief EME Scientist, the Director of Corporate EME Research
Laboratory, responsible for RF product safety, now retired. (
See ICES leadership here
).
Meetings are sometimes held at
Motorola headquarters
.
●
In 2016 ICES TC95 Chairman CK Chou gave a presentation at the Mobile
Manufacturers Forum sponsored
IEEE ICES Exposure Limits
Above 6 GHz
. “No adverse
effects have been established from low-level exposures despite 50 years of
research…The committee is unaware of any more recent studies that would change the
conclusions reached in the 2005 version of the standard (June 2011).” (despite the NTP
results.) “The development of this standard is based on protection against...established
adverse health effects:”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

●
You also can watch
a 2017 presentation by CK Chou here
.
Myth: The National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements
(NCRP)  has determined that cell towers, 5G and cell phone radiation is
safe.
Fact: The National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP)  has not
released a final report on this issue since its 1986 Report
“Biological effects and exposure
criteria for radiofrequency electromagnetic fields : recommendations of the National Council on
Radiation Protection and Measurements
” which reviewed
research up to 1982. The NCRP has
not issued any review of the recent research.
●
The EPA specifically stated in their April 1993 submission to the FCC on human
exposure limits that the NCRP 1986 Report was outdated, based on research though
1982
and needed to be updated.
“The FCC should consider
requesting that the NCRP
revise it's 1986 report to provide an updated comprehensive review of the biological
effects on RF radiation and recommendations for exposure criteria.” -
EPA 1993 Letter to
the FCC
●
EPA experts specifically stated that the NCRP 1986 Report was not protective of chronic
low level exposures. “As I have previously noted, while there ia sufficient information on
thermal exposure/affects on which to base  a standard, the data on low level, long-term
exposure is insufficient to provide a basis for standards do protect the public against
adverse human health effect  that may result from long-term, nonthermal exposures.
Both the NCRP and ANSI/IEEE standards are thermally based, and do not apply to
chronic, nonthermal exposure situations. The statement referring to “adequate
protection” pertains to thermally related effects.”  -
1996 Letter from Norbert Hankin of the
EPA
●
Note: The NCRP did
draft a report
regarding magnetic
field EMFs concluding a stronger
safety threshold in 1995. That report was leaked to the press but never finalized. No
report has been drafted or issued since. Current leadership at NCRP are primarily
industry tied and industry funded consultants.
Myth: The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) has determined
that cell towers, 5G and cell phone radiation is safe.
Fact: The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) has not made any determinations since
the 80’s.
●
In 1985
the United States government adopted an exposure
limit from the
American National Standards Institute
ANSI C95.1 -1982
Exposure Limit
Standard (1982).
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

●
In 1996 the U.S. government adopted the
IEEE C95.1- 1991 Exposure Limit
Standard
(updated from the 1982 ANSI Standard).
Myth: The Occupational Safety and Health Administration has determined
that cell towers, 5G and cell phone radiation is safe.
Fact: The Occupational Safety and Health Administration has made zero safety determinations
and issued zero scientific reports regarding cell towers, 5G and cell phone radiation.
The Department of Labor OSHA sent a letter to the FCC in 2015 in response to the FCC
request for an opinion on FCC human exposure limits stating they are not evaluation RF for
health effects. The
2015 OSHA letter
states,  “RF
emissions are not on OSHA's active
regulatory agenda, so we have not conduct in a comprehensive literature review a risk
assessment RF hazards. With respect to non thermal health effects, the FCC might also want to
contact the National Toxicology Program of the US Department of Health and Human Services
which is currently conducting toxicology and carcinogenicity animal studies on emissions from
mobile phones.”
OSHA has not had any staff researching the EMF issue for decades. In fact, the online
webpages contain outdated resources and leave open safety questions. The most recent report
referenced on their webpage is the 2011 WHO IARC determination of RF-EMF as a possible
carcinogen.
■
Elements of a Comprehensive RF Protection Program: Role of RF Measurements
. U.S.
Department of Labor (DOL), OSHA  Health Response Team, (April 12, 1995). Outlines the
elements of a comprehensive RF Protection Program and the role of RF measurements in
implementing the program.
Such a proposed program
does not exist at OSHA.
■
The OSHA  radiofrequency radiation health ef fects page as of 2022
states “Electric and
magnetic fields are complex physical agents whose potential health ef fects are the subject of
much research. Particularly controversial are the biophysical mechanisms by which these RF
fields may af fect biological systems. General health ef fects reviews explore possible
carcinogenic, reproductive and neurological ef fects. Health ef fects by exposure source are
noted in radar traf fic devices, wireless communications with cellular phones, radio
transmission, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).” This webpage does not
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Myth: The National Cancer Institute (NCI) has determined that cell towers,
5G and cell phone radiation is safe.
Fact:
The NCI has confirmed that they never systematically
reviewed the science on wireless
radiation to make a determination on cell tower safety or evaluate FCC limits.
Myth Included in Statement by CTIA Wireless Industry to New Hampshire Lawmakers
:
‘The National Cancer Institute agrees that "studies [on the possible association between cell
phone using cancer] are mixed but overall they do not show an association between cell phone
use and cancer.
" (CTIA Footnote goes to
NCI cell phones
and Cancer factsheet
.)
New Hampshire’s Josiah Bartlett also misleadingly references the NC
I in his
blog post
about New Hampshire cell tower legislation
:
“The NCI
says
that cell phone radiofrequency
“energy is too low to damage DNA” and “there are no other clearly established dangerous
health effects on the human body from radiofrequency radiation.”
Most people will read such
statements and assume this means that cell phone and cell tower radiation is proven safe. This
is false.
Fact: There are no scientific reports by the NCI that exist regarding 5G, cell tower or cell phone
safety.   Even if NCI scientists had an official determination (which they do not), the agency is
only focused on cancer, and does not investigate other effects such as brain or reproductive
damage. Thus, even if the NCI did have an opinion, it would not be proof of safety- as research
has shown damage to the
brain
and
fertility
. .
Documentation on the National Cancer Institute’s lack of safety evaluation.
1.
The fact that the NCI has not reviewed the science nor concluded any official position on
safety was confirmed by a letter from New Hampshire 5g Commissioner Denise Ricciardi
to the NCI
asking
,  “What is the NCI opinion on the
safety of cell phones?” On July 30,
2020, the National Cancer Institute
wrote
Ricciari
back that, “As a Federal research
agency, the NCI is not involved in the regulation of radiofrequency telecommunications
infrastructure and devices, nor do we make recommendations for policies related to this
technology…Our sister agencies, the FDA as well as the FCC, retain responsibility for
reviewing guidance on safety concerns and informing the public if those circumstances
change.”
Read the Exchange From New Hampshire 5G Commission
Report.
2.
The NCI did not provide any opinion on the safety of wireless radiation to the FCC during
the 7 year inquiry opened re FCC’s safety limits for wireless radiation. Instead the NCI
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

sent a two paragraph letter to the FCC without mention of any opinion on the state of
science.
Read the NCI Letter to FCC
3.
The NCI wrote to EHT’s Executive Director Theodora Scarato, stating of the NCI that,
“Neither the literature reviews, nor the fact sheets, make safety determinations.” (
Letter
from NCI to Scarato
)
Myth: The American Cancer Society  (ACS) has determined that cell towers
and cell phones are safe.
The CTIA Wireless Industry used the ACS in it’s letter to New Hampshire Lawmakers
:
"Likewise the American Cancer Society explained that "the RF waves given off by cell phone
towers don't have enough energy to damage DNA directly or to heat body tissues. Because of
this it's not clear how cell towers might be able to cause cancer." (CTIA then Footnotes to
ACS
Cell Phone Towers Page
Josiah Bartlett also references the NCI in his
blog
post about New Hampshire cell tower
legislation
stating,
“At this time, there’s no strong
evidence that exposure to RF waves from
cell phone towers causes any noticeable health effects,” the American Cancer Society has
concluded
.”
Fact:
The ACS has not reviewed the science on cell
towers or cell phones and their webpages
do not provide science backed safety assurances.
●
In fact, the ACS website
states
very clearly that
ACS does “not have any official position
or statement on whether or not radiofrequency radiation from cell phones, cell phones
towers, or other sources is a cause of cancer.”
●
Furthermore the ACS
says
they “look to other expert
organizations to determine if
something causes cancer “ and the ACS then lists the International Agency for Research
on Cancer (IARC) and the US National Toxicology Program (NTP) both of which
document
science showing links to cancer.
See
IARC
and
NTP
.
●
When the NTP
found
“clear evidence” of cancer from
wireless RFr radiation, the ACS
referred to the study in their
press release
as paradigm
shifting “good science.”
Furthermore the
ACS press release
on the NTP  study:
“The NTP report linking radiofrequency
radiation (RFR) to two types of cancer marks a paradigm shift in our understanding of radiation
and cancer risk. The findings are unexpected; we wouldn’t reasonably expect non-ionizing
radiation to cause these tumors.”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Myth: The Food And Drug Administration (FDA) has reviewed the science
on 5G and cell towers and determined the radiation is safe and FCC limits
protect public health.
Myth:
The FDA’s
website
clearly shows that the FDA
has reviewed the totality of scientific
evidence and found cell phones, 5G and cell towers are safe. After all, the FDA
concluded
in
February of 2020 that “there is no consistent or credible scientific evidence of health problems
caused by the exposure to radio frequency energy emitted by cell phones.
Myth in CTIA Testimony to New Hampshire Lawmakers:
“And the FCC sister agency, the FDA stands in full support of the adequacy of the FCC
standards. The director of the FDA center for Devices and Radiological Health wrote, "based on
our ongoing evaluation of this issue and taking into account all available scientific evidence we
have received, we have not found sufficient evidence that there are adverse health effects in
humans caused by exposures at or under the current radiofrequency energy exposure limits."
Fact
: The FDA has never evaluated the totality of
the science to conclude any opinion on the
safety of human exposure to 5G technology or cell tower radiation.  All the FDA has done is to
release a now outdated literature review (ending in 2018) focused solely only on cell phones
and cancer. This literature review omits studies on damage to DNA, the brain and reproduction.
The FDA literature review is not a systematic review nor is it a risk analysis nor is it an
evaluation of FCC cell tower radiation limits, despite being presented in this way.
Fact
: The FDA has no authority in regards to cell
tower radiation and 5G infrastructure. This
was confirmed in a January 11, 2022 letter by Ellen Flannery of the Director of the FDA Office of
Policy Center for Devices and Radiological Health who wrote that the FDA doesn't regulate cell
towers. When asked about the safety of a cell tower outside a California mother’s window, she
responded,  “The FDA does not regulate cell towers or cell tower radiation.  Therefore, the FDA
has no studies or information on cell towers to provide in response to your questions.”
Link to
FDA Letter.
The FDA stated on June 20, 2016
“We don’t have jurisdiction over cellphone towers since those are environmental emitters.”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

While the public might assume the FDA is always monitoring the science and monitoring
exposures, this is inaccurate. For example, the
2021
FDA’s  Annual report
was released on
January 31, 2022 and there is no mention of the issue of cell phones or cell towers or wireless
electromagnetic radiation. The FDA has not shown any evidence of monitoring research with
new agency reports, meetings or budget on the issue.
A Pittsburgh Law Review
article
on the FDA and it’s
role in ensuring public safety in regards to
wireless radiation entitled,
The FCC Keeps Letting
Me Be: Why Radiofrequency Radiation
Standards Have Failed to Keep Up With Technology
concludes,
“The FCC and FDA have failed
in their obligation to prescribe safe RFR guidelines produced from wireless communication
devices to protect the public health and safety.”
In December 2021, numerous groups
petitioned
the
Department
of Health and Human
Services regarding the issue of radiofrequency radiation exposure requesting it be
declared as an Imminent Hazard to public health because while the RF exposures to
children and vulnerable populations are rapidly increasing, the FDA  has not clarified its
present of ficial safety policy . Scientific studies are documenting biological harm at levels
far below the current 1996 Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exposure
guidelines. The petition documented people harmed by RFR and also the misleading
and inaccurate statements by the FDA  regarding RFR safety that have resulted in the
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

widespread public belief and reliance by federal agencies and state governments,
physicians, and the public that the FDA  is ensuring safety .
In their response, the
FDA denied the petition
, stating
that the section of the law on the
issue of the FDA  and  imminent hazard radiofrequency does not apply to cell phones or
wireless devices.
Additional Documentation
●
The Government Accountability Report on 5G (
GAO 2020
)
clarified that the FDA and
other organizations “only reviewed a subset of the relevant research”  and stated in
regards to the FDA Literature Review that “The assessment focused on cancer-related
animal and human studies of frequencies below 6 GHz.”
●
Not only did the FDA do a limited literature review looking
only at cancer,
but it omitted
impacts to the brain, oxidative stress, and reproduction. It omitted evaluation of
children’s unique vulnerability. Most importantly it discounted the results of the National
Toxicology Program which is why
numerous scientists
- including
several now retired US
government scientists -  are calling for the FDA to retract the review as it offers
unsubstantiated assurance of safety (
EHT 2020
).
●
EHT’s 150 page
report “
FDA's Misleading Information
on Cell Phone Radiation
on
the FDA documents the lack of adequate research review and misleading information
put forward by the FDA.
●
In 2020, the FDA
refused to testify
to the New Hampshire
State Commission on 5G and
refused to answer specific questions regarding it’s purported review of health effects of
5G and wireless networks.  Although the FDA responded with a few general sentences
about how “FDA’s doctors, scientists and engineers continually monitor the scientific
studies and public health data for evidence that radio frequency energy from cell phones
could cause adverse health effects, “the FDA refused to answer specifics such as
providing reports or answering questions about the safety margin, and the FDA’s
research activities.
Read FDA Communications with
the New Hampshire 5G
Commission
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has concluded 5G,
cell towers and cell phones are safe.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Myth:
The
CDC website statements
that “we do not have the science to link health problems to
cell phone use” confirm that cell phones and towers are safe.
Fact:  CDC experts have
not reviewed the latest research
on wireless radiation and the
website pages do not reflect an opinion or determination on safety.
1.
First,and most importantly, there are no scientific reports by the CDC on wireless safety,
nor does the agency have staff with expertise monitoring the science and evaluating risk.
As far as we know they have never undertaken any research review as the CDC has no
authority on the issue.
2.
In fact, due to the lack of CDC scientists with subject matter expertise in wireless, the
agency hired an outside consultant to help draft several CDC webpages. This individual
has longstanding financial ties to industry and consults for cell tower companies. The
pages he helped draft at the CDC omit scientific research that has found health effects
and the text downplays any health risk.
Read the EHT
expose on the CDC industry tied
consultant here.
3.
In 2014, the CDC actually posted cautionary statements that recommended people
reduce cell phone radiation exposure. However, these statements were removed just a
few weeks after they were posted.
Read the New York
Times article
which tells part of
the story as well as the
Microwave News article on
influence to CDC webpage from
wireless industry consultants.
4.
Of note- a now retired top CDC expert now states that the research shows cell phone
radiation likely causes cancer.  Chris Portier PhD, retired CDC Director of the National
Center for Environmental Health and former Director of the Agency for Toxic Substances
and Disease Registry submitted
scientific research
review
in a major cell phone/brain
cancer lawsuit where he concludes that “the evidence on an association between
cellular phone use and the risk of glioma in adults is quite strong.”
Myth: National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has
determined that cell towers, 5G and cell phone radiation is safe.
Fact: The CDC NIOSH has not reviewed the science and does not even have staff with
expertise tasked to review the science. NIOSH has
one webpage
dedicated to the issue of
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

electric and magnetic fields. The
NIOSH webpage
only links to CDC NIOSH reports from 1998
and 1999 because at that time, its staff was focused on the issue. Although there are links to
other agencies, there have been no updates specifically by the CDC NIOSH with systematic
reviews or agency determinations since the late 1990’s.
Further, when there were funded CDC NIOSH staff with EMF expertise on the issue years ago,
they; 1. recommended precaution and 2. reducing exposure to levels more stringent than
current thresholds. NIOSH staff also had co-authored papers finding associations between non
ionizing electromagnetic fields and cancer. No NIOSH reports conclude safety nor are any of
these NIOSH reports research reviews or hazard evaluations.
Documentation
●
Joseph D. Bowman, PhD, of the Engineering and Physical Hazards Branch at the
National Institute for Occupational Safety (NIOSH) presented a
slide show entitled
Precautionary Strategies to Reduce Worker Exposures to Extremely Low Frequency
(ELF) Magnetic Fields, a Possible Carcinogen
in 2016
which recommended reducing
exposure to magnetic field non ionizing electromagnetic fields.
●
Gregory Lotz PhD who is  retired after serving for nine years as the Director of the
Division of Applied Research and Technology at the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH) was co-author to a 2000 published (dated 1999)
“Review of
the Potential Health Risks of Radiofrequency Fields from Wireless Telecommunication
Devices”
for the Canadian government. This report
is over 30 years old.
●
A 1995 NIOSH report on
Occupational Exposure of Police
Officers to Microwave Radiation
From Traffic Radar Devices made “concrete recommendations” to reduce microwave exposure
from radar guns after reports of increased testicular cancer in police officers.
●
See also NIOSH Bowman’s
Managing the Health Risks
from Workplace Electric and
Magnetic Fields (EMF)
presented at the St. Louis ASSE/AIHA
Professional Development
Professional Development Development Conference where Bowman presents hois
published research on risk assessment of cancers from occupational ELF-MF [Bowman
et al. 2012] which found the risk of dying prematurely decreases when magnetic fields
are reduced. Again, he recommends precaution.
●
In a 2012 Meeting
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (OSHA) ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON
CONSTRUCTION SAFETY AND HEALTH (ACCSH) ANNUAL MEETING
Greg Lotz PhD
and Joe Bowman PhD of NIOSH reported that the International Agency for Research on
Cancer, IARC, had recently rated RF and cell phones as group 2B, which is possibly
carcinogenic. There was general agreement from the speakers that construction workers
could experience inadvertent  RF exposures from working around disguised antennas.
Notably Mr. Walter Jones, representative of the Laborers Health and Safety stated, “I do
think that we need to observe the precautionary principle here… and determine exactly
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

what the exposure is, what the rates and what the health effects are from  different types
of exposure are.”
●
NIOSH’s Joseph Bowman was coauthor to the study
Occupational
Exposure to
Extremely Low-Frequency Magnetic Fields and Brain Tumor Risks in the INTEROCC
Study
published in Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers
& Prevention which concluded that
“results showed positive associations between ELF in the recent past and glioma.” and
“Occupational ELF exposure may play a role in the later stages (promotion and
progression) of brain tumorigenesis.”
●
NIOSH’s Bowman was also co-author to
Occupational
exposure to high-frequency
electromagnetic fields and brain tumor risk in the INTEROCC study: An individualized
assessment approach which
concluded that although
“no clear associations were
identified” “the results obtained for recent exposure to RF electric and magnetic fields
are suggestive of a potential role in brain tumor promotion/progression and should be
further investigated.”
●
OSHA presentations are all outdated. (
See Wayback
Machine Website Archive Link for
more.
)
○
See 2001 presentation:
Suggested Update to RF Standards
Related to Wireless
Communications
Robert Curtis OSHA w
hich has slide
stating “Action” Level at FCC or
50% of Maximum.
○
2003
PPT Presentation Introduction to Radiofrequency
Radiation
by Robert
Curtis OSHA which discussed the RF progra and notably also recommended the
“ Implementation of an appropriate medical surveillance program.”
●
Dr. Bowman has sadly passed away, Dr. Lotz is retired and as far as we know, no CDC
NIOSH staff has continued his work on non-ionizing EMFs.
Myth: The Environmental Protection Agency has evaluated the science and
deemed 5G and wireless networks as safe.
Fact: The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has not performed a research review
for over thirty years and is not monitoring or researching the issue.
As the EPA stated to Theodora Scarato in a
2020 letter
,
“EPA’s last review was in the 1984
document
Biological Effects of Radiofrequency Radiation
.
The EPA does not currently have a
funded mandate for radiofrequency matters.”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Fact: The EPA was defunded from researching the issue just as it was poised to develop
RF safety standards for human exposure in 1996.
Thus,
the US does not have federally
developed safety standards based on U.S. agency expert research to determine a safe level.
Instead the US has RF exposure guidelines promulgated by the FCC which set limits in 1996
based on limits
created
by industry dominated/tied
groups.
Fact: The EPA used to measure RF and non-ionizing EMF levels. The last Report was a
1986 Report on Environmental Exposure Levels
. The
FCC also had programs taking RF
measurements from cell antennas but the field offices were shuttered. In sharp contrast to the
USA, many other countries have RF measuring projects with RF radiation levels posted on
public websites including:
France
,
Spain
,
Austria
,
Greece
,
Turkey
,
India
,
Israel
,
Gibraltar,
Brussels Belgium,
Switzerland,
Bulgaria
,
Tunisia,
Malta
,
Brazil
,
Bahrain
,
Monaco
,
French
Polynesia
,
Bhuton
,
Senegal
.
France even has 5G monitoring
stations
.
Some communities are starting to address this lack of accountability. For example, see the
Copake NY code
: Pretesting and post testing by RF
engineer and annual monitoring of RF
emissions by the independent RF engineer using actual field measurements like in Copake New
York. Davis, Burbank and Berkeley also have testing requirements in their ordinances. An RF
engineer performs measurements and the OWNER of the wireless facility pays for this.
Fact: EPA scientists have long tried to address the inadequacies of FCC’s limits.
EPA
expert staff signed onto letters in
1999
and
2003
to the RF limit setting group leadership
requesting answers to identified shortcomings in their recommended human exposure limits.
Fact: In 2019, the EPA website pages on cell phones, cell tower and EMFs
were rewritten
(scrubbed) and now parrot FCC verbiage and link to the FCC as the authority, despite the fact
that the EPA has done no recent research, nor developed any opinion on safety. When the FCC
asked the EPA to comment on the need to update or change FCC’s 1996 limits in their 2013
Inquiry, the EPA responded with a
one paragraph letter
offering no opinion.
Fact:
EPA has confirmed that FCC RF exposure limits
were not created to address health
effects from long term exposure. A
2002 EPA letter
stated, “I believe that it is correct to say that
there is uncertainty about whether or not current guidelines adequately treat nonthermal,
prolonged exposures (exposures that may continue on an intermittent basis for many
years)…Federal health and safety agencies have not yet developed policies concerning
possible risk from long-term, nonthermal exposures. When developing exposure standards for
other physical agents such as toxic substances, health risk uncertainties, with emphasis given
to sensitive populations, are often considered. Incorporating information on exposure scenarios
involving repeated short duration/nonthermal exposures that may continue over very long
periods of time (years), with an exposed population that includes children, the elderly, and
people with various debilitating physical and medical conditions, could be beneficial in
delineating appropriate protective exposure guidelines.”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Brief History
●
Previous to 1996, the EP A conducted robust research on electromagnetic
radiation (
EPA Letter
) and was in development of safety
limits for wireless
radiation.  See
EPA Briefing
, and a
1995
EPA Letter
to the FCC on their near
completion of non ionizing EMF guidelines
clearly
detailing how they were in
development of safety limits which considered thermal and thermal impacts.
However ,
heavy industry lobbying abruptly halted the EP A from standards development.
The same year it passed the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Congress
eliminated EP A’s funding for activities related to RF radiation in an appropriations
bill. Congress specified that “EP A shall not engage in EMF activities.” Thus the
EPA shuttered its research on standards development.
●
1993
EPA Comments to the Federal Communication Commission’s
(FCC’s) proposed
RF/MW radiation limits 93-142 Guidelines For Evaluating the Non Thermal Effects of
Radiofrequency Radiation
includes information asserting
that
certain subgroups are
more at risk (pregnant women, children and the elderly) and calls for an  updated,
comprehensive review that considers the biological effects of RF, specifically pointing to
the need to update the (1986) NCRP Report 86 (Note: NCRP 86 is still the basis for US
regulations according to the FCC  and this report has not been updated to include
biological effects). The
EPA stated
:
“The FCC should not adopt the 1992 ANSI IEEE standard; there are serious
flaws in the standard that call into question whether the proposed use of the 1992
ANSI IEEE is sufficiently protective.”
“It is clear that the adverse effects threshold of 4W /kg is based on acute exposures
(measured in minutes of a few hours) that elevate temperature in laboratory animals
including non-human primates and not on long term, low level (non thermal) exposure.”
Documentation
●
2020 EPA letter to EHT Executive Director Theodora Scarato
.
●
US Exposures Limits: A History of Their Creation
documents
how ANSI and IEEE limits
were developed, despite awareness of biological effects.
●
FCC’s Legal Duties to Inform and Protect the Public by Sharon Buccino Natural
Resources Defense Council Washington, DC
●
1984 letter by the
U.S. Science Advisory Board
that
recommends that the EPA develop
radiation protection guidance to protect the public.
●
1993
EPA Letter
states that “it is clear” that the
U.S. human exposure limits are  based
on short term exposures and not on research considering chronic long term exposures.
●
1996:
EPA Letter that US Limits are only protective
for thermal impacts
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

●
1996:
EPA comments to FCC Docket 93-62
includes recommendations that the FCC
request the NCRP revise its 1986 report to include an updated, comprehensive review of
the biological effects of RF.
●
1999:
Scientists from US federal agencies of the radiofrequency
interagency workgroup
(RFIWG) write IEEE  Work Group Chair on critical issues about RF exposure limits
●
2002:
EPA Letter stating FCC’s 1996 RF limits do not
protect against all effects
●
2003:
Scientists from US federal agencies write IEEE
again on additional issues re
IEEE’s RF exposure limits.
Both 1999 and 2003 letters
remain unanswered.
Myth: The World Health Organization webpages confirm there are no
health effects for cell towers or cell phones.
Example of the Myth Asserted by the CTIA Wireless Industry to New Hampshire
Lawmakers:
“
The legislative findings and purpose section of
HB 1644 erroneously suggests that the
World Health Organization views RF emission from telecommunications equipment as a
"carcinogen". To the contrary, the WHO position has been and continues to be that there
is no convincing scientific evidence that the weak signals from base stations and
wireless networks can cause adverse health effects.”
(Note- the CTIAs footnote 7 goes
to a
2006 WHO webpage)
The CTIA also states
“The WHO also concluded that research has not been able to provide support for a
causal relationship between exposure two electromagnetic fields and self-reported
symptoms or electromagnetic hypersensitivity.” (CTIA then footnotes to the WHO mobile
phone web page with one unsubstantiated sentence).
Example of well educated decision makers assuming the WHO has ensured safety:
In a February 15, 2023 meeting a lawyer on the New York Community Board 6 said “The WHO
has also looked into this and come to the same conclusion as the FCC and FDA. Just a sort of
philosophical thing … I'm kind of uncomfortable as an attorney and community board member…
the notion that we are going to be second guessing the scientific experts at these agencies who
have done the research on this cause. I feel like they have a lot more expertise and knowledge
on this and I'm not sure how we would go about making decisions on this.”   I would be
uncomfortable voting to say we know better than the people with science degrees that say it's
safe.”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Fact 1. The CTIA inaccurately conflates two separate entities of the WHO and the position
the CTIA references was drafted over a decade ago by one person who used wireless
company money to start the “WHO EMF Project.”
The CTIA was inaccurate in stating the WHO “position was that of “no evidence.”  In fact, the
WHO has two distinct and separate entities addressing the issue; 1. the WHO EMF Project who
wrote the webpages referred to and 2. the WHO International Agency for Research on Cancer.
1.The WHO International Agency for Research on Cancer (WHO/IARC) in fact designated
wireless radiation as a class 2 B “possible”  carcinogen in 2011
largely based on human
studies that found long term cell phone users had increased risk for tumors- glioblastomas and
acoustic neuromas (Read the
WHO/ IARC 2011
press release).
The scientific documentation for
the determination was compiled in a 2013 monograph (
IARC 2013
). Furthermore, because that
determination was a decade ago, the WHO/IARC advisory group now has recommended
wireless be re-evaluated as a “high priority” within 5 years due - largely in part- to the recent
animal research (
Falconi, 2018
;
NTP, 2018
) would found
evidence for cancer (
IARC, 2019
).
2.The World Health Organization (WHO) EMF Project webpages are not official
determinations because this group has not reviewed the science
since 1993.
There are two WHO EMF Project web pages that are often referenced by the wireless industry.
1. The
mobile phone webpage
that says  “no adverse
health effects have been established as
being caused by mobile phone use” and 2. The
base
station (cell tower) webpage
which states
“from all evidence accumulated so far, no adverse short- or long-term health effects have been
shown to occur from the RF signals produced by base
stations.”
Fact: The outdated WHO website statements are not based on a scientific review of the
totality of the evidence.
●
The WHO EMF Project website pages are outdated (
cell
towers in 2006
,
cell phones in
2014
) and are not official conclusions from a review.
●
The WHO EMF Project, the entity that drafted these webpages, has not reviewed the
science
since 1993.
WHO webpages list the recent monographs
(scientific research
evaluations on health risks) and clearly state that the last one on radiofrequency wireless
was completed in 1993.
Read WHO Webpage stating 1993
as the last date of research
review.
●
The WHO EMF Project is trying to launch a systematic review of the research but it has
not been completed. The process was stalled for years due to serious transparency
issues.
●
Further, these online WHO webpages are authored by a scientist  who started the WHO
EMF Project with wireless industry funding and with staff documented to have long
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

standing conflicts of interest.
Read a published article about the conflicts published in the
International Journal of Oncology by Dr. Lennart Hardell.
●
Listen to industry funded Scientist Michael Repacholi in a community meeting in India
(brought in by the
Cellular Operators of India
) stating
he wrote the online webpage
factsheets at the WHO
in this video
and how “they
have been accurate for 10 years.”
(Yet he shares no scientific reports.)
Conflicts of Interest at the WHO EMF Project
●
The WHO EMF Project was started by a scientist, Michael Repacholi, who funneled
money from wireless companies through a hospital to start the EMF Project at the WHO.
Hardel and Carlberg 2017
states “Michael Repacholi
immediately set up a close
collaboration between WHO and ICNIRP (being head of both organizations) inviting the
electric, telecom and military industries to meetings. He also arranged for a large part of
the WHO EMF project to be financed by the telecommunication industry's lobbying
organizations; GSM Association and Mobile Manufacturers Forum, now called Mobile &
Wireless Forum (MWF).”
●
The WHO EMF Project founder Repacholi is now on several wireless company
advertisements speaking about cell phone and electromagnetic safety.
○
Watch him talk about children are safe with cell phones here
○
Watch him talk about how EMFs are safe here.
●
Transparency:
The engineer who now directs the EMF
Project refuses to answer
questions about how the online factsheets were written or where the scientific reports
are that back up the cell tower and cell phone statements.
Read letter sent to engineer
Emile Van Deventer WHO EMF Project Director that remains unanswered
.
Dr. Lennart
Hardell
also describes transparency issues here.
The
current WHO Project Director is an
engineer and not a medical doctor or public health expert.
Myth: Reports suggesting harmful effects of RF to non-humans, including
birds, honey bees, and other insects have been largely discredited.
When 5G and small cells were being deliberated on in Mitchell South Dakota,
Verizon sent
information
that states “harmful effects of RF to
non-humans, including birds, honey bees, and
other insects have been largely discredited.” Verizon supported this statement with reference to
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

two non peer reviewed blogs by individuals. The authors of these two blog articles have never
published on EMFs before. One of the authors
writes
a
newsletter
about the  W orld of W arcraft
Classic.
Fact: Numerous published studies on impacts to wildlife have found adverse effects at low
levels.
●
A landmark three part 2021 research review on effects to wildlife published in Reviews
on Environmental Health by U.S experts including former U.S. Fish and Wildlife senior
biologist Albert Manville states current science should trigger urgent regulatory action
citing more than 1,200 scientific references which found adverse biological effects to
wildlife from even very low intensities of non ionizing radiation with findings of  impacts to
orientation and migration, reproduction, mating, nest, den building and survivorship
(
Levitt et al., 2021a,
Levitt et al., 2021b
,
Levitt
et al., 2021c
).
●
Previous literature reviews have warned that non ionizing EMFs are an “emerging threat”
to wildlife (
Balmori 2015
).
“
A review of the ecological
effects of RF-EMF
” reviewed 113
studies finding RF-EMF had a significant effect on birds, insects, other vertebrates, other
organisms, and plants in 70% of the studies (
Cucurachi
2013)
. Development and reproduction in
birds and insects were the most strongly affected. As an example of the several studies on wildlife
impacts, a study focusing on RF from antennas found increased sperm abnormalities in mice
exposed to RF from GSM antennas (
Otitoloju 2010)
.
●
The
Department of Interior wrote a letter in  2014
detailing several published studies
showing impacts of wireless radiofrequency radiation (RFR)  to birds stated that, “There
is a growing level of anecdotal evidence linking effects of non-thermal, non-ionizing
electromagnetic radiation from communication towers on nesting and roosting wild birds
and other wildlife…. And  “However, the electromagnetic radiation standards used by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) continue to be based on thermal heating, a
criterion now nearly 30 years out of date and inapplicable today. “ and “third-party
peer-reviewed studies need to be conducted in the U.S. to begin examining the effects
from radiation on migratory birds and other trust species.”
●
Albert Manville, former senior biologist of the US Fish and Wildlife Service  wrote
“A
BRIEFING MEMORANDUM: What We Know, Can Infer, and Don’t Yet Know about
Impacts from Thermal and Non-thermal Non-ionizing Radiation to Birds and Other
Wildlife
”  published in  Wildlife and Habitat Conservation
Solutions, 2014 on the impacts
of RFR  to birds and bees. India dropped their RF limits by 1/10th after a
research review
documented the majority of research studies found adverse effects to wildlife, birds and
bees.
●
The study “
Exposure of Insects to Radio-Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields from 2 to
120 GHz
” published in Scientific Reports found insects
(including the Western honeybee)
can absorb the higher frequencies that will be used in the 4G/5G rollout with absorbed
power increases up to  370%. The researchers warn, “This could lead to changes in
insect behaviour, physiology, and morphology over time….”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

●
Research also has found impacts to bees from wireless frequencies including inducing
artificial worker piping
(Favre, 2011)
, disrupting navigation abilities (
Kimmel et al., 2007
)
reducing colony strength (
Harst et al., 2006
) impacts
to honey bee physiology
(2011)
.
●
Research on trees has found trees are harmed by RFR. A 9 year field study
Waldmann-Selsam, C., et al 2016,
found significant
impacts to trees near cell antennas
and an investigation of 700 trees found
damage starts
on the side of the tree with
highest RF.
(See also the
Observation Guide by By
Helmut Breunig
) A review on
impacts to plants entitled “
Weak radiofrequency radiation
exposure from mobile phone
radiation on plants
concluded, “a substantial amount
of the studies on RF-EMFs from
mobile phones show physiological and/or morphological effects.” A study on aspen
seedings found ambient RF in a  Colorado setting were high enough to cause necrotic
lesions on the leaves, decrease leader length and leaf area, and suppress fall
anthocyanin production (
Haggarty 2010
).
●
In 2020 Alfonso Balmori reviewed research that has been conducted on the link between
exposure to power-frequency fields and wireless radiation and the decline of insect
species in a paper entitled
“Electromagnetic radiation
as an emerging driver factor for
the decline of insects
.” He found some of the harmful
effects on bees found in these
studies on non ionizing electromagnetic field exposures include:
●
loss of queen cells
●
changes to weight gain of hive
●
poor survival in winter
●
changes to propolisation
●
changes to flight, foraging and feeding
●
changes to short-term memory
●
causes worker piping signals which can mean disturbance or preparation for
swarming
●
reduced egg-laying speed of queen
●
no honey or pollen in a colony by the end of exposure
●
lower weight of honeycomb
●
increased mortality.
Myth: The FCC has “been reviewed repeatedly over the years” and
repeatedly found its limits are safe.
Where was this myth stated? At a February 13, 2023 New York Community Board Meeting
Fact: The FCC only opened up one Inquiry in 2013 (
FCC’s
Inquiry Asking if RF Limits Should be
Updated
DA/FCC #: FCC-13-39 Docket/RM: 13-84, 03-137),
a process requesting comments on
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

the question of if a  review is needed, and the
FCC decided in 2019
there was no need to
review limits. However, in 2021, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit
ruled
that the 2019 decision by the FCC to
retain its 1996 safety limits for human
exposure to wireless radiation was “arbitrary and capricious,”  because the FCC did not show
evidence of reviewing record evidence (
read  evidence
on the docket here
) related to long term
exposure, children’s vulnerability, non cancer harms (such as impacts to brain development  and
reproductive organs, wildlife and environment).
Thus,
the FCC 2019 decision cannot be
considered one which met obligations of the law and it also cannot be referred to as proof that
the FCC has properly reviewed the issue to ascertain safety.
The 2021 court judgment  ordered the FCC to
1.
“provide a reasoned explanation for its decision to retain its testing procedures for
determining whether cell phones and other portable electronic devices comply with its
guidelines”
2.
“address the impacts of RF radiation on children, the health implications of long-term
exposure to RF radiation, the ubiquity of wireless devices, and other technological
developments that have occurred since the Commission last updated its guidelines”
3.
“address the impacts of RF radiation on the environment.”
So far, the FCC has not responded to this 2021 court mandate.
While it is true that the
FCC limits set in 1996
do
remain as the regulation regarding human
exposure in place, it cannot be said that the FCC repeatedly has reviewed the limits, nor that
such limits were found to be adequately protective as it must also be said that the
2019 decision
was  deemed arbitrary and capricious and the FCC has not responded to the Court request to
show how it made its determination. The FCCs “failure to provide a reasoned explanation” for its
1996 limits means the FCC could not explain how its 1996 limits were based on a robust review
of current research. Therefore it cannot be said that FCC compliance assures safety based on
an up to date review of the research on health effects.
Additional Information on EHT et al v FCC
The Court's decision regarding the FDA
The
2021 Court decision
notably found the FCC’s reliance
on FDA statements to be
“unreasoned” because the FDA did not substantiate it’s statements on RF limits. The Court
stated the FCC should have determined “how and why it (the FDA) reached its conclusions” as
the FCC had a responsibility “to regulate radio communications and devices that emit RF
radiation and interfere with radio communications and to do so in the public interest, including in
regard to public health.”
Federal agencies
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

The EPA, CDC, NISH and NCI did not submit any research review to the FCC in response to
the FCC’s inquiry, and
the FDA submitted only one
letter.
The FCC pointed to the silence of
other agencies as indicating no reason to review the limits.
The
August 2021 Court ruling
states that the silence
of such agencies does not equate with adequate
review.
“The silence of other expert agencies, however, does not constitute a reasoned explanation for the
Commission’s decision to terminate its notice of inquiry for the same reason that the FDA’s
conclusory statements do not constitute a reasoned explanation: silence does not indicate why the
expert agencies determined, in light of evidence suggesting to the contrary, that exposure to RF
radiation at levels below the Commission’s current limits does not cause negative health effects
unrelated to cancer. Silence does not even indicate whether the expert agencies made any such
determination, or whether they considered any of the evidence in the record.”
The Court found that the FCC had improperly relied on conclusory statements from the Food
and Drug Administration. The Court found no indication—no reports, no reviews, no
analysis—that the FDA had looked at all the scientific evidence of health effects from wireless
RF radiation submitted to the official FCC record.
After the FCC made its decision,
the FDA later released
a literature review (not a systematic
review, nor a risk analysis) but it was limited to only cell phones (not cell towers, Wi-Fi, or 5G
networks and new frequencies) and only cancer and it did not include any evaluation of the
research on non-cancer effects (such as oxidative stress or brain and reproductive system
damage).
Myth: Federal government safety standards have such wide safety margins
that they protect everyone, including children.
Verizon misleadingly states in health and safety
information
shared with elected officials
that
that “all Verizon networks and equipment must comply with federal government safety
standards. Those standards have wide safety margins and are designed to protect everyone,
including children.”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Fact: Federal limits for exposure to wireless radiation have not been updated in over two
decades and scientists and physicians have long cautioned that children are not protected.
Research shows
brain damage
as well as other effects
which could have serious long term
consequences to children's health. When the limits were “designed” back in the 90’s by industry
filled groups, there was not even any research on children available to substantiate at what level
a child would be safe.
For example the
American Academy of Pediatrics has
written several letters to the FCC calling
on them to update wireless safety limits
to protect
children stating that,  “Current FCC standards
do not account for the unique vulnerability and use patterns specific to pregnant women and
children. It is essential that any new standard for cell phones or other wireless devices be based
on protecting the youngest and most vulnerable populations to ensure they are safeguarded
throughout their lifetimes.”
Verizon should clarify that federal government safety standards were “designed” in the nineties based on
science from the 60s, 70s and 80s. (The
IEEE C95.1-1991
guideline
and the
NCRP 1986 Report
are
based on science from the 80s and earlier.) The limits the FCC based its limits on are grounded in the
(now proven wrong) assumption that heating is the only harm as numerous studies show effects at levels
lower than government safety standards.  In fact, the US does not even have federal government safety
standards because that would mean a federal agency developed safety standards based on their review
of the totality of research. This did not happen. Instead, the EPA was
poised
to develop safety standards
(
after being requested to do so
) and then was later
defunded by federal officials (
during a period of
heavy
industry lobbying
) from researching the issue.
Facts to Know about US FCC limits:
●
Outdated:
In the United States the human exposure
limits have not been updated since 1996.
Worse. No federal agency with health expertise has evaluated the totality of the last three
decades of science.
●
Limits were developed based on a large man, not a child
: Radiation exposure limits
were
created
for a large adult man with a very large head,
not a child. Decades ago, when engineers
limits for how much radiation could penetrate into the body were developed it was for the military.
When new phones are brought to market, radiation is still measured with tests on a
plastic head
model r epresenting the t op 10% of U.S. militar y recruits in 1989.
●
Limits do not consider a child' s mor e sensitiv e de veloping br ain:
No federal agency has ever
looked at children's unique vulnerability or reviewed the accumulated scientific evidence showing
damage to the young brain. Limits were set based on whole body heating but not in regards to
exposures to organs such as the brain and eyes, both organs which are still developing in
children.
●
Limits do not consider long term exposur es:
The limits
were designed t o protect against
over heating br ain tissue fr om a v ery high power ed exposur e. Three decades ago ther e was
very little r esear ch on long term exposur e. Since then numer ous studies ha ve shown low
level exposur e over many y ears lead t o
harmful effects.
Children will have cumulative
exposures over many years. The
EPA stated
, “Federal
health and safety agencies have
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

not yet developed policies concerning possible risk from long-term nine thermal
exposures.”
●
Limits were designed to protect from harm from heating (thermal) levels but not from
biological effects such as oxidative stress that could lead to health effects such as
cancer, brain damage or reproductive damage. As the
EPA stated
,“
The FCC exposure
guideline is considered protective of affects arising from a thermal mechanism but not from all
possible mechanisms. Therefore the generalization by many that the guidelines protect human
beings from harm by any or all mechanisms is not justified.”
●
Not based on curr ent use of modern technology:
Limits
were de veloped two decades ago
when people (adults) only used a cell phone. Today people talk and watch mo vies on phones,
wear smar twatches and sleep next t o various wir eless de vices. Plus the newest wir eless
gener ations use higher fr equencies with a mor e complex signal, all of which can impact the
effects. Howe ver cell phone and wir eless r adiation limits
only consider one de vice at a time.
Levels ar e measur ed b y averaging r adiation r eadings o ver 6 and 30 minutes.
”The FCC‘s current exposure guidelines, as well of those of the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the International Commission on Non ionizing Radiation
Protection (ICNRP), are thermally based, and do not apply to chronic, non-thermal exposure
situations. They are believed to protect against injury that may be caused by acute exposures
that result in tissue heating or electric shock and burn…”
The Environmental Protection
Agency Letter Responding to Questions About FCC Limit Protection
.
Myth: FCC limits have a wide safety margin- a 50 times safety factor.
Fact:
There is not a 50 times safety factor as confirmed
by the latest science. It simply does not
exist.
The CTIA  misleadingly asserted this myth to New Hampshire lawmakers in the
CTIA testimony
stating that,
“Indeed, when setting limits for the
RF emissions of wireless devices, the FCC
intentionally provided a significant safety margin- 50 times below the threshold at which adverse
effects have been observed in laboratory animals.”
This statement is misleading because while it is true that FCC limits were set in 1996 based on
animal studies, that was 25 years ago.  New studies have found harmful effects in animals and
humans at much lower RF levels yet they are all dismissed for various reasons by the industry
tied groups considered “authorities” (
Lerchl et al.,
2015
,
Smith-Roe et al., 2020
,
Tan et al.,
2017
,
Yakymenko et al., 2015
,
Schuermann & Mevissen,
2021
,
Bas et al., 2009;
Deshmukh et
al., 2015
,
Shahin et al., 2017
,
Megha et al., 2015
,
Aldad et al., 2012;
Zhang et al., 2015
,
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Sonmez, et al., 2010,
Dasdag et al., 2015
,
Shahin et al., 2018,
Obajuluwa et al., 2017,
Tan et
al., 2021
,
Hasan et al., 2021
,
U.S. National Toxicology
Program, 2018
,
Uche & Naidenko .,
2021
). Yet, the FCC/ICNIRP/IEEE  limits continue to
be based on a handful of small animal
studies from the 70s (as detailed below).
The CTIA footnotes their
statement
that a safety margin
exists by citing the FCC’s 2013 Notice
of Inquiry. However this was not a determination,
but an Inquiry.
The outcome of that Inquiry
was an FCC action which was deemed arbitrary and capricious by
a judgment
of the U.S. Court
of Appeals for the District Of Columbia in August 2021. Thus, the CTIA footnoted statement is
irrelevant. The last defensible FCC determination was in 1996.
The CTIA also has a second footnote reference to the
IEEE C95.1 2019
standard as if it
provided up to date proof of a 50 times safety factor.  Once again, the CTIA points to a
document based on decades old science. Further, the IEEE C95 is not a peer reviewed
systematic review and it’s leadership/membership is largely industry financed. As just one
example, the Chairman of the IEEE group that developed the
2019 IEEE Standard - ICES TC95
is
Dr. C-K Chou
, retired Chief Scientist at Motorola
for RF safety, now industry consultant. The
Co-Chair
Kevin Graf
is an Engineer at FCC
formerly
with Exponent-
called a
“science for hire”
firm
.
Importantly, the IEEE standard  determines the  “established critical temperature levels leading
to adverse biological effects- the “effect threshold” which they determined to be 4 W/kg- citing
only a few ancient small animal studies.  The sixth row of
Table B.10 on page 125
of the IEEE
standard lists the studies specifically;
De Lorge
1984
- a study of five food-deprived rhesus
monkeys; De Lorge 1983 (
See full 1982 study report
for naval research
)- a study of five rhesus
monkeys, one squirrel monkeys and one rat; and
D‘Andrea
et al., 1977
- a study of eleven rats.
The fifty times safety factor is considered established based on these studies.
While numerous studies showing low level non thermal effects are referenced in the IEEE
document, the bottom line is that the IEEE C-95 Committee concluded that none were
reproducible or they had various flaws and thus they retain their effect threshold at 4W kg.
Environmental Health Trust has detailed the inaccuracy of the often referenced “fifty-fold safety
factor” in our
Submission to the FCC
.
Fact:
Even when it comes to protecting against heating
effects only, organizations that industry
reference as the authority confirm that
there is not
a 50 times safety factor, especially when it
comes to local limits for cell phones
We assume the limits referenced as “authorities” are ICNIRP and IEEE.
ICNIRP 2020 Limits State Safety Factor is 2 and 10:
●
The self appointed small invite only group named the International Commission on
NonIonizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) which industry promotes as an authority
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

states in their latest
2020 guidelines
(regarding local SAR thresholds) that for Type 2
tissues
such as the head
the local adverse health
effect threshold is a SAR of 20 W/kg
averaged over 10 g. The
guidelines
state, “... the
operational adverse health effect
thresholds for the eye and brain (Type 1) and for the skin (Type 2) will not be exceeded
for local SARs of up to 20 W kg.” Therefore, the reduction factors in the 2020 ICNIRP
guidelines are 2 for the occupational local exposures and 10 for the general public local
exposures-
not 50
.
Fact:
The August 2021 U.S. Court of Appeals of the
District of Columbia Circuit
ruling in favor of
EHT et al
highlighted the FCC’s lack of justification
for the “large safety margin” on
page 19 of
the federal court ruling.
The judges stated the FCC
had failed “to provide a reasoned
explanation for its determination that exposure to RF radiation at levels below its current limits
does not cause negative health effects.”  Further, cell phones emit RF levels that can exceed
FCC limits by up to ten times.
Studies
show that if
cell phones and wireless devices are in body
contact positions (without a separation distance), the RF exposure can violate U.S. government
human exposure limits
up to 11 times the radiofrequency
limit
when the cell phone is pressed to
the body. The FDA and FCC have been fully informed of this and knowingly allow the American
public to be exposed to RFR levels that exceed the U.S. regulatory limit.
Fact:
Even if the safety factor were 50 (which it
is not), 50 is NOT a “wide margin” of safety.
The Environmental Protection Agency typically uses safety factors in the 100’s or 1000’s range.
A study in Environmental Health analyzing the findings of tumor and heart damage from the
National Toxicology Program study concluded that FCC limits should be strengthened by 200 to
400 times to protect children according to current risk assessment guidelines (
Uche 2021
).
Not only does the CTIA
repeat the myth
of the 50 fold
safety factor and footnote their
statements with invalid references, but in addition, the CTIA then uses these invalid references
to further assert that the safety margin protects people who are more sensitive to the exposure.
The CTIA
states
of the FCC’s 2019 Order (found to
be arbitrary and capricious by the Court on
August 2021) that “The agency explained the this 50 fold factor can well “accommodate a
variety of variables such as different physical characteristics and individual sensitivities and
even the potential for exposures to occur in excess of FCC limits without posing a health hazard
to humans." As detailed earlier, the 2019 FCC Order Refusing to Change 1996 RF limits was
found to be in
violation of the law
- specifically
the Administrative Procedures Act.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Myth:
An
Australian study
found “no confirmed evidence that low-level RF
fields above 6 GHz such as those used by the 5 G network are hazardous
to human health,”
so 5G is safe.
Statement in
Josiah Bartlett Blog post
: “An
Australian
study
published in March of 2021
reviewed 138 studies of radio frequency fields consistent with 5G networks. It found “no
confirmed evidence that low-level RF fields above 6 GHz such as those used by the 5 G network
are hazardous to human health.”
Fact
: This
study
does not show proof of safety. In
fact, it proves that no long term research even
exists to assess health risks from years of 5G millimeter wave networks stating “there are no
epidemiological studies investigating 5 G directly as yet.”  Most importantly, this review was
only
on high band frequencies
and not on the low and mid
band frequencies- frequencies that 5G
networks
will use
in addition to high band frequencies.
In other words, 5G will use a wide range
of frequencies, many of which have already been extensively studied.
The
Nature review
did not look at low and mid band
frequencies of which there is copious
research indicating biological effects. 5G uses 4G networks as its backbone so one cannot
claim safety with one review that only focuses on 5G millimeter wave networks.
Notably,
this study
(not a systematic review) was
authored by individuals associated with a
group called ICNIRP- a small private group known to have conflicts of interest and to reject
research showing harm.
Interestingly, in the
Nature paper
the authors declare
no conflicts of interest. However, in several
other papers, author Andrew Wood disclosed that he has three telecom company employees in
his lab. A
2022 paper
Wood co-authored states, “
Declaration
of Competing Interest: The
authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered
as potential competing interests: AWW directs a research group, which includes three technical
associates who are telecommunications company employees.”
Another
paper
Wood co-authored states, "
AWW directs
a research group, which includes
three technical associates who are telecommunications company employees. The
group is also providing advice for a local government authority and a utility on electric
and m
agnetic field exposure issues on a fee-for-service
basis."
Further, the laboratory contains equipment from Telstra Research Lab.
The
laboratory
webpage
states, “the Radiofrequency Dosimetry Laboratory
was funded by Telstra
Corporation and Swinburne and is part of the NHMRC-funded
Australian Centre for
Electromagnetic Bioef fects Research
.
” Note NHMRC is
in fact
also funded by Telstra
as
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

documented in
public information requests
which show how
industry money is moved
through the NHMC but comes from AMTA- the Australian Mobile Telecommunications
Association.
Thus author
Andrew Wood has long had Telecom staff
working with him in the Telecom
equipment funded lab- with salaries paid for by Telstra, the telecommunications company of
Australia.
●
The
Journal of Cancer Science and Clinical Therapeutics
published an article on
ICNIRP’s conflicts here.
●
Read an European Parliament Members Report on ICNIRP conflicts here.
Hardell and Carlberg published
“Health risks from
radiofrequency radiation, including
5G, should be assessed by experts with no conflicts of interest”
(
Hardell & Carlberg,
2020
) detailing how  the independent evaluations of
RF radiation health risks are
ignored by ICNIRP  and other closely connected groups. They conclude that, “ there
seems to be a cartel of individuals monopolizing evaluation committees, thus reinforcing
the no-risk paradigm. W e believe that this activity should qualify as scientific
misconduct.”
Myth: There is no evidence that 5G, cell towers or cell phones are harmful
to health.
Professor Eric Swanson
testified at the February 7,
2022 New Hampshire House Committee
hearing
on the behalf of the CTIA wireless industry
that there are “No verified effects on the
human body except for heating… “
Fact:
There are hundreds of credible research studies
showing harmful effects from wireless
radiation and non ionizing radiation.
The respected journal Lancet Planetary Health published
Bandara and Carpenter 2018
that states:
“A recent evaluation of
2,266 studies
(including in-vitro
and in-vivo studies in
human, animal, and plant experimental systems and population studies)
found
that most studies (n=1546, 68·2%) have demonstrated significant biological or
health ef fects
associated with exposure to anthropogenic
electromagnetic fields.
We have published our preliminary data on radiofrequency electromagnetic
radiation, which shows that 89% (216 of 242) of experimental studies that
investigated oxidative stress endpoints showed significant ef fects.
This weight of
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

scientific evidence refutes the prominent claim that the deployment of wireless
technologies poses no health risks at the currently permitted non-thermal
radiofrequency exposure levels.”
Examples of research on radio frequency- including frequencies emitted from low/mid band 5G
networks, small cells, cell towers, cell phones and wireless electronics.
●
European Parliament requested a research report
“Health
Impact of 5G
” released in
July 2021 concluding that commonly used RFR frequencies (450 to 6000 MHz) are
probably carcinogenic for humans
and
clearly affect
male fertility with possible adverse
effects on the development of embryos, fetuses and newborns.
●
A review on real world exposure to 5G published in
Toxicology Letters
found that 5 G will
have systemic effects as well as adverse effects to the skin and eyes (
Kostoff et al.,
2020
).
●
A landmark three part
2021 research review
on effects
of non ionizing radiation to wildlife
published in
Reviews on Environmental Health
by U.S
experts, including former U.S. Fish and
Wildlife senior biologist Albert Manville, states current science should trigger urgent regulatory
action citing more than 1,200 scientific references which found adverse biological effects to
wildlife from even very low intensities of non ionizing radiation with findings of  impacts to
orientation and migration, reproduction, mating, nest, den building and survivorship (
Levitt et al.,
2021a,
Levitt et al., 2021b
,
Levitt et al., 2021c
).
●
2021 systematic reviews that find RFR can
harm sperm
(
Kim et al., 2021
,
Sungjoon et al,
2021
,
Yu et al., 2021
).
●
A 2021 systematic review on the effects of RFR to male reproductive hormones found
that wireless can decrease testosterone (
Maluin  et
al, 2021
)
.
●
A review on the genetic effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic fields found DNA strand
breaks, micronucleus formation, and chromosomal structural changes (
Lai 2021
).
●
A systematic review published in the
Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences
found that neuronal ion channels are particularly affected
(
Bertagna et al  2021
).
●
A review in the International Journal of Oncology describes how EMFs lead to
dysfunction of ion channels which lead to reactive oxygen species/free radical
overproduction providing “ a complete picture” of  how exposure may indeed lead to
DNA damage and related pathologies, including cancer,” (
Panagopoulos et al. 2021
).
●
A systematic review and meta-analysis of case-control studies found evidence that
linked cellular phone use to increased tumor risk (
Choi et al., 2020
).
●
The Switzerland Institute of the Environment expert published review found increased
oxidative stress in the majority of animal studies and cell studies with exposures
within
regulatory limits (
Schuermann et al., 2021
) corroborating
an earlier review (
Yakymenko
et al 2016
) on oxidative stress that concluded 93
of 100 studies found oxidative effects.
A sampling of research on cell tower radiation specifically:
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

●
A 2017 study entitled the
“Impact of radiofrequency radiation on DNA damage and
antioxidants in peripheral blood lymphocytes of humans residing in the vicinity of mobile
phone base stations”
published in Electromagnetic
Biology and Medicine found higher
RFR exposures in people living near mobile phone base stations was linked to changes
in the blood that are considered biomarkers predictive of cancer.
●
A 2018 study
Mobile Phone Base Station Tower Settings
Adjacent to School Buildings:
Impact on Students' Cognitive Health
published in
the American Journal of Men’s Health
found school-aged adolescents exposed to higher levels of RFR exposure had delayed
fine and gross motor skills, spatial working memory, and attention in comparison to those
exposed to lower RFR levels.
●
A 2015 study
Association of Exposure to Radio-Frequency
Electromagnetic Field
Radiation (RF-EMFR) Generated by Mobile Phone Base Stations with Glycated
Hemoglobin (HbA1c) and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
published in the
International
Journal of Envir onmental Resear ch and Public Health
on elementary students found higher
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in students exposed to higher levels of RFR.
●
A
2011 review
found a year of operation of a powerful
cell base station resulted in a
dramatic increase in cancer incidence among the population living nearby.
●
A
large-scale animal study
published in Environmental
Research which exposed rats to
cell tower levels of RF found increased cancers, the same tumor types as found by the
National Toxicology program animal studies (
Falcioni
2018)
.
●
A
2020 study
considering liability issues for wireless
companies recommends that
“although direct causation of negative human health effects from RFR from cellular
phone base stations has not been finalized, there is already enough medical and
scientific evidence to warrant long-term liability concerns for companies deploying
cellular phone towers. In order to protect cell phone tower firms from the ramifications of
the failed paths of other industries that have caused unintended human harm (e.g.
tobacco)” the author recommends, “voluntarily restrictions can be made on the
placement of cellular phone base stations within 500 m of schools and hospitals.”
●
An
analysis
of studies found ~80% showed biological
effects near towers. “Many
biological effects have been documented at very low intensities comparable to what the
population experiences within 200 to 500 ft (*60–150 m) of a cell tower, including effects
that occurred in studies of cell cultures and animals after exposures to low-intensity
RFR. Effects re- ported include: genetic, growth, and reproductive; increases in
permeability of the blood–brain barrier; behavioral; mo- lecular, cellular, and metabolic;
and increases in cancer risk.” (
PDF)
.
●
A
2021 study
published in the International Journal
of Environmental Research and
Public Health Found higher cell tower RFR radiation exposures linked to increased
mortality for all cancers including breast, cervix, lung, and esophagus cancers.
●
A
study
from Germany found that stress hormones adrenaline
and noradrenaline
significantly increased over the first 6 months after cell tower antenna activation and
after 18 month dopamine and PEA levels decreased.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

●
A
study
by a Municipal Health Department and several universities in Brazil found a
clearly elevated relative risk of cancer mortality at residential distances of 500 meters or
less from cell phone towers.
●
A
review
published in the International Journal of
Occupational and Environmental
Health of epidemiological studies found in 80% of the studies, people living <500 m from
base stations had an increased adverse neuro-behavioral symptoms and cancer.
●
An
analysis
by human rights experts published in Environmental
Science & Policy
argues that cell tower placement near schools is a human rights issue for children
because “protection of children is a high threshold norm in Human Right  law” and “any
widespread or systematic form of environmental pollution that poses a long-term threat
to a child’s rights to life, development or health may constitute an international human
rights violation.” The authors document numerous studies indicating a myriad of effects
and conclude that, “because scientific knowledge is incomplete, a precautionary
approach is better suited to State obligations under international human rights law.”
(
PDF
)
●
A
2014 study
entitled “RF radiation from mobile phone
towers and their effects on human
body” published in the Indian Journal of Radio & Space Physics surveyed residents 6
years after the cell tower was erected. They measured the RF and notably found very
high levels when the antennas were closest to homes and also very high levels  when
the antennas were directly facing the antennas without any obstructions. Residents living
within 50 meters had more health complaints (fatigue, nausea, sleep, headache etc.)
than those living over 50 meters from the antennas.
●
A 2021
research study
with a total of 268 surveys
completed by residents of a Madrid
neighborhood surrounded by nine telephone antennas, and 105 measurements of
electromagnetic radiation both outside and inside the houses found people who are
exposed to higher radiation values present more severe headaches, dizziness and
nightmares. Moreover, they sleep fewer hours.“
Myth: 5G and wireless networks are safe because they are non-ionizing
radiation.
Fact:
Claims that 5G networks are safe because “the
radiation is non ionizing” are simply false.
More than enough research exists to confirm that non-ionizing radiation has biological effects.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Our scientific understanding of electromagnetic radiation is in a paradigm shift. The ionizing
versus non-ionizing model is no longer relevant to understanding the health effects of RFR.
Just because RFR is non-ionizing does not mean that it cannot initiate, promote, or play a role
in the development of cancer. Research has found adverse health effects from RFR including
increased cancer risk, cellular stress, increase in harmful free radicals, genetic damage,
structural and functional changes in the reproductive system, learning and memory deficits, and
damage to the nervous system (
Belpomme et al., 2018
;
Miller et., 2019
,
Schuermann et al.,
2021
).
Fact:
Scientists have published papers on the mechanisms
by which non ionizing radiation can
impact human health and the environment.
Several pathways have been suggested to explain how non-ionizing RFR could lead to DNA
damage -without causing direct DNA damage in the same way as ionizing radiation, (
Barnes
and Greenebaum, 2018
;
Belpomme et. al., 2018
;
Blank
and Goodman, 2009
,:
Markov et al.,
2010
).
RFR can interfere with oxidative repair mechanisms, induce oxidative stress, and impact cellular
processes leading to cancer (
Havas, 2017
;
Melnick,
2019
;
Yakymenko et al., 2016
). A 2021
review reported the majority of the animal studies and more than half of the cell studies found
increased oxidative stress caused by non-ionizing electromagnetic fields and concluded that “a
trend is emerging” that non ionizing EMF exposure, even in the low dose range, may well lead
to changes in cellular oxidative balance (
Schuermann
et al., 2021
). Induction of oxidative stress
is a key characteristic of many human carcinogens (
Smith et al., 2016)
.
Several publications document biophysically plausible mechanisms for biological effects
(
Belyaev, 2015
;
Dasdag and Akdag, 2016
;
Georgiou CD,
2010
; Pall
2013
,
2015
).  For example,
although they are low power, wireless RFR communication signals have complex waveforms,
and include components of lower frequency non-ionizing electromagnetic fields, which can
induce perturbations of Voltage Controlled Calcium Gates (VCCG) in cellular membranes.  This
leads to imbalances in cytoplasmic ionic concentrations, leading to excessive reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and DNA damage (
Panagopoulos, 2019
;
Panagopoulos et al., 2021
).
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Myth: Wireless radiation is not a carcinogen. The classification by the WHO
International Agency for Research in Cancer of wireless radio frequency as
a Class 2B “Possible Carcinogen” simply means wireless radiation like
talcum powder or picked vegetables.
Fact: The
WHO International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC) concluded
that RFR
was a Group 2B “possible” carcinogen was largely based on human studies that found
long term cell phone users had increased risk for tumors- glioblastomas and acoustic
neuromas (
WHO/ IARC 201 1
). The scientific documentation
for the determination was
compiled in a 2013 monograph (
IARC 2013
).
In 201 1, there was limited animal evidence demonstrating carcinogenicity and this is
one of the reasons the WHO/IARC designation was not stronger .  However , since that
date, two large scale animal studies have found increased tumors demonstrating
carcinogenicity in laboratory animals exposed to both near field (cell phone) and far field
(cell tower) exposures (
Falconi, 2018
;
NTP, 2018
).
The tumor types found in the recent
animal studies, glioma and schwannoma, are similar to those associated with the use of
wireless phones, glioma and acoustic neuroma (vestibular schwannoma), in human
epidemiological studies (
Hardell, 2018
).  Thus, the
WHO/IARC advisory group
recommended RFR be re-evaluated as a “high priority” within 5 years due - largely in
part- to the recent animal research findings positive for cancer (
IARC, 2019
). IARC has
not reviewed the research since 201 1.
Fact: The WHO/IARC Director recommended people reduce exposure after the 201 1
classification.
“Given the potential consequences for public health of this classification and findings it
is important that additional research be conducted into the long
‐
term, heavy use of
mobile phones. Pending the availability of such information, it is important to take
pragmatic measures to reduce exposure such as hands
‐
free devices or texting,” stated
WHO/IARC Director Christopher Wild
Press Release from
WHO/IARC
classification
Fact: The research linking RFR to cancer has increased since 201 1.
Several scientists, several of whom notably
served
on
the WHO/IARC EMF  working
group in 201 1
, reviewed the findings of the NTP  as
well as other recent studies and now
conclude the evidence is adequate for the International Agency for Research to
conclude that cell phone radiation is a probable carcinogen and even a proven Group 1
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

human carcinogen (
Miller et al., 2018
;
Peleg et al., 2018
;
Carlberg and Hardell 2017
;
Belpomme et al., 2018
;
Melnick, 2019
;
Portier , 2021
;
Lin, 2019
;
Directorate-General for
Parliamentary Research Services (European Parliament) & Belpoggi, 2021
).
There are  publications which conclude that Bradford Hill criteria for carcinogenicity is
met (
Carlberg and Hardell 2017,
Peleg et al 2018
)
meaning that yes, radiofrequency
radiation can cause cancer .
Hardell and Carlberg 2018
comments that the NTP  findings
allow the following
conclusion “there is clear evidence that RF radiation is a human carcinogen, causing
glioma and vestibular schwannoma (acoustic neuroma). There is some evidence of an
increased risk of developing thyroid cancer , and clear evidence that RF radiation is a
multi
‑
site carcinogen. Based on the Preamble to the IARC Monographs, RF radiation
should be classified as carcinogenic to humans, Group 1.”
Professor Lennart Hardell, who notably worked on DDT  decades ago, presented his
conclusion that RFR met Bradford criteria in a
lecture
entitled “Using the Bradford Hill
viewpoints to evaluate the evidence on RF radiations from mobile phones to head
tumors lecture”(
Royal Society of Medicine, 2019
) at
Brunel University , London in
October 2016.
Fact
: In addition to brain cancer , r
esearch also associates
RFR with thyroid cancer and
breast cancer (
Luo et al., 2020
,
Di Ciaula et al.,
2021
,
Carlberg et al., 2020
,
Shih et al., 2020
,
West et al., 2013
)
.
Fact: Research has found that wireless radiation could act as a tumor promoter.  It also could
combine with other toxic exposures synergistically, amplifying the effects.
Research has found that non ionizing EMF exposure can act synergistically with other
environmental pollutants potentiating harmful effects (
Kostoff and Lau, 2017)
. Animal studies
have found tumor promoting effects when RFR is combined with a known carcinogen (
Lerchl et
al., 2015
;
Tillmann et al., 2010
). Animal studies
have also found combining lower frequencies of
non ionizing electromagnetic fields (ELF-EMF) with known carcinogens can increase tumors
(
Soffritti et al., 2016
,
Soffritti et al., 2016)
.
Additionally, RFR can impact the integrity of the blood-brain barrier that protects the brain from
toxic molecules circulating in the blood (
Leszczynski
et al., 2002
;
Salford et al., 2003
;
Sirav &
Seyhan, 2011
;
Sırav & Seyhan, 2016
;
Tang et al., 2015
).
It is notable that prenatal and
postnatal mobile phone exposure has been linked to greater neurobehavioral effects in children
with elevated lead levels (
Choi et al., 2017
,
Byun
et al., 2017
).
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Fact: Cell phone and wireless radiofrequency cannot be compared with talcum powder or
pickled vegetables.
First,  all agents classified as a Class 2 B carcinogen like wireless radiation, talc and various
chemicals are not the same. Other hazards that made it to the list of 2B carcinogens remain the
subject of major regulatory attention, including pesticides like DDT and Kepone, industrial
materials such as PBBs, carbon black and carbon tetrachloride, jet and diesel fuel, and mercury.
The IARC classification is based on weight of evidence, not amount of risk. With any toxic
exposure, it takes decades to accumulate enough weight of evidence, meaning enough
scientific research and statistics (in human epidemiology this refers to sick people) to show the
exposure is toxic.
Regardless, we are now exposed to cell phones and wireless radiation day and night, totally
different from talcum powder.
As an example of how long it takes to show an exposure causes cancer, take the case of talcum
powder. The talc in talcum powder for years was heavily contaminated with asbestos, which
increases the risk of ovarian cancer. In fact, in 2016
Johnson & Johnson was fined to pay $72
million in damages
to the family of a woman whose
death from ovarian cancer was linked to her
use of the company’s body powders. According to the
Washington Pos
t, more than 1,200
women from across the country are suing Johnson & Johnson for failing to warn consumers of
the dangers associated with talc—the mineral used in baby powder.
On June 23, 2020, the
Missouri Court of Appeals upheld
a jury verdict
that Johnson & Johnson's
talcum powder caused ovarian cancer in 22 women, and ordered the company to pay $2.1
billion.
On May 19, 2020, Johnson & Johnson announced it was stopping sales of its talc-based baby
powder in the U.S. and Canada.
How do they know it is the talcum powder causing ovarian cancer? Answer: the talc was found
within the tumors themselves—many of those tumors took 40 years to develop.
Myth: Professor Swanson’s brain, the sun and his hot water bottle violate
FCC limits.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

At the February 7, 2022 New Hampshire House Committee hearing
Professor Eric Swanson
testified on the behalf of the CTIA Wireless Industry stating (
at minute 1:33:00
) that, “My brain
is a radio transmitter…It violates FCC regulations by about a factor of 10. …The sun violates
FCC regulations by about a factor of 16. My hot water bottle violates FCC regulations by about
a factor of 50. As you might gather from what I am saying, these regulations are very strict and
protect us very well.”
Fact :
FCC limits
apply to specific frequencies- 300
kHz to 100 GHz.The brain, sun and hot
water bottle do not emit telecommunications frequencies in this frequency range. The statement
is incorrect and scientifically unsound.
When a radiofrequency engineer measures the RF from a cell tower they do not measure the
sun's rays. Even if they were measuring the sun's rays, these types of electromagnetic fields
(EMFs) are not the same as artificial EMFs.
Panagopoulos et al 2015
published in the journal
Nature explains how man-made EMFs (in
comparison to natural EMFs like the sun) are polarized and thus more biologically active.
“Polarized EMFs/EMR can have increased biological activity, due to: 1) Ability to produce
constructive interference effects and amplify their intensities at many locations. 2) Ability
to force all charged/polar molecules and especially free ions within and around all living
cells to oscillate on parallel planes and in phase with the applied polarized field. Such
ionic forced- oscillations exert additive electrostatic forces on the sensors of cell
membrane electro-sensitive ion channels, resulting in their irregular gating and
consequent disruption of the cell’s electrochemical balance. These features render
man-made EMFs/EMR more bioactive than natural non-ionizing EMFs/EMR. This
explains the increasing number of biological effects discovered during the past few
decades to be induced by man-made EMFs, in contrast to natural EMFs in the terrestrial
environment which have always been present throughout evolution, although human
exposure to the latter ones is normally of significantly higher intensities/energy and
longer durations. Thus, polarization seems to be a trigger that significantly increases the
probability for the initiation of biological/health effects.”
The conclusions of
Panagopoulos et al 2015
directly
address Swanson’s inaccurate claims:
“The present theoretical analysis shows that polarized man-made EMFs/EMR can trigger
biological effects while much stronger and of higher energy (frequency) unpolarized
EMFs/Non-Ionizing EMR (e.g. heat, or natural light) cannot. This is the reason why polarized
microwave radiation of maximum power 1W emitted by a mobile phone can damage DNA and
cause adverse health effects
while non-polarized infrared,
visible, and ultraviolet radiation from a
100 W light bulb, or ~400 W infrared and visible EMR from a human body
cannot.”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Professor Swanson’s analogy is solely focused on the heat from the sun and his hot water
bottle. Heating is not the only harm. Adverse effects have been found at levels that do not
increase heat (
Belpomme et al., 2018
,
Miller et al.,
2019
,
Yakymenko et al., 2015
,
Schuermann
& Mevissen, 2021)
.
Myth: FCC limits for cell tower radiation emissions are very strict and as
Professor Swanson states, “protect us very well.”
At the February 7, 2022 New Hampshire House Committee hearing
Professor Eric Swanson
testified on the behalf of the CTIA Wireless Industry stating of FCC regulations that, “The
regulations are extremely strict. I won't give you the numbers…As you might gather from what I
am saying these regulations are very strict and protect us very well.”
Fact:  U.S. limits for radiofrequency radiation from cell tower networks are not strict. They are
among the most permissible in the world, meaning the U.S  allows RF emissions at levels that
are so high –
they would be illegal in many countries.
Note: When cell tower network RFR limits are discussed, ICNIRP limits are often referenced.
For example, India dropped its limits to 1/10th of ICNIRP limits.  FCC and ICNIRP cell tower
emission limits are very similar so if a country has RF limits “more restrictive than ICNIRP,”  they
are also more restrictive than FCC limits.
Countries which have limits far more stringent than the US include China, Russia, Italy,
Switzerland, India and Israel, Turkey, Bulgaria, Brussels Belgium, Chile, Belarus, Serbia,
Slovenia, Croatia, Montenegro, Greece, Liechtenstein, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Ukraine, Kuwait, Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, Bosnia Herzegovina, Georgia, Uzbekistan, and
the Republic of Moldova.
●
Note: Industry lobbied
Poland,
Lithuania,
I
taly,
Switzerland
and
Brussels Belgium
to
weaken their regulations  in order to allow more radiation for 5G. In 2020,
industry
succeeded
in Lithuania and Poland.
Italy
and
Switzerland
voted no. Now industry has its
eyes on
Russia
, which along with several countries
such as China and India  has RF
limits much stricter lower than the USA.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Fact: When the Italian government considered weakening their RF limits in 2020, U.S. scientists
who served in leadership positions in the CDC and at NIH wrote a letter to the lawmakers urging
them to maintain their more stringent limits.
Linda Birnbaum PhD, retired Director of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
and Chris Portier PhD, former Director of the National Center for Environmental Health, US
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention joined  Lennart Hardell MD, Professor Department
of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro University, Devra Davis PhD and several
other experts as signatories to a
letter to the government
of Italy
stating, “As senior scientists
with relevant experience of EMF/RFR we are writing to you to caution against raising, by 100
times in terms of power density, the 20 year- old, and path- breaking, Exposure Limits for
protecting the Italian public from EMF/RFR, and to replace them with the higher exposure limits
recommended 20 years ago (and reiterated in 2020) by the private sector body, ICNIRP.”
Documentation
●
Scientists letter to the Italian government
, April
6, 2021
●
“
Human radio frequency exposure limits: An update
of reference levels in Europe, USA,
Canada, China, Japan and Korea
”
●
TU-D Study Group 2, “Strategies and policies concerning human exposure to
electromagnetic field, 6th Study Period, 2014-2017”
●
GSMA Website on 5G Deployment Policy and EMF RF Limits
,
GSMA website with Map
of SAR and RF limits
●
Mary Redmayne (2016)
International policy and advisory
response regarding
children’s exposure to radio frequency electromagnetic fields (RF-EMF)
,
Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine, 35:2,
Fact: China and Russia have strict limits because of research indicating non-thermal effects.
In a 2003
International Seminar of the World Health
Organization
, Dr. Huai Chiang of Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, China explained the basis for China’s continued strict RF limit
rested on science that found a variety of behavioral, neurological, reproductive abnormalities, as
well as DNA damage.
“In summary, there are many reports of non-thermal potential health effects from microwave
radiation using both in vivo and in vitro, and some of them are cited above. The SAR threshold
for the adverse effects in the frequency range from 100 kHz to 10 GHz may be at 0.5 to 1.0
W/kg, rather than 4.0 W/kg. Thus, a whole body average SAR of 0.1 W/kg is chosen as the
restriction for occupational exposure, and 0.02 W/kg for general public exposures in the draft of
amending China exposure standard”
“The main differences ( with ICNIRP ) and its own rationale are as follows: (1) ICNIRP
guidelines are based on short-term, immediate health effects such as stimulation of peripheral
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

nerves and muscles, and elevated tissue temperature resulting from absorption of energy during
exposure to EMF (thermal effects). However, there is a body of literature, which reports that
health effects can be shown at such a level of radiation that does not produce heating or
stimulation.”
●
Read Proceedings from Dr. Chiang's presentation
on
page 69
of the International EMF
Seminar in China: Electromagnetic Fields and Biological Effects Guilin, 2003
●
Read Dr. Chiang’s Short Summary here.
A
2012 paper
documents the scientific evidence such
as impacts to the nervous system used to
develop the original USSR RF exposure limits and subsequent Russian public health standards-
which are more strict than FCC or ICNIRP limits.
According to the The Russian National Committee on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection, “the
following health hazards are likely to be faced in the near future by children who use mobile
phones: disruption of memory, decline in attention, diminished learning and cognitive abilities,
increased irritability, sleep problems, increase in sensitivity to stress, and increased epileptic
readiness. For these reasons, special recommendations on child safety from mobile phones
have been incorporated into the current Russian mobile phone standard.”
●
Read Scientific Basis for the Soviet and Russian Radiofrequency Standards for the
General Public
Fact: Wireless companies warn their shareholders of a financial risk should they lose lawsuits or
should regulations change regarding radiofrequency radiation. Wireless companies
warn their
shareholders
but they do not warn the users of these
products, nor do they warn the people
exposed to emissions from their products and infrastructure. These corporate investor
warnings
by companies such as
AT&T,
Verizon
,
Vodaphone
and
Crown Castle
are contained in their
Annual Reports filed on Form 10-K (or Form 20-F or 40-F for foreign companies) with the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and they clearly inform shareholders that
companies may incur significant financial losses related to electromagnetic fields. Safety is not
assured.
●
Verizon Wireless warns their shareholders in their
10-K form
to the US Securities and
Exchange Commission that: “Our wireless business also faces personal injury and
wrongful death lawsuits relating to alleged health effects of wireless phones or radio
frequency transmitters. We may incur significant expenses in defending these lawsuits.
In addition, we may be required to pay significant awards or settlements.”
●
As another  example, Crown Castle states in their
2020 Annual Report
, “If radio
frequency emissions from wireless handsets or equipment on our communications
infrastructure are demonstrated to cause negative health effects, potential future claims
could adversely affect our operations, costs or revenues. The potential connection
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

between radio frequency emissions and certain negative health effects, including some
forms of cancer, has been the subject of substantial study by the scientific community in
recent years. We cannot guarantee that claims relating to radio frequency emissions will
not arise in the future or that the results of such studies will not be adverse to us…If a
connection between radio frequency emissions and possible negative health effects
were established, our operations, costs, or revenues may be materially and adversely
affected. We currently do not maintain any significant insurance with respect to these
matters.”
●
Wireless companies themselves define non-ionizing radiation as a “pollutant”. Both
AT&T Mobile Insurance
(pg. 4)
and
Verizon Total Mobile
Protection(page 10)
state that
coverage is excluded for pollutants, which are defined as “Any solid, liquid, gaseous, or
thermal irritant or contaminant including smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acid, alkalis,
chemicals, artificially produced electric fields, magnetic field, electromagnetic field,
sound waves, microwaves, and all artificially produced ionizing or non-ionizing radiation
and waste.”
●
Insurers
rank 5G and electromagnetic radiation as
a “high” risk, comparing the issue to
lead and
asbestos
. A 2019 Report by
Swiss Re Institute
,
a world leading provider of
insurance,
classifies 5G mobile networks as a “high”,
“off-the-leash” risk stating,
“Existing concerns regarding potential negative health effects from electromagnetic fields
(EMF) are only likely to increase. An uptick in liability claims could be a potential
long-term consequence” and “[a]s the biological effects of EMF in general and 5G in
particular are still being debated, potential claims for health impairments may come with
a long latency.”
●
US Mobile operators have been
unable to get insurance
to cover liabilities related to
damages from long term exposure to radiofrequency emissions for over a decade.
●
Due to the high risk that electromagnetic (EMF) field exposure poses, many insurance
companies do not cover electromagnetic fields as standard practice and have very clear
“electromagnetic field exclusions.” EMFs are classified as a “pollutant” alongside smoke,
chemicals and asbestos.
A&M Insurance for Medical
Professionals – No Coverage for
Electromagnetic Fields
states “GENERAL INSURANCE EXCLUSIONS:
Electromagnetic
fields directly or indirectly arising out of, resulting from or contributed to by
electromagnetic fields, electromagnetic radiation, electromagnetism, radio waves or
noise.”
●
If you want insurance that will cover EMFs you often have to purchase additional
“
Pollution Liability
” or “Policy Enhancement” coverage.
○
The Electromagnetic Fields Exclusion (Exclusion 32) is a General Insurance
Exclusion and is applied across the market as standard. The purpose of the
exclusion is to exclude cover for illnesses caused by continuous long-term
non-ionising radiation exposure i.e. through mobile phone usage.” - CFC
Underwriting LTD in London, the UK agent for Lloyd’s
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

○
Complete Markets “
Electromagnetic Fields (Utilities) Liability Insuranc
e” states:
“Classified alongside chemicals, smoke, and asbestos as “pollutants”
electromagnetic fields (EMF) poses a high risk to various persons such as users
of electrical power, electrical power generating companies, power transmission
companies, and large generators. Sources of possible EMF health risks include
radio frequencies, extremely low frequencies, and static magnetic fields. In
homes, EMF exposures come from electrical appliances. The public has targeted
cell phone manufacturers and electric power lines as likely EMF targets.
Electromagnetic Fields (Utilities) Liability Insurance is a way for prudent
companies to minimize exposure to vexatious litigation and adverse publicity.
●
Some insurance companies not only exclude coverage for harm, but also exclude
coverage for defense related to recommendations that should or should not have been
given. For example, the
City of Ann Arbor Michigan
Insurance Policy: Electromagnetic
Radiation Exclusion
not only excludes mitigation
and harm from electromagnetic
radiation but also excludes paying for the defense of “any supervision, instruction,
recommendation, warning or advice given or which should have been given in
connection with  bodily injury , property damage, abatement and/or mitigation etc. (
page
14
)
If FCC limits “protect us very well”  then why does the New Hampshire Commission Report on
5G conclude to reduce wireless radiation exposure?
●
The
New Hampshire State Commission 5G Report
has 15
recommendations including
reducing public exposure to cell phones, wireless devices and ensuring cell network
infrastructure antenna setbacks from schools and homes as well as the establishment of
establish wireless radiation-free zones.
If FCC limits “protect us very well, then why do scientists conclude with the recommendations to
reduce wireless radiation exposure?
●
The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends families reduce cell phone radiation
and
states of cell towers
that, “An Egyptian study
confirmed concerns that living nearby
mobile phone base stations increased the risk for developing: headaches, memory
problems, dizziness, depression, sleep problems. Short-term exposure to these fields in
experimental studies have not always shown negative ef fects, but this does not rule out
cumulative damage from these fields, so lar ger studies over longer periods are needed to
help understand who is at risk. In lar ge studies, an association has been observed between
symptoms and exposure to these fields in the everyday environment.”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

●
Roda & Perry, 2014
states,   “dearth of legislation to regulate the installation of base stations (cell
towers) in close proximity to children’s facilities and schools clearly constitutes a human rights
concern…”
●
Singh and Kappor 2014
conclude, “For the time being,
the public should follow the
precautionary principle and limit their exposure as much as possible.”
●
Bandara and Carpenter 2018
recommend a “coordinated
international ef fort” to reduce
public exposure.
●
Sangun et al., 2015
reviewed ef fects to the endocrine
system (an issue OHA  omitted) and
concluded that “Although the results are conflicting and cannot be totally matched with
humans; there is growing evidence to distress us about the threats of EMF on children.”
●
Redmayne 2016
concludes “minimum exposure of children
to RF-EMF is
recommended.”
●
Miller et al., 2019
concludes, “current knowledge
provides justification for governments,
public health authorities, and physicians/allied health professionals to warn the
population that having a cell phone next to the body is harmful, and to support measures
to reduce all exposures to RFR.”
●
Moon 2020
a review on impacts to children states,
“Precautionary approaches are
recommended for children…”
●
Frank 2020
on 5G deployment and children’ s health
concludes, “after reviewing the
evidence cited above, the writer , an experienced physician-epidemiologist, is convinced
that RF-EMFs may well have serious human health ef fects...Based on the precautionary
principle, the author echoes the calls of others for a moratorium on the further roll-out of
5G systems globally , pending more conclusive research on their safety .”
Myth: There is no cumulative effect from cell tower or radiofrequency
radiation.
Myth presented at the
February 7, 2022 New Hampshire
House Hearing
after a Representative
asks,
"What is the cumulative effect of me constantly
walking by or living near a cell tower and
having it outside by door."
Professor Swanson then
states,
"There actually is no cumulative
effect…[he gives an analogy of trying to throw a rock across the river]…There is not enough
energy on these 5G waves to disrupt anything and it doesn't matter how long you stand there.
It's still not going to disrupt anything for basically the same reason as I said… the rock
throwing.”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Fact: Research has shown a cumulative effect from exposure.
Chronic, low-intensity
cumulative exposures have been ignored by standard setting groups.
They claim as
Professor Swansn does, without independent systematic scientific documentation, that
cumulative effects do not exist. Numerous studies show that a longer duration of exposure (i.e
more hours or years) increases effects. A one time exposure is different than years and years of
exposure.
A
comprehensive meta-analysis of case-control studies
found significant evidence linking cellular phone
use to increased tumor risk, especially among cell phone users with cumulative cell phone use of 1000 or
more hours in their lifetime (which corresponds to about 17 min per day over 10 years), and especially
among studies that employed high quality methods.
(
Choi et al., 2020
).
T
he Switzerland Institute of the Environment review
which found increased oxidative stress in
the majority of animal studies and cell studies (with exposures within regulatory limits)
documents how several studies showed “effects can be cumulative with duration of exposure”
(
Schuermann et al., 2021
).
●
“After 24 h of exposure with a 1.8 GHz RF-EMF (GSM signal, continuous, or
intermittent), an increase in oxidative DNA damage, ROS production, and autophagy
activity was observed in GC-2 cells at the highest SAR dose of 4 W/kg
[
164
,
169
,
170
,
171
]. Hence, there is evidence that the
increase in ROS production does
not occur immediately but with increasing exposure time (>12 h) or cumulative dose
[
170
].”
Studies on people living near cell towers and base station antennas (antennas mounted on
buildings)  are important in considering cumulative impacts as people are exposed continuously.
A 2018 study
“Radiofrequency radiation from nearby
base stations gives high levels in an
apartment in Stockholm, Sweden: A case report”
which
documents high RF levels in apartments
close to mobile phone base stations on the roof summarized several cell tower studies showing
the longer the exposure, the higher the impacts.
●
Buchner and Eger studied residents in the village of Rimbach in Germany after a GSM
mobile base station was built and found for the participants with RF radiation exposure
over 100 µW/m2 at home,  3 neurotransmitters showed a clear dose-response
relationship. Phenylethylamine (PEA) levels decreased at first for the highest exposed
group, but after 18 months the 3 groups were all statistically significantly decreased.
After 18 months, even the lowest exposed group had decreased dopamine and PEA
levels. PEA is often low in patients with depression and attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD). Chronic dysregulation of the catecholamine system and PEA may
contribute to chronic illnesses and health problems in the long term.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

The study
“How does long term exposure to base stations
and mobile phones affect human
hormone profiles?”
followed participants for 6 years.
Blood samples were collected regularly
every 3 years for time intervals of 1 year, 3 years and 6 years. They found a reduction in
volunteers' plasma ACTH, serum cortisol levels as well as a decrease in the release thyroid
hormones. “In addition, each of their serum prolactin in young females (14–22 years), and
testosterone levels significantly dropped due to long-term exposure to radio frequency radiation.
Conversely, serum prolactin levels for adult females (25–60 years) significantly rose with
increasing exposure time.” The researchers concluded that, “The intensity and frequency of
RFR and exposure duration are important determinants of the cumulative effect that could occur
and lead to an eventual breakdown of homeostasis and adverse health consequences.
Therefore, greater commitment from policy makers, health care officials and providers is needed
to raise public awareness about the hazardous outcomes of long term exposure to RFR.”
Additional documentation
●
A large-scale animal study from the Ramazzini Institute used RF exposure levels
similar to those from a mobile phone base station. They exposed rats to levels
(lower than FCC limits) every day until their death. The study found increases in
tumors (
Falcioni et al., 2018
).
●
A
study
carried out by the Municipal Government of
Belo Horizonte along with 3
Universities located in Brazil looked at death records, telecommunications records
and city population data. The results found higher mortality rates were exhibited for
the residents inside a radius of 500 meters from cellular telephone base stations. In
fact, there were 14 times more deaths within a 500 meter radius than outside 500
meters.
●
A 2018 review
Effect of radiofrequency radiation on
reproductive healt
h concludes that
“available data indicate that exposure to EMF can cause adverse health effects. It is also
reported that biological effects may occur at very low levels of exposure. The RFR effect
can be more intensified based on the range and duration of the exposure.”
●
A study on 4G found kidney inflammation in mice was higher in the mice exposed for 60
minutes compared to 40 minutes (
Hasan  et al., 2021
.)
“It is concluded that
fourth-generation cell phone radiation exposure may affect blood hemostasis and
inflammation of mice's kidney and testis tissue. Based on these studies, it is important to
increase public consciousness of potential adverse effects of mobile phone
radiofrequency electromagnetic radiation exposure.”
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Myth: The majority of studies on RF show no harm. The WHO found only
5% of 25,000 studies showed harmful effects but that is the false positive
rate.
Myth in Professor Swanson’s testimony to New Hampshire  Lawmakers in February 7,
2022 Hearing:
●
A
Representative asked
, "We just heard some testimony
about bio effects…Voltage
gated channels being disrupted… I wonder if you have any impressions…"
●
Professor Swanson responded, "I hear about this all the time, it's all wrong, all of it. And I
want to explain why this even exists. The medical industry standard for conducting a
study is to work at 5 percent false positive level, it's called alpha."
●
Swanson continued, "All medical studies desire to have a 5% false positive level.
Meaning that if you run a hundred studies, five of them are going to find something.
That's the definition of a false positive level. Twenty five thousand studies have been
done estimated by the World Health Organization. 5 percent of that is about a thousand.
About a thousand studies are going to find something."
●
Swanson summarized that, "Now what do they find? It's random, remember. It's a false
positive rate. So they find random stuff and it's all over the map. And the reason it's all
over the map and the reason you get such a long laundry list of disastrous things is
because it's random. When people focus on these thousand studies -the five percent-
they are ignoring the 95% of studies that don't find any effect whatsoever. Its natural
instinct of course to just - oh that agrees with my viewpoint, i'm going to pay attention to
that. And ignore the 95% that disagrees with you. That's what underpins all of this stuff."
Fact #1: Numerous reviews and analysis have found the majority of studies for various
endpoints do show effects.
Professor Swansons reference
to 25,000 is based on an unknown
statement (?) and is not  based on any up to date analysis. We hope that Professor Swanson
will be asked for scientific substantiation for his statement.
Numerous analyses of studies have found the majority of studies evaluated show
effects.
1.The respected journal Lancet Planetary Health published
Bandara and Carpenter
2018
that states: “A  recent evaluation of
2,266 studies
(including in-vitro and in-vivo
studies in human, animal, and plant experimental systems and population studies)
found that most studies (n=1546, 68·2%) have demonstrated significant biological or
health ef fects
associated with exposure to anthropogenic
electromagnetic fields. W e
have published our preliminary data on radiofrequency electromagnetic radiation, which
shows that 89% (216 of 242) of experimental studies that investigated oxidative stress
endpoints showed significant ef fects.
This weight
of scientific evidence refutes the
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

prominent claim that the deployment of wireless technologies poses no health risks at
the currently permitted non-thermal radiofrequency exposure levels.”
2. A
November 18, 2021 letter
from Cindy Sage, M.A.,
David O. Carpenter , MD.,
Lennart Hardell, M.D., Ph.D., Prof. Henry Lai, Ph.D. documents the majority of recent
studies show ef fects concluding that the “r
esearch
published over the last two years has
added significant additional weight to the body of evidence which indicates that FCC public
safety exposure limits are grossly inadequate to protect public health given the proliferation of
RFR-emitting devices now in common usage.”
●
“When the cumulative body of evidence is assessed over the last decades of
research, the overall picture for studies on radiofrequency radiation ef fects shows
clear and consistent patterns of ef fects on living tissues. Chronic RFR exposures
at environmental levels common today can reasonably be presumed to produce
health harm at and below current FCC safety limits for humans and should be
substantially lowered.”
●
Neurological ef fects: Ef fect= 74% (271 studies);
No
Effect= 26% (97
studies) (literature up to November 12, 2021)
●
Oxidative ef fects: Ef fect= 92% (258 studies)
; No Ef fect=
8% (23) studies)
(literature up to November 12, 2021)”
●
Genetic ef fects: Ef fect= 67% (259 studies)
; No Ef fect=
33% (129 studies)
(literature up to November 12, 2021)
3. Earlier in 2020, Henry Lai PhD updated his reports on published studies finding
effects from RFR and non ionizing radiation. He posted this analysis as well as
all the
abstracts for the studies
.
●
Neurological RFR studies report
effects in 73 % of
studies on RF radiation -
- or
244 of 336 studies. (
Bioinitiative 2020
).
●
Genetic ef fect studies report
effects in 65 % of studies
on RF radiation -
- or 224
of 346 studies (
Bioinitiative 2020
).
●
Free Radical (Oxidative Damage) ef fect studies report ef fects in
91 % of studies
on RF radiation
-- or 240 of 261 studies (
Bioinitiative
2020
).
●
RFR Comet Assay ef fect studies report ef fects in
65
% of studies on RF radiation
-- or 78 of 125 studies (
Bioinitiative 2020
).
4. Numerous published reviews confirm and corroborate such evaluations.
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

●
For example, the Switzerland Institute of the Environment expert published review found
increased oxidative stress in the majority of animal studies and cell studies with
exposures within regulatory limits (
Schuermann et
al., 2021
).
●
An earlier review (
Yakymenko et al 2016
) on oxidative
stress  concluded 93 of 100
studies found oxidative effects.
●
Recent systematic reviews find harm to sperm (
Sungjoon
et al, 2021
,
Yu et al., 2021
,
Kim et al., 2021
) corroborating earlier reviews that
concluded harm to sperm  (
Adams et
al 2014
,
Houston et al 2016
,
Liu et al 2014
).
Additional Comments on the
CTIA Testimony
The CTIA  has created a false impression of safety with true statements and industry tied
conclusions.  Here are some examples.
1.The CTIA presents conclusions of so-called authorities neglecting to mention the
reports are well outdated, authored by scientists known to have conflicts of interest and
some of the organizations are even defunct.
The CTIA
states
, "Likewise both the United Kingdom
Health Protection Agency Independent
Advisory Group on Non ionizing Radiation and the Swedish Council for Working Life and Social
Research agree that RF exposure below guideline levels consistent with FCC limits do not
cause health effects."
●
The CTIA Footnote goes to two reports
from 2012.
●
The United Kingdom Health Protection Agency Independent Advisory Group on Non
ionizing Radiation
no lon
ger exists. The CTIA has
it as a link to the wayback machine.
The incorrect and misleading statements as serious conflicts of interest of the group is
documented in a published paper entitled,
“Inaccurate
official assessment of
radiofrequency safety by the Advisory Group on Non-ionising Radiation” (Starkey 2016)
.
(
Watch a video of Dr. Starkey presenting her research
/Download
Dr. Starkey’s PPT
).
●
The Swedish Swedish Council for Working Life 2012 Report that the CTIA references
(
found here
) was was authored by 4 scientists: Professor
Ahlbom was officially removed
from WHO/IARC’s Expert Working Group on RF the day before the meeting began, due
to conflicts-of-interests as he found to be a member of the Board of Directors of Gunnar
Ahlbom AB, a lobby group headed by his brother Gunnar Ahlbom that represented the
interest of the leading Swedish mobile phone operator TeliaSonera, among others; Maria
Feychting also has a long history of industry ties.
Additional Resources
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Policy
●
New Hampshire State Commission 5G Report
●
Pittsburgh Law Review:
The FCC Keeps Letting Me Be:
Why Radiofrequency Radiation
Standards Have Failed to Keep Up With Technology
,
2021
●
The Harvard Press Book “
Captured Agency: How the Federal
Communications
Commission is Dominated by the Industries it Presumably Regulates
”
●
FCC’s Legal Duties to Inform and Protect the Public by Sharon Buccino Natural
Resources Defense Council Washington-
an overview
of some of the key legal principles
that affect the authorization of wireless services and the construction of the networks
needed to provide these services.
Santa Clara Medical Association Magazine Articles
●
"
Wireless Silent Spring"
●
“
A 5G Wireless Future: Will it give us a Smart Future
”
●
“
Wi-Fi in Schools Are We Playing It Safe With Our
Kids?
”
P D F
●
“
Shallow Minds: How the Internet and Wi-F in Schools
Can Affect Learning
”
Investigative Reports
●
Santa Fe New Mexican,
Report says wireless radiation
may harm wildlife,
Scott Wyland
●
The Journal of Scientific Practice and Integrity,
Experts Blast David Robert Grimes for
His Failure to Understand Science and Love of Self-Citation
,
January 18, 2022
○
Also published in Disinformation Chronicle “
Experts
Blast David Robert Grimes
for His Failure to Understand Science and Love of Self-Citation”
●
Wireless Hazards
by Barbara Koepell in the Washington
Spectator
●
“Is Wireless Technology an Environmental Health Risk?”
Society of Environmental
Journalists Journal
●
The Harvard Press Book “
Captured Agency: How the Federal
Communications
Commission is Dominated by the Industries it Presumably Regulates
”
●
Investigate Europe’s Three Part Investigation on 5G
○
“The ICNIRP Cartel: Who’s Who in the EMF Research World
○
5G The Mass Experiment (Part 1)
○
How Much is  Safe? Finances Effect Research (Part 2)
○
Real 5G issues overshadowed by Covid-19 conspiracy theories ( Part 3)
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

●
A
report
released by European Members of Parliament “
The International Commission
on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection: Conflicts of Interest, Corporate Capture and the
Push for G.”
(
PDF
)
●
“
How Big Wireless Made Us Think That Cell Phones Are
Safe: A Special Investigation
:
The Disinformation Campaign—And Massive Radiation Increase—Behind The 5G
Rollout
” by Mark Hertsgaard And Mark Dowie in The
Nation April 23, 2018
●
NPR, On Point
“The Connection Between Cellphones And
Cancer”
April 5, 2018
●
KALW News
“The Nation investigates how big wireless
made us think that cell phones
are safe”
●
Is 5G Going to Kill Us,
The New Republic by Christopher
Ketcham
●
Seattle Magazine,
“UW Scientist Henry Lai Makes
Waves in the Cell Phone Industry.”
Seattle Magazine on Motorola  working to create doubt and attack Dr. Lai’s research
finding DNA damage.
●
We Have No Reason to Believe 5G is Safe
. Scientific
American, by  Joel Moskowitz PhD
●
There's a clear cell phone-cancer link, but FDA is downplaying it
. The Hill, Ronald
Melnick, Ph.D.
●
Alternet:
What the Cellphone Industry Doesn’t Want
You to Know About Radiation
Concerns: A leading expert goes to battle against a multi-trillion-dollar industry.
●
Today Show:
Pediatricians’ New Warning: Limit Children’s
Exposure to Cellphones
Envir onmental Health Trust
P.O. Box 58, Teton Village WY 83025
ehtrust.org

Theodora Scarato
 Environmental Health Trust ehtrust.org 
LD 697
Please see a document that details with scientific evidence myths and facts on 5G and 
wireless radiation. 
