STUDENT GUIDE:  
CELL PHONES,  
WIRELESS,  
AND YOUR HEALTH  
Freepik
STUDENT GUIDE:
CELL PHONES, WIRELESS AND YOUR HEALTH
 >>> What is cell phone radiation?
Cell phones have wireless antennas that send and receive signals invisibly carrying data such as text, voice, 
data, music, or video through the air to and from cell phone towers and other wireless networks. These signals 
are microwaves, a type of electromagnetic radiation called radiofrequency (RF). Unlike natural sources of elec -
tromagnetic radiation such as the sun, wireless technology uses man-made pulsed signals.  
Cell phones were not evaluated for safety before they first came on the market in 1983. Because RF is non-ion -
izing radiation at a much lower power than X-rays or UV rays, it was assumed to be safe when the technology 
was first developed. Now there is much more completed research to understand the health impacts of cell 
phone radiation emissions. Recent science suggests that our daily exposure to RF radiation poses serious 
health risks.
Many governments, doctors, and scientists recommend the public reduce RF exposure, especially for children 
whose brains are developing.
>>> What are the health impacts?
Scientific research links radiofrequency radiation exposure to a broad range of effects including:
• cancer   • brain tumors   • memory problems 
• headaches   • sleep problems  • impacts on brain development
• oxidative stress  • impacts on reproductive systems.
The Cancer Connection
In 2011, the World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research on Cancer (WHO/IARC) ranked 
RF-EMF as “possibly carcinogenic to humans” (Group 2B) due to research that found increased risk (a doubling) 
of a type of brain cancer called glioblastoma in persons who have used cell phones heavily for more than 10 years. 
However, in these studies, “heavy” use was defined as about 30 minutes of cell phone use against the head per 
day. The scientific evidence linking radiofrequency radiation with cancer has significantly increased since 2011.
For persons who started using cell phones as teenagers, tumor risks four to five times higher were found. Stud -
ies also found that persons who used cell phones heavily had higher rates of acoustic neuroma, also known as 
vestibular schwannoma, which is a tumor that grows on the nerve that connects the inner ear to the brain.Do the rat and mouse findings apply to 
humans?
The findings in animals cannot be directly applied 
to humans for two key reasons: 
• The exposure levels and durations were greater 
than what people may receive from cell phones. 
• The rats and mice received RFR across their whole 
bodies, which is different from the more localized 
exposures humans may receive, like from a cell 
phone in their pocket or next to their head.
However, the studies question the long-held 
assumption that radio frequency radiation is of 
no concern as long as the energy level is low and 
does not significantly heat the tissues.
Did NTP find health effects other than cancer?
NTP found lower body weights among newborn  
rats and their mothers, especially when exposed to 
high levels of RFR during pregnancy and lactation, 
yet these animals grew to normal size. 
What factors contributed to the NTP conclusions?
In addition to seeing tumors in the male rats with 
higher exposures to RFR, NTP scientists also observed 
other changes in the hearts of exposed male and 
female rats that supported their conclusions. 
The evidence for tumors in the brain and adrenal 
glands was not as strong as what NTP scientists 
saw in the heart. However, the type of brain cancer 
observed is similar to a type of brain tumor linked to 
heavy cell phone use in some human studies.3 Still, the effects observed in the animals were 
relatively rare. NTP scientists are not sure why male 
rats appear to be at greater risk for developing 
tumors compared to female rats.
How do the RFR levels used in the studies 
compare to typical human exposures?
The lowest exposure level used in the studies was 
equal to the maximum local tissue exposure currently 
allowed for cell phone users. This power level rarely 
occurs with typical cell phone use. The highest exposure 
level in the studies was four times higher than the 
maximum power level permitted for local tissues.
Why did NTP expose the animals’ whole bodies  
to RFR?
Although many previous studies focused on exposure 
to the brain, NTP scientists wanted to make sure that 
they were considering health effects to the whole 
body, especially since many people do not hold their 
phones next to their head much of time.
RFR used in cell phones is at the lower frequency and lower energy end of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Image: National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
In 2018, the U.S. National Toxicology Program (NTP) issued their final reports from a $30M large scale animal 
study of about 3,000 rats and mice exposed for 2 years to 9 hours of cell phone radiation per day. The exposed 
male rats developed increases in two types of cancers: gliomas in the brain and schwannomas in the heart. 
None of the control (unexposed) rats developed these tumors. DNA damage was also found in brain regions of 
the mice and rats.  
In 2018, the Ramazzini Institute of Italy published findings from their study in which they exposed rats to RF 
at much lower radiation levels than used in the NTP study. The Ramazzini Institute found increased incidence 
of the very same tumors that the NTP found: statistically significant increased schwannomas of the heart in 
male rats. These two studies are the largest animal studies ever done about cell phone radiation and found the 
same tumor types.
The schwannoma of the heart found in these two animal studies is considered by scientists to be comparable 
to the vestibular schwannomas (also known as acoustic neuroma) that researchers have found increased in 
humans who used cell phones long-term. When scientists find the same types of tumors in multiple animal 
studies as well as in multiple human studies, they consider the findings very important.  
As a result of these studies about cell phone radiation and cancer, many scientists consider cell phone radiation 
to be a human carcinogen, and they are calling for the public to reduce exposure to radiofrequency radiation.
Breast Cancer
Doctors are reporting cases of young women who stored their cell phones in their bra for years and developed 
unusual tumors directly underneath the location of the cell phone antennas. These women had no history of 
breast cancer and no genetic predisposition to the disease, and the cancer is an unusual type. Now, many breast 
surgeons recommend against carrying cell phones in the bra. 
Brain Impacts
In 2011, a National Institutes of Health study of 47 people found 
that 50 minutes of cell phone radiation exposure to the head 
significantly changed brain activity in the parts of the 
brain closest to the phone’s antenna. This is one of 
several studies that provides scientific evidence that 
the human brain is sensitive to even short-term cell 
phone radiation exposures. 
A Yale Medicine study found that exposing preg -
nant mice to RF increased hyperactivity, impaired 
memory, and abnormal brain development in 
the offspring. This Yale University study is one of 
several published experiments that found wireless 
radiation exposure can damage brain development 
and decrease brain cells. In humans, researchers 
have found pregnant women with higher use of cell 
phones had children with higher risk for behavioral 
problems. 
A Swiss research study found decreased memory among teen -
agers with higher cell phone exposures to the brain after one year 
of repeated exposure. 
Studies also have found persons who use cell phone more often have more headaches. Studies also have repeat -
edly found that RF can change brain waves during sleep and impact sleep. 

Headquartered at the  
National Institute of Environmental  
Health Sciences NIH -HHS
Cell Phone Radio Frequency Radiation Studies
Cell phones are used by 95% of American adults.1 
Given the large number of users, any harmful effects 
associated with cell phone use could be a significant 
public health concern. 
Cell phones use radio frequency radiation (RFR) to 
transmit signals. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) nominated RFR for study by the National 
Toxicology Program (NTP), due to widespread human 
exposure and limited information about the potential 
health effects of long-term use of cell phones. 
What did NTP study?
NTP conducted toxicology studies in rats and mice to 
help clarify potential health hazards, including cancer 
risk, from exposure to RFR used in 2G and 3G cell 
phones. 2G and 3G networks were standard when  
the studies were designed and are still used for  
phone calls and texting.
The $30 million NTP studies took more than 10 years  
to complete and are the most comprehensive 
assessment, to date, of health effects in animals 
exposed to RFR. The results will help guide other 
studies of newer technologies.What did the studies find?
NTP studies found that exposure to high levels  
of RFR, like that used in 2G and 3G cell phones,  
was associated with:
• Clear evidence of tumors in the hearts of male rats. 
The tumors were malignant schwannomas.
• Some evidence of tumors in the brains of male rats.  
The tumors were malignant gliomas.
• Some evidence of tumors in the adrenal glands of 
male rats. The tumors were pheochromocytomas.
For female rats, and male and female mice, it was unclear, 
also known as equivocal, whether cancers observed in 
the studies were associated with exposure to RFR.
The conclusions were based on the NTP four categories 
of evidence that a substance may cause cancer.
• Clear evidence (highest)
• Some evidence
• Equivocal evidence
• No evidence (lowest)
If you are concerned about potential  
health risks from RFR, the FDA suggests the 
following tips:2
• Use speaker mode or a headset to  
place more distance between your  
head and the cell phone.
• Reduce the amount  
of time spent using  
your cell phone.
PO Box 12233 • Research Triangle Park, NC 27709  
Phone: 919-541-3345 • https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov
November 2018  Printed on recycled paperSynergistic Effects 
Electromagnetic fields (EMF) are found to have a stronger effect when combined with other toxic exposures. 
This is called a synergistic effect. Just like mixing drugs can be harmful, a synergistic effect means that the ef -
fects of mixing EMF with other exposures has a more harmful effect than if you only added together the effects 
from one exposure at a time. For example, a study found children with blood levels of the heavy metal lead 
(known to damage the brain) combined with higher cell phone exposures was associated with increased symp -
toms of ADHD. Experimental animal studies that combined EMF with a known carcinogen found that the EMF 
exposure accelerated the tumor growth.  
Reproduction
A cell phone in the pants pocket results in high RF exposure to male and female reproductive organs. The 
testicular barrier is known to be more sensitive than most other membranes in the human body. Scientists at 
major research centers around the world have repeatedly found cell phone radiation effects on sperm. As an 
example, studies have found sperm from healthy men who are exposed to cell phone radiation die three times 
more quickly and develop more damage than sperm from the same men when they are not exposed. Research 
on animals has found damage to testes and ovarian development, raising critical questions about cell phone 
radiation effects to young boys and girls whose reproductive organs are still developing. 
How could non-ionizing radiation cause harm?
Although non-ionizing radiation does not directly damage DNA as ionizing radiation does, there are many ways 
that non-ionizing radiation could start a chain reaction in the body that can increase cancer risk and promote 
disease. Very small amounts of this radiation have been found to cause biochemical changes at the cellular level 
and alter the way living cells communicate with each other. Over time, with repeated exposure, these effects 
build up and lead to other effects.
EMF exposure has been found to increase oxidative stress in the body and this can weaken the body’s ability to 
repair damage from everyday toxic exposures. Oxidative stress is understood to contribute to the development 
of cancer, immune problems, neurodegenerative disease, and many other health issues.
Studies also have found that very low levels of RF can weaken membranes including the blood-brain barrier 
(BBB). The BBB protects the brain from toxins that circulate in the blood. A weaker 
BBB allows toxins and metals to penetrate into the brain more easily..
>>> Why should we read our cell phone manuals?
All cell phones have clear instructions in their manuals to keep the phone 
at a specific distance away from your body because when phones are 
placed in contact with your body the radiation that will penetrate into 
your body could be at levels that exceed government recommended  
limits.
Most people assume phone and wireless device radiation emissions tests are 
conducted in the same ways people use these devices, such as in positions 
touching the body. However, phones are not tested touching the body. 
Phones are radiation tested with a space—a separation distance—between 
the phone and a body dummy.
The separation distances used in cell phone radiation tests can range 
from 5 to 15 millimeters. That is why cell phone companies recommend 
keeping a specific distance in their user manuals. The separation dis -
tance stated in manuals is the exact distance that manufactures use 
between the phone and the body when they test the radiation emissions 
of a new phone model before placing it on the market.
Cell phone radiation tests were developed decades ago, and the way people use phones has dramatically changed. 
Although 5 mm may seem like a short distance, when it comes to RF radiation every millimeter makes a huge dif-
ference in the rate that the radiation is absorbed into the body. The government of France decided to test phones 
the way they are used, touching. the body.  They tested hundreds of cell phones and found most exceed European 
radiation limits in body contact positions.  found high radiation absorption levels at body contact. A 2019 study 
analyzed the test results and found that the phones could exceed US limits up to eleven times.
So when you rest a phone on your leg or tuck a phone inside your stretchy pants or sleep with the phone on your 
chest, you risk exposing your body to radiation intensities that can exceed U.S. government recommended limits. 
That is why scientists recommend that cell phones stay away from the body and out of your pocket or bra.
Remember that government cell phone radiation laws are outdated and do not protect people from long-term 
effects. Scientists recommend cell phones be as far away as possible (with even more distance than the manuals 
recommend) and choosing wired connections (not wireless) whenever possible.
>>> Cell phone radiation penetrates deeper into children’s brains.
Children have thinner skulls, smaller heads, and higher water content in their developing tissues. Their unique 
physiology allows cell phone radiation to penetrate deeper and more intensely into their brains as compared to 
an adult.
“In children using mobile phones, the average deposition of RF energy may be two times higher in the brain 
and up to ten times higher in the bone marrow of the skull,” according to the World Health Organization’s In -
ternational Agency for Research on Cancer.
Childhood is a time of rapid brain growth and even small disruptions can have large effects later on, making 
children more at risk from cell phone radiation. The American Academy of Pediatrics has written several letters 
to the U.S. government to strengthen cell phone radiation exposure limits because of children’s increased vul -
nerability to this radiation. 
“Body-worn SAR testing has been carried out at a separation  
        distance of 1.0 cm. To meet RF exposure guidelines during body 
             worn operation, the device should be positioned at least this  
                   distance away from the body.” – Samsung Galaxy S5
 
“Usage precautions during 3G connection: Keep safe distance  
from pregnant women’s stomach or from lower stomach of teenagers. 
Body worn operation: Important safety information regarding  
radiofrequency radiation (RF) exposure. To ensure  
compliance with RF exposure guidelines the  
Notebook PC must be used with a minimum  
of 20.8 cm antenna separation from the body.” 
– Samsung 3G Laptop
>>> What are the main ways people are exposed to radiofrequency radiation?
People are mainly exposed to RF from their cell phones, cordless phones, and other wireless devices powered 
on in close proximity to their body. When a cell phone connects to a network tower or Wi-Fi router, the RF 
sprays out of the phone’s antenna in all directions, and about half of the RF is absorbed into the head and body 
of the person who is using the phone.
Wireless phones emit radiation, even when you are not using them. A phone might be sitting quietly, but it is 
always radiating. Apps are updating, texts are incoming, and notifications are arriving. The phone is always au -
tomatically “checking in” via a “digital handshake” to the nearest cell network tower, each time exposing your 
body to more of the pulsed radiation. 
Similarly, every type of wireless device (whether it’s large like a wireless desktop computer or tiny like blue -
tooth earpiece) is checking in with the with the nearby Wi-Fi router/cell phone/cell tower and by always 
emitting RF. This is why doctors recommend against sleeping near a cell phone, cordless phone base, wireless 
game/entertainment system, wireless baby monitor, or Wi-Fi router. 
A simple step to reduce this unnecessary exposure is to turn your cell phone or digital device on airplane mode 
with Bluetooth and Siri OFF which will disable the antennas. Wi-fi connectivity can be disabled in the settings 
of your computer.  You still can do word processing, take pictures and play music while the device is on air -
plane mode. 
Research has found that if you are in an area of low reception and you have under two bars on your phone – 
such as in a basement, elevator or car – the cell phone must work harder to connect to the network and there -
fore the radiation emissions can be increased up to 10,000 times. In this situation it is recommended to turn 
off or airplane mode the phone/device and wait until the signal is better. 
At home, your cordless phone base unit is also always radiating. If you replace your home cordless phone sys -
tem with a corded phone that does not have any wireless features, you eliminate this radiation exposure. 
“If you carry or use your 
phone in a pants or shirt 
pocket or tucked into a 
bra when the phone is 
ON and connected to  
a wireless network, you 
may exceed the federal 
guidelines for exposure  
to RF radiation. 
Refer to the instructions 
in your phone or user 
manual for information 
about how to use your 
phone safely.”
Berkeley Cell Phone  
Right To Know Ordinance
Protect Yourself
>>> What policies are in place by  
governments?
Over a dozen countries such as India, Russia, France, Belgium, 
Cyprus and Israel have issued clear recommendations to reduce 
RF exposure from cell phones. India, France and Korea label 
phones with their cell phone radiation levels. Many coun -
tries have policies in place to reduce exposures to children in 
schools. However US agencies only give the public two tips to 
reduce exposure “if you are worried.”
In the United States, the City of San Francisco passed a 2010 
law to inform people how to reduce cell phone radiation.  The 
law would make stores share information whenever someone 
went to buy a phone at a store. The wireless industry sued the 
City and halted implementation of the law but the City still has 
a website with information on how to reduce cell phone exposure. The City of Berkeley passed a similar law in 
2015 and again, the Wireless Industry sued and took it to the Supreme Court. Some towns like Pembroke Pines 
Florida and Jackson Hole Wyoming passed cell phone proclamations to raise awareness about the issue. 
>>> How can we decrease exposure to radiofrequency radiation?
The American Academy of Pediatrics, California Department of Health, Maryland Council on Children’s Envi -
ronmental Health, Connecticut Department of Health, and several international medical organizations such as 
the Vienna Medical Association, Athens Medical Association and the International Society of Doctors for the 
Environment all recommend reducing exposure to radiofrequency radiation.  
>>> Recommendations to Reduce Exposure to Cell Phone Radiation  
•  Use cell phones in speaker mode or with the use of airtube headset. 
•  Keep phone at a distance from your head and body as general rule of thumb. 
•  Avoid carrying your phone against the body like in a pocket, sock, or bra. Cell phone manufactur -
ers can’t guarantee that the amount of radiation you’re absorbing will be at a safe level.
•  If you plan to watch a movie on your device, have movies pre-downloaded rather than streaming. 
Prefer wired computers to watch movies and do social media. 
•  Keep an eye on your signal strength (i.e. how many bars you have). The weaker your cell signal, 
the harder your phone has to work and the more radiation it gives off.
•  Avoid making calls in cars, elevators, trains, and buses. The cell phone works harder to get a signal 
through metal, so the power level increases.
•  Children should be given toys, not cell phones to play with. 
•  Make only short or essential calls on cell phones.                                     
•  Stop sleeping with your phone or wireless device.
•  Turn the phone on airplane mode if you need to use your phone as an alarm clock.
•  Use a hardwired cabled (not wireless) mouse, speaker, printer and keyboard with your computer. 
•  Turn Wi-Fi off and unplug wireless devices at night or when not in use. 
•  Hard-wire devices in your home that connect to the internet whenever possible.
•  Use corded phones (with a curly cord from headset to base) instead of cell phones/ home cordless 
phones whenever possible, especially for your long voice calls. 
•  Remove screens and electronics from the bedroom for a healthier sleep.
•  Educate your elected officials for policy changes that inform and protect the community.
FRANCE
Cell phones are labeled  
for radiation levels.
Ban on cell phone advertising aimed  
at children under 14. 
Ban on sale of cell phones designed  
for young children.
Ban on Wi-Fi in nursery schools.
Wi-Fi turned off in schools unless  
in use by specific class. 
Government public awareness program  
on how to reduce exposure.
When the cell phone is on your body >>>    
• The closer the cell phone is to your body, the 
higher the amount of RF that will penetrate 
into your body and brain.> Do not hold phone up to your head. Instead use  
speakerphone or air tube headset.
> Keep cell phones and wireless devices at a distance from  
your body. 
> Do not carry phones in your pocket, bra, or sock.  
Power OFF the phone more often. 
> If you want to take pictures or video, set the phone to  
airplane mode with Wi-Fi OFF and Bluetooth OFF. 
> Use a corded phone whenever possible rather than a cell phone. 
> Turn OFF antennas you are not using, and only turn on  
individual antennas one at a time as needed.  When Do Cell Phones        >>>     Solutions  
Expose You to Higher RF?                  
Connecting in areas of low signal                >>>
• If the connection is weak, and when there is 
less than two bars on your phone, the cell  
phone must work harder to connect to the  
network (cellular antennas) and emits higher 
RFR.> Unless it is an emergency, wait until the signal is stronger 
before using the phone. 
> Better yet, find a corded phone to make the call. 
> Turn phone and device off or on airplane mode.
Traveling in a moving car, bus, or train >>>
• The phone emits stronger RF to avoid  
dropping calls as it switches connections from 
each cell tower it passes. 
• The metal surroundings of a vehicle (also 
including elevators, aircraft, and watercraft) can 
cause the radiation to bounce around, which 
increases your exposure.
• Research finds that if one passenger is using  
a cell phone or other wireless device, the  
radiation penetrates into the other passengers 
in the vehicle. > Before you enter a vehicle or elevator, turn ON airplane mode 
and turn OFF Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. 
> Choose a non-wireless GPS model for navigation. 
> Do not stream inside vehicles. Passengers can use electronics 
with pre-loaded movies and applications (instead of streaming). 
Streaming audio or video, or  >>> 
downloading large files
• The larger the amount of data moving  
wirelessly, the more RF exposure. 
• The more apps, the more updates, which  
means higher RF. 
• Wireless internet connections for transferring 
data files (instead of streaming) are slower, 
which means longer RF exposure.  (Also,  
wireless connections are less secure than  
corded connections.) > Learn how to use ethernet cords to connect laptops, tablets, 
and cell phones to networks with wireless turned OFF, so that 
you can listen to audio, watch video, or download large files for 
use anywhere.
> Video chat only when you are at a computer with a  
corded internet connection (with both Wi-Fi and Bluetooth 
turned OFF).
> If you want to listen to music or watch a video, first  
download the files (preferably by using a corded connection) 
onto your device (instead of streaming) so that you can watch 
and listen without continuous RF.
> Prefer to use social media (with photos and video) when you 
have a corded internet connection rather than on a cell phone.
Several apps are active >>>
• The more applications open or running in the 
background on your device, the more connections 
and RF radiation the device is making.
• Apps are always updating (even when you are 
not actively using them), and social media is 
always sending you notifications.> Delete apps you do not use.
> Close apps whenever you are not using them.
> Turn OFF social media notifications
Protect Yourself

>>> What about other types of electromagnetic radiation?
Scientists have long investigated another type of electromagnetic radiation called extremely low frequency 
fields (ELF-EMF). ELF-EMF is a lower frequency than RF-EMF and is found where ever electricity flows from 
high voltage transmission lines to plugged in appliances. Magnetic fields are generated from electricity so sci -
entists will often measure the magnetic field level  while researching health effects.  
In 2001, the World Health Organization’s International Agency for the Research on Cancer  classified ELF 
magnetic fields as “possibly carcinogenic to humans” based on the consistent research finding a two-fold incre -
ase in childhood leukaemia associated with residential exposure to magnetic fields. The research finding effects 
has increased since that date.  For example, replicated research has linked ELF-EMF to leukemia and miscarri -
age. Studies on pregnant women exposed to ELF-EMF found those women with higher exposures during their 
pregnancy had children with a higher risk for asthma and obesity. 
People are exposed to ELF-EMF when their homes are close (such as within 50 feet) of  high voltage power 
lines. People are also exposed to this type of EMF from appliances and electronics in their homes and work. 
The ELF-EMF field drops off rapidly from the source so it is relatively easy to reduce exposure from everyday 
electronics. All you need to do to reduce exposure is keep a distance. Scientists are most concerned about cu -
mulative exposures rather than the unavoidable short term exposures. 
Laptops and tablets have ELF-EMF emissions from the power supply and even if you have the Wi-Fi and other 
RF-EMF features OFF, they still emit ELF-EMF radiation. However you can easily minimize the exposure by 
using the computer on a table rather than on your lap or body.  In addition, when you plug your phone into the 
charger, the phone and wire can generate large fields so do not make calls until the phone is fully charged and 
unplugged from the charger. 
Several european countries have recommendations to reduce exposure to this type of electromagnetic radiation 
and when new homes or schools are built, they cannot be built in areas where the ELF-EMF levels are higher 
than the level linked to leukemia in children. However, the United States does not have any regulatory limits 
for this type of radiation. 
REDUCE EXPOSURE TO ELF-EMF
>  Do not charge phones and devices by your  
bedside or working space. 
>  Use a battery-powered alarm clock
>  Use laptops and tablets on a table- not lap. 
>  Unplug heating blankets and waterbed  
heaters before getting into bed. 
>  Do not stare into microwave  
watching food cook. 
>  Sleep away from all electronics,  
utility meters and large appliances.
>  Get professional measurements. Correct electrical wiring errors. Remove electronics 
and screens from bedroom.

RESOURCES:
Environmental Health Trust
Database of International Policy Recommendations to Reduce EMF Exposure 
American Academy of Pediatrics Recommendations
World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research on Cancer.
New Jersey Education Review on Minimizing Health Effects of Digital Devices
Maryland State Council on Children and Environmental Health Protection
California Department of Health Cell Phone Advisory
Connecticut Department of Health Recommendations on Cell Phones
U.S. National Toxicology Program Study on Cell Phone Radiation 
Ramazzini Institute Study on Base Station Radiation
Do the rat and mouse findings apply to 
humans?
The findings in animals cannot be directly applied 
to humans for two key reasons: 
• The exposure levels and durations were greater 
than what people may receive from cell phones. 
• The rats and mice received RFR across their whole 
bodies, which is different from the more localized 
exposures humans may receive, like from a cell 
phone in their pocket or next to their head.
However, the studies question the long-held 
assumption that radio frequency radiation is of 
no concern as long as the energy level is low and 
does not significantly heat the tissues.
Did NTP find health effects other than cancer?
NTP found lower body weights among newborn  
rats and their mothers, especially when exposed to 
high levels of RFR during pregnancy and lactation, 
yet these animals grew to normal size. 
What factors contributed to the NTP conclusions?
In addition to seeing tumors in the male rats with 
higher exposures to RFR, NTP scientists also observed 
other changes in the hearts of exposed male and 
female rats that supported their conclusions. 
The evidence for tumors in the brain and adrenal 
glands was not as strong as what NTP scientists 
saw in the heart. However, the type of brain cancer 
observed is similar to a type of brain tumor linked to 
heavy cell phone use in some human studies.3 Still, the effects observed in the animals were 
relatively rare. NTP scientists are not sure why male 
rats appear to be at greater risk for developing 
tumors compared to female rats.
How do the RFR levels used in the studies 
compare to typical human exposures?
The lowest exposure level used in the studies was 
equal to the maximum local tissue exposure currently 
allowed for cell phone users. This power level rarely 
occurs with typical cell phone use. The highest exposure 
level in the studies was four times higher than the 
maximum power level permitted for local tissues.
Why did NTP expose the animals’ whole bodies  
to RFR?
Although many previous studies focused on exposure 
to the brain, NTP scientists wanted to make sure that 
they were considering health effects to the whole 
body, especially since many people do not hold their 
phones next to their head much of time.
RFR used in cell phones is at the lower frequency and lower energy end of the electromagnetic spectrum.Electricity 60 Hz in  
North America = 60 waves per second  
(50 Hz Internationally)
Microwave Oven 2.45 GHz = 
2,450,000,000 waves per second
Wi-Fi 2.45 GHz = 2,450,000,000 
waves per second
Wi-Fi 5 GHz = 5,000,000,000  
waves per second
Cell Phones 900 MHz to 2.45 
GHz = 900,000,000  to 
2,450,000,000  waves per secondFREQUENCY: 
The number of waves that pass a certain 
point per second, every second. 
RF-EMF frequency is usually expressed 
in units called hertz (Hz).
1 Hz = 1 wave per second.
1 kilohertz (kHz) =  
1 thousand waves per second.
1 megahertz (MHz) =  
1 million waves per second.
1 gigahertz (GHz) =  
1 billion waves per second.

The Environmental Health Trust has 
compiled a list of the latest 
research  studies that have linked 
wireless radiation to numerous 
health effects including impacts on memory 
damage,  emotional problems, headaches, 
brain damage and reproduction issues, as 
well as increased thyroid and brain tumor 
risk. Numerous recent, peer-reviewed studies 
indicate a connection between wireless 
radiation and a variety of illnesses and 
symptoms and doctors conclude that children 
are “more vulnerable.” 
The Federal Communications Commission is 
the U.S. agency in charge of regulating wireless 
exposures but it is still using science from 
1996, when most phones were flip phones. 
EHT recently won a lawsuit against the FCC 
that demanded the FCC re-examine the 
growing body of scientific evidence on their 
record indicating health risks from the wireless 
radiation of cell phones, smart speakers, 
and Wi-Fi.  The court specifically mandated 
the FCC to address issues of children's 
vulnerability, long term exposure and modern-
day technologies.  
While the FCC contemplates how it will meet 
the court order, the Environmental Health Trust 
recommends the following to reduce wireless 
radiation exposure at home:
1. Limit use, especially with and 
around children.  Cell phones are not 
toys.  Instead of handing your child a cell 
phone or Wi-Fi connected iPad, choose a 
real toy.  Minimizing your use around children 
as well as children’s use of cell phones and 
wireless devices greatly reduces their exposure. Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, Cellular, and HotSpot 
antennas are toggled off as they also emit 
wireless. If your children watch shows on a 
phone or iPad, download the program and 
then let the child watch while the device is in 
airplane mode.  The more you use Airplane 
Mode with wireless antennas off, the less you 
and your children are exposed.
5. Protect your and your child’s 
sleep. Remove TV’s, screens, and electronics 
from the bedroom.  Try turning Wi-Fi and 
wireless off at night to ensure 8 hours of 
healthier sleep.  Do not sleep with a cell phone 
under your pillow or a cordless phone base on 
your nightstand. Power cell phones off at night 
and use a battery powered alarm clock.
6. Replace your cordless phone with a 
corded phone. Just like cell phones, cordless 
phones also emit wireless radiation. The 
cordless phone base emits wireless radiation 
continuously. Corded phones with the curly 
handset cords do not emit wireless radiation.
7. Used corded tech instead of 
everything wireless. You can easily swap out 
most wireless tech in your home for safer corded 
non-wireless technology.  Use a wired keyboard 
and mouse. Ditch the wireless smart speaker 
for wired computer speakers. Replace Wi-Fi 
with hardwired ethernet as much as possible. In 
fact, you can still connect to the internet, stream 
music and videos and social media–all with an 
ethernet corded connection.  By choosing safer 
technology at home, parents can also greatly 
reduce their children's exposure.
EHT warns that children are especially vulnerable 
to wireless radiation due to the fact that 
their brains are still developing. According to 
the American Academy of Pediatrics, “Children 
are not little adults and are disproportionately 
impacted by all environmental exposures, 
including cell phone radiation.” The American 
Academy of Pediatrics along with numerous 
medical organizations and health professionals 
worldwide recommend reducing children’s cell 
phone radiation exposure to protect their health.
For more information, visit www.ehtrust.org. ᯽Is your cell phone  
dangerous?· SVK FEATURE ·
2. Distance wireless connected 
devices away from the body. The 
closer a wireless device is, the more 
wireless is absorbed into body tissue. Be 
aware that if you are holding your child 
with your cell phone nearby, some of the 
radiation from your phone is absorbed into 
their brain.  Do not use a cell phone or 
wireless device while nursing or holding an 
infant in your lap. Do not hold your child 
on your lap in front of a Wi-Fi laptop or 
tablet.  Is your child’s highchair near the 
smart speaker? Wi-Fi routers should not be 
near places where adults work or anywhere 
where children sleep and play.
3. Know the fine print warnings. All 
cell phones and wireless devices have fine 
print manufacturer instructions in their 
user manuals warning consumers to keep 
the phone or Wi-Fi device at a specific 
distance from the body. For instance, the 
minimum distance for the Apple iPhone 
13 is 5 mm; for the Amazon Echo Dot 
recommended minimum distance is 20 
cm and Wi-Fi printers are 20 cm.  If a cell 
phone or device is held at body contact, 
the absorption of wireless radiation can be 
so high it exceeds even the government’s 
outdated safety limits, in some cases by 
up to 11 times the FCC limit.
4. Pre-download and use airplane 
mode as often as possible. The 
airplane mode setting turns wireless 
antennas off on your cell phone, tablet, 
or laptop.  You can play pre downloaded 
music and videos and even take pictures 
with airplane mode. Be sure to ensure 7 Steps to Reducing 
Wireless Radiation Exposure 
in Your Home
About Environmental Health Trust   
Founded in 2007, Environmental Health Trust, 
a 501(c)3 nonprofit, is a think tank that 
promotes a healthier environment through 
research, education, and policy. EHT conducts 
cutting edge research on environmental health 
hazards and works with communities, health, 
education professionals and policymakers 
to understand and mitigate these hazards. 
Currently, EHT works with scientists, 
policymakers, teachers, parents, and students 
to promote awareness on how to practice safe 
technology.  
Protect  
the ones 
you  loveENVIRONMENTAL
HEALTH TRUST
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS 
RECOMMENDS: REDUCE CELL PHONE AND 
WIRELESS RADIATION
Do not hold the cell phone up to your head. Use speaker 
mode or hands free to limit radiation exposure to the 
brain. 
Avoid carrying your phone against the body like in 
a pocket, sock, or bra. Cell phone manufacturers 
can’t guarantee that the amount of radiation you’re 
absorbing will be at a safe level.
Make only short or essential calls on cell phones.
If you plan to watch a movie on your device, download 
it first, then switch to airplane mode while you watch in 
order to avoid unnecessary radiation exposure.
Keep an eye on your signal strength (i.e. how many 
bars you have). The weaker your signal, the harder your 
phone has to work and the more radiation it gives off. 
Avoid making calls in cars, elevators, trains, and buses. 
The cell phone works harder (and emits more radiation) 
to get a signal through metal.
Remember that cell phones are not toys or teething 
items. 
from AAP’s HealthyChildren.orgRESEARCH SHOWS:  
Cell phone/Wi-Fi radiation can 
damage the developing brain , 
sperm , and sleep . Research 
indicates increased cancer risk , 
headaches , hyperactivity , and 
memory problems  from cell 
phone radiation.
All wireless devices emit the 
same type of radiation as cell 
phones. 
AT HOME:  
Easily reduce wireless radiation 
at home. Get a corded landline 
phone  and forward cell phones  
to it.  
100% SAFETY = CORDED 
ETHERNET CONNECTIONS  
Use non-wireless corded 
connections  for printers, mouse, 
computers, laptops, tablets, 
video game systems, e-readers, 
routers, keyboards, headphones, 
speakers, and other accessories – 
with all wireless functions off .
ENVIRONMENTAL
HEALTH TRUSTMore at EHTrust.org

Harvard Investigation Finds Industry Funding  
Influences Science and Policy
“Industry control, in the case of wireless health issues, 
extends beyond Congress and regulators to basic  
scientific research.”  
— Norm Alster, in Captured Agency , Harvard University
Medical Doctors Caution:
“An Egyptian study confirmed concerns that living nearby 
mobile phone base stations increased the risk for developing 
headaches, memory problems, dizziness, depression and 
sleep problems. In large studies, an association has been 
observed between symptoms and exposure to these fields 
in the everyday environment.”  
— The American Academy of Pediatrics 
Scientists Worldwide Are Calling For A Halt To 5G: 
“We recommend a moratorium on the roll-out of the fifth 
generation, 5G, for telecommunication until potential hazards 
for human health and the environment have been fully 
investigated by scientists independent from industry...RF-
EMF has been proven to be harmful for humans and the 
environment.”  
— The 5G Appeal  (signed by over 250 independent scientists 
and medical doctors from 40 countries)
Worldwide Opposition
Governments are taking action to stop 5G. Dozens of 
cities in Italy, the U.K., the U.S. and Switzerland are passing 
resolutions/restrictions to halt the 5G roll-out until adequate 
safety testing has been done. Several countries recommend 
reducing children’s exposures to cellular phone radiation.Issues With 5G
• Experimental technology
• Increases radiation exposure
• Outdated radiation guidelines
• Children are more vulnerable 
• Inadequate regulations
• Impact to tree canopy
• No oversight by health authority
• No environmental review 
• Increases energy usage
• Increases e-waste and pollution
• Lowers property values
• Local authority overruled
• Loss of privacy
• Interferes with weather forecasting
• Screen addiction
• Uninsured liability  
• Cyber security risks
LEARN MORE AT  EHTRUST.ORGWHAT IS 5G?
Peer Reviewed Research  
On Wireless Radiation
• Sperm damage
• Oxidative stress
• Altered brain development 
• DNA damage
• Immune system damage
• Memory problems 
• Sleep problems
• Hyperactivity
• Behavior problems
• Breach of blood-brain barrier
• Brain tumors
• Cancer
• Harm to birds, bees, and trees5G is the fifth generation of wireless technology promising to connect the Internet of Things (IoT) at blazing 
fast speeds. Millions of new cell antennas are being installed in front of homes on street lights and utility 
poles. Telecom has heavily lobbied governments to pass new regulations that fast track new wireless antenna 
installations by removing public notice and public hearings and usurp local control. 5G, Your Health 
And The  
EnvironmentENVIRONMENTAL
HEALTH TRUST
WI-FI AND SMARTPHONE FACT SHEET
1. New Studies Find Microwave Radiation from Smartphones Could Cause Brain Cancer
The landmark $25 million U.S. NIH/NIEHS National Toxicology Program  study found long-term daily exposure to cell phone radiation 
led to cancers of the brain and heart nerve in male rats, as well as DNA damage . Studies in humans  who used cell phones close to their 
heads for over 10 years develop the same types of cancers. 
 
2.  Smartphone Radiation Is Linked to Brain Damage, ADHD, Fertility Problems and More
Compliance with government guidelines generally has been presented as “safe” and so cell phones and wireless devices are assumed as 
safe by the public.  However, peer reviewed studies show that very low radiation intensities, far far below regulatory government limits, 
can cause serious damage to health. Even though this radiation is much weaker than x-rays, it can induce a range of damage. 
A Yale Medicine study found  that prenatally exposed mice showed  increased hyperactivity, impaired memory and abnormal brain 
development. This study is one of many  that have linked wireless radiation to impacts such as damaged brain cells , altered brain 
activity , memory problems , headaches  and sleep problems . Numerous studies  indicate that cell phone  and Wi-Fi radiation  damage 
sperm. Connections  between electromagnetic exposure and autism and ADHD  have led doctors to advise  reducing exposure. More 
than 140 physicians, scientists and educators signed the  BabySafe Project’s Joint statement  emphasizing that pregnant women reduce 
cell phone radiation exposure due concerns about impacts of exposure to prenatal brain development. 
 
3.  Virtual Reality with Smartphones Exposes The Eyes To Microwaves and Is Linked To Eyesight and Balance Problems in Children
Smartphones are placed in virtual reality (VR) headgear to take children on adventures to faraway places, but when researchers  
evaluated the wireless radiation exposure, they found  the highest radiation intensities were to the eye and frontal lobe of the brain as 
phones are positioned in front of the face. Safety testing was never done for such repeated exposures to the eye. 
Even without smartphone radiation, VR technology is linked to visual problems in children due to the headgear placement in front of 
the eyes. A recent Leeds University  study found  a 20-minute VR game led to eyesight and balance problems in children. Understanding 
that children’s eyes are more vulnerable, VR headgear instructions  usually warn that the headgear should not be used by children under 
the age of 13 because “watching videos or playing games with the [a VR headset] may affect the visual development of children.” Both 
eye doctors  and scientists  who study cell phone radiation are issuing warnings.
 
4.  Cell Phones Were Never Tested for Long-Term Safety nor for Use by Children
Cell phones were never pre-market tested for long-term safety. Safety limits for cell phone radiation were set 20 years ago, based on 
30-year-old science, using a model of a large adult male. After a Government Accountability Office report  recommended a review of 
U.S. human exposure guidelines, the FCC opened  a docket and many scientists submitted expert comments  calling current standards 
“inadequate” to protect children. Parents assume they are buying devices and toys that have been deemed “safe,” but no U.S. health 
agency has ever completed a systematic evaluation of the health risks of wireless radiation. Cell phone companies inform  their 
shareholders that wireless devices may pose a ﬁnancial risk, and most insurance companies exclude damages  from exposure to cell 
phone radiation due to their evaluation  of this type of radiation as high risk.
 
5. Makers of “Smart” Toys, “Wearables” and Cell Phones Issue Fine Print Warnings That Are Impossible to Follow 
All cell phones have ﬁne print warnings  advising that users maintain a speciﬁc separation distance between the phone and the body. 
Manufacturers radiation test the phone at this distance.
 
For example, the LG G6 Manual  on page 158 states, “To comply with FCC RF exposure requirements, a minimum separation distance of 
0.39 inches (1.0 cm) must be maintained between the user’s body and the back of the phone.”  Are children remembering to place their 
phones in their pockets with the back of the phone facing out?
 
Many wireless toys also warn about keeping a safe distance from the device. For example, there is an internet-connected watch that 
Verizon says , “you and your kid can be happy about.” But would you be happy about strapping a device on your kid’s wrist that has a 
ﬁne print warning  in the manual recommending “a minimum separation distance of 0.39 inches (1cm) must be maintained between the 
user’s mouth (face) and the front of the device”? The Apple Watch also carries a ﬁne print warning  that the user keep a distance of 1 
cm from the antenna, while the same device is touted as “wearable.” But what parent who gives their kid an Apple Watch tells them not 
to rest their head on their arms—as that would create body contact with the watch?   
 
Many video gaming system consoles also state to users,  “this equipment should be installed and operated with at least 20 cm (8 in) 
and more between the radiator and person’s body (excluding extremities: hands, wrists, feet and legs). Many laptops also state that the 
antennas should be about 8 inches from the body. Do you know where the antenna is on your child’s device? 
PRE-DOWNLOAD 
INSTEAD OF STREAMING.
Remember that when you
wirelessly stream videos or
music the radiation goes into
your body. It is better to
pre-download audio and video 
ﬁles and then watch or listen 
with wireless connections
turned oﬀ.
MINIMIZE FACETIME 
AND SOCIAL MEDIA 
ON CELL PHONES. 
When you use facetime or
post images, your phone
emits more radiation.
Instead, do social media
or video sharing on a
computer connected to
the Internet by ethernet
cord (with Wi-Fi turned oﬀ).Simple steps to practice safe tech. 
CORDED PHONE
Corded phones do not 
emit wireless radiation.
REDUCE WIRELESSBE SUPER-SMART
WIRED (NOT WI-FI 
& NOT BLUETOOTH)
Use a wired mouse, 
speakers, printer, game 
system, keyboard, tv, etc.
HEALTHY SLEEP 
Remove electronics 
and wireless devices 
from around your 
bed. Do not sleep 
with your cell phone.USE A PLUG-IN 
ETHERNET CORD. 
It is super fast. Whenever 
possible connect your laptop, 
tablet, or computer with an 
ethernet cord (with Wi-Fi 
OFF, and Bluetooth OFF). TURN IT OFF 
WHEN NOT IN USE. 
Avoid unnecessary radiation by 
powering oﬀ wireless devices, 
network equipment, and hotspots 
when not in use, like at bedtime.
DISTANCE MATTERS.
Maximize the distance 
between people and 
wireless devices. 
ENVIRONMENTAL
HEALTH TRUST Learn more at www.ehtrust.org
AIRPLANE MODE
Learn how to set your 
phone to Airplane 
Mode with antennas 
OFF. Airplane Mode 
turns oﬀ most of the 
wireless antennas. Ways to REDUCE Cell Phone
Radiation
Here are some examples of recommendations made by the American Academy of 
Pediatrics, the Vienna Medical Association, and the Cyprus Medical Association. 
REDUCE TIME
Reduce the time you spend 
on cell phone and wireless 
overall. Choose safer tech. SPEAKERPHONE 
Keep the phone away 
from your brain by using 
speakerphone. 
DISTANCE 
IS YOUR 
FRIEND
Phones should not 
be in your pocket, 
bra, or touching 
your body.BEWARE THE 
LOW SIGNAL 
The weaker your signal 
strength, the stronger the 
radiation from your phone. AVOID MAKING 
CALLS IN CARS
The cell phone works 
harder to get a signal 
through metal, so the 
radiation is stronger. 
DO NOT SLEEP 
WITH YOUR PHONE
Use a battery-powered 
alarm clock, and power 
oﬀ the phone. 
ANTENNAS OFF
Also be sure the Wi-Fi,
Bluetooth, and Mobile Data
antennas are OFF in the
phone settings. Even with 
antennas oﬀ, you still can 
play music, take photos,
and make videos.
TEXT INSTEAD 
OF TALK
Remember to 
hold the phone 
away from your 
body. Pics and 
video increase 
radiation. 
Learn more at www.ehtrust.orgENVIRONMENTAL
HEALTH TRUST
6. When Cell Phones Are Tested In Contact With The Body, The Radiation Violates Government Safety Limits 
Last year, France released  the results of their cell phone radiation measurements on hundreds of cell phones after pressure from a 
French physician making headline  news. The test results  found that when the phones were tested in body contact positions, up to 90% 
of the phones exceeded radiation limits, some over 3 times the European limits and over 9 times the equivalent US limits. This means 
most phones could allow 3 to 9 times the allowable radiation into your body.  The French test results apply to phones sold all over the 
world because the situation is the same in every country. Manufacturers do not have to test phones or wireless devices in positions of 
body contact.  
So when a child rests a phone on their leg to watch a video, or lies in bed with the phone on their chest streaming music, their body 
could be absorbing radiation at levels far higher than government limits.  
7 .  The World Health Organization Classiﬁed The Microwave Radiation In Smartphones As A Possible Carcinogen in 2011 and Current 
Evidence Indicates It Is A Human Carcinogen.  
In 2011, the World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research on Cancer (WHO/IARC) classiﬁed  radio frequency as a Class 
2B Possible Carcinogen. However, because of the newly released National Toxicology Program (NTP) ﬁndings and several other studies 
published since then, long-time advisors  to the WHO/IARC conclude that this radiation should be regarded as a human carcinogen 
causing glioma—the same type of brain cancer that affected Senators Ted Kennedy and John McCain.
 
Surgeons have published case reports  of unusual cancers in young women who have stored a cell phone in their bras. The tumors were 
located directly under the areas where the antennas of the phones were stored. 
8. The American Academy of Pediatrics Recommends Families Reduce Exposure To Children and Has Called on the Federal Government to 
Tighten Wireless Radiation Limits.
Children have thinner skulls, smaller heads and higher water content in their developing tissues. As a result, cell phone radiation 
penetrates deeper and more intensely into a child’s brain when compared to an adult. According to the World Health Organization’s 
International Agency for Research on Cancer, “in children using mobile phones, the average deposition of RF energy may be two times 
higher in the brain and up to ten times higher in the bone marrow of the skull.“ The American Academy of Pediatrics  reiterated this fact 
and childrens unique vulnerability in their letters calling on the Federal government to tighten cell phone radiation exposure limits. 
After the results of the National Toxicology Program results were made public, the American Academy of Pediatrics issued a press 
release  recommending that parents “limit use of cell phones by children and teens” and issued  ten steps to the public to reduce cell 
phone radiation exposure.
9.The California Department of Public Health Just Issued  Public Health Advice To Reduce Exposure To Cell Phone Radiation. 
The newly released guidance  from California to reduce exposure to  radiofrequency radiation from cell phones made headline national 
news  last week and cautions that “children may be more at risk”  because they will be exposed to cell phone radiation for a “lifetime.”  
The Department states, “laboratory experiments and human health studies have suggested the possibility that long-term, high use of 
cell phones may be linked to certain types of cancer and other health effects, including: brain cancer and tumors of the acoustic nerve 
and salivary glands, lowered  sperm quality and inactive or less mobile sperm, headaches and effects on learning and memory, hearing, 
behavior and sleep.” 
The Connecticut Department of Public Health has also issued advice to reduce cell phone radiation as has Consumer Reports . Last year 
the Maryland State Children’s Environmental Protection Council  issued recommendations to reduce radiofrequency radiation in public 
school classrooms. Several medical organizations internationally  and over a dozen countries  recommend children minimize wireless 
phone exposures.  
 
10. Even When “Sleeping,” Smartphones/Toys/Watches Emit Radiation
A phone might be sitting quietly on your nightstand, in your pocket, or tucked into the waistband of your yoga pants, but it is 
always radiating. Apps are updating, texts are incoming and notiﬁcations are arriving. The phone is always “checking in” with pulsed 
microwaves several times per second to the nearest cell tower. Likewise, Wi-Fi toys are always checking in with the Wi-Fi router even 
when they are not being used. Each time a device makes that connection near your body, you are exposed to pulsed radiation.
Cell phone regulations were set decades ago and the way people are using phones has dramatically changed. At that time, adults used 
phones with belt clips and Wi-Fi was non-existent. Long term safety testing was not done. Research to understand the risk to children 
was not done.
Learn more at EHTrust.orgWI-FI AND SMARTPHONE FACT SHEET
1. Hold Off on the Cell Phone for Y our Child
Hold off on a wireless phone for your child as long as you can . Instead, consider a digital camera that takes video. If your child likes to talk on 
the phone, choose a corded landline phone with a dedicated line instead of a cell phone . If you are going to splurge, consider an experiential 
gift, like taking your child and their best friends all out for a special dinner and concert or play.
 
2. Model Healthier Tech Habits
Familiarize yourself with the American Academy of Pediatrics recommendations on reducing cell phone radiation in your family. For 
example, keep the phone away from your head by using speakerphone. Do not use or carry phones in your pocket, and keep them away 
from your body. Take care when a child is in your arms not to use a cell phone or wireless tablet/computer near their body. Educate yourself 
about the times when radiation intensity is highest such as when streaming video, when traveling in a car or when the signal is poor. 
Minimize use of a phone under these conditions and talk to your children about why. 
 
3. Invest in a Corded Landline at Home
Your children can make voice calls on a corded  home phone. Remember, even cordless landline phones emit radiation  just like cell phones . 
A cordless phone base is always on and transmitting, even when you are not making a call. Swap your cordless phone for a corded home 
phone. Forward cell phones to your home or office line when possible. 
 
4. Airplane Mode On, Wi-Fi Off and Bluetooth Off Whenever Possible
Airplane mode with Wi-Fi OFF and Bluetooth OFF turns off the wireless antennas inside a device, stopping microwave transmissions. Every 
computer, laptop, tablet or wireless transmitting device has a function key or switch in the settings that disables the Wi-Fi transmitters, and 
one that disables Bluetooth as well. Whenever you intend to hand a child a Wi-Fi or Bluetooth enabled device, remember to turn on airplane 
mode, and to separately disable Wi-Fi and Bluetooth connections. Try to turn devices to these settings whenever possible, and teach your 
kids to do the same.
 
5. Connect Y our Smartphone and Wireless Device with Cords
You can easily connect many phones, tablets and computers to the internet without microwave exposures. Most wireless devices have a 
USB, lightning or ethernet port so you can plug it in  for wired internet access. Many devices can be hardwired to the internet by simply 
getting a few accessories and adapters. Whenever you purchase electronics, choose a device that connects with wires, not Wi-Fi.
 
6. Power Off When Not in Use
Remember: wireless devices continuously check in with their networks whenever they plugged in or turned on. You can easily decrease your 
family’s ﬁrst- and second-hand radiation exposure by turning off wireless networks and devices whenever you are not actively using them, 
such as while you sleep. Turning off wireless devices and their related gear—for example, printers, gaming, entertainment, and computer 
systems and accessories—when not in use by powering them off also saves signiﬁcant energy and makes all around good sense. Plug these 
devices into a power switch so you can easily turn them off. This is often the ﬁrst step people take as they work on swapping out wireless 
with corded connections. 
 
7 . Get Electronics Out of The Bedroom
Do not let your children use a cell phone or tablet in bed. Be aware that the blue light from screens and wireless radiation can seriously 
impact our slee p, so be sure to power off all screens and electronics at least an hour before bedtime. Many newer TVs, gaming systems, 
and computers also have wireless radiation emissions even if you are not using them, so it is best to remove them from the bedroom and 
completely disconnect them from their power source. Keep screens and electronics in family areas. Instead of sleeping with your cell phone, 
get a battery-powered alarm clock for your nightstand. This removes the temptation to “quickly” check the phone.
 
There have also been reports of ﬁres from exploding electronics and charging cell phones. Teenagers will rest electronics on their bed, 
unaware that the soft cushions block airﬂow to the battery and cause the device to heat up. Be aware that chargers generate other types of 
electromagnetic ﬁelds that are also linked to health issues. Always charge cell phones and tech devices outside the bedroom, on a table or 
countertop.  
 
8.  Children Should Not Use Virtual Reality with Transmitting Smartphones
Children’s brains are not fully myelinated and eyes absorb radiation readily due to their high water content. Placing a two-way microwave 
radiating device directly in front of young eyes is not recommended. Considering the myriad of safety risks that VR poses for children, 
consider entertainment alternatives like watching a great family movie on a non-wireless screen.FAMIL Y FACT SHEET
Reducing Exposures at Home
New Jersey Education Association “Minimize health risks from electronic devices”   
Article , PDF of Recommendations  
“Practice Prevention A Quick Guide to Avoiding EMF’s”  by Cindy Sage and Nancy Evans  
for the Collaborative on Health and the Environment EMF Working Group
C4ST Factsheets: Wireless Safety Tips , Presentation Reducing Exposure 101 ,
Easy steps you can take to minimize your exposureThe American Academy of Pediatrics Letter In Support of The Cell Phone Right T o Know
Doctor’s Advice on Cell Phone Radiation: English , Spanish , Greek , Finnish , Turkish , Italian  
Postcard with American Academy of Pediatrics Recommendations, English , Spanish
What Parents Need to Know About Wireless Radiation and How to Practice Safe Technology
BabySafe Project: “Reduce Y our Wireless Exposure”  English Brochure , Spanish Brochure
More Printable Resources  from Environmental Health Trust
Learn more at EHTrust.orgRESOURCES ON REDUCING EXPOSURE
Epic Holiday Toy Recommendations  
Tried and True Gifts For Children 
Tickets  to a game, movie, music concert or play. 
Classic toys  such as yoyo, kite, play cash register, kaleidoscope, dominos, dartboard, juggling balls and magic sets. 
A bike and helmet, a go-kart, another ride-on toy.
Musical instruments  such as xylophone, egg shakers, tamborine, wooden ﬂute, recorder, harmonica, guitar, keyboard or 
drum set.  
A cool battery-powered alarm clock. 
Host a party for your child to go out to a special dinner/movie/activity with friends. 
Personalized gifts such as a photo of your child with their friends on a personalized mug or t-shirt.  
T-Shirt or cap specially ordered with a saying/logo from their favorite sports team, musical, or band. 
Magazine subscription  on a subject that interests your child. 
A good old fashioned boom box with radio and MP3 player  (without Wi-Fi and without Bluetooth). 
Make a donation to a cause they care about, a local food bank, or sponsor a animal. 
Do It Yourself (DIY) Kits and Theme Baskets  ﬁlled with something your child is interested in sparks your child’s creativity.
Cake decorating, baking, building a birdhouse  — you can put together a DIY kit with items from grocery or hardware 
stores that will spark hours of creativity.  
Baking DIY:  specially shaped cake pan and unique cookie cutters, cookbook, baking ingredients, personalized apron, 
and special serving plate. 
Birdhouse DIY:   birdseed, birdhouse kit, (here are birdhouse kids you can order online), binoculars, and bird identiﬁcation 
book. 
Dinosaur DIY:   book about dinosaurs, kit for assembling a dinosaur skeleton
Art Basket:  colored pencils with a sharpener, specialty markers, splurge on fancy colors like gold and silver, watercolor 
paints and brushes, drawing paper, art sketchpad and watercolor paper, E
Paper Craft, Origami Basket:  new scissors, specialty scissors, colorful decorated paper, cardstock paper, glue, glue 
sticks, origami paper, origami instruction book.   
Gardening:  gardening book, gift certiﬁcate for seeds, containers and pots, or take it a step further with a salad table or 
wood for raised planting bed. 
Make a Photo Album with pictures of family and friends they will cherish for years to come. 
Animal/Insect Identiﬁcation Guides are picture books that children love pouring over to identify all kinds of animals — 
from dogs to spiders to birds to dinosaurs. 
For Younger Children, dolls, books, puzzles and building blocks are tried and true. They love small ﬁgures to play with in 
a dollhouse, ﬁre station, castle or far away land. Consider dress-up clothes or a doctor kit. Children play for hours inside 
a pop-up play tent, house or car. Less is more and the simpler the toy, the more the child can imagine. There’s no need 
for a toy to have a built-in voice or Smartphone/Bluetooth connection, because children will imagine the back and forth 
conversation.  
Theodora  Scarato
Environmental Health Trust ehtrust.org 
LD 697
Please see resources we have developed to educate high school students on cell phone
radiation with the Massachusetts Breast Cancer Prevention Association. In addition I 
attached resources on how to reduce cell phone radiation exposure. 
