By Cindy Russell, MD
VP Community Health, SCCMA
 Wireless Silent Spring, SCCMA 
Oct 2, 2018 
“Those who dwell among 
the beauties and mysteries 
of the earth are never 
alone or weary of life.” 
Rachel Carson, Author Silent Spring
IN THE WAR ON INSECTS: NATURE BECOMES SILENT
Our ill-fated desire to control nature as well as our tendency to ignore our own complicity in its destruction for profit was 
the focus of a seminal 1962 book, “Silent Spring.” This publication is widely credited with ushering in the modern environmental 
movement. (1) Rachel Carson, a marine biologist, and author of  “Silent Spring,” was first a lover of nature and a poet. Through 
her astute observations of nature, careful documentation and gifted writing, she was able to bring attention to the devastating 
and long lasting effects of pesticides which continue to impact all wildlife and species, including humans. 
Her book contains story after story showing the annihilation of birds, squirrels, fish, earthworms, and beneficial insects 
after the introduction of ever more toxic pesticides to fight invasive insects such as the Japanese beetle. Funds were endless from 
the Department of Agriculture who declared that these pesticides were perfectly safe as planes deposited hundreds of pounds of 
pellets into yards, schools and farms. Water turned into poison and rivers of death for salmon and other species. Bird popula -
tions of robins, pheasants, and meadowlarks plummeted along with rabbits, muskrats and cats. Farm animals who were exposed 
withered and many died. Dogs even fell ill. The Japanese beetle survived, however, as most insects cleverly and rapidly become 
resistant to these chemicals, which can persist in the soil and waterways for years. While species targeted biologic methods of 
control and integrated pest management tools have been developed, more and more pesticides have been created leaving us an 
economically profitable but toxic legacy – DDT, Chlordane, Dieldrin, 2-4 D- Malathion, Glyphosate.
There are many similarities between the silent spring created in cities and farms from pesticides and that of wireless tech -
nology with the rapid and widespread adoption of cell towers. Let’s examine the effects of this technology that biologists have 
found on wildlife and then compare the histories, mechanisms and impacts between pesticides and wireless radiation. 
WIRELESS RADIOFREQUENCY AFFECTS 
NAVIGATION OF BIRDS AND BEES
It is well known that magnetite, a form of iron ore, is found in a wide 
variety of organisms. It has been shown that this substance is used to sense 
the earth’s low energy magnetic field as a directional reference. (Cadiou and McNaughton 2010). Magnetite acts as an internal compass. For over 50 years, scientists have known that migratory birds use the earth’s mag -
netic field to navigate. As it turns out, a diverse array of animal life also relies upon this geomagnetic field as their GPS for breeding, feeding, mi -
gration and survival. 
Biologists have unexpectedly discovered that wireless radiofrequency 
radiation (RFR) disturbs internal magneto-receptors used for orientation. In addition, this non ionizing radiation can have profound impacts on the natural environment by disruption of other complex cellular and biologic processes in mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, insects, trees, plants, seeds and bacteria. Reported adverse effects from radiofrequency radiation that have been identified include abnormal behavior, developmental abnor -
malities, diminished reproduction and increased mortality. The effects of this radiation may not be immediately apparent with a slow decline in the health of wildlife seen over time with cumulative exposure, adding a new environmental toxin contributing to silent springs in cities, orchards and farms. The more towers, the more additive mix of radiation frequencies saturating the environment, creating an increasingly toxic air space. Non thermal biological effects are not considered in current guidelines. Appro -
priate safety testing and regulation of this technology is lacking, however, invention, commercialization and deployment of cell towers marches on – 1G, 2G, 3G, 4G, 5G.
THE SKRUNDA RADIO LOCATION CASE
Firstenberg (2017) in his fascinating and well-referenced book, The 
Invisible Rainbow: A History of Electricity and Life , describes both ob -
servations and biological controlled experiments performed, mostly in Europe, where a high power early warning Radio Location Station tower was in place for over 25 years. (12) Studies performed during and after the tower was removed demonstrated that it caused not only human symp -
toms including documented memory, attention and motor deficits in chil -
dren, but also affected widespread forest health with loss of birds, thin -
ner growth rings on trees, poor seed germination, and loss of duckweed, among other effects. (3) When these towers were removed, not only did the health of the local residents improve, the forest recovered. 
BIRD MIGRATION DISRUPTED MORE BY WEAK 
MAGNETIC FIELDS
Biologists have discovered that birds’ magnetic compass orientation appears more vulnerable to weak broadband electromagnetic fields. Pak -
homov (2017),  Schwarze (2016), Wiltschko (2015).  A German scientist, 
Svenja Engles (2014) lead the research project to confirm this effect.  He and his German graduate students exposed migratory European robins to the background electromagnetic noise present in unscreened wooden huts at the University of Oldenburg city campus and found the birds were confused and could not orient using their magnetic compass. If grounded or screened with aluminum their orientation reappeared, but disappeared again if broadband radiofrequencies were generated inside the huts. He did not believe the effects at first and repeated the same double-blinded ex -
periment many times in seven years and with different graduate students to confirm the effect before publishing his results. 
WHEN HOMING PIGEONS CAN’T FIND HOME
Modern communications systems with a proliferation of cell towers 
in cities and now in rural areas, create continuous pulsating artificial ra -
diofrequency wave mixtures that can alter local magnetic fields and thus impair bird migration and orientation of pollinators. In a straight line, sight cell towers can transmit 20 miles or more. In 1998, soon after cell towers were installed in Pennsylvania, pigeon races ended in disaster as up to 90% of birds were disoriented and lost their navigational skills. This was reported in a New York Times article December 6, 1998, “When Homing Pigeons Don’t Go Home Again.” (2)
The problem of lost homing pigeons is becoming commonplace, 
leaving pigeon racing aficionados very concerned. (6)(13)  A 2013 British Pigeon Insider  article notes that pigeon keepers in England reported the 
loss of dozens of pigeons during races, as well as abnormal frantic behav -
ior near cell towers and declining pigeon reproduction as cell towers have been reproducing in cities and farms.  Another article in Wired  magazine 
cites one pigeon fancier who lost two-thirds of his pigeons after a tower was installed next to his farm. 
FATAL ATTRACTION: COLLISIONS WITH CELL 
TOWERS
The Audubon Society reports that each year up to 50 million birds, 
representing 230 different species, die in collisions with communication 
towers at night. (8) This occurs when they hit the tall, antenna-sporting structures or associated guy-wires that support the cables.  It has been found that at night birds are lured into the deadly metal structures by the steady beam of red lights on the tops of the towers. The lights are required by law for airline safety but the birds see this as a guiding light and shift  from using geomagnetic signals and instead head straight for the beam. 
An FAA study showed that small migratory birds become confused 
when they reach the light and either hit the tower or they continue to fly “ And it’s not just pigeons — have you 
seen any sparrows or parrots around, 
since these towers started springing up?” 
K. Pazhaniappan, Secretary,
New Madras Racing Pigeon Association (43) 
around the tower until exhausted and they fall to the ground. Flashing 
red lights seem to reduce the number of fatal bird collisions. (11)   Long -
core (2013) studied the numbers and types of birds killed by cell towers in the U.S. and Canada and found “Neotropical migrants suffer the greatest mortality; 97.4% of birds killed are passerines, mostly warblers (Parulidae, 58.4%), vireos (Vireonidae, 13.4%), thrushes (Turdidae, 7.7%), and spar -
rows (Emberizidae, 5.8%). Thirteen birds of conservation concern in the United States or Canada suffer annual mortality of 1–9% of their estimated total population.”  A 2015 FAA guideline strongly encouraged operators of all tall cell towers to switch to flashing red lights by 2016. In November of 2016 about 750 tall towers (above 350 feet) had been switched, leaving about 15,000 more to go, according to an American Bird Conservancy re -
port. (24) 
CELL TOWERS NOT HEALTHY FOR BIRDS OR 
FIREMEN
Government agencies, however, are becoming more aware. The De -
partment of Interior wrote a letter in 2014 to the National Telecommu -
nications and Information Administration regarding the DOI concerns 
about the First Responder Network Authority (FirstNet) and their regula -
tions regarding cell towers and the protection of wildlife, especially mi -
gratory birds.(15) FirstNet is a public-private partnership with AT&T and because of its stated duty to public safety it has significant preemptions.(17) The DOI stated, “the proposals lack provisions necessary to conservemigratory bird resources, including eagles. The proposals also do not re -
flect current information regarding the effects of communication towersto birds.” FirstNet noted that the DOI “requested that FirstNet’s proce -
dures include a process for ensuring compliance with the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act (‘BGEPA’), Migratory Bird Treaty Act (‘MBTA’), andExecutive Order (E.O.) 13186, Responsibilities of Federal Agencies to Pro -
tect Migratory Birds.” (16)
The DOI is not the only one concerned about FirstNet towers. Al -
though public safety is important, what happens when the device intended for safety causes an unintended threat to others? Some firemen have expe -
rienced a variety of neurologic symptoms consistent with electrosensitiv -
ity (headaches, dizziness, brain fog, sleep deprivation, irritability) when cell towers were placed on their fire stations. A pilot study of firemen was completed in 2004 and brain scans confirmed those with symptoms had evidence of adverse brain al -
terations. Because of this, the International Association of Firefighters has developed a policy to ask for exemptions from cell tower placement on or adjacent to fire sta -
tions with new cell tower legislation. (19)  It is codified in California’s AB57 (2015). (18)
THE DECLINE OF BIRDS, 
BEES AND WILDLIFE WITH INCREASING RADIOFREQUENCY RADIATION 
Researchers are now attributing wire -
less radiation from cellular communica -
tions to be a significant contributing cause 
of bee “colony collapse disorder,” insect dis -
appearance, the decline in house sparrows 
in London (Balmori 2007) (Everaert 2007), as well as the steady deteriora -
tion of the worlds bird population with now more than 40% of bird species under critical threat.  Insects are not only important pollinators, they are the base of the food chain for birds, amphibians, reptiles and mammals. A Yale report highlights a 2014 study by Stanford professor Rudolfo Drizo, which revealed that 42% of the 3,623 terrestrial invertebrate species on the International Union for Conservation of Nature [IUCN] Red List, are clas -
sified as threatened with extinction. He notes, “human impacts on ani -
mal biodiversity are an under-recognized form of global environmental change.” (5)
WIRELESS RADIATION AND COLONY COLLAPSE 
DISORDER 
Bees are a critical pollinator species for agricultural productivity. (20) 
Of the 100 crops that provide 90% of the world’s food supply, 71 are pol -
linated by bees, according to the U.N. Environmental Program, #Friday 
Fact. (21) The report also notes that to produce 1 kilogram of honey, a bee must visit four million flowers and fly a distance equivalent to going around the Earth four times. Bee numbers have plummeted in Europe, the United States and around the world in the last two decades. Contrib -
uting factors affecting the health and reproduction of bees include pes -
ticides, global climate change, loss of habitat and air pollution with new research pointing towards microwave radiation as an important and yet unrecognized cause for concern. Bees, as well as birds, contain magnetite magneto-receptors in their abdomen. 
 
E
lectromagnetic microwave radiation has been shown to disrupt bee 
behavior and may cause worker bees to emit a piping signal to swarm. The bees have also demonstrated aggression after 30 minutes of cell phone exposure. Favre (2017)
A cell phone placed next to a bee hive appears to cause a slow de -
struction of the hive. (Dallo 2015) concludes in his research, “significant decrease in colony strength, honey stores, pollen reserves, number of for -
agers returning to their hives and egg laying capacity of queens in test colonies. Cell phone radiations disturbed navigational skills of foragers.” 
Lazaro (2016) looked at the effect of mobile communication antennas 

on the  abundance and composition of wild pollinators, including wild 
bees, hoverflies, bee flies, remaining flies, beetles, butterflies, and wasps 
on two Greek islands with variable distances from cell towers, carefully 
measuring the radiofrequency radiation. He found negative effects in all 
groups except butterflies.
Belgian entomologist Marie-Claire Cammaerts (2017) has done a 
number of studies on RFR and found that insects are particularly sensi -
tive. She writes, “Before the invention of the wireless technology, plenty of 
active insects fed on crops, flowers, fruits, where they ate, drank, collected 
nectar, and numerous dead insects were found crushed on cars. Nowa -
days, all this no longer occurs at such an extent [2]. Bees may be particu -
larly affected by manmade electromagnetism [21,22,23] – When crossing 
such electromagnetic fields, bees may no longer remember their way, may 
no longer fly in the correct direction, and may become unable to go back 
to their hive.”
These are truly alarming findings and serve as a dire warning on fur -
ther wireless expansion, especially with regards to sensitive wildlife areas 
and agricultural rural zones that depend on pollination.
5G ESPECIALLY HARMFUL TO INSECTS: THE 
RESONANCE EFFECT AND PHASED ARRAYS
Proposed 5G millimeter wavelengths are a similar size to insects and 
this creates a damaging vibrational effect known as resonance on the or -
ganism.  Resonance is a well-known phenomenon in physics. A common 
example is that of a wine glass which shatters when an opera star reaches a 
high C note, vibrating air molecules matching the glasses natural oscillat -
ing frequency. In general, mechanical resonance occurs when the frequen -
cy of an oscillation matches the system’s or its subcomponent’s natural fre -
quency and this results in increasingly intensified additive vibration with 
more energy being absorbed, causing more disturbance of the system. At 
low power an effect is greatly magnified. Thielens (2018) looked at this ef -
fect on four different insects exposed to electromagnetic fields from 2 to 
120 GHz.  He noted, “The insects show a maximum in absorbed radio fre -
quency power at wavelengths that are comparable to their body size – This 
could lead to changes in insect behavior, physiology, and morphology over 
time due to an increase in body temperatures, from dielectric heating.”  
In addition, a newer technology previously used in the military for early warning missile radar systems, PAVE PAWS,  is incorporated into 
these 5G systems and called phased arrays. (29) These powerful “beam 
steering” arrays scan back and forth from tower to device for easier con -
nection with an individual’s movement, to detect the device, similar to 
the surface-to-air missile systems. (30)  They are also used in AM and 
FM Broadcast stations and planned for automotive sensors and satellites. 
What effect will this increase in power and density of environmental ra -
diation have on our beneficial insects and pollinators?
REVIEW STUDIES POINT TO WILDLIFE HARM
Balmori (2015)  states in his latest review “Current evidence indicates 
that exposure at levels that are found in the environment (in urban areas 
and near base stations) may particularly alter the receptor organs to ori -
ent in the magnetic field of the earth. These results could have important 
implications for migratory birds and insects, especially in urban areas, but 
could also apply to birds and insects in natural and protected areas where 
there are powerful base station emitters of radiofrequencies.
Cucurachi (2012)  in reviewing 113 peer-reviewed publications re -
vealed, “In about two thirds of the reviewed studies ecological effects of 
RF-EMF was reported at high as well as at low dosages. The very low dos -
ages are compatible with real field situations, and could be found under 
environmental conditions.” 
The Ministry of Environment and Forest in India (MOE 2010)  
examined all available peer reviewed research on the impacts of wireless 
radiofrequency (RF) on living organisms at the time, including birds and 
bees. They found that 593 of the 919 articles showed adverse impacts. In 
each category of organism, over 60% of the research indicated harm to that 
biological species.
TREES DAMAGED BY CELL TOWERS
Aspen trees reproduce primarily from sprouting from the roots. If 
a stem dies, another fresh shoot is sent up.  “Clones” of tree stands are 
thus created that can live hundreds to thousands of years. The health of 
Aspen tree stands is determined by mature trees with shoots and saplings 
in between. In Colorado, Aspen trees have been on the decline for decades 
but rapid mortality has been observed in clones since 2004. (25)   A pre -
liminary experiment on trembling Aspen trees points to ambient elec -
“The exponential increase of mobile 
telephony has led to a pronounced 
increase in electromagnetic fields 
in the environment that may affect 
pollinator communities and threaten 
pollination as a key ecosystem service.”
Lazaro 2016

tromagnetic radiation from a variety of sources (cell towers, satellites, RF 
from electric power generation) causing poor growth and smaller leaves. 
Seedlings shielded from surrounding low level background RF radiation 
produced vigorous shoot growth, no necrotic lesions and rich pigmenta -
tion in the leaves due to anthocyanin production, versus unshielded seed -
lings which had a high percentage of leaf necrotic tissue and a reduction in 
shoot length. (Haggerty 2009)   
Waldmann-Selsam et al (2016) clearly demonstrated, in a robust four 
year study with accurate RF emission testing, cell tower radiation causing 
the death of nearby trees over time. He notes, “These results are consistent 
with the fact that damage afflicted on trees by mobile phone towers usually 
start on one side, extending to the whole tree over time.” 
ARE BEE DRONES THE ANSWER?  “SMART” OR 
DUMB POLLINATION?
Wireless technology, however convenient, has consequences. High 
tech has invaded every corner of our lives and will soon be used in agricul -
ture to pollinate crops as bee colony collapses disorder worsens. In a CNN 
article “This ‘bee’ drone is a robotic flower pollinator” the developer notes 
“It could conceivably be used in large-scale farming, even in hydroponic 
farming.” (22) 
As cell towers and wireless systems proliferate, will we continue to ig -
nore their role in harming life sustaining ecosystems?  Will we create dead 
zones in cities where urban or rural farmers will not be able to grow food 
or have a vegetable garden?  Agriculture is already under siege from many 
other environmental threats. Without bees there will be no pollination or honey. Without birds there will be no seed dispersal. 
The tech industry may advise us to use the very technology that is 
harming ecosystems by using bee drones to pollinate our crops. Walmart 
has already filed a patent for a robotic bee. (23)  These high tech insects 
would be directed by 4G or 5G radiation to operate via the Internet of 
Things. Because the size of 5G frequencies matches that of insects, this 
radiation acts as an insecticide (Yadav 2014). What about ownership of 
drones, privacy, security and adverse effects on sensitive native bees and 
flowers, e-waste and energy consumption with the use of these drones?  
Many questions with no answers but predictable negative consequences. 
We have been there before with pesticides, asbestos, lead, mercury, with 
new emerging toxins being regularly introduced. The fallout on public and 
environmental health continues. 
SCIENTISTS APPEAL TO THE UN FOR PROTECTIVE 
HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS 
Scientists who study radiofrequency radiation note a serious lack of 
monitoring and protocols to study the impacts of wireless technology and 
biologists are calling for precaution in the placement of cell towers with 
further expansion of wireless broadband.  As of August 30, 2018, 244 EMF 
scientists from 41 nations have signed an Appeal calling upon the United 
Nations, the WHO and the UNEP to address the public health and envi -
ronmental concerns raised in an extensive and growing body of scientific 
evidence on the broad adverse impacts of wireless radiation. (33) 
GETTING SMARTER: PREVENTION VERSUS 
TREATMENT
Solving the real problems causing the decline in wild -
life seems smarter than always trying to develop a new and 
potentially more toxic industry to fix it. Indeed, pesticides, 
habitat loss, over fishing, overhunting, overpopulation, 
global climate change, environmental toxins, plastics in 
the ocean have had a devastating impact on species. The 
World Wildlife Fund and the Zoological Society of Lon -
don reports that over half of the earth’s wildlife has been 
lost in the last 40 years. (27)
Prevention is far easier and more economical than 
treating a problem, especially if the problem becomes ir -
reversible (global climate change). Physicians prescribe 
medications to treat chronic diseases of our modern cul -“When crossing such electromagnetic 
fields, bees may no longer remember 
their way, may no longer fly in the 
correct direction, and may become 
unable to go back to their hive.”
Marie-Claire Cammaerts (2017)

ture.  They are now recognizing, however, that many of these synthetic 
medications, while useful, can cause side effects that may be worse than 
the disease being treated. Current medical care is focused more on cure 
or treatment than prevention or precaution, causing continuing escala -
tion of health care costs. Would it be better, instead, to encourage lifestyle 
changes to promote health and wellness with a holistically healthy diet, 
exercise and policies to reduce environmental toxic exposures?
WHAT IS A SAFE LEVEL OF RADIOFREQUENCY? 
STANDARDS ONLY LOOK AT HEAT
Current guidelines for radiofrequency exposure are set at levels that 
cause tissue heating, the assumed cause of harm from this radiation. The 
balance of scientific evidence now indicates that there are significant ad -
verse effects of this wireless radiation at non-thermal levels. (Belpomme 
2018)  Environmental effects on wildlife and plants confirms this. The 
mechanism has been found to be related to calcium channel membrane 
effects and oxidation. 
BIOINITIATIVE REPORT
Sage, Carpenter, Blank and other scientists note in the BioInitiative 
Report that non-thermal bio-effects are clearly established. The Bioinitia -
tive Report reviewed studies looking at the lowest levels of non-thermal, 
non-ionizing radiofrequency that did not cause harmful biological effects.  
Their conclusions, based on peer reviewed research, indicated that there 
should be a “scientific benchmark of 0.003 uW/cm2 or three nanowatts 
per centimeter squared for ‘lowest observed effect level’ for RFR is based 
on mobile phone base station-level studies.” They also suggest “Applying a 
ten-fold reduction to compensate for the lack of long-term exposure – or 
for children as a sensitive subpopulation.”  This would be a recommended 
precautionary action exposure level of 0.0003 uW/cm2. (Bioinitiative 2012) 
Our current U.S. guideline is 200 uW/cm2 to 1000 uW/cm2 for RF radia -
tion depending on frequency. This is a substantial difference and indicates 
a need for re-evaluation of FCC safety standards and consideration of pub -
lished scientific research indicating non-thermal effects. (NTP 2018)
INDEPENDENT SCIENCE IGNORED
Professor Emeritus of Biochemistry at Washington State University, 
Dr. Martin Pall, has written extensively on this subject.  In a recent pa -
per “5G: Great Risk for EU, US and International Health,” he looked at 
eight distinct types of harm from electromagnetic field exposure.  This 
included DNA damage, carcinogenicity, endocrine, nervous system and 
reproductive effects. Of 22 robust independent research review papers on 
non-thermal EMF effects published on or before 2013,  20 were ignored by  
the latest report of the European Commission’s  Scientific Committee on 
Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR).
There is an urgent need for government agencies to adopt a realis -tic biologically based radiofrequency exposure standard to replace the 
20-year-old thermal (SAR) standard, which is far too permissive and not 
protective of human or environmental health.
WIRELESS SILENT SPRING: PARALLELS 
BETWEEN PESTICIDES AND WIRELESS 
RADIATION
In rereading Rachel Carson’s book, Silent Spring , I was struck by the 
many similarities between pesticides and wireless radiation.
BOTH ARE INVISIBLE
Pesticides  act as an invisible poison that works on a cellular level and 
can abruptly or slowly cause disease. You cannot see or taste it on your 
food or smell it as it drifts through the neighborhoods and enters creeks.
Wireless  radiation is similarly silent to most. You typically cannot 
hear, feel or see radiofrequency radiation unless you are electrosensitive. 
Cellular and biologic damage however is occurring.
BOTH ARE UNIVERSAL IN OUR ENVIRONMENT
Pesticides  are routinely sprayed in homes, gardens, on trees, in for -
ests to strike insects far and wide. Biomonitoring studies nationwide and 
in California show pesticides still present in blood, urine and breast milk. 
(California Biomonitoring) (CDC Biomonitoring NHANES)
Wireless  radiation is found almost ubiquitously in homes, businesses 
and schools to connect us to the world and with each other instantaneous -
ly. This is supported by well over 300,000 cell towers in the U.S. not count -
ing private cell towers. The continuous pulsating waves of radiation stray 
into any nearby living organism, be it human, pet or wildlife.
LIFE LONG EXPOSURES: CRADLE TO GRAVE
Pesticides  and their sometimes more toxic residues are now found in 
all human cord blood, urine and breast milk, and in children who do not 
eat organic foods.  (Bradman 2003) (Curl 2003) (Lu 2006) (Salama 2017) 
(CDC Biomonitoring)
Exposure to wireless radiation now begins in the fetus with cell tow -
ers along with a host of wireless devices in the homes (i.e. cell phones, 
Tablets, Wi-Fi routers,  smart meters, and now baby toys, smart cribs and 
wearable technology). 
NON SELECTIVE TARGETS TO LIVING ORGANISMS 
WITH INDISCRIMINANT HARM
Pesticides  are sprayed in large areas to kill a few flying insects but end 
up harming all species and the balance of nature with ecosystem effects. 
(EPA Persistent Organic Pollutants)
Wireless  radiation is sprayed in all directions to find the intended 
device but also penetrates all living organisms causing cellular damage 
with ecosystem effects. (Balmori 2010), (Cucurachi 2012) (Sivani S and “Everything is reversible because 
everything is unfortunately of 
humankind’s making.”
Tris Allinson,  Bird Life’s senior global scientist, on the decline of birds
Saravanamuttu 2013) (NTP 2018)
BOTH CAUSE A VARIETY OF ADVERSE BIOLOGICAL 
EFFECTS
Pesticides  can have many toxic biologic impacts and are associated 
with malignant, neurodegenerative, respiratory, reproductive, develop -
mental, and metabolic diseases in humans. DDT and its metabolite DDE 
was found to cause blindness in fish and can act as an endocrine disruptor, 
mutagen and carcinogen. Women exposed to DDT before puberty are five 
times more likely to develop breast cancer. Glyphosate is linked to cancer.  
(Creesey 2015) (Soto 2015) (Mostafalou S and Abdollahi M 2013, 2017)
Wireless  2G radiation was found to cause DNA damage and increase 
the risk of cancer of the heart and brain in a recent 10 year, $25 million 
dollar National Toxicology Program study (NTP 2018). Non-ionizing ra -
diation from 3G and 4G cell towers have been found to cause nonspecific 
symptoms of electrosensitivity in some liv -
ing within 300 meters of a cell tower includ -
ing insomnia, dizziness, brain fog, fatigue, 
depression and heart palpitations. Cell 
phone radiation has been associated with 
harm to the reproductive system, neurologic 
system, immune system and hematologic 
system. (Bioinitiative Report 2014) (Oceana 
Report) 
BOTH ARE CHILDREN OF WAR
Pesticides  were first developed as 
agents of chemical warfare. They happened 
to kill the research insects and thus became 
commercialized for that purpose after the 
war. We can now buy pesticides in the gro -
cery store.
Radiofrequency  microwave technol-
ogy was developed in World War II. Known 
as radar, it has many military uses including 
for surveillance, missile control, air traffic 
control, moving target indication, weapons 
location and vehicle search. (39) At the end 
of the war, microwave ovens were developed 
after an engineer discovered a candy bar in 
his pocket had melted when he was near the 
magnetron power source. (38) Millimeter 
technology (95GHz) has been developed for crowd control (Active Denial 
System). (40) The recent health problems of Cuban, Canadian and Chinese 
diplomats and their families has been attributed to microwave radiofre -
quency radiation effects from either RF surveillance or deliberate attacks. 
(36).  Our homes typically have many wireless devices such as cell phones, 
cordless phones, Wi-Fi, smart meters as well as microwave ovens. 
BOTH ARE BIOACTIVE: TOXICITY THROUGH 
OXIDATION
Pesticide  toxicity can take various forms with a direct neurotoxic 
effect, DNA damage, immune suppression and endocrine disruption 
through disturbance of many cellular processes. (Mostafalou S and Ab -
dollahi M. 2013, 2017) Newer research on the mechanisms of toxicity of 
pesticides is focusing on oxidative damage (free radical formation) as the result of a multistep process causing cellular disruption, tissue damage, 
chronic disease and cell death. (Agrawal 2010)  Antioxidants have been 
shown to lessen the toxic effects of pesticides as well as  chemicals. (Akefe 
2017)
Wireless  radiofrequency radiation has also been shown to have a pri -
mary mechanism of harm from oxidation. Yamenko (2016) looked at 100 
studies of RF radiation both in vivo and in vitro and found 93 showed 
oxidation as a mechanism of toxicity. Research on antioxidants including 
curcumin, vitamin C, vitamin E, melatonin show protection against the 
effects of non-ionizing radiation with a reduction in oxidative stress. 
ADDITIVE TOXIC MIXTURES MORE HARMFUL
Pesticide  exposure does not happen in isolation. Typically, we are ex -
posed to a mix of pesticides in the food we eat. These pesticides circulate 
in our system for a variable length of time from hours to years and can 
be stored in our fat or breast milk. The toxic 
interactions can be long term. A convention -
al potato has 41 pesticides, 14 of which are 
classified as carcinogens. (44)  EWG tested 
strawberries and found about 22 pesticides 
in a conventionally grown berry. Research 
has shown that mixes of chemicals and pes -
ticides have additive and synergistic toxic ef -
fects. For approval, however, these pesticides 
are studied only one at a time and without 
their “inactive” ingredients. 
The more pesticides we are exposed to 
the greater the mix of adverse effects on the 
immune system, reproduction, carcinoge -
nicity, as our protective enzyme and anti -
oxidant mechanisms are overwhelmed. One 
pesticide can act as a mutagen, the next an 
endocrine disruptor and the next suppress 
your immune system to promote cancer. A 
true toxic triad of effects. 
Wireless  technology has continued to 
evolve and expand. The 1G analogue system 
worked well but did not carry much data. 
While new generations have been intro -
duced to the marketplace to serve our un -
quenchable appetite for instant wireless in -
formation and communication, the old will 
still be in place – 2G, 3G, 4G. With the latest proposed 5G technology and 
the Internet of Things, industry aims to integrate this with other wireless 
generations, and even open up any remaining radiofrequency spectrum, 
creating a blanket of mixed frequency wireless radiation wildlife and hu -
mans will be exposed.  
Radiation emissions are not only from cell towers, but also in remote -
ly-controlled stratospheric balloons (Loon Project) and proposed low or -
biting satellites, greatly increasing ambient levels of electromagnetic radia -
tion (EMR). Like pesticides there has been inadequate research into the 
mix of frequencies we are exposed to. The 2018 NTP study, which found 
clear evidence of carcinogenicity, looked only at 2G technology. There are 
no government plans for testing of 3G, 4G or 5G individually or in com -
bination. Synergistic effects of wireless radiation and toxic chemicals has 

also not been attempted. Despite a virtual research vacuum on 5G high 
frequency radiation, federal and state legislation is being introduced and 
quickly approved to ensure the rapid deployment of this technology by 
removing local jurisdiction and limiting fees for cities and counties to use 
the public right of way. (32) 
SENSITIVE HUMAN POPULATIONS IN BOTH
Pesticides  appear more toxic to some people who do not have the 
metabolic pathways to transform and excrete them. For organochlorine 
pesticides such as DDT and Lindane it has been shown that there are ge -
netic variations in the cytochrome P450 system to break down these pes -
ticides, causing increased risk of disease. (Docea 2017) Those pesticide 
workers with paranoxonase genetic polymorphism suffer chronic toxicity 
exhibited by nausea, dizziness, headaches, fatigue and gait disturbance. 
Symptoms in those individuals with multiple chemical sensitivity are sim -
ilar. (Lee 2003) (Rossi 2018)
Wireless  radiofrequency radiation is observed to cause non-specific 
symptoms of headaches, dizziness, insomnia, nausea, irritability, depres -
sion and heart palpitations in those who are electrosensitive. This was 
first reported by NASA in military personnel working on radar and was 
called “microwave illness.” (NASA 1981) Although some claim this could 
be a psychologic condition, researchers have identified a high correlation 
of symptoms to inflammatory and other biomarkers which can aid the 
diagnosis. Belpomme (2015) conducted a large clinical study and found 
laboratory biomarkers that connect multiple chemical sensitivity to elec -
trosensitivity. It also has been noted that having these conditions causes 
predictable isolation and fear which can lead to neuropsychiatric symp -
toms. (41) 
INDUSTRY DECEPTION
Pesticides  have been well protected by the industry that created 
them. An investigation of over 20,000 documents including internal sci -
entific studies, meeting minutes and memos from federal regulatory agen -
cies and manufacturers was led by the Center for Media and Democracy 
and the Bioscience Research Project resulting in “The Poison Papers” of 
2018. (46)  Concealment, political manipulation, cover-up and collusion 
were found, along with suppression of fraudulent independent research 
and secrecy of the toxic effects of chemicals and pesticides.
Wireless  telecommunications have been regulated by the Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) since the 1996 Telecommunica -tions Act was passed. The Environmental Protection Agency was relieved 
of their oversight duty of radiofrequency radiation prior to that. This 1996 
Act assumed, even before testing, that there were no health or environ -
mental effects of this radiation. It is specified in the law that health and 
environmental effects cannot be used as an argument to deny cell tower 
placement. This has hampered attempts to monitor or identify health ef -
fects in the United States.  Harvard’s Center for Ethics investigation of 
the wireless industry, written by Norm Alster, resulted in a publication 
called “Captured Agency: How the Federal Communications Industry is 
Dominated by the Industries it Presumably Regulates.” (47) Highlighted is 
industries exorbitant lobbying influence to the tune of about $400 million 
a year according to the Center for Responsive Politics. A revolving door in 
Washington was also noted with telecom industry executives filling the 
critical “independent” government positions. 
In her book, “Disconnect,” Dr. Devra Davis documents industry ma -
nipulation along with discrediting of scientists who have identified and 
published literature on the adverse health effects of wireless radiation. (48)
OUR FATE IS THAT OF NATURE
We are just beginning to understand the fragile biologic complexities 
of the earths living creatures as we simultaneously document natures de -
cline under the dismissing hand of mankind. Many have warned that our 
fate will follow that of nature. The expansion of wireless technologies for 
human convenience will require more cell towers on every street corner. 
This will threaten natural ecosystems in favor of immersive and invasive 
technology which is contributing to both negative environmental, physi -
cal and mental health effects, especially on our youth. 
SAFER SECURE ALTERNATIVES: 
FIBEROPTIC, CABLE AND LANDLINES
The internet has become a necessity to most people. It can be provid -
ed in a safer manner to reduce EMR exposure. Alternatives such as fiber -
optic networks and cable exist that are faster, more fire resistant, use less 
energy and are cheaper in the long run. (49) Traditional copper landlines 
are reliable in emergencies, are cheap, already built, and connect everyone 
without risk. Why remove them?  We can have the benefits of faster, de -
pendable and more private communications without compromising pub -
lic or environmental health.“Doubt is our product since it is the 
best means of competing with the 
“body of fact” that exists in the minds 
of the general public. It is also the 
means of establishing a controversy.” (22)
Tobacco executive, from Doubt is Their Product, David Michaels
Recommendations by Biologists and 
Scientists in a 2010 Report by the  
Ministry of Environment and Forests 
in India to Protect Wildlife from EMR 
(paraphrased) (MOE 2010)
1. Electromagnetic radiation (EMR) should be 
recognized as a pollutant.
2. Create laws to protect urban flora and fauna 
from EMR. 
3. Create protected areas with no cell towers.
4. Require bold signs on the dangers of 
radiation to be displayed on all cell tower 
structures. 
5. Perform regular independent auditing 
of EMR/RF in urban localities – schools, 
hospitals, residential, recreational and 
ecologically sensitive areas.
6. Require blinking red lights on cell towers to 
protect birds at night.
7. Create laws to enable removal of existing problematic mobile 
towers to protect human or environmental health.
8. Require ecological assessment and review of sites identified for 
installing towers before their installation in wildlife, ecologically 
sensitive or conservational important areas.
9. Strictly control installation of mobile towers near wildlife 
protected areas, breeding areas, bee colonies, zoos, and identify 
with scientific studies appropriate distances from tower 
structures as part of pre-installation review. 
10. The locations of cell phone towers and other EMF radiating 
towers along with their frequencies should be made available on 
public domain. This information would help in monitoring the 
population of birds and bees in and around the mobile towers 
and also in and/or around wildlife protected areas. 
11. Public consultation to be made mandatory before installation of 
cell phone towers in any area. The Forest Department should be 
consulted before installation of cell phone towers. The distance 
at which these towers should be installed should be studied on a 
case by case basis. 
12. The government should educate the public about the dangers of 
EMR and need for precaution, placing signs in wildlife areas and 
zoos.
13. To prevent overlapping high radiation fields, new towers should 
not be permitted within a radius of one kilometer of existing 
towers. 
14. If new towers must be built, construct them to be above 80 feet 
and below 199 feet tall to avoid the requirement for aviation 
safety lighting. Construct un-guyed towers with platforms that 
will accommodate possible future co-locations and build them at 
existing ‘antenna farms,’ away from areas of high migratory bird 
traffic, wetlands and other known bird areas. 
ABUNDANCE OF LIFE AND DIVERSITY OR A 
WIRELESS SILENT SPRING? 
Natures communication systems evolved using minute electromag -
netic signals in tune with the earth and each other. They are being over -
whelmed now with manmade artificial electromagnetic radiation, that in 
combination with other well established environmental threats spells di -saster. Rachel Carson called for humans to “act responsibly, carefully, and 
as stewards of the living earth.” Science and observation is warning us that 
a thoughtful approach to all of man-kinds activities is imperative, to favor 
the protection of biodiversity over profit, innovation or convenience. We 
need to take a lesson from nature that acts slowly and deliberately to cre -
ate a healthy balance. Rapid shifts in technology are changing our social 
structure and separating us from reality, each other and the natural world. 
There are no limits to “disruptive” 21st century wireless technology nor 
any meaningful safeguards. If we don’t slow down and think about the 
risks as well as the benefits of high tech, will it quietly lead us to a wireless 
silent spring and then to a silent Earth?
REFERENCES
SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE
• Agrawal A et al. Pesticides induced oxidative stress in 
mammalian systems: A review . International Journal 
of Biological and Medical Research. 2010. https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/202037053_Pesticides_induced_
oxidative_stress_in_mammalian_systems_A_review
• Akefe IO. Protective Effects of Antioxidants in Chlorpyrifos 
Toxicity . Research and Reports on Toxicology. Vol 1 1:4 
2017. http://www.imedpub.com/articles/protective-effects-
antioxidants-in-chlorpyrifos-toxicity.pdf
• Balmori A.  Anthropogenic radiofrequency electromagnetic 
fields as an emerging threat to wildlife orientation . (2015) 
Science of the Total Environment. Vol 518-519, 15 June, 2015. 
Pages 58-60. 68. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0048969715002296 or https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/273121908_Anthropogenic_Radiofrequency_
Electromagnetic_Fields_as_an_Emerging_Threat_to_Wildlife_
Orientation
• Balmori A and Hallberg O. The Urban Decline of the 
House Sparrow(Passer domesticus): A Possible Link with 
Electromagnetic Radiation . (2007) Electromagnetic Biology 
and Medicine, 26: 141–151, 2007. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17613041
• Belpomme D et al. Thermal and non-thermal health effects 
of low intensity non-ionizing radiation: An international 

perspective . Environmental Pollution 242(Pt A) July 2018. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/326256720_Thermal_
and_non-thermal_health_effects_of_low_intensity_non-
ionizing_radiation_An_international_perspective
• Belpomme D. Reliable disease biomarkers characterizing 
and identifying electrohypersensitivity and multiple 
chemical sensitivity as two etiopathogenic aspects of 
a unique pathological disorder . (2015)  Rev Environ 
Health. 2015;30(4):251-71. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/26613326
• BioInitiative Working Group , Cindy Sage and David 
O. Carpenter, Editors. BioInitiative Report: A Rationale 
for a Biologically-based Public Exposure Standard for 
Electromagnetic Radiation at www.bioinitiative.org, December 
31, 2012 at www.bioinitiative.org
• Bradman, A. Measurement of pesticides and other toxicants in 
amniotic fluid as a potential biomarker of prenatal exposure: a 
validation study . Enviromenatl Health Perpsectives. 2003 Nov; 
111(14): 1779–1782. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1241723/
• Cadiou H and McNaughton P.  Avian magnetite-based 
magnetoreception: a physiologist’s perspective . (2010). J R Soc 
Interface. 2010 Apr 6; 7(Suppl 2): S193–S205. 
• California Biomonitoring. Organochlorine Pesticides . https://
biomonitoring.ca.gov/results/chemical/207
• California Biomonitoring. Organophosphate Pesticides . 
https://biomonitoring.ca.gov/results/chemical/428Aa
• CDC Biomonitoring DDT . https://www.cdc.gov/biomonitoring/
DDT_BiomonitoringSummary.html
• California Biomonitoring. 2,4 D herbicide . https://
biomonitoring.ca.gov/results/chemical/all?field_chemical_
name_target_id_selective%5B0%5D=276
• Cammaerts MC. Is Electromagnetism one of the causes of the 
CCD? A work plan for testing this hypothesis . Marie-Claire 
Cammaerts. Journal of Behavior. 2 (1):1006. March 28, 2017. 
https://www.jscimedcentral.com/Behavior/behavior-2-1006.
phphttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2844004/
• Carson, Rachel. Silent Spring . 1962. Houton Mifflin Company 
Boston
• CDC. NHANES.  Forth National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals . https://www.cdc.gov/
exposurereport/pdf/FourthReport_UpdatedTables_Volume1_
Mar2018.pdf
• CDC. National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental 
Chemicals (National Exposure Report). Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC)’s Environmental Health 
Laboratory at the National Center for Environmental Health  
https://www.cdc.gov/exposurereport/pdf/FourthReport_
ExecutiveSummary.pdf
• Cressey D. Widely used herbicide linked to cancer . (24 March 
2015). Scientific American. http://www.scientificamerican.com/
article/widely-used-herbicide-linked-to-cancer/
• Cucurachi S et al. A review of the ecological effects of 
radiofrequency electromagnetic fields (RF-EMF) . (2012) 
Environment International. 51C:116-140. 2012.  https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/233974663_A_review_of_the_
ecological_effects_of_radiofrequency_electromagnetic_fields_RF-EMF
• Curl CL. Organophosphorus Pesticide Exposure of Urban and 
Suburban Preschool Children with Organic and Conventional 
Diets . Environmental Health Perspectives. Volume 111, No.3, 
March 2003. 
• Dallo J.S. Effect of Electromagnetic (cell phone) radiations on 
Apis mellifera . (2015)   Journal of Research in Agriculture and 
Animal Science Volume 2 ~ Issue 12 (2015) pp:06-10. Feb. 2015. 
http://questjournals.org/jraas/papers/vol3-issue1/B310610.pdf  
• Dirzo R et al. Defaunation in the Anthropocene . Science  
25 Jul 2014: Vol. 345, Issue 6195, pp. 401-406.  http://science.
sciencemag.org/content/345/6195/401
• Engel S et al.  Anthropogenic electromagnetic noise disrupts 
magnetic compass orientation in a migratory bird . (2014) 
Nature. 2014 May 15;509(7500):353-6. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/24805233
• Docea AO et al. CYP polymorphisms and pathological 
conditions related to chronic exposure to organochlorine 
pesticides . Toxicol Rep. 2017; 4: 335–341. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5615117/
• EPA. Persistent Organic Pollutants: A Global Issue, A Global 
Response . https://www.epa.gov/international-cooperation/
persistent-organic-pollutants-global-issue-global-response
• Erickson WP et al. A Summary and Comparison of Bird 
Mortality from Anthropogenic Causes with an Emphasis on 
Collisions . USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-191. 
2005. Page 1029. https://www.fs.fed.us/psw/publications/
documents/psw_gtr191/psw_gtr191_1029-1042_erickson.pdf
• Everaert and Bauwens. A possible effect of electromagnetic 
radiation from mobile phone base stations on the number 
of breeding house sparrows (Passer domesticus) (2007) 
Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine 26:63–72 , 2007. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17454083
• Hardell L. World Health Organization, radiofrequency 
radiation and health - a hard nut to crack (Review). Int J Oncol. 
2017 Aug; 51(2): 405–413. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC5504984/
• Hernandez AF. et al Toxic effects of pesticide mixtures at a 
molecular level: their relevance to human health . Toxicolog y. 
2013 May 10;307:136-45. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22728724
• Heuser G et al. 1992. Diagnostic Markers of Multiple Chemical 
Sensitivity . https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK234795/ 
• Kolodynski AA1, Kolodynska VV. Motor and psychological 
functions of school children living in the area of the Skrunda 
Radio Location Station in Latvia . Sci Total Environ. 1996 Feb 
2;180(1):87-93. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8717320  
and https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/bd54/63b82631cd70196b36
86189083fe6c7a0b0c.pTe
• Lee BW et al. Association Between Human Paraoxonase 
Gene Polymorphism and Chronic Symptoms in Pesticide-
Exposed Workers. Journal of Occupational and Environmental 
Medicine 45(2):118-22 · March 2003  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/10866951_
Association_Between_Human_Paraoxonase_Gene_
Polymorphism_and_Chronic_Symptoms_in_Pesticide-
Exposed_Workers
•L ongcore T et al. Avian mortality at communication towers in
the United States and Canada: which species, how many, and 
where?  Biological Conservation, Volume 158. February 2013 ,
Pages 410-419. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0006320712004144
•
L
u C et al. Organic Diets Significantly Lower Children’s 
Dietary Exposure to Organophosphorus Pesticides . Environ
Health Perspect. 2006 Feb; 114(2): 260–263.
•MO
E. The Ministry of Environment and Forest. Report on 
Possible Impacts of Communication Cell Towers on Wildlife Including Birds and Bees . (2010) http://www.moef.nic.in/
downloads/public-information/final_mobile_towers_report.pdf
•
M
ostafalou S and Abdollahi M. Pesticides: an update of human
exposure and toxicity . Arch Toxicol. 2017 Feb;91(2):549-599.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27722929
•M
ostafalou S and Abdollahi M. Pesticides and human chronic
diseases: evidences, mechanisms, and perspectives . Toxicol
Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Apr 15;268(2):157-77.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23402800
•
N
ASA Report – Electromagnetic Field Interactions with
the Human Body: Observed Effects and Theories . April
1981. Jeremy Raines, PhD. https://ntrs.nasa.gov/search.jsp?R=19810017132
•
Ni
colopoulou-Stamati P et al.  Chemical Pesticides and Human 
Health: The Urgent Need for a New Concept in Agriculture. Front Public Health . 2016; 4: 148. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC4947579/
•
N
TP. National Toxicology Program. TOXICOLOGY 
AND CARCINOGENESIS STUDIES IN Hsd:SPRAGUE DAWLEY SD RATS EXPOSED TO WHOLE-BODY RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATION AT A FREQUENCY (900 MHz) AND MODULATIONS (GSM AND CDMA) USED BY CELLPHONES . March 26-28, 2018. https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/
about_ntp/trpanel/2018/march/tr595peerdraft.pdf
•
O
ceana Radiofrequency Scientific Advisory Association .
ORSAA https://www.orsaa.org/orsaa-database.html
•P
akhomov A et al. Very weak oscillating magnetic field 
disrupts the magnetic compass of songbird migrants . (2017) J
R Soc Interface. 2017 Aug;14(133). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28794163
•
P
all, Martin. 5G: Great Risk for EU, US and International 
Health .  http://peaceinspace.blogs.com/files/5g-emf-hazards--dr-
martin-l.-pall--eu-emf2018-6-11us3.pdf
•R
ossi S et al. Multiple Chemical Sensitivity: Review of the 
State of the Art in Epidemiology, Diagnosis, and Future Perspectives . Rossi, Sabrina, MSc; Pitidis, Alessio, MSc. Journal
of Occupational and Environmental Medicine. February2018 - Volume 60 - Issue 2. https://journals.lww.com/joem/Fulltext/2018/02000/Multiple_Chemical_Sensitivity__Review_of_the_State.5.aspx
•
R
ussell, CL. 5G Wireless Telecommunications Expansion: 
Public Health and Environmental Implications. Environmental Research . 165(2018).484-495. https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29655646
•
S
alama AK. Lactational Exposure to Pesticides: A Review .
Toxicology Open Access.Feb 2017. https://www.omicsonline.org/open-access/lactational-exposure-to-pesticides-a-review.php?aid=85482
•S
chwarze S et al. Weak Broadband Electromagnetic Fields
are More Disruptive to Magnetic Compass Orientation in a Night-Migratory Songbird (Erithacus rubecula) than Strong Narrow-Band Fields . (2016). Front Behav
Neuroscience. March, 2016.  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=PMID%3A+27047356
•
S
ivani S and Saravanamuttu S. and Impacts of radio-frequency 
electromagnetic field (RF-EMF) from cell phone towers and wireless devices on biosystem and ecosystem—A review . (2013)  
Biology and Medicine. 4(4):202-216. January 9.  2013. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258521207_Impacts_of_radio-frequency_electromagnetic_field_RF-EMF_from_cell_phone_towers_and_wireless_devices_on_biosystem_and_ecosystem-A_review
•
S
oto A M. DDT, endocrine disruption and breast cancer . Nat
Rev Endocrinol. 2015 Sep; 11(9): 507–508. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4667778/
•
W
iltschko R et al. Magnetoreception in birds: The effect of 
radio-frequency fields . (2015) 
 J
ournal of The Royal Society
Interface 12(103).  February 2015. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/270002583_Magnetoreception_in_birds_The_effect_of_radio-frequency_fields
•
Y
adav DN et al. Microwave technology for disinfestation of 
cereals and pulses: An overview . J Food Sci Technol. 2014 Dec;
51(12): 3568–3576. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4252428/
•
Y
akymenko et al. Oxidative mechanisms of biological activity 
of low-intensity radiofrequency radiation . (2016) Electromagn
Biol Med. 2016;35(2):186-202. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26151230
OTHER REFERENCES 
1.M argaret Atwood: Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring, 50 years on .
Margaret Atwood. Dec 7, 2012. https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/07/why-rachel-carson-is-a-saint
2.
W
hen Homing Pigeons Don’t Go Home Again. NY Times. 
Dec 6, 1998 .  https://www.nytimes.com/1998/12/06/nyregion/
when-homing-pigeons-don-t-go-home-again.html
3.Th
e Skrunda Radio Location Case https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/0048969795049134
4.G
AO- TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Exposure and Testing 
Requirements for Mobile Phones Should Be Reassessed . July
2012. https://www.gao.gov/assets/600/592901.pdf
5.W
hat’s Causing the Sharp Decline in Insects, and Why It
Matters . July 6, 2016. https://e360.yale.edu/features/insect_
numbers_declining_why_it_matters
6.A
fter Tens of Thousands of Pigeons Vanish, One Comes 
Back . National Geographic.  May 26, 16. https://www.
nationalgeographic.com/science/phenomena/2016/05/26/after-tens-of-thousands-of-pigeons-vanish-one-comes-back/
7.
M
OBILES BAD FOR BIRDS, PEOPLE . Wired Magazine. Sept
5, 2011 https://www.wired.com/2001/09/mobiles-bad-for-birds-people/
8.
A
udubon Society.  How to Protect Birds from 21st Century 
Threats . Becca Cudmore and Nicole Lou.  May 22, 2015  https://
www.audubon.org/news/how-protect-birds-21st-century-threats
14 | THE BULLETIN | SEPTEMBER / OCTOBER 2018
9. Forty Percent of the World’s Bird Populations Are in Decline, 
New Study Finds . April 23, 2018.Yale Environment 360. 
https://e360.yale.edu/digest/forty-percent-of-the-worlds-bird-
populations-are-in-decline-new-study-finds
10. Radio and tv towers killing birds: the solution may be 
simple . ABC News Sept 10, 2013. http://www.birdsontheedge.
org/2013/09/10/radio-and-tv-towers-killing-birds-the-solution-
may-be-simple/
11. The Government Is Changing Tower Lights to Save 
the Birds . March 28, 2016. https://www.citylab.com/
transportation/2016/03/birds-planes-collisions-blinking-
lights/475548/
12. The Invisible Rainbow: A History of Electricity and Life . (2017) 
Arthur Firstenberg.
13. The Pigeon Insider. Are Mobile Phone Towers Pigeon Killers?  
2013. https://www.pigeonracingpigeon.com/discussion-of-the-
week/are-mobile-phone-towers-pigeon-killers/ 
14. FCC Seeks to Expedite Deployment of 5G Wireless Networks: 
Agency expected to approve plan to override local rules . 
WSJ. John McKinnon. Sept 4, 2018. https://www.wsj.com/
articles/fcc-seeks-to-expedite-deployment-of-5g-wireless-
networks-1536080376
15. (2014) Department of Interior Letter to National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration 
Regarding Adverse Impact of Cell Tower Radiation on Wildlife. 
Willie Taylor, Director, Office of Environmental Policy and 
Compliance. https://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/us_doi_
comments.pdf
16. FirstNet Defends Revised NEPA Procedures . National 
Telecommunications Public Safety Council. Feb 1, 2018.    
https://blog.npstc.org/2018/02/01/firstnet-defends-revised-nepa-
procedures/
17. First Responder Network Goes Nationwide As All 50 States, 2 
Territories and District of Columbia Join FirstNet . First Net.  
December 29, 2017. https://firstnet.gov/news/first-responder-
network-goes-nationwide
18. AB 57 (2015) Bill Text: CA AB57 | 2015-2016 | Regular Session | 
Chaptered. https://legiscan.com/CA/text/AB57/2015
19. INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIRE FIGHTERS, 
DIVISION OF OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH, SAFETY 
AND MEDICINE. Position on the Health Effects from 
Radio Frequency/Microwave (RF/MW) Radiation in Fire 
Department Facilities from Base Stations for Antennas and 
Towers for the Conduction of Cell Phone Transmissions . 2004. 
http://www.iaff.org/hs/facts/celltowerfinal.asp
20. What’s Causing the Sharp Decline in Insects, and Why It 
Matters . CHRISTIAN SCHWÄGERL • JULY 6, 2016. Yale 360. 
https://e360.yale.edu/features/insect_numbers_declining_why_
it_matters
21. UN Environment.  #FridayFact: One in three spoonfuls of 
food depends on bees! https://www.unenvironment.org/news-
and-stories/story/fridayfact-one-three-spoonfuls-food-depends-
bees
22. This ‘bee’ drone is a robotic flower pollinator . Parija 
Kavilanz. February 15, 2017. CNN Tech.  https://money.cnn.
com/2017/02/15/technology/bee-drone-pollination/index.html
23. Walmart has hinted that it’s building crop-pollinating robot bees . Leanna Garfield add period unless the month is May Mar. 
14, 2018, https://www.businessinsider.com/walmart-robot-bees-
farming-patent-2018-3  
24. American Bird Conservancy. Communication Tower Owners 
Change Lighting to Protect Birds . Press release Nov 1, 2016. 
https://abcbirds.org/article/communication-tower-owners-
change-lighting-protect-birds/
25. US Department of Agriculture USDA Forest Service 
Rangeland Management & Vegetation Ecology – Botany 
Program .   https://www.fs.fed.us/wildflowers/beauty/aspen/
decline.shtml
26. Robotic bee could help pollinate crops as real bees decline .
The New Scientist. Feb 9, 2017.  https://www.newscientist.com/
article/2120832-robotic-bee-could-help-pollinate-crops-as-real-
bees-decline/
27. Earth has lost half of its wildlife in the past 40 years, says 
WWF . Damian Carrington.  Sept 30, 2014. . The Guardian. 
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/29/earth-
lost-50-wildlife-in-40-years-wwf  
28. EPA. Persistent Organic Pollutants: A Global Issue, A Global 
Response . 2009. https://www.epa.gov/international-cooperation/
persistent-organic-pollutants-global-issue-global-response
29. The Air Force upgrades its missile early warning systems . 
Katherine Owens. April 24, 2017. https://defensesystems.com/
articles/2017/04/24/earlywarningradar.aspx
30. A Beam-Steering Antenna for 5G Mobile Phones: For the first 
time, a beam-steering antenna is integrated into the metal 
casing of a mobile phone . IEEE Spectrum. Jan 29, 2018. Dexter 
Johnson.  https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/telecom/wireless/a-
beam-steering-antenna-for-real-world-mobile-phones
31. Monsanto ordered to pay $289 million in world’s first 
Roundup cancer trial . Tina Bellon. Aug 10, 2018. https://www.
reuters.com/article/us-monsanto-cancer-lawsuit/monsanto-
ordered-to-pay-289-million-in-worlds-first-roundup-cancer-
trial-idUSKBN1KV2HB
32. FCC order to streamline small cell deployments looks to speed 
5G. Sean Kinney, Editor in Chief on SEPTEMBER 5, 2018. ttps://
www.rcrwireless.com/20180905/policy/fcc-order-to-streamline-
small-cell-deployments-looks-to-speed-5g
33. EMF Scientist Appeal . 2018. EMFScientist.org
34. The Top 40 Best Wearable Tech Products for Kids and 
Families . https://www.safety.com/best-wearables/#gref
35. The Chemical Age Dawns in Agriculture . https://
livinghistoryfarm.org/farminginthe40s/pests_01.html
36. Microwave Weapons Are Prime Suspect in Ills of U.S. Embassy 
Workers. Doctors and scientists say microwave strikes may 
have caused sonic delusions and very real brain damage 
among embassy staff and family members . Sept 1, 2018. 
William J. Broad. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/01/science/
sonic-attack-cuba-microwave.html?action=click&module=Well
&pgtype=Homepage&section=Health
37. INNOVATIVE CROPPING SYSTEMS CAN REPLACE 
HAZARDOUS PESTICIDES   http://www.panna.org/sites/
default/files/NCAP%20potatoes%20%2797.pdf
38. A Brief History of the Microwave Oven . Evan Ackerman.  Sept 
30, 2016. https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-history/space-age/a-
brief-history-of-the-microwave-oven
SEPTEMBER / OCTOBER  2018  | THE BULLETIN | 15
39.R adar Grows from Military Tool to Everyday Use . Jack Browne
| Aug 18, 2015https://www.mwrf.com/systems/radar-grows-
military-tool-everyday-use
40.A
ctive Denial System FAQs . US Department of Defense.
https://jnlwp.defense.gov/About/Frequently-Asked-Questions/Active-Denial-System-FAQs/
41.
W
hat’s the Diagnosis Doctor? Eberle S.  http://www.sccma-
mcms.org/Portals/19/Whats%20the%20Diagnosis%20Doctor.pdf?ver=2016-12-09-152046-290
42.
R
einventing Wires: The Future of Landlines and Networks .
National Institute for Science, Law & Public Policy. http://electromagnetichealth.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/ReInventing-Wires-1-25-18.pdf
43.
P
igeon racers keep hobby alive despite fading interest, phone
towers . LiveMint. Samanth Subramanian Jun 24 2008. https://
www.livemint.com/Home-Page/l1y6sTn2fy4DxDejgBijfL/Pigeon-racers-keep-hobby-alive-despite-fading-interest-phon.html
44.
J
ournal of Pesticide Reform. Winter 1997. INNOV ATIVE
CROPPING SYSTEMS CAN REPLACE HAZARDOUSPESTICIDES . http://www.panna.org/sites/default/files/NCAP%20potatoes%20%2797.pdf
45.P
esticide mixtures may increase health risks but are still 
unregulated by California, UCLA report says . Kathy Wyer |
February 17, 2016. http://newsroom.ucla.edu/releases/pesticide-mixtures-may-increase-health-risks-but-are-still-unregulated-by-california-ucla-report-says
46.
The Poison Papers .  Documenting the Hidden History of
Chemical and Pesticide Hazards in the United States. 2018.https://www.poisonpapers.org
47.
C
aptured Agency: How the Federal Communications Industry 
is Dominated by the Industries it Presumably Regulates . Norm
Alster. 2015.  https://ethics.harvard.edu/files/center-for-ethics/files/capturedagency_alster.pdf
48.
D
isconnect: The Truth About Cell Phone Radiation, What 
The Industry Is Doing To Hide It, And How To Protect YourFamily . Devra Davis, PhD, MPH. 2013.
49.
R
e-Inventing Wires: The Future of Landlines and Networks .
National Institute for Science, Law and Public Policy inWashington D.C. 2018. http://electromagnetichealth.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/ReInventing-Wires-1-25-18.pdf
16 | THE BULLETIN  | MARCH / APRIL 2015
By Cindy Russell, MD
VP of Community Health, SCCMA 
Industry has been quite successful in creating magically useful wire -
less technologies such as cell phones, Ipads, Wi-Fi, and now wearable tech 
devices such as Google glasses, we all love. Many of these handy gadgets have now reached the typical classroom across the globe. It has become apparent, however, that there are substantial downsides to being too con -
nected to technology and as safety concerns mount, governments such as France and Israel are backing away from the blind adoption of wireless technology in schools, especially for young children.
These devices are cool and convenient, however there remains nag -
ging questions of overuse and safety as the application of these devices has 
increased to the point we are literally exposed 24 hours a day to this radia -
tion. Wireless microwaves come from many sources both at work and at 
home.
An increasing number of physicians, scientists, and parents are con -
cerned about long term health effects from Wi-Fi in schools. (42)(43)(44)(49) As any parent knows, computers now are as ubiquitous in schools as they are at work. From kindergarteners on up kids are required to learn computer skills in order to take core testing online. There is a push to en -
able students to be connected to the internet 24/7 to take photos, email documents, and research a topic. In schools, wired connections for com -
puters have been rapidly being eliminated to install wireless systems that connect students both indoors and outdoors on campus.
Europe and some schools in the U.S. are taking a different more pre -
cautionary approach and going back to the future with wired plug in com -
puters. Studies have also cast doubt on some of the benefits of classroom computers and warned of the new age of “Digital Dementia” which has now crept into Korean youth due to the heavy use of electronic gadgets. (17)(48)
Professors in college are banning computers during lectures and 
finding students learn more. (38) (39)CHILDREN ARE MORE VULNERABLE THUS 
NEED MORE PROTECTION
Children have several organ systems that are immature at birth and 
are thus much more sensitive to toxic exposures. The human brain, one of 
the top vital organs, is far from being a finished product in youth. Long-term structural maturation of the nervous system is required for suc -
cessful development of cognitive, motor, and sensory functions. Neuro -
nal axons – long thin projections from the nerve cell – act as electronic transmission lines. Axons in major pathways of the brain continue to de -
velop throughout childhood and adolescence. Myelin is the insulation sur -
rounding individual nerves protecting it from outside electrical charges. The process of myelination is much faster the first two years but continues 
into adulthood. (16) Children have thinner skulls (29), their immune sys -
tems are undeveloped, their cells are dividing more rapidly, thus, they are 
more vulnerable to EMF radiation and other carcinogens. They also have a longer cumulative exposure to all toxins including EMF radiation.
CURRENT WIRELESS SAFETY STANDARDS 
AND MICROWAVING POTATOES
Wireless devices work on high frequency microwaves similar to the 
microwave you use to cook food with.  It is with less power but substantial 
research (1)(2)(3)(4) demonstrates that even at low power within the cur -
rent safety standards these microwaves can cause biologic harm to plants, animals, and cellular structures. Current Federal Communications Com -
mission (FCC) standards are based only on heat generated by the device, not on adverse biological effects seen in hundreds of studies and at much 
lower levels.
Our own CMA supports reassessment of EMF standards. The Cali -
fornia Medical Association, in 2014, passed a resolution as follows:
 “Resolved 1:That CMA supports efforts to re-evaluate 
microwave safety exposure levels associated with wire -
less communication devices, including consideration 
MARCH / APRIL 2015  | THE BULLETIN  | 17
Continued on page 18“Current FCC standards do not account for the unique 
vulnerability and use patterns specific to pregnant women 
and children. It is essential that any new standard for cell 
phones or other wireless devices be based on protecting 
the youngest and most vulnerable populations to ensure 
they are safeguarded throughout their lifetimes.” American 
Academy of Pediatrics Letter to FCC August 29, 2013 (20)
of adverse nonthermal biologic and health effects from 
non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation used in wire -
less communications and be it furtherResolved 2: That CMA support efforts to implement new safety limits for wireless devices to levels that do not cause human or environmental harm based on sci -
entific research.
ADVERSE EFFECTS DEMONSTRATED IN 
PEER REVIEWED PUBLISHED RESEARCH (2)
• DNA with single and double stranded breaks
• Leakage of the blood brain barrier ( two hours of cell phone 
exposure causes 7+ days of albumin leakage)
• Stress protein production in the body indicating injury
• Infertility/reproductive harm
• Neurologic harm with direct damage to brain cells
• Lowering of melatonin levels
• Immune dysfunction
• Inflammation/oxidation.
PLAUSIBLE 
MECHANISM FOUND FOR EMF MICROWAVE 
EFFECTS
Dr. Martin Pall, Professor Emeritus 
of Biochemistry, Washington State Uni -
versity has studied how electromagnetic 
fields impact the cells of our bodies. His 2013 paper on this subject highlights a major biological mechanism of action of EMF microwave radiation on cell struc -
ture. His work, along with two dozen prior studies, demonstrated that EMF microwave radiation effects cellular cal -
cium channels and this can be inhibited with calcium channel blockers.  “A whole series of biological changes reportedly produced by microwave exposures can now be explained in terms of this new paradigm of EMF actions via Voltage Gated Calcium Channels (VGCC) activation.” (14)(15)
EMF AFFECTS ON WILDLIFE: BIRDS, BEES, 
AND TOMATO PLANTS
Bird researchers in Germany found that their migratory European 
Robins lost their sense of navigation when in the city. (5) This was found 
to be due to the EMF radiation interfering with the bird’s special internal magnetic compass.  They replicated the experiment over seven years be -
fore publishing the results in the prestigious journal Nature .  
John Phillips and others have found that newts, sea turtles, and mi -
gratory birds use a magnetic compass to navigate long distances and this can be interrupted by low levels of EMF. (6)(7) A review of effects on cell towers and wireless devices showed that beehives can have rapid colony collapse with exposure to cell phone radiation. (8)
Plants have been shown to have stress response to EMF from wire -
less devices. (9)(10) (22) In tomatoes exposed for short duration, the stress response seen by exposure to EMF was prevented by administration of calcium counteracting drugs. (11) Even simple high school science experi -
ments document abnormal seed growth near Wi-Fi routers. (19) There ap -
pear to be adverse biological effects of this seemingly harmless radiation.HUMAN ELECTROSENSITIVITY: IS IT REAL?
There is varied opinion about those who state they are sensitive to 
EMF. Scientific research has not given a definitive answer, nevertheless, many seem to suffer from vague and often disabling symptoms they feel in the presence of EMF. Exposure to EMF radiation in some people report -
edly causes headaches, memory problems, fatigue, sleep disorders, depres -
sion. This is so significant for some people that they have to live in a very low EMF environment to feel normal. (25)
Sweden recognizes electro-sensitivity as a functional impairment and 
estimates that about 3% of the population suffers from this. (23)(24) Dr. Magda Havas found in replicated studies that some EMF sensitive individ -
uals heart rates increased with wireless devices turned on in double blind study. (12)(26)  Researchers at Louisiana State University, in 2011, studied a self reported EMF sensitive physician and found “In a double-blinded EMF provocation procedure specifically designed to minimize uninten -
tional sensory cues, the subject developed temporal pain, headache, mus -
cle twitching, and skipped heartbeats within 100 s after initiation of EMF exposure (p < .05).” They concluded that “EMF hypersensitivity can occur as a bona fide environmentally inducible neurological syndrome.” (27) 
Genius and Lipp reviewed the cur -
rent literature on EHS, in 2011, and point to several explanations for this multisys -
tem phenomenon, including toxicant induced loss of tolerance as many with EHS symptoms had high levels of PCB’s possibly causing immune dysfunction. Scientific research also identifies an inflammatory response with cytokine production. Another aspect of research points to catecholamine and adrenal 
gland dysfunction. In addition, heavy 
metal toxicity has also been proposed as contributing to EHS. (28)
The Austrian Medical Association 
feels Electrohypersensitivity is a real 
phenomenon and in 2012 published Guidelines for EMF and Electro-hy -
persensitivity. They state the primary method of treatment should consist in the prevention or reduction of EMF exposure, taking care to reduce or eliminate all sources of EMF if possible. (32)
GOVERNMENT ACTIONS ON WI-FI IN 
SCHOOLS
While much of the U.S. is marching forward with Wi-Fi in schools, 
Europe is changing direction, as indicated by the policies listed below. 
(45) Internationally there is wide disagreement in standards. The U.S. and Canadian limits are 1000 microwatts/cm2. China and Russia are 10 microwatts/cm2.   Belgium is 2.4 microwatts/cm2, and Austria is 0.001 microwatts/cm2. The Bioinitiative Report 2012 recommendation for “No Observable Effect” is 0.0003 microwatts/cm2. Cosmic background EMF we evolved with is <0.00000000001 microwatts/cm2.  (2)
COUNCIL OF EUROPE PARLIAMENT 
ASSEMBLY 2011 EMF MICROWAVE POLICY : “THE POTENTIAL DANGERS OF 
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS AND THEIR 
EFFECT ON THE ENVIRONMENT” 
The report notes “other non-ionizing frequencies, whether from ex -
18 | THE BULLETIN  | MARCH / APRIL 2015Wi-Fi in Schools, continued from page 17
In May 2011, the 
International Agency for 
Research on Cancer (IARC) 
classified radiofrequency 
electromagnetic fields as 
possibly carcinogenic to 
humans (Group 2B).(30)
tremely low frequencies, power lines or certain high fre -
quency waves used in the fields of radar, telecommunica -
tions, and mobile telephony, appear to have more or less 
potentially harmful, non-thermal, biological effects on plants, insects, and animals, as well as the human body, even when exposed to levels that are below the official threshold values.”
The Council calls for a number of measures to pro -
tect humans and the environment, especially from high-frequency electromagnetic fields. One of the recom -
mendations is to “take all reasonable measures to reduce exposure to electromagnetic fields, especially to radio fre -
quencies from mobile phones, and particularly the expo -
sure to children and young people who seem to be most at risk from head tumors”. (37)
IN FRANCE: A NEW NATIONAL 
LAW BANS WI-FI IN NURSERY SCHOOLS
In January 2015, France passed a landmark law that 
calls for precaution with wireless devices for children and 
the general public. (34)(35) It calls for:
1. Wi-Fi banned in nursery schools.
2. Wi-Fi routers should be turned off in school 
when not in use.
3. Schools are informed when new tech equipment is installed.
4. Citizens will have access to environmental cell 
tower radiation measurements near homes.
5. There will be continued research conducted into 
health effects of wireless communications.
6. Information on reducing exposure to EMF radiation is mandatory in the contents of the cell 
phone package.
7. Wi-Fi hotspots are labeled.
ISRAELI MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
ISSUE GUIDELINES TO LIMIT WI-FI IN SCHOOLS
On August 27, 2013, the Israeli Ministry of Educa -
tion issued new guidelines regarding Wi-Fi use in schools. 
(33)  The guidelines will:
1. Stop the installation of wireless networks in classrooms in 
kindergarten.
2. Limit the use of Wi-Fi between first and third grades. In the first grade, students will be limited to use Wi-Fi to study for one hour per day and no more than three days per week. Between the first 
and third grades, students will be limited to use Wi-Fi up to two 
hours per day for no more than four days per week.
3. To limit unnecessary exposure teachers will be required to turn off mobile phones and Wi-Fi routers when they are not in use for 
educational purposes.
4. All Wi-Fi equipment be tested for compliance with safety limits 
before and after installation in an Israeli school.
5. Desktop computers and power supplies be kept at least 20 cm from students.
2012 THE RUSSIAN COMMITTEE ON 
NON-IONIZING RADIATION PROTECTION OFFICIALLY RECOMMENDED THAT WI-FI 
NOT BE USED IN SCHOOLS.
2011 THE RUSSIAN COMMITTEE ON NON-IONIZING 
RADIATION PROTECTION (RNCNIRP) RELEASED THEIR RESOLUTION ENTITLED “ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS FROM MOBILE PHONES: HEALTH EFFECTS ON CHILDREN AND TEENAGERS.”
According to the opinion of the Russian National Committee on 
Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection, the following health hazards are like -
ly to be faced by the children mobile phone users in the nearest future: 
disruption of memory, decline of attention, diminishing learning and cog -
nitive abilities, increased irritability, sleep problems, increase in sensitivity to the stress, increased epileptic readiness. (36)
Expected (possible) remote health risks : brain tumors, tumors of 
acoustical and vestibular nerves (in the age of 25-30 years), Alzheimer’s 
MARCH / APRIL 2015  | THE BULLETIN  | 19Continued on page 20

20 | THE BULLETIN  | MARCH / APRIL 2015disease, “got dementia”, depressive syndrome, and the other types of de -
generation of the nervous structures of the brain (in the age of 50 to 60).
PLAYING IT SAFE FOR OUR KIDS
A healthy and safe learning environment is a cornerstone of educa -
tion. Current FCC standards are obsolete and inappropriate as they are 
based only on heat effects, not biological effects. They give us a false sense of security. There may be higher EMF levels at school than at home as rout -
ers are more powerful. Cumulative Effects on DNA or cell structures are not taken into consideration in any safety standard. Because of the long-term exposure to EMF microwave radiation this generation is experienc -
ing, they will be at higher risk for potential health problems. We will not know what happens to our progeny’s DNA until our grandchildren are born.
Considering there has been a more precautionary approach interna -
tionally to microwave radiation exposure and the trend is toward less ex -
posure in schools, especially to vulnerable populations such as children, it makes sense to re-evaluate our wireless schools. We buckle our seat belts 
and wear a helmet when we ride bikes even though we don’t know if we 
will get in an accident.  Although not all the issues of wireless microwaves 
are understood, there is enough science to understand it acts as a toxicant 
at even low levels that fall within current safety standards. We also know 
that decades of research precedes meaningful regulation in the area of tox -
ins, thus the only reasonable approach is precautionary.
In addition, we need to be thoughtful about how much our kids should 
use computers and what this is doing not only to them, but to our society 
as a whole. We get starry eyed with every new wireless gadget, however, in “Alone Together” Sherry Turkle expertly addresses the rise in isolation, loneliness, lack of privacy, and increasing pressure on students in this age of invasive technology. Her thorough and non-judgmental scientific in -
vestigation of the psychological effects of computers makes us aware that we need to take care that we do not replace real human connection with a “virtual reality” that will redirect us in an unhealthy direction. 
As physicians and parents, we understand that decisions we make to -
day may have far reaching consequences in the future for our kids. Let’s play it safe for them right now.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SCHOOLS
1. Wired internet connections like we used to have are the safest 
and possibly cheapest option – all the benefits of the internet without the risk.
2. Wireless devices , but with an on/off switch in each room so 
teachers can use only when needed for educational purposes.3. Limit Wi-Fi  use, especially in younger grades.
4. Cell phones stay off and in the backpacks during class and on the campus during school hours.
5. Have EMF and electrical measurements done by one or more qualified, experienced consultants before and after any installation .  Understand you may need to increase your 
knowledge of low and high frequency electromagnetic fields and limits to accurately interpret the reports. The Bioinitiative Report 
is a very useful compendium that has recommendations for safer 
levels.
6. Support efforts by governments to provide independent standardized transparent research to define safe limits in all 
the different wireless frequencies used commercially . This 
could lead to less EMF emissions and safer wireless devices.
REFERENCES
1. “Overpowered”  by Dr. Martin Blank, 2014
2. Bioinitiative Report . 2012  http://www.bioinitiative.org/
3. EMF Portal . http://www.emf-portal.de/
4. Why Fi? : Is Wireless Communication Hazardous to Your Health?  http://www.sccma-mcms.org/Portals/19/assets/docs/
Why%20Fi.pdf
5. Electronics’ noise disorients migratory birds. Man-made 
electromagnetic radiation disrupts robins’ internal magnetic 
compasses . May 7, 2014 http://www.nature.com/news/electronics-
noise-disorients-migratory-birds-1.15176
6. True Navigation: Sensory Bases of Gradient Maps . Phillips, J. 
2006 http://www.pigeon.psy.tufts.edu/asc/Phillips/
7. A behavioral perspective on the biophysics of the light-
dependent magnetic compass: a link between directional and 
spatial perception?   Phillips, J. Journal of Experimental Biology. 
June 17, 2010. http://jeb.biologists.org/content/213/19/3247.full.pdf
8. Impacts of radio-frequency electromagnetic field (RF-EMF) 
from cell phone towers and wireless devices on biosystem and 
ecosystem – a review . Sivani, S. Biology and Medicine . Dec 3, 2012 
http://www.emrpolicy.org/regulation/united_states/Exhibit_19_EMRPI_Sivani_Bio_&_Med_2012.pdf
9. Effects of Microwaves on the Trees and Other Plants . 
Balmori, A.  2003.  http://www.hese-project.org/de/emf/WissenschaftForschung/Balmori_Dr._Alfonso/showDoc.php?lang=de&header=Dr.%20Balmori&file=THE%20EFFECTS%20OF%20MICROWAVES%20ON%20THE%20TREES%20AND%20OTHER%20PLANTS.html&back=../
showAuthor.php?target=Balmori_Dr._Alfonso
10. Effects of Electromagnetic Waves Emitted by Mobile Phones on Wifi In Schools, continued from page 19
“Certain high frequency waves used in the fields of radar, 
telecommunications, and mobile telephony, appear to have more 
or less potentially harmful, non-thermal, biological effects on plants, 
insects, and animals, as well as the human body, even when exposed 
to levels that are below the official threshold values.”
MARCH / APRIL 2015  | THE BULLETIN  | 21Germination, Root Growth, and Root Tip Cell Mitotic Division .  
Pol J of Envir Studies. Nov 2010. http://www.pjoes.com/pdf/21.1/
Pol.J.Environ.Stud.Vol.21.No.1.23-29.pdf
11. Intercellular Communication in Plants: Evidence for an EMF-Generated Signal that Evokes Local and Systemic Transcriptional Responses in Tomato . 2013. http://link.springer.
com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-36470-9_16
12. Provocation Study using heart rate variability shows 
microwaves radiation from 2.4 Ghz cordless phones . European 
Journal of Oncology . January 16, 2011.  http://www.bemri.org/
publications/dect/341-provocation-study-using-heart-rate-
variability-shows-microwave-radiation-from-2-4ghz-cordless-
phone.html?path=
13. Is newborn melatonin production influenced by magnetic fields 
produced by incubators?  Early Hum Dev 2012; 88 (8): 707 – 710  
http://www.emf-portal.de/viewer.php?aid=20376&l=e
14. Electromagnetic fields act via activation of voltage-gated 
calcium channels to produce beneficial or adverse effects . Pall, 
ML. J Cell Mol Med. 2013 Aug;17(8):958-65. http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/23802593
15. Microwave Electromagnetic Fields Act by Activating Voltage-
Gated Calcium Channels: Why the Current International Safety Standards Do Not Predict Biological Hazard . 
Professor Dr. Martin L. Pall http://apps.fcc.gov/ecfs/document/view?id=7521102473
16. Communication Studies UCLA . http://cogweb.ucla.edu/CogSci/
Myelinate.html
17. “Digital Dementia” on the Rise .  June 24, 2013 http://
koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/news/article/article.aspx?aid=2973527
18. International Precautionary Actions EMF . http://ehtrust.org/
international-policy-actions-on-wireless/
19. Student Science Experiment Finds Plants won’t Grow near 
Wi-Fi Router  http://www.globalresearch.ca/student-science-
experiment-finds-plants-wont-grow-near-wi-fi-router/5336877
20. American Academy of Pediatrics Letter to FCC and FDA 
regarding EMF Exposure Policies and Standards . http://www.
wirelesswatchblog.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/FCC-13-84-
09-03-2013-American-Academy-of-Pediatrics-7520941318-1.pdf
21. Transient DNA damage induced by high-frequency 
electromagnetic fields (GSM 1.8 GHz) in the human trophoblast HTR-8/SVneo cell line evaluated with the alkaline 
comet assay . Mutat Res. 2010 Jan 5. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19822160
22. High frequency (900 MHz) low amplitude (5 V m-1) 
electromagnetic field: a genuine environmental stimulus that 
affects transcription, translation, calcium and energy charge in 
tomato . Roux, D.  Planta. 2008 Mar http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18026987
23. Electrosensitivity in Sweden . http://www.emfacts.
com/2009/02/1014-electrosensitivity-in-sweden-by-olle-johansson/
24. Towards Better Health: Switzerland TV Program on Electrohypersensitivity . 2009. http://mieuxprevenir.blogspot.
com/2013/03/swiss-tv-program-from-2009-on.html
25. ‘Wi-fi refugees’ shelter in West Virginia mountains . 2011. http://
www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-14887428
26. Replication of heart rate variability provocation study with 2.4-GHz cordless phone confirms original findings . Havas, M. Electromagn Biol Med. 2013 Jun http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23675629
27. Electromagnetic hypersensitivity: evidence for a novel 
neurological syndrome . Int J Neurosci. 2011 Dec;121(12):670-6. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21793784
28. Review: Electromagnetic hypersensitivity: Fact or Fiction?   
Genius, S, Lipp, C. Science of Total Environment. Sept 2011. 
http://www.academia.edu/4125616/Genuis_EHS_paper
29. Electromagnetic absorption in the human head and neck for mobile telephones at 835 and 1900 MHz . Gandi, O. Microwave 
Theory and Techniques . Vol 44, Oct, 1996. http://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/xpl/articleDetails.jsp?reload=true&arnumber=539947
30. International Agency for Research on Cancer. IARC Classifies Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields as Possibly Carcinogenic to Humans . http://www.iarc.fr/en/media-centre/
pr/2011/pdfs/pr208_E.pdf
31. Alone Together . Sherry Turkle. 2012. http://www.npr.
org/2012/10/18/163098594/in-constant-digital-contact-we-feel-alone-together
32. Austrian Medical Association Guidelines- EMF and Electrohypersensitivity . http://freiburger-appell-2012.info/media/
EMF%20Guideline%20OAK-AG%20%202012%2003%2003.pdf
33. Israeli Ministry of Education issue guidelines to limit Wi-Fi 
in schools . 2013   http://www.gsma.com/publicpolicy/israeli-
ministry-of-education-issue-guidelines-to-limit-wi-fi-in-schools
34. France: New National Law Bans Wi-Fi in Nursery School! http://
ehtrust.org/france-new-national-law-bans-wifi-nursery-school/
35. French government bans advertising of mobiles to children . 
2009 http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-tech/
news/french-government-bans-advertising-of-mobiles-to-
children-1299673.html
36. Electromagnetic Fields From Mobile Phones: Health Effects on Children and Teenagers . April 2011. http://www.magdahavas.
com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/Russia_20110514-rncnirp_resolution.pdf
37. Parliament Assembly European Council EMF Microwave Policy. 2011 . http://assembly.coe.int/Mainf.asp?link=/Documents/
AdoptedText/ta11/ERES1815.htm
38. Why A Leading Professor of New Media Just Banned Technology Use in Class . Sept 25, 2014. Washington Post . http://
www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/answer-sheet/wp/2014/09/25/why-a-leading-professor-of-new-media-just-banned-technology-
use-in-class/
39. Princeton/UCLA Study: Its Time to Ban Laptops in Law School 
Classrooms .  Feb 5, 2015. http://taxprof.typepad.com/taxprof_
blog/2015/02/princetonucla-study-.html
40. Brain Cancer – Mobile phone and cordless phone use and the risk for glioma – Analysis of pooled case-control studies in Sweden, 1997-2003 and 2007-2009 . Hardell. Pathophysiology . 
2014 Oct 29. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25466607
41. Brain Cancer – Mobile phone use and brain tumors in the CERENAT case-control study . Coureau G. Occup. Environ Med . 
2014 Jul; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24816517

20 | THE BULLETIN  | JANUARY / FEBRUARY 2017Dr. Cindy Russell
SCCMA V.P. Community HealthIt would greatly extend FCC’s current policy of the mandatory irradiation of the public without 
adequate prior study of the potential health impact and assurance of safety. It would irradi -
ate everyone, including the most vulnerable to harm from radiofrequency radiation: pregnant 
women, unborn children, young children, teenagers, men of reproductive age, the elderly, the dis -
abled, and the chronically ill.” —Ronald Powell, PhD, Letter to FCC on 5G expansion (7)
BRAVE NEW WORLD OF COMMUNICATION
The use of mobile wireless technologies continues to increase worldwide. A new faster 5th gen -
eration (5G) telecommunication system has recently been approved by the Federal Communications Commission(FCC) with new antennas already being installed and tested in Palo Alto and Mountain View. While it may give us uber automation and  instantaneous “immersive entertainment” a lot of questions remain with regards to public health and safety of wireless devices. Will the adoption of this new 5G technology harm directly or indirectly the consumers and businesses it hopes to attract?
5G is the new promised land for wireless technology. It could connect us in our homes, work -
places and city streets to over a trillion objects around the world. (96)  The Internet of Things (IoT) 
is primed to give us self-driving cars, appliances that can order their own laundry soap, automa -
tion hubs that pay your bills, not to mention fast movie downloads and virtual reality streaming from anywhere when you are on the go.  Companies are already asking local cities and counties to move forward to create “Smart Cities” which have comprehensive digital connectivity by installing a massive wireless sensor network of almost invisible small cell antennae on light posts, utility poles, homes and businesses throughout neighborhoods and towns in order to integrate IoT with IT. They 
state it will improve services, the economy and quality of life. This communication network will 
WILL IT GIVE US A SMART 
NATION OR CONTRIBUTE TO 
AN UNHEALTHY ONE?A 5G WIRELESSFUTURE
Santa Clara California Medical Association SCCMA Bulletin
JANUARY / FEBRUARY 2017  | THE BULLETIN  | 21form an expanded electromagnetic microwave blanket above each city 
and county, permeating the airspace and providing seamless connectivity where people and things will exchange data.
Former Federal Communications Commission (FCC) chair Tom 
Wheeler called this a “National Priority” and thus ushered in approval for the addition of this new pervasive network of high frequency short wave millimeter broadband for commercial use first planned in urban areas.
DEVELOPING A “SMART” WORLD?
Engineers and physicists are busy working out the details of carrier 
frequencies and the architecture of the new network.  Manufacturing industries are already developing commonly used products that feature wireless integration that will connect to the densely clustered antennas. Marketing companies are now pushing ads for “smart” devices for “smart” people in “smart” cities. Even the healthcare industry is anticipating using some of these wearable devices for patients with cardiac conditions or to do remote surgery in other parts of the world.  Opening up 5G Spectrum access hopes to drive an explosion of new products. The economic oppor -
tunities are obvious and business will be booming in the tech industry. 
Concerns continue to rise however about the basic safety of our cur -
rent use of wireless technologies not to mention adding layers of newer microwave frequencies that have not been tested for short term or long term safety. Important questions have not been addressed while industry and government policy have already moved forward.
•Why is the FCC streamlining permitting of 5G high frequency
when they have not completed their investigation on healtheffects nor updated safety limits for low-intensity radio frequency
radiation?
•Is the widespread “deployment” of this pervasive higherfrequency small cell distributed antennae system in our citiesand on our homes safe for humans and the environment?
•Will it add to the burden of chronic disease that costs our nation
over a trillion dollars annually? (105)
•Are we already digitally over connected, outsourcing our grey
matter and becoming a dysfunctional addicted nation because ofit?  (136,137,138)
•How will this a ffect our privacy, cyber security and the security
of medical records?
•Will we as physicians be able to recognize the emerging adversehealth e ffects of new millimeter technology and wearable
technology let alone that of current wireless devices?
A GOOD READ: FEDERAL 
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION 5G LETTERS
Letters to the FCC in 2016 responding to the 5G roll out with the addi -
tion of new high frequencies were mixed. Industry generally applauded the 
FCC for its e fforts and discussed the growing demand for this technology 
along with a need for flexible regulation to implement it. Some expressed 
concerns about interference with other satellite systems. Some felt there should be maximum spectrum usage opening up even higher frequencies that are only experimental now in order to help “the underserved”. Others argued about opening this up to licensed versus unlicensed uses. Industry did not mention any potential public or environmental health hazards re -
garding the use of these new frequencies.
RAISING A RED FLAG TO PUSH THE PAUSE 
BUTTON ON 5G
Private citizens and Phd’s, however did raise a red flag at the FCC, 
recommending a halt to infrastructure plans and more testing for health 
and environmental reasons. They questioned the current FCC standards which are outdated and not protective of human health. They asked “How 
will it a ffect children, pregnant women and the elderly who are the most 
vulnerable in our population?”  While scientists gave ample evidence that precaution should prevail, I found the most compelling letters were from those who describe their fear as electro-sensitive people in an already dan -
gerously high electromagnetic environment for them.
GIMME SHELTER: NO ESCAPE FOR 
ELECTRO-SENSITIVE INDIVIDUALS
Linda K., a Michigan resident, explained how she became increas -
ingly sensitive to EMF a fter a cell tower was placed within 1000 feet of her 
house.
She experienced insomnia at first and did not know there was a cell 
tower until several years later when she then associated the timing of its 
placement with her symptoms. A fter smart meters were installed in her 
area (but not on her house) she became sensitive to her laptop on wireless and her cell phone.  Comcast then placed a Wi-Fi hotspot within 400 feet of her house and she stated her symptoms increased to the point that if she was outside in her yard more than 20 minutes she developed increas -
ing fatigue, headaches, heart palpitations and high pitched ringing in her ears. These are all reported e ffects in those sensitive to EMF from wireless 
devices. She wrote about her concerns and that the new frequencies may add to her symptoms and inability to leave her house. (54)
In another letter Veronica Z. noted “ This is a notice of survival. What 
many of us deal with currently is trying to survive in an environment that is hostile to us biologically. We have lost all of our rights, our finances, our 
homes, our ability to earn a living due to this ubiquitous exposure. We are being tortured every second of every day and have been reduced to simply trying to survive the moments we are alive. Others have been unable to do so and have opted to not stay living on this planet of torture... There is no 
escape for people with severe sensitivities to this deadly radiation.” (55)
ASK NASA: IS ELECTRO-SENSITIVITY REAL 
OR IMAGINED?
Are these people telling the truth? Is this just psychological? You may 
wonder, however, more and more people from all ages, professions and 
walks of life are relating similar symptoms in the presence of wireless de-vices. Some children reported these symptoms when their school adopted WiFi. 
Dr. Scott Eberle, a well respected Petaluma hospice physician, elo -
quently described his development of electro-sensitivity in the November 2016 issue of the SCCMA Bulletin. He goes to great lengths to continue his profession, interact with his collegues and maintain a healthy existence. (67) 
We are exposed to increasing levels of microwave EMF in our daily 
lives. More scienti fic evidence links biologic e ffects with increased reports 
of health related e ffects including electrosensitivity.  In 1971 Russian sci -
entists Gordon and Sadchikova from the Institute of Labor Hygiene and Occupational Diseases described a comprehensive series of symptoms which they called ‘microwave sickness” and presented this at an interna -
tional WHO meeting. (109) 
In a 1981 NASA report, “Electromagnetic Field Interactions: Ob-
served E ffects and Theories” microwave sickness was also described. The 
symptoms recorded were headaches, eyestrain, fatigue, dizziness, dis-turbed sleep at night, sleepiness in daytime, moodiness, irritability, unso -
ciability, hypochondriac reactions, feelings of fear, nervous tension, men -
tal depression, memory impairment, pulling sensation in the scalp and brow, loss of hair, pain in muscles and heart region, breathing di fficulties, 
increased perspiration of extremities. (63)
Santa Clara California Medical Association SCCMA Bulletin
22 | THE BULLETIN  | JANUARY / FEBRUARY 2017THE SCIENCE OF ELECTRO-SENSITIVITY
Belpomme, in 2015, completed the most comprehensive study of elec -
trosensitivity, investigating 1216 people: 71.6% with EHS, 7.2% with CS, 
and 21.2% with both. They found an elevation in several reliable disease 
biomarkers—each occurring within a range of 23% to 40% of all cases—which prompted their conclusion that these sensitivities can be objectively characterized and diagnosed and “appear to involve in flammation-related 
hyper-histaminemia, oxidative stress, autoimmune response, capsulotha -
lamic hypoperfusion and pathologic leakage of the blood-brain barrier, and a de ficit in melatonin metabolic availability” (68)
THE SCIENCE OF EMF BIOLOGICAL HARM
The scienti fic literature abounds with evidence of non-thermal cel -
lular damage from non-ionizing wireless radiation for several decades. There are likely several mechanisms both direct and indirect. Oxidative 
damage is one that has been well studied. E ffects have been demonstrated 
on cell membranes causing a shi ft in the voltage gated calcium channels. 
Sperm studies have consistently found genotoxic, morphologic and motil -
ity abnormalities in the presence of cell phone radiation. DNA damage, blood brain barrier e ffects, melatonin reduction, nerve cell damage, mito -
chondrial disruption and memory disturbances have been revealed. The 
Bioinitiative Report (139) has chronicled these e ffects and a growing wave 
of PEER reviewed studies is building on that base daily. In 2011, the Inter -
national Agency for Research on Cancer classi fied radiofrequency 
as 2B carcinogen and “possibly carcinogenic to humans”, the same category as DDT, lead and other pesticides.
THE LATEST 
SCIENCE: NATIONAL TOXICOLOGY PROGRAM STUDY ON CELL PHONES AND CANCER
The most recent and com -
pelling evidence has come from 
the 2016 National Institutes of Health, National Toxicology Program. Called the NTP Toxicology and Carcinogenicity Cell Phone Radiation Study, the 10 year $25 million research revealed conclusively that there was a harmful e ffect from cell phone microwave radiation. (124,125)  The fre -
quencies are similar to other wireless devices we commonly use.  The stud -
ies were robust, collaborative, well controlled and with double the number of rats required to reveal a signi ficant effect, if present. The preliminary 
results of the study showed that RFR caused a statistically signi ficant in -
crease in two types of brain tumors, gliomas and schwannomas. These 
were the same two types of tumors shown to increase in human epidemio -
logical studies on long term use of cell phones. Dr. Lennart Hardell and others have demonstrated a consistent pattern of increased incidence of ipsilateral (same side) acoustic neuromas (vestibular schwannomas) and gliomas with each 100 hours of cell phone use. (112-118)  Another telling finding was that the control rats had much lower than expected cancer 
rates. It is believed due to the fact the control rats were in a controlled fara -
day cage and not exposed to normal ambient EMF that could contribute to cancer.
Ron Melnik, PhD, Senior Toxicologist and Director of Special Pro -
grams in the Environmental Toxicology Program at the National Insti -tute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) and designer of the study states, “ The NTP tested the hypothesis that cell phone radiation could not 
cause health e ffects and that hypothesis has now been disproved. The ex-
periment has been done and, a fter extensive reviews, the consensus is that 
there was a carcinogenic e ffect.” (124,125,126,127)
HEALTH EFFECTS OF MILLIMETER 5G 
WAVELENGTHS
The term "millimeter waves" (MMW) refers to extremely high-
frequency (30-300 GHz) electromagnetic radiation. Millimeter Waves 
(MMW) used in the next-generation of high-speed wireless technologies have shallow penetration thus e ffect the skin surface, the surface of the eye 
or on bacteria, plants and small life forms. Surface e ffects, however, can 
be quite substantial on an organism as stimulation of skin receptors can affect nerve signaling causing a whole body response with physiological 
effects on heart rate, heart rhythm, and the immune system.
In a 1998 review article, Pakhomov (123) looked at the bio-e ffects of 
millimeter waves. He reviewed dozens of studies and cites research dem -
onstrating profound e ffects of MMW on all biological systems includ-
ing cells, bacteria, yeast, animals and humans. Some e ffects were clearly 
thermal as millimeter microwaves are rapidly absorbed by water which is abundant in living organisms. When microwaves are absorbed the en-ergy can cause tissue heating. Many of the millimeter frequency studies 
however showed e ffects without 
heating of tissues and at low in -
tensities.  Research was variable and showed both regenerative effects and also adverse e ffects 
depending on frequency, power and exposure time.
ARRYTHMIAS
Chernyakov induced heart 
rate changes in anesthetized frogs by microwave irradiation of remote skin areas. Complete denervation of the heart did not prevent the reaction. This sug -
gested a re flex mechanism of the 
MMW action involving certain peripheral receptors.(28)
HEART RATE VARIABILITY
Potekhina found certain frequencies from 53-78 GHz band (CW) 
changed the natural heart rate variability in anesthetized rats. He showed that some frequencies had no e ffect (61 or 75 GHz) while other frequencies 
(55 and 73 GHz) caused pronounced arrhythmia. There was no change in 
skin or whole body temperature. (69)
TERATOGENIC EFFECTS
One study of MMW teratogenic e ffects was performed in Drosophila 
flies by Belyaev. Embryos were exposed to 3 di fferent GHz frequencies for 
4-4.5 hours at 0.1 mW/cm2. He found that irradiation at 46.35 GHz, butnot at 46.42 or 46.50 GHz, caused marked e ffects including an increase in
morphological abnormalities and decreased survival. It was felt the MMWdisturbed DNA-protein interactions at that particular frequency.(65)
BACTERIAL AFFECTS AND ANTIBIOTIC 
RESISTANCE
Bulgakova in over 1,000 studies with 14 di fferent antibiotics showed 
how MMW exposure of S. aureus a ffects its sensitivity to antibiotics with 
different mechanisms of action. The MMW increased or decreased antibi-“Over the past century, this 
natural environment has sharply 
changed with introduction of a 
vast and growing spectrum of 
man-made EM ﬁelds.”
Adey (135)
Santa Clara California Medical Association SCCMA Bulletin
JANUARY / FEBRUARY 2017  | THE BULLETIN  | 23otic sensitivity depending on the antibiotic concentration. (134)
 Pakhomov warns, “Regardless of the primary mechanism, the pos -
sibility of signi ficant bio-e ffects of a short-term MMW irradiation at in -
tensities at or below current safety standards deserves consideration and 
further study. The possibility of induction of adverse health e ffects by a lo -
cal, low-intensity MMW irradiation is of potential signi ficance for setting 
health and safety standards and requires special attention.” He called for replication of studies especially long term e ffects of MMW.
His conclusions:
1.Individuals or groups in a population, which would usually be
regarded as uniform, may react to MMW in rather di fferent or
even opposite ways.
2.There seem to exist unknown and uncontrolled factors that
determine the MMW sensitivity of a specimen or a population.Irradiation could increase antibiotic resistivity in one experimentand decrease it in the next one.
3.Increased sensitivity and even hypersensitivity of individuals to
MMW may be real. Depending on the exposure characteristics,especially wavelength, a low-intensity MMW radiation wasperceived by 30 to 80% of healthy examinees. (123)
CATARACTS
Prost in 1994 studied millimeter microwave radiation on the eye. He 
noted that microwaves of di fferent wave-lengths can induce the devel-
opment of cataracts. (13)  His research found that low power millimeter 
waves produced lens opacity in rats exposed to 10mW/cm2, a predisposing indicator of cataracts.(74)
IMMUNE SYSTEM
Kolomytseva, in 2002, looked at  the dynamics of leukocyte number 
and functional activity of peripheral blood neutrophils under whole-body exposure of healthy mice to low-intensity extremely-high-frequency elec -
tromagnetic radiation (EHF EMR, 42.0 GHz, 0.15 mW/cm2, 20 min daily).The study  showed that the phagocytic activity of peripheral blood neutro -
phils was suppressed by about 50% in 2-3 h a fter a single exposure to EHF 
EMR.(131)
CHROMATIN EFFECTS
Gapeve in 2003 showed for the first time that low-intensity extremely 
high-frequency MMH electromagnetic radiation in vivo causes e ffects on 
spatial organization of chromatin in cells of lymphoid organs. Chromatin is a complex of DNA and proteins that forms chromosomes within the nucleus of eukaryotic cells. He exposed mice to a single whole-body expo -
sure for 20 min at 42.0 GHz and 0.15 mW/cm2. (132)
GENE EXPRESSION
Habauzit in 2013 looked at gene expression in keratinocytes with 
60GHz exposure at upper limit of current guidelines and concluded  “In our experimental design, the high number of modi fied genes (665) shows 
that the ICNIRP current limit is probably too permissive to prevent bio -
logical response. (73)
GAPS IN DATA FOR LAUNCHING 5G 
MILLIMETER DEVICES
Commercial production o ften precedes research on consumer pro -
tection and health e ffects. We have too many toxins that have escaped 
premarket safety protocols for too long—lead, asbestos, smoking and our 
modern unregulated nanoparticles to mention just a few. These affect our 
long term and short term health in ways we do not even know. If we be -
come ill, we do not question or identify the daily or weekly chemical expo -
sures that could have contributed to that cancer or arthritis or lung disease or Alzheimer’s. We have too many toxins to sort it all out.
Research shows that wireless microwave radiation adds yet another 
dose of toxic exposure to our daily lives. We cannot hear it or smell it or feel it. Yet it a ffects our biology and our wellbeing with perhaps subtle af -
fects.  If we are electro-sensitive then we are more likely to avoid exposure. Trees are even susceptible to EMF harm and they cannot move away. (128) What about birds and bees and us?
CLOSE ENCOUNTERS: GOOGLE GLASS, 
VIRTUAL REALITY AND WEARABLE WIRELESS DEVICES
If we are concerned about putting a cell phone to our ears for long 
periods of time a fter reading about the NTP study then why aren’t we con -
cerned about other wearable devices? While very cool to use Google Glass 
and Virtual Reality may have dangerous consequences to our eyes, brain function or immune systems with long term use, especially to children.  What are the frequencies in these devices?  3G, 4G, 5G or a combination of zapping frequencies giving us immersive connection and entertainment but at a potentially steep price.
5G RESEARCH AND POLICY
Safety testing for 5G is the same as other wireless devices. It is based 
on heat. This is an obsolete standard and not considering current science 
showing cellular and organism harm from non-thermal e ffects. There is 
a large gap in safety data for 5G biological e ffects that has been demon -
strated in older studies including military.
NEW RECOMMENDATIONS TO PROTECT 
PUBLIC HEALTH
1.Do not proceed to roll out 5G technologies pending pre-market
studies on health eff ects.
2.Reevaluate safety standards based on long term as well as short
term studies on biological e ffects.
3.Rescind a portion of Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act
of 1996 which preempts state and local government regulation
for the placement, construction, and modi fication of personal
wireless service facilities on the basis of the environmentaleffects so that health and environmental issues can be addressed.
4.Rescind portions of The Spectrum Act which was passed in 2012
as part of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act,which strips the ability city o fficials and local governments to
regulate cellular communications equipment, provides no publicnotification or opportunity for public input and may potentially
result in environmental impacts.
5.Create an independent multidisciplinary scienti fic agency tasked
with developing appropriate safety regulations, premarkettesting and research needs in a transparent environment withpublic input.
6.Label pertinent EMF information on devices along with
appropriate precautionary warnings.
REFERENCES
A full list of references used in this article are available at  
www.sccma-mcms.org.
Santa Clara California Medical Association SCCMA Bulletin
Theodora Scarato
Environmental Health Trust ehtrust.org 
LD 697
Please see articles from the Santa Clara Medical Association on wireless, 
environment and health.  
