 

 
Captured Agency  
How the Federal Communications Commission  Is Dominated  
by the Industries It Presumably Regulates  
 
By Norm Alster  
 
 
-- 
Copyright:   
This ebook  is available  under  the Creative  Commons  4.0 license.  
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  
 
 
 
 
Published  by: 
Edmond  J. Safra  Center  for Ethics  
Harvard  University  
124 Mount  Auburn  Street,  Suite 520N  
Cambridge,  MA 02138  USA  
http://www.ethics.harvard.edu/  
 
  

CONTENTS  
1. The Corrupted  Network  
2. Just Don‘t  Bring  Up Health  
3. Wireless  Bullies  and the Tobacco  Analogy  
4. You Don‘t  Need  Wires  To Tie People  Up 
5. $270  Billion  . . . and Looking  for Handouts  
6. The Cable  Connection  
7. What  about  Privacy?  
8. Dependencies  Power  the Network  of Corruption  
9. A Modest  Agenda  for the FCC  
10. Stray  Thoughts  
Appendi x – Survey  of Consumer  Attitudes   
Endnotes  
  
Chapter One:  The Corrupted Network  
Renee Shar p seeme d proud to discuss her spring 2014 meeting with the Federal 
Communications Commission.  
As research director for the non-profit Envir onmental Working Group, Sharp do esn‘t get 
many chances to visit with the FCC.  But on this occasion she  was able to express her concer ns 
that lax FCC standar ds on radiation from wireless technologies were  especially hazardous for 
children.  
The FCC , however , should have little trouble dismissing those concerns . 
Arguing that current standards are more than sufficient and that children are at  no elevated 
risk from microwave radiation, wi reless industry lobbyists don‘t gen erally have to set up 
appointments months in advance.  They are at the FCC‘s door night and  day. 
Indeed , a former executive with  the Cellular Tel ecommunications Industry Associ ation  
(CTIA) , the industry ‘s main lobbying group, has  boasted that the CTIA meets with FCC officials 
―500 times a year .‖1 
Sharp do es not seem surprised.  ―The re‘s no question that the government has been under the 
influence of industry. The  FCC is a captured agency ,‖ she said.2  
Captured agency.  
That‘s a term that comes up time and time again with the FCC.  Captured agenc ies are  
essentially controlled by the industries they are supposed to regul ate. A detailed look at FCC  
actions —and non -actions—shows that over the years the FCC  has granted the  wireless industry  
pretty much what  it has  wanted. Until very recently it has also granted cable what it wants. More 
broadly, the FCC has again and again echoed the lobbying points of major technology in terests . 
 Money —and lots of it —has played a part.  The National Cable and Telecom munications 
Association  (NCTA)  and CTIA h ave annually been amo ng Washington‘s top lobbying spenders.  
CTIA alone lobbied on at least 35 different Congressional bills through the first half of 2014. 
Wireless market leaders AT&T and Verizon work through CTIA.  But they also do their own 
lobbying, spending  nearly $15 million through June of  2014 , according to data from the Center 
for Responsive Politics  (CRP) . In all, CTIA, Verizon, AT&T, T -Mobile USA, and Sprint spent 
roughly $45 million lobbying in 2013 . Overall, the Communications/Electronics sector is one of 
Washington‘s super heavyweight lobbyists, spendin g nearly $800 million in 2013 -2014, 
according to CRP data.  
But direct lobbying by industry is just one of many  worm s in a rotting apple.  The FCC sits at 
the core  of a network  that has  allowed powerful moneye d interests with limitless access a variety 
of wa ys to  shape its policies, often at the ex pense of  fundament al public interests.  
 As a result, consumer safe ty, health , and privacy , along  with consumer wallets , have all  been 
overlooked,  sacrificed , or raided due  to unchecked industry influence.  The cable industry has 
consolidated into  giant  local  monopolies  that control pricing while leaving consumers little 
choice over con tent sele ction.  Though the FCC has only partial responsibility, federal regulators 
have allowed the Internet to grow into a vast  huntin g grounds for cri minals and commercial 
interests : the go -to destination for the surrender of personal information, privacy and  identity . 
Most insidious of all, the wireless industry has been allowed to grow unchecked and virtually 
unregulated, with fundame ntal questions o n public health impact routinely  ignored.  
Industry controls the FCC through a soup -to-nuts stranglehold that extends from its well -
placed campaign spending in Congress through  its control of the FCC‘s Congress ional oversight 
comm ittees  to its persistent  agency lobbying.  ―If you‘re on a committee that regulates industry 
you‘ll be a m ajor target for industry, ‖ said Twa un Samuel, chief of staff for Congresswoman  
Maxine Waters.3 Samuel several years ago helped write a b ill aimed at slowing the r evolv ing 
door.  But with Congress getting its marching orders from industry, the bill never gained any 
traction.  
Industry control, in the case of wireles s health issues, ex tends beyo nd Congress and 
regulators to  basic scientific research.  And in an obvious echo of the hardball tac tics of the 
tobacco industry, the wireless industry has backed up its economic and political power  by 
stonewall ing on public relations and bully ing pot ential threats into submission  with its huge  
standing a rmy of lawyers . In this way, a coddled wireless industry  intimidated and silenced the 
City of San Francisco, while  running roughshod over  local opponents of its expansionary 
infrastructure . 
On a persona l level, the entire system is greased by the free flow of executive le adership 
between the FCC and the industries it presumably  overse es. Currently presiding over the FCC  is 
Tom Wheeler, a man who has led the two most powerful industry lobbying groups:  CTIA and  
NCTA.  It is Wheeler who once supervised a $25 million industry -funded research effort o n 
wireless health effects.  But when handpic ked research leader Geor ge Carlo concluded that 
wireless radiation did raise the risk of  brain tumors, Whee ler‘s CTIA allegedly rushe d to muffle 
the message.  ―You d o the science.  I‘ll take c are of the politics,‖ Carlo recalls Wheeler saying.4 
Wheeler over time has proved a masterful politician.  President Obama overl ooked Wheeler‘s 
lobbyist past to nominate him as FCC chairman in 2013.  He had , after all , raised more than 
$700,000 for Obama‘s presidential campai gns. Wheeler had little trouble earning confirmation 
from a Senate whose Democrats toed the Presidential line and whose Republicans understood 
Wheeler was as industry -friendly a nominee as they could get.  And while Wheeler, at the behest  
of his Presidential sponsor,  has taken on cable giants with his pl ans for net neutrality  and shown 
some openness on other issues , he has dug  in his heels on wireless . 
 Newly ensconced as chairman of the agency he onc e blitzed with partisan pitches , Wheele r 
sees familiar fac es heading the  industry lobbying group s that ceaselessly petition the FCC . At 
CTIA, which now calls itself CTIA  - The Wireless Associa tion, former FCC  commissioner 
Meredith Atwell Baker is in charge.   
 
And while cell phone manufacturers  like Apple and Samsung , along with wireless service 
behemoths like Verizon and AT&T , are prominent CTIA members , the infrastructure of 300,000 
or more cellular base stations and antenna sites has its own lobbying group: PCIA, the Wireless 
Infrastructure A ssociation.  The President and CEO of PCIA is Jonathan Adelstein, another 
former FCC commissioner.  Meanwhile, the cable industry‘s NCTA employs former FCC 
chairman Michael Powell as its president and CEO.  Cozy, isn‘t it?  
FCC  commissioners in 2014  received invitations to the Wireless Foundation‘s May 19th 
Achievement Awards Dinner . Sounds harmless, but for the fact that the chief honoree at the 
dinner was none other than former wireless lobbyist but cur rent FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler. Is 
this the man  who will act to look impartially at the growing  body of evidence pointing to health 
and safety issues?   
The revolving door also reinforces the clout at another node on the industry -controlled 
influence network.  Mem bers of congressio nal oversight committee s are prime  targets of 

industry.  The cable industry, for example,  knows that key legislation must move through the 
Communications and Technology Subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce 
Committee. Little wonder then that subcommittee chairman Greg Wal den was the second 
leading recipient (after Speaker John Boehner) of cable industry contributions  in the last six 
years (through June 30, 2014).  In all, Wald en, an Oregon Republican , has taken over $108,000 
from cable and satellite production and distribut ion companies.5 But he is not alone.  Six of the 
top ten recipients of cable and satellite contributions sit on the industry‘s House oversight 
committee.  The same is true of s enators on the cable oversight committee.  Committee members 
were six of the ten to p recipients  of campaign cash from the industry.6  
 

 
 

 
The compromised FCC network goes well beyond the revolving door and congressional 
oversight committees.  The Washington social scene  is one where money sets the ton e and throws 
the parties.  A look at the recent calendar of one current  FCC commissioner shows  it would take 
very disciplined and almost saintly behavior  on the part of government officials to resi st the lure 
of lavishly catered dinners and cocktail events.  To paraphrase iconic inve stigative journalist I.F. 
Stone , if you‘re going to work in Washington, bring your chastity belt . 
All that free liquor, food and conviviality translates into the lobbyist‘s ultimate goal: access.  
―They have disproportionate access,‖ notes former FCC commis sioner Michael Copps.  ―When 
you are in a town where most people you see socially are in industry, you don‘t have to ascribe  
malevole nt behavior to it,‖ he added.7 
Not malevole nt in motive . But the results can be toxic.  And blame does not lie  solely at the 
feet of current commissioners.  The FCC‘s problems predate Tom Wheeler and go back a long 
way.  
Indeed, former Chairman Newton Minow, enduringly famous for his 1961 description of 
television  as a ―vast wastel and,‖ recall s that industry manipulation  of regulators  was an issue 
even back then.  ―When I arrived, the FCC and the communications industry were both regarded 
as cesspools.  Part of my job was to try to clean it up.‖8 
More than 50 years later, the mess continues  to pile up.  
  

Chapter Two: Just D on’t Bring Up Health  
Perhaps the best example of how the FCC is tangled  in a chain of  corruption  is the cell tower 
and antenna infrastructure that lies at the heart of the phenomenally successful  wireless industry.  
It all begins with p assage of the Telecom munications Act of 1996 , legislation once described 
by South Dakota Republican senator Larry Pressler as ―the most lobbied bill in history.‖  Late 
lobbyi ng won th e wireless industry  enormous  concessions from  lawmake rs, many of them major 
recipients of indus try hard and soft dollar contributions.  Congressional staffers who helped 
lobbyists write the  new law did not go unrewarded.  Thirteen of fifteen staffers later became 
lobbyists themselves.9 
Section 332(c)(7)(B)(iv)  of the Act remarkably —and that adve rb seems  inescapably best 
here—wrests zoning authority from local  governments.  Specifica lly, the y cannot cite health 
concerns about the effects o f tower radiation to deny tower  licenses  so long as the towers comply 
with FCC regulations . 
 
 In preempting local zoning authority —along with the public‘s right to guar d its own safety 
and health — Congress  unleashed an orgy of infrastruc ture b uild-out. Embol dened by the 
government g reen light and  the vast consumer appetite for wireless technology,  industry has had 
a free hand in installing more than 300,000 sites . Church steeples, schoolyards, school rooftops, 
even trees can house these facilities.  
Is there any reason to believe that the relatively low level radiofrequency emissions of these 
facili ties constitute a public health threat?  Certainly, cell phones themselves, held close to the 
head, have been the focus of most concern on RF emissions.  Since the impact of RF diminishes 
with distance, industry advocates and many scientists dismiss the poss ibility that such structures 
pose health risks.  

But i t‘s not really that simple.  A troubling  body of evidence  suggest s exposure to even low 
emission levels at typical cellular frequencies between 300 MHz and 3 GHz can have a wide 
range of negative effects . 
In a 2010 review of research on the biolog ical effects of exposure to radiation from c ell tower 
base stations,  B. Blake Levi tt and Henry Lai found that ―some research does exist to warrant 
caution in infrastructure siting.‖10 They summarized the results on  one 2002 study that  compared 
the health of 530 people living at various distances within 300 meters of cell towers with a 
control group living more than 300 meters away.  ―Results indicated increased symptoms and 
complaints the closer a person lived to a t ower. At <10 m , symptoms i ncluded nausea, loss of 
appetit e, visual disruptions , and d ifficulties in moving.  Significant differences were observed up 
through 100 m f or irritability, depressive ten dencies, concentration difficult ies, memory los s, 
dizziness , and lower l ibido.‖11 
A 2007 study conducted in Egypt found similar resu lts. Levitt and Lai report, ―Headaches, 
memory changes, dizzi ness, tremors, depressive sympt oms, and sleep dist urbance were 
significantly higher among exposed inhabitants than controls. ‖12  
Beyond epidemiological studies, research on a wide range of living things  raise s further red 
flags.  A 2013  study by the Indian scientist s S. Sivani and D. Sudarsanam  reports : ―Based on 
current available literature, it is justified to  conclude that RF -EMF [electro magnetic fields ] 
radiation exposure can change neurotransmitt er functions, blood -brain barri er, morphology, 
electrophysiology, cellular metabolism, calcium efflux, and gene and protein expression in 
certain types of cells even at lower intensit ies.‖13 
The article goes on to detail the effects of mobile tower emissions on a wide range of living 
organisms : ―Tops of trees tend to dry up when they directly  face the cell tower antennas . . . . A 
study by the Centre for Environment and Vocational Studie s of Punjab University noted that 
embryos of  50 eggs of house sparrows wer e damaged after being exposed to mobile tower 
radiation for 5-30 minu tes. . . . In a study on cows and calves on the effects of exposure from 
mobile phone base stations, it was noted  that 32% of calves developed nuclear cataracts, 3.6% 
severely. ‖14 
Does any of this constitute the conclusive evidence that would mandate much tighter control  
of the wireless infrastructure? Not in the estimation of industry and its captured agency.  Citing 
other studies —often industry -funded —that fail to establish health effects,  the wireless industry  
has dismissed such concerns.  The FCC has typically echoed t hat position.  
Keep in mind that light regul ation has been one factor in th e extraordinary growth of 
wireless —CTIA says exactly that in a Web post that credits the Clinton Administrations light 
regulatory touch .  
 
Obviously, cellular  technology is wildly popular because it offers many benefits to 
consumers.  But even allowing for that popularity and  for the incomple te state of science , don‘t 
some of these findings raise enough concern to warrant  some  backtracking on the ham-fisted 
federal pre emption of local  zoning right s? 
In reality, since the passage of the 1996 law, the very o pposit e has occurred. Again  and again 
both Congress and the FCC have opted to stiffen —rather than loosen —federal preemption over 
local zoning authority.  In 2009, for example, the wireless ind ustry convinced the FCC to impo se 
a ―shot clock‖ that requires action within 90 days on many  zoning applications.  ―My sens e is that 
it was an industry request,‖ said Robert Weller , who headed up the FCC‘s Office of Engineering 
and Technology  when the shot clock w as considered and imposed .15  
And j ust last November, the FCC voted to further curb th e rights of local zoning officials  to 
control  the expansion of antenna sites Again and again, Congress and the FCC have  extended the 
wireless industry carte blanche to build out  infrastructure no matter the consequences to local 
communities . 
The question t hat hangs over all this:  would consumer s‘ embrace of cell phones and Wi -Fi be 
quite so ardent if the wireless industry , enabled by its Washington errand boys,  hadn‘t so 
consistently stonewalled on evidence and s ubstituted legal intimidation for honest inqu iry? (See 
Appendix for online study of consumer attitudes on wireless health and safety .) 
Document searches under the Freedom of Informat ion Act reveal the central role  of Tom 
Wheeler and the FCC  in the tower siting issue. As both lobbyist  and FCC chairman , Wheeler has 
proved himself a good friend of the wireless industry.  
 In January of 1997, CTIA chieftain Wheeler wrot e FCC Wireless Telecommunications 
Bureau Chief Michele C. Farquhar citing several municipal efforts to assert control over siting.  
Wheeler,  for example, asserted that one New  England state had  enacted a l aw requiring its Public 
Service Comm issioner to issue a report on h ealth risks posed by wireless facilities.16 He 

questions whether such a study —and regulations based on its results —would infr inge on FCC 
preemption authority.  
 FCC bureau chief  Farquhar hastily reassured Wheeler that no such study could be consulted 
in zoning decisions.  ―Therefore, based on the facts as you have presented them, that portion of 
the statu te that directs the State Commissioner to recommend regulations based upon the study‘s 
findings would appear  to be preempted ,‖17 the FCC official wrote to Wheeler.  She emphasized 
that the stat e had the right to do the study.  It just couldn‘t deny a siting application based on 
anythi ng it might learn . 
The FCC in 1997  sent the message it has implicitly endorsed and conveyed ever since : study 
health effects all you want. It doesn‘ t matter what you find. The build -out of wireless cannot be 
blocked or slowed by health issues . 
Now let‘s fa st forward to see Wheeler on the other side of the revolving door , interacting  as 
FCC chairman  with a former FCC commissioner who  is now an industry lobbyist.  
A March 14 , 2014  letter18 reveal s the chummy relationship between Wheeler  and former 
commissioner Jonathan Adelstein, now head of PCIA,  the ce llular infrastructure lobbying group . 
It also references  FCC Chairman Wheeler seeking policy counsel from  lobbyist  Adelstein :  
 
 “Tom – It was great to see you the other night at the FCBA event, and wonderful to  see how 
much fun you’re having  (if that’s the right word) . I know I enjoyed my time there  (thanks to your 
help with Daschle in getting me tha t role in the first place!).”  
 “Thanks for asking how we think the FCC can help spu r wireless broadband deployment ,” 
the w ireless lobbyist writes to the ex -wireless lobbyi st, now running the FCC . 

 Adelstein‘s first recommendation for FCC action:  “Amend  its rules t o categorically exclude 
DAS and small deployments [Ed. note: these  are compact  tower add -ons currently being widely 
deployed ] from environmental and historic review .” Adelstein outlined other suggestions for 
further  limiting local antenna zoning authority and the FCC  soon  did its part.  Late last year, the 
agency proposed  new rules  that largely  (though not e ntirely)  complied  with the antenna 
industry‘s wish list.   
James R. Hobson is an attorney who has represented mun icipalities in zoning issues 
involving the FCC. He is also a  former FCC official,  who is now of counsel  at Best,  Best and 
Krieger, a  Washington -based municipal law practice.  ―The FCC has been the ally of industry,‖ 
says Hobson.  Lobbyist pressure at the FC C was intense even back in the 7 0s, when he was a 
bureau chief there . ―When I was at the FCC, a lot of my day was taken up with appoin tments 
with industry lobbyists.‖  He says of the CTIA that Wheeler once headed:  ―Their reason for being 
is promoting the wireless industry.  And they‘ ve been successful at it.‖19 
The FCC‘s def erential compliance has allowed industry  to regularly bypass and if  necessary 
steamroll local authorities . Violation of the FCC -imposed  ―shot cl ock,‖ for example,  allow s the 
wireless license applicant to sue . 
The F CC‘s service to the industry it i s supposed to regulate is evidently appreciated.  The 
CTIA web site, typicall y overflowing with self-congratulation , spreads the praise around in 
ackno wledging the enabling contributions of a cooperative  FCC . In one brief summation of  its 
own glorious accomplishments,  CTIA twice uses the wor d ―thankfully‖  in des cribing favorable  
FCC actions . 
In advancin g the industry agenda , the FCC can claim that  it is merely reflecting the will of 
Congress.  But the agency may not be doing even that . 
 Remember the key clause in the 96 Telecom Act that disallowed denial of zoning permits 
based on  health concerns?  Well, federal preemption is granted to pretty much any wireless outf it 
on just one simple condition:  its installations must comply with  FCC radiation emission 
standards . In view of this generous cart e bla nche to move radiation equipment i nto 
neighborhoods, schoolyards and home rooftops, one would think the FCC would at the very least 
diligently enforce its own emission standards.  But that does not appear to be the ca se. 
Indeed, one RF engineer  who has worked on more than 3,000 rooftop site s found vast 
evidence of non -compliance. Marvin Wessel  estimates that ―10 to 20% exc eed allowed radiation 
standards.‖20 With 30,000 rooftop antenna sites across the  U.S. that would mean that  as many as 
6,000 are emitting radiation in violation of FCC standa rds. Often, these emissions can be 600% 
or more of allowed exposure levels, according to Wessel . 
Antenna standards allow for higher exposure to workers.  In the case of rooftop sites, such 
workers  could be roofers, painters, testers  and installers of heating and air condition ing 
equipment, to c ite just a few examples.  But many sites, according to Wessel, emi t radiation  at 
much higher levels than those permitted in occupational standards. This is especially t rue of sites 
where service  providers keep adding new antenna units to expand their coverage.  ―Some of these 
new sites will exceed ten times the allowable occupational radiation level,‖ said Wessel.21 
Essentially, he adds, this means that n obody should be stepping on the roof.  
―The F CC is not enforcing its own standard,‖ noted Janet N ewton , who  runs the  EMF Policy 
Institute, a Vermont -based non -profit.  That group several years ago filed 101 complaints on 
specific rooftop s ites where radiation emissions exceeded allowable leve ls. ―We d id this as an 
exercise t o hold the FCC‘s feet to the fire,‖ she said.  But the 101 complaints resulted  in few 
responsive actions, according to Newton.22  
Former FCC official Bob Weller confirms the lax —perhaps negligible is the more 
appropriate word —FCC acti vity in enforcing ant enna standards.  ―To my kn owledge, the 
enforcement bureau  has never done a targeted inspection effort around RF exposure,‖ he said.23 
Budget cuts at  the agency  have hurt, limiting the F CC‘s ability to perform field inspections, he 
added.  But enforcement, he adds, would do wonders to insure industry  compliance with its  
limit ed regulatory compliance requirements.  ―If there were targeted enforcement and fines issued 
the industry would pay greater attention to ensuring compliance and self -regulation,‖ he allowed . 
Insurance is where the rubber hits the road on risk.  So it is interesting to note that the rating 
agency A.M. Best , which advises insurers on risk,  in 2013 topped its list of ―emerging 
technology -based risks‖ with RF  Radiation:   
“The risks associated with long -term use of cell phones, although much studied over the 
past 10  years, remain unclear.  Dangers to the estimated 250,000 workers per year who 
come in close contact with cell phone antennas, however, are now more clearly 
establishe d. Thermal effects of the cellular antennas, which act at close range es sentially 
as open microwave ove ns can include eye damage, sterility and cognitive impairments.  
While workers of cellular companies are well trained on the potential danger s, other 
work ers expose d to the antennas are often unaware of the health risks.  The continued 
expon ential growth of cellular tower s will significantly increase exposure of these 
workers and others coming into close contact with high -energy cell phone antenna 
radiation, ” A.M. Best wrote.24 
So what has the FCC don e to tighten enforcement ? Apparently, n ot very much . Though it  
does follow up on many of the complaints filed against sites a lleged to be in violation of 
standards  it takes punitive actions very rarely.  (The  FCC did not pro vide answers to written 
questions on details of its tower enforcement policies .) 
The best ally of industry and the FCC on this (and other) issues may be public ignorance . 
An online poll cond ucted for this project asked 202  respondents to rate the likelihood of a 
series of statements.25 Most of the statements were subject to dispute.  Cell phone s raise the risk 
of cer tain health effects and brain cancer , two said . There is no proof that cell phones are 
harmful, anothe r declared.  But among the six st atements there was one statement of indisputable 
fact: ―The U.S. Congress forbids local communit ies from consid ering health effects when 
decid ing whether to issue zonin g permits for wireless antennae, ‖ the statement said . 
Though this is a stone cold  fact t hat the wireless industry, the FCC and the courts h ave all 
turned into hard and in escapable  reality  for local authorit ies, just 1.5% of all poll respondents 
replied that it  was ―definitely true.‖   
Public ignorance didn‘t take much cultivation by the wirele ss industry on the issue of local 
zoning.  And maybe it doesn‘t matter much, considering the enormous popularity of wireless 
devices.  But let‘s see how  public ignorance  has been cultivated and secured —with the FCC‘s 
passive support —on the potentially more disruptive  issue of mobile phone health effects . 
  
Chapter Three:  Wireless Bullies and t he Tobacco Analogy  
Issues of cable and net neutrality have  recently attracted wide public attention  (more on that 
in Chapter Six) . Still, the bet here remains that futu re judgment of the FCC will hinge on its 
handling of wireless health and safety issues . 
And while the tower siting issue is an egregious example of an industry -dominated political 
process run amuck, the stronger health risk s appear to reside in the phones themselves.  This is an 
issue that has flared up several times in recent years.  Each time, industry has managed  to beat 
back such concerns.  But it‘s worth noting that the scientific roots of concern have not 
disappeared. If anything, they‘ve thickened as ne w research substantiates older concerns . 
The story of an FCC passively echoing an industry determined to play hardball with its 
critics is worth a further look.  The CTIA‘s own website acknowledges the helpful hand of 
government‘s  ―light regulatory touch‖ i n allowing the industry to grow.26  
Former congressman Dennis Kucinich ventures one explanation for the wireless industry‘s 
success in dodging regulation:  ―The industry has  grown so fast its growth has overtaken any 
health concerns that may have gained atte ntion in a slow growth environment.  The proliferation 
of technology has overwhelmed all institutions that would have attempted safety testing and 
standards,‖  Kucinich  said.27  
But t he core questions remain: Is there really credible evidence that cell phones  emit harmful 
radiation that can cause human health problems and disease? Has the FCC done an adequate job 
in protecting consumers from health risks?  Or has it  simply aped  industry stonewalling on health 
and safety issues?  
Before wading int o these questio ns, some  perspective is in order . 
First, there‘s  simply no denying the usefulness and immense  popularity of wireless 
technology.  People depend on it for safety, information, entertainment an d com munication. It 
doesn‘t tak e a keen social observer to know  that wireless has thoroughly insinuated itself into 
daily life and culture . 
The unanswered question , though,  is whether consumers would embrace the technology quite 
so fervently if health and safety information was not spun, filtered and clouded by a variety  of 
industry tactics . 
To gain some insight into this question, we conducted an online survey of  202 respondents , 
nearly all of whom own cell  phones , on Amazon‘s Mechanical Turk Web  platform (see 
Appendix ). One striking set of finding s: many respondents claim they would change behavior —
reduce wireless use, restore landline service, protect their children —if claims on health  dangers 
of wireless are  true. 
It is not the purpose of this reporter to  establish that heavy cell phone usage is dangerous.  
This remains an extremely controversial scientific issue  with new findings and revised scientific 
conclusions repeatedly popping up.  Just months ago, a German scientist who had been outspoken 
in denouncing the view  that cell phones pose health risks reversed course.  In an April 2015 
publication, Alexander Lerchl reported results confirming previous research on the tumor -
promoting effects of electromagnetic fields  well below human exposure limits for mobile 
phones.  ―Our findings may help to understand the repeatedly reported increased incidences of 
brain tumors in heavy users of mobile phones,‖ the Lerchl team concluded.28 And in May  2015 , 
more than 200 scientists boasting over 2,000 publications on wireless effects called on global  
institutions to address  the health risks posed by this technology . 
But t he National  Cancer Institute still contends that no cell phone dangers have been 
established.  A representativ e of NCI was the sole known dissenter among the 30  member s of the 
World Health Organization‘s International Agency for Research on Cancer  (IARC) when it 
voted to declare wireless RF  ―possibly carcinogenic.‖29 If leading scientists  still can‘t agree, I 
will not presume  to reach a scientific conclusion on my own . 
 

But let‘s at least look at some of the incriminating  clues that health and biology research has 
revealed to date. And let‘s look at the responses of both industry and the FCC.  
 The most widely cited  evidence implicating wireless phones concerns gliomas, a very 
serious type of brain tumor.  The evidence of elevated risk for such tumors among heavy cell 
phone users comes from several sources . 
 Gliomas account for roughly half of all malig nant brain tumors, which are relatively rare.  
The annual incidence of pri mary malignant brain tumors in the U.S. is only 8.2 per 100,000 
people , according to the International Radio Surgery Association.  
Still,  when projected over the entire U.S. popula tion, the public health impact  is potentially 
very significant.  
Assuming roug hly four new glioma cases annually in the U.S. per 100,000 people, yie lds 
over 13,000 new cases per year over a total U .S. population of 330 million. Even a dou bling of 
that rate would mean 13 ,000 new gliomas, often deadly, per year.  A tripling, as some st udies 
have  found, could mean as many as 26 ,000 more new cases  annually. Indeed , the re spected 
online site Medscape in January 2015 reported results of Swedish research under the headline: 
Risk for Glioma Triples With Long -Term Cell Phone Use .30  
 And here‘s some eye -opening  quantitative perspective:  the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, 
waged now for more than a decade each, have together resulted in roughly 7,000 U .S. deaths . 
Preliminary —though still inconclusive —research has sugges ted other potentia l negative 
health effects . Swedish, Danish and  Israeli scientists have all found elevated risk of salivary 
gland tumors.  One Israeli studied suggested elevated thyroid cancer risk.  Some research has  
found that men who carry their phones in their pockets ma y suffer sperm count damage.  One 
small study even suggests that young women who carry wireless devices in their bras are 
unusually vulnerable  to breast cancer . 
And while industry and government have never accepted that some portion of the population 
is unu sually sensitive to electromagnetic fields,  many people continue to complain of a broad 
range of symptoms that include general weakness, headaches, nausea and dizziness from  
exposure to wireless.  
Some have suggested that the health situation with wireless is analogous to that of tobacco 
before court decisions finally forced Big T obacco to admit guilt and pay up.  In some ways, the 
analogy is unfair.  Wireless research is not as conclusively incrimin ating as tobacco research was. 
And the identified health risk s with wireless, significant as they are, still pale compared with 
those of tobacco . 
 But let‘s not dismiss the analogy  outright.  There is actually a very significant sense in which 
the tobacco -wireless analogy is uncannily valid . 
People tend to forget that the tobacco industry —like the wireless industry —also adopted a 
policy of tone -deaf denial. As recently as 1998,  even as evidence of tobacco toxicity grew 
overwhelming, cigarette maker Phillip Morris was writing newspaper advertorials insisting  there 
was no proof  smoking caused cancer . 
It seems  significant that the responses of wireless and its captured agency —the FCC —
feature the same obtuse refusal to examine the evidence.  The wir eless  industry reaction  featur es 
stonewalling public relations and hyper aggressive legal action. It can also involve undermining 
the credibility and cutting off the  funding for researchers who do not endorse cellular safety.  It is 
these hardball tactics that  look a lot like 20th century  Big Tobacco tactics.  It is these hardbal l 
tactics —along with  consistently s upportive  FCC policies —that heighten suspicion the wireless 
industry does indeed have something to hide.  
Begin with some simple facts issuing from meta -analysis of cellular research.  Dr. Henry Lai,  
emeritus professor of b ioengineering at the University of Washington , has reviewed hundreds of 
published scientific papers on the subject.  He wanted to see how many studies demonstrated that 
non-ionizing radiation produces biological effects beyond the heating of tissue.  This is  critical 
since the  FCC emission standards protect only against heating.  The assumption behind these 
standards is that there are no biological effects beyond heating.  
But Dr. Lai found that just over half —actually 56% —of 326 studies ide ntified biological 
effects. And  the results were far more striking when Dr. Lai divided the studies b etween those 
that were industry -funded and those that were independently funded.  Industry -funded research 
identified biological effects in just 28% of studies.  But fully 67% of non -industry funded studies 
found biological effects  (Insert  Slide —Cell Phone Biological Studies ). 
A study conducted by S wiss and British scientists also looked at how funding sources 
affected scientific c onclusions on the possible healt h effects of cel l phone usage.  They found that 
of studies privately funded, publicly funded  and fu nded with mi xed sponsorship,  industry -funded 
studies were ―least likely to report a statistically significant result. ‖31 ―The interpretation of 
results from studies of health effects of radiofrequency radiation should take sponsorship into 
account,‖ the scientists concluded.32  
So how does the FCC handle a scientific split that seems to suggest bias in industry -
sponsored research?  
 In a posting on its Web site that reads  like i t was written by wireless lobbyi sts, the FCC 
chooses strikingly  patronizing  language to slight and trivialize the many scientists and health and 
safety experts who‘ve found cause for concern.  In a two page Web post titled ―Wireless Devices 
and Health Conce rns,‖ the FCC four times refers to either ―some health and safety interest 
groups,‖ ―some parties,‖ or ―some consumers‖ before in each case re butting their presumably 
groundless  concerns about wireless risk.33 Additionally, the FCC site references the World  
Health Organization as among those organizations who‘ve found that ―the weight of scientific 
evidence‖ has not linked exposure to radiofrequency from mobile devices with ―any known 
health problems.‖  
Yes, it‘s true that the World Health organization remain s bitterly divided on the subject.  But 
it‘s also  true that a 30  member unit of the WHO called the International Agency for Research on 
Cancer (IARC) was near unanim ous in pronouncing cell phones  ―possibly  carcinogen ic‖ in 
2011.  How can the FCC omit any ref erence to such a pronouncement?  Even if it finds  reason to 
side with  pro-industry scientists, shouldn‘t this government agency also mention that cell phones 
are currently in the same potential carcinogen c lass as lead paint ?  
Now let‘s look a bit more closely at the troublesome but presumably clueless crowd of  ―some 
parties‖ that the FCC so cavalierly hastens to dismiss? Let‘s begin with Lennart Hardell , 
professor of Oncology and Cancer Epidemiology at the University Hospital in Oreboro, Sweden . 
Until r ecently it was impossible to gain any real sense of brain tumor risk from wireless since 
brain tu mors often take 20 or more years to develop. But the cohort of long -term users has been 
growing. In a study published in the International Journal of Oncology in 2013, Dr. Hardell and 
Dr. Michael Carlberg found that the risk of glioma —the most deadly type of brain cancer —rose 
with cell phone usage.  The risk was highest among heavy cell phone users and those who began 
to use cell phones before the age of 20.34  
 Indeed, those who used their phones at least 1640 hours (which would be roughly 30 
minutes a day for nine years) had nearly three times the glioma incidence.  Drs. Hardell and 
Carlberg also found that gliomas tend to be more deadly among heavy wireless calle rs.35  
Perhaps of greatest long -term relevance, g lioma risk was found to be four times higher 
among those  who began to use mobile phones as teenagers or earlier. These findings, along with 
the established fact that it generally takes decades for tumors indu ced by environmental agents to 
appear, suggest  that the worst consequences of omnipresent wireless devices  have yet to be  seen. 
In a 2013 paper published in Review s on Environmental Healt h, Drs. Hardell and Carlberg  
argued that the 2011 finding of the IARC  that ident ified cell phones as a ―possibly  carcinogen ic‖ 
needs to be revised. The conclusion on radiofrequency electromagnetic fields from cell phones 
should now be ― cell phones are not just a possible carcinogen. ‖ They can now be  ―regarded as 
carcinogenic to humans‖ and the direct cause of gliomas (as well as acoustic neuromas, a less 
serious type of tumor).36 Of course, these  views are not universally accepted.  
The usual spin among  industry supporters when presented with research t hat produces  
troubling  results is along the lines of: ―We might pay attention if the results are duplicated.‖  In 
fact, the Hardell results were echoed in the French CERENAT study, reported in May  of 2014.  
The CERENAT study also found higher risk among heav y users, defined as those using their 
phones at least 896 hours (just 30 minute s a day for five years).  ―These additional data support 
previous findings concerning a possible association between heavy mobile phone use and brain 
tumors,‖ the study concluded .37 
Cell phones are not the only wireless suspects. Asked what he would do if he had policy -
making authority, Dr. Hardell  swiftly replied that he would  ―ban wireless use in schools and pre -
schools. You don‘t need Wi -Fi,‖ he noted.38 This is especially interesting in view of the FCC‘s 
sharply hiked spending to promote and extend Wi -Fi usage, as well as its consistent refusal to set 
more stringent standards for c hildren (m ore on all this later ). But for now  let‘s further fill out the 
roster of the FCC‘s u nnamed ―some parties.‖  
Martin Blank  is a Special Lecturer in Physiology and Cellular Biophysics at Columbi a 
University. Unlike Dr. Hardell , who looks at broad epidemiological effects over time, Dr. Blank 
sees cause for concern in research showing there is  biological response at the cellular level to the 
type of radiation emitted by wireless devices.  ―The biology tells you unequivocally that the cell 
treats radiation as a potentially damaging influence,‖ Dr . Blank said in a late 2014  interview.39  
―The biology tells you it‘s dangerous at a  low level,‖ he added . Though some results have 
been difficult to replicate, researchers have identified a wide range of cellular responses 
including genetic damage and penetration of the blood brain barrie r. Dr. Blank specifically cited  
the ―cellular stress response‖ in which cells exposed to radiation start to make proteins . 
It is still not clear whether biological responses a t the cellular level  translate into human 
health effects.  But the research seems to invalidate  the basic premise of FCC standar ds that the  
only biological effect of the type of radiation produced by wireless devices is tissue heating  at 
very high power levels. But t he standards -setting agencies ―ignore the biology,‖ according to Dr. 
Blank.  He descr ibes the FCC as being ―in industry‘s pocket.‖40 
Sweden‘s Lund University is annually ranked among the top 100 universities in the world.  
Leif Salford  has been chairman of the Dep artment  of Neurosurgery at Lund since 1996.  He is 
also a former president of th e European Association for Neuro -Oncology. In the spring of 2000, 
Professor Salford told me that wireless usage constituted ―the world‘s largest biological 
experiment ever .‖41  
He has conducted numerous  experiments exposing rats to cellular -type radiation.  Individual 
experiments have shown the radiation to penetrate the blood -brain barrier, essential to protecting 
the brain from bloodstream to xins.  Professor Salford also found that  rats exposed to radiation 
suffered loss of brain cells.  ―A rat‘s brain is ver y much the same as a human‘s.  They have the 
same blood -brain barrier and neurons.  We have good reason to believe that what happens in rat‘s 
brains also happens in humans,‖ he told the BBC in 2003.  Dr. Salford has also speculated that 
mobile radiation could  trigger Alzheimer‘s disease in some cases but emphasized that much 
more research would be needed to establish any such causal relationship.  Does this man deserve 
to be dismissed as one of a nameless and discredited group of ―some parties?‖  
And what about the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP),  which represents 60,000 
American doctors who care for children? In a December 12, 2012  letter to former Ohio 
Congressman Dennis Kucinich, AAP President  Dr. Thomas McInerny writes:  ―Children are 
disproportionately a ffected by environmental exposures, including cell phone radiation. The 
differences in bone density and the amount of fluid in a child‘s brain compared to an adult‘s 
brain could allow children to absorb greater quantities of RF energy deeper into their bra ins than 
adults.‖42  
In a subsequent letter to FCC officials dated August 29, 2013, Dr. McInerny points out that 
―children , however,  are not little adults and are disproportionately impacted by all environmental 
exposures, including cell phone radiation.‖  Current FCC exposure standards, set back in 1996,  
―do not account for the unique vulnerability and use patterns specific to pregnant women and 
children ,‖ he wrote. (Insert slide: A Plea from Pediatricians).  Does an organization representing 
60,000 practitio ners who care for children deserve to be brushed off along with  ―some health and 
safety interest groups?‖  
So what is the FCC doing in response to what at the  very least is a troubling chain  of clues to 
cellular danger? As it has done  with wireless infrastr ucture, the FCC has to this point largely 
relied on industry ―self-regulation. ‖ Though it set standards for device radiation emissions back 
in 1996, the agency doesn‘t generally test devices itself.  Despite its responsibility for the safety 
of cell phones,  the FCC relies on manufacturers ‘ good -faith efforts to test them.  Critics contend 
that this has allowed manufacturers undue latitude in testing their devices . 
 Critics further contend that current standards, in place since cell phones were barely in use,  
are far too lax and do not reflect the heavy usage patterns tha t have evolved.  Worse still,  industry  
is allowed  to test its own devices using an imprecise system that makes no special provision for 
protecting children and pregnant women.  One 2012 study  noted that the procedure widely used 
by manufacturers to test their phones  ―substantially underestimates‖ the amount of RF energy 
absorbed by 97% of the pop ulation, ―especially children.‖  A child‘s head can absorb over two 
times as much RF energy. Other perso ns with smaller heads, including women, are also more 
vulnerable . The authors recommend an alternative computer simulation technique that would 
provide greater insight into the impact of cellular radiation on children and on to the specific RF 
absorption  rates of different tissues, which vary greatly.43  
 Acting on recommendations of the General Accounting Office, the FCC is now 
reconsi dering its standards for  wireless testing and allowed emissions . On the surface, this may 
seem to represent an effort to tig hten standards to promote consumer health and safety.  But many 
believe the FCC‘s eventual new standard will actually be weaker, intensifying any health risk 
from  industry‘s self -reported emission levels.  ―They‘re under great pressure from industry to 
loosen the crit eria,‖ notes Joel Moskowitz, di rector of the Center for Family and Community 
Health at UC Berkeley‘s School of Public Health.44 One fear is that the FCC could  measure the 
allowed radiation ab sorption level (SAR) over  a wider sample of tissue,  effectively loosening the 
standard allowable energy absorption.  One FCC official, who asked that his name not be used, 
contended that a decision had not yet been made to loosen the standard.  
But t o this point, there is little evidence the FCC is listening  to anyone beyond its familiar 
friends in the wireless industry.  Carl Blackman, a scientist at the Environmental P rotection 
agency until  retiring  in 2014 , notes that the FCC does rely to some degree on an inter -agency 
governmental group for advice on healt h matters. The group includes, for example, 
representatives from the EPA and the FDA . 
 Blackman served on that advisory group and he says that it has bee n divided. Though some 
government advisers to the  FCC find evidence of wireless h ealth risks convincing , others remain 
skeptical , said Blackman.  Root of th e skepticism: even though numerous researchers have found 
biological and health effects, the mechanism for action by non -ionizing radiation on the human 
body has still not been identified.  ―I don‘t think there‘s eno ugh of a consensus within the R adio 
Frequency In ter-agency Working Group for them to come out with stricter standards,‖ he says.45 
But p olitical pressures also figure mightily in all this.  The EPA , notably,  was once a hub of 
research on RF effect s, employing  as many as 35 scientists.  However,  the research program was 
cut off  in the late 80s  during the Regan presidency . Blackman says he  was personally 
―forbidden‖ to study health effects by his ―supervisory structure.‖46 He termed it ―a political 
decision‖  but recognized that if he wanted to continue to work at the EPA he would have to do 
research in another area . 
Blackman is cautious in imputing motives to the high government officials who wanted his 
work at EPA stopped.  But he does say  that polit ical pressure has been a factor at both the EPA 
and FCC : ―The FCC p eople were quite responsive to the biological point of view.  But there are 
also pressures on the FCC from industry.‖  The FCC, he suggests, may not just be looking at the 
scientific evidence  ―The FCC‘s position —like the EPA‘s —is influenced by political 
considerations as well.‖47  
 Still, the FCC has ultimate regulatory responsibility  and cannot indefinitely pass the buck  on 
an issue of fundamental public health . Remarkably, it has not changed course despite the IARC 
classification of cell phon es as possibly carcinogenic,  despite the recent studies  showing triple 
the glioma risk for heav y users,  despite the floodtide of research showing bi ological effects , and 
despite even the recent defection o f core industry booster Alex Lerchl.  It is the refusal of both 
industry and t he FCC to even acknowledge th is cascade of  warning signs that seems most 
incriminating . 
 Of course, indust ry behavior goes well beyond pushing for the  FCC‘s willful ignorance and 
inaction.  Industry behavior also includes self -serving  public relations and hyper aggressive legal 
action. It can also involve undermining the credibility of and cutting off the  funding for 
researchers who do not endorse cellular safety.  It is these hardball tac tics that  recall  20th century  
Big Tobacco  tactics.  It is these tac tics that heighten suspicion that the wireless in dustry does 
indeed have a  dirty secret . And it is those tactics that intensify the spotlight on an FCC that  so 
timidly follows the script of the fabulously  wealthy,  bullying , billion -dollar ben eficiari es of 
wireless.  
  
Chapter Four : You Don’t Need Wires To Tie People Up  
So let‘s look a little more deeply at some of the actions of an industry group that boasts of 
500 meetings a year  with the FCC . Lobbying is one thing.  Intimidation is another.  CTIA has 
shown its skill at —and willingness to use —both.  
Outright legal bullying is a  favored tactic.  The City of San Francisco passed an ordinance in 
2010 that required cell phone manufacturers  to display more prominently information on the 
emissions from their devices.  This information was already disclosed —but often buried —in 
operator manuals and on manufacturer websites.  The idea was to ensure that consumers saw 
information already mandated and provided . 
Seeing this as a threat to its floodtide of business, the industry sued the City of San 
Francisco.  The City, fearing a prolonged legal  fight with an industry that generates hundreds of 
billions of dollars in annual revenue, backed down.  
On Ma y 12, 2015 , Berkeley, C alifornia‘s City Council unanimously passed  a similar 
ordinance.  Joel Moskowitz, director of the Center for Family and Community Health at the 
University of California -Berkeley‘s School of Public Health, has been involved in the effo rt. 
Berkeley, he says, didn‘t want to run into the same legal threats that par alyzed San Francisco.  So 
it tried to draft the most inoffensive and mild language possible.  The proposed Cell Phone Right 
to Know ordinance : ―To assure safety, the Federal Govern ment requires that cell phones meet 
radio frequency (RF) exposure guidelines. If you carry or use your phone in a pants or shirt 
pocket or tucked into a bra when the phone is ON and connected to a wireless network, you may 
exceed the federal guidelines for  exposure to RF radiation. This potential risk is greater for 
children. Refer to the instructions in your phone or user manual for information about how to use 
your phone safely. ‖48 
 Sounds pretty inoffensive, no? Not to the CTIA , which  indicated  that it wa s prepared to  sue, 
according to Berkeley City Attorney Zach Cowan .49 (On June 8th, CTIA did indeed sue the City 
of Berkeley.)  
Well, from the  industry point of view , why not throw around your weight? Smash mouth  
legal tacti cs have been highly successful  thus far as industry has managed to throttle several 
efforts to implicate manufacturers in cases where heavy use rs suffered brain tumors . 
But one  current case has advanced in district court in Washington to the point wher e the 
judge  allowed plaintiffs to present expert witness testimony. The industry response: file a legal 
action seeking to  invalidate  long-held court methods for qualifying expert witnesses . 
This is a very rich  industry that does not hesitate to outspend and bully challengers int o 
submission. Meanwhile, amidst the legal smoke and medical confusion, the industry has 
managed to  make the entire world dependent on its products. Even tobacco never had so many 
hooked users.  
Such sustained success  in the face of medical do ubt has required industry to keep a lid on 
critics and detractors. M any scientis ts who‘ve found  real or potential risk from the sort of 
microwave radiation emanating f rom wireless devices have learned there is a price to be paid for 
standing up to the indu stry juggernaut.  A few prominent examples:  
-- 
In 1994, University of Washington researchers Henry Lai and N.P. Singh found that rats 
exposed  to microwave radiation suffered DNA damage to their brain cells.  This was a scary 
finding since DNA damage can lea d to mutations and possibly cancer . 
The reaction from industry was swift.  Motorola was at that time the U.S. market leader in 
cell phones.  In a memorandum obtained by the journal Microwave News, Motorola PR honcho 
Norm Sandler outlined how the company coul d ―downplay the significance of the Lai study.‖  
One step:  ―We have developed a list of independent experts in this field and are in the process of 
recruiting individuals willing and able to reassure the public on these matters,‖ Sandler wrote.  
After outlin ing such measures, he concluded that Motorola had ―sufficiently war -gamed‖ the 
issue . The practices of linin g up industry -friendly testi mony and ―war -gaming‖ researchers who 
come up with unfavorable results h ave been persistent themes with  this industry . 
-- 
After Lai‘s result s were published , Motorola decided to sponsor further research on 
microwaves and DNA damage. Oftentimes, lab results ca nnot be reproduced by other 

researchers, particularly if experiments are tweaked and performed a bit differently.  Non-
confirming studies raise doubt, of course,  on the original work . 
 Motorola lined up Jerry Phillips , a scientist at the Veteran‘s Administration Medical Center 
in Lom a Linda, California , and Phillips tested the effect of radiation at different frequencies from  
those tested by Lai and Singh. Neverth eless, Phillips found that at some  levels of exposure, DNA 
damage increased, while at other levels it decreased.  Such findings were ―consistent ‖ with the 
sorts of effects produced by  chemical ag ents, Phillips said in an interview.50 In some cases, the 
radiation may have activated DNA repair mechanisms, reducing the overall microwave effect.  
But what was important, Phillips explained, is that there  were  any biological effects at all . The 
wireless industry has long contended —and the FCC has agreed —that there is no evidence that 
non-ionizing radiation at the frequencies and power levels used by cell phones is biologically 
active . 
Understanding the pot ential impact of ―biological effect‖  findings, Motorola again turned to 
damage control , said Phillips. He  recalls receiving a phone call from a  Motorola R&D executive.  
―I don‘t think you‘ve done enough research,‘‖ Phillips recalls being told.  The study was n‘t ready 
for publication, according to the Motorola executive.  Phillips was  offered more money to do 
further research without publishing the results of what he‘d done . 
 But Phillips felt he‘d done enough. Despite warnings for his own boss to ―give Motorol a 
what it wants ,‖ Phillips  went ahead and published his findings in 1998.  Since then, Phillips‘ 
industry funding has dried up.  Meanwhile, as many other researchers report, government funding 
to do independent research on microwave radiation has dried up, l eaving the field at least in the 
U.S. to industry -funded scientists. ―There is no money to do the research,‖ Said Phillips.  ―It‘s not 
going to come from government  because government is controlled by industry.‖51 
-- 
Om P. Gandhi is Professor of Electrical a nd Computer Engineering at the University of Utah 
and a leading expert in dosimetry —measurement of non -ionizing radiation absorbed by the 
human body.  Even before cell phones were in wide use, Professor Gandhi had concluded that 
children absorb more emitted  microwave radiation.  ―The concentration of absorbed energy is 50 
to 80% greater,‖ he explained.52  
These conclusions were not acceptable to Professor Gandhi‘s industrial sponsors.  In 1998, he 
recalls,  an executive from a cell phone manufacturer —which he di d not want to identify —told 
him directly that if he did not discontinue his research on  children his funding would be cut off. 
Professor Gandhi recalled replying:  ―I will not stop.  I am a tenured professor at the University of 
Utah and I will not reject my  academic freedom.‖  Professor Gandhi also recalled some of his 
thought process:  ―I wasn‘t going to order my students to alter their results so that I can get 
funding.‖ His industry sponsors cancelled his contract and asked fo r a return of funds . 
 Professor  Gandhi believes that some cell phone users require extra protection because their 
heads are smaller and more absorptive.  ―Children, as well as women and other individuals with 
smaller heads absorb more concentrated energy because of the proximity of the r adiating antenna 
to the brain tissue,‖ he said.  And yet the FCC has not acted to provide special protection for these 
groups.  Asked why not, Professor Gandhi conceded that he doesn‘t know.  He does note, 
however, that recent standards -setting  has been domin ated by industry representatives.53  
-- 
While the mobile industry refuses to admit to even the possibility that there is danger in RF 
radiation, giant insurance companies see things diffe rently.  Several insurers  have in recent years 
issued reports highlight ing product liability risk with cell phones.  This is important because it is 
evidence that where money is  on the line professionals outside the industry see the risk of legal 
liability.  
Legal exposure could be one  reason —perhaps the central one —the industr y continues to 
stonewall. Should legal liability be established, one key question will be how much wireless  
executives knew —and at what point in time.  Mean while, the combination of public relations 
denials, legal intimidation and the selective application of pressure on research follows a familiar 
pattern.  ―The industry is basically using the tobacco industry playbook,‖ UC Berkeley‘s 
Moskowitz said in a recent radio interview .54  
That playbook has thus far been highly success ful in warding off  attention,  regulation  and 
legal incrimination . 
Chapter Five : $270 Billion  . . . and Looking for Handouts  
The FCC‘s network of corruption doesn‘t just shield industry from needed scrutiny and 
regulation on matters of public health and safety.  Sometimes it just puts its hand directly into  the 
public pocket and redistributes that cash to industry supplicants.  
Such is arguably  the case with the Universal Service Fund.  Originally established  to extend 
telephone service to rural and urban areas that industry would find di fficult or uneconomical to 
wire, the USF is now shifting from subsidizing landline phone service to subsidizing the 
extension of broadband Internet. USF monies also support  the Lifeline  program, which 
subsidizes cell phone service  to low -income consumers , and the E -Rate program , which 
subsidizes Internet infrastructure and service to schools and libraries . 
Since 1998, more than $110 billion has been allocated  to Universal Service programs, notes 
Charles Davidson, director of the Advanced Communications Law & Policy Institute at New 
York Law School.  The FCC has allocated over $40 billion  to the E -Rate program alo ne. 
Who pays the freight for  these high-cost programs?  You do.  
Technically, landline and wireless phone companies are assessed for the Universal Service 
fund‘s expenditures.  But the FCC a lso allows those companies to pass on such  charge s to their 
subscribers, which they do. Both  landline and wireless  subscribers  pay a monthly Universal 
Service charge that  is tacked on to their phone bills.  That charge has been rising and recently 
amounted t o a 16% surcharge on interstate calls . 
Consumers  who pay for the se programs might  be interested to learn that both the E -Rate and 
Lifeline  programs have been riddled w ith fraud.  Government watchdogs have repeat edly found 
the programs to be inefficient and prone to inflated and fraudulent claims.  But the programs have 
been  a windfall for tech and telecom industry beneficiaries. Wherever the FCC presides, it 
seems, these industries reap a windfall.  
 The General Ac counting Office  (GAO) has  issued  several  reports citing fraud, waste and 
mismanagement, along with inadequate FCC oversight of the subsidy program.  Bribery, 
kickbacks and false documentation can perhaps be expected in a handout  program mandated by 
Congress  and only indirectly supervised by the FCC . 
But the scope of fraud has been  impressive. The most striking corruption has marred the E -
Rate program, which subsidizes Internet hardware, software and service for schools and libraries, 
and the Lifeline cell ph one subsidies . 
 In recent years, several school districts have paid fines to settle fraud cases involving 
bribery, kickbacks, non -competitive bidding of contracts and false documentation in the E -Rate 
program.  More eye opening  perhaps are the settlements o f fraud claims by tech giants like IBM, 
Hewlett Packard and AT&T. The HP case, for example, involved some colorful bribery 
allegations, including gifts of yachts and Super Bowl tickets.  HP settled for $16 million.  An HP 
official and a Dallas  Independent Sc hool District official  both received jail sentences.  
The Lifeline program has also been riddled with fraud.  A Wall Street Journal investigation of 
the five top corporate beneficiaries of Lifeline  showed that 41% of more than 6 million subsidy 
claimants  ―couldn‘t demonstrate their eligibility or didn‘t respond to requests for certification.‖55 
AT&T, Verizon , and Sprint Nextel were three of the major Lifeline beneficiaries . 
The FCC has initiated several efforts to clean up USF programs and seems honestly 
determined to bring greater accountability and efficiency to its subsidy efforts. Nevertheless, 
problems with fraud persist, as reported recently by the FCC‘s own top investigator . 
 Congress established t he FCC‘s Office of Inspector General in 1989 to ―provi de objective 
and independent investigations, audits and reviews of the FCC‘s programs and operations.‖ 
Here‘s what the FCC‘s internal investigative unit said in a Sept ember  30, 2014 report to 
Congress about its Office of Investigation  (OI):  ―The bulk of th e work of OI involves 
investigating and supporting civil and criminal investigations/prosecutions of fraud in the FCC’s 
federal universal service program .‖56  
 
Fraud —as pervasive and troubling as it has been —is just  one of the problems with the 
programs of  universal service.  It may  not even  be the fundamental problem. More fundamental 
issues concern the very  aim, logic and efficiency of programs to extend broadband and wireless 
technology at public expense. Though the aims of extending service to distant im poverished 
areas seem  worthy  on the surface , there are many reasons to think the major beneficiaries of 
these programs are the technology companies that win the contracts . 

Lobbyists have long swarmed over the FCC looking to get an ever-growing piece of the  USF 
honeypot.  An FCC report on  meetings with registered lobby ists details a 2010 meeting with 
representatives of the International Society for Technology in Education and other education 
lobbyists.  Topics discussed, according to the FCC report, included ― the need to raise the E -
Rate‘s annual cap.‖57  
The CTIA,  leaving no stone unturned in its efforts to pump up member revenues, last year 
responded to a House hearing on the USF by grousing that ―current USF -supported programs 
skew heavily toward support of wireline services . . . . The concentration of USF monies to 
support wireline  services is inconsistent with technolog ical neutrality principles and 
demonstrated consumer preferences,‖ CTIA wrote..58 An industry that generates hundreds of 
billions of dollars in equipment and  service revenues annually bellies up for  a bigger slice  of the 
$8 billion a year USF.  
The grousing has paid off.  The FCC recently announced that it will raise s pending on E -Rate 
from what had  been a cap of $2.4 billion a year to $3.9 billi on. A significant portion of new 
outlays will go to Wi -Fi—yet another wireless industry victory at the FCC. But  the CTIA is by 
no means the only industry group pressing the FCC . 
 Leading the roster of active lobbyists on E -Rate issues  is the Software and I nformation 
Industry Association. Beginning in 2006, SIAA led all lobbyists with 54 mentions of E -Rate in 
its filings, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.  SIAA board members include 
executives from tech heavyweights Google, Oracle and Adobe Sy stems . 
Tech business leaders —many of them direct benefici aries of  FCC programs —made a direct 
pitch to  FCC Chairman Wheeler last year to hik e E-Rate funding.  ―The FCC must act boldly to 
modernize the E -Rate program to provide the capital needed to upgrade ou r K-12 broadband 
connectivity and Wi -Fi infrastructure within the next five years,‖ the executives wrote.59  
There were dozens of corporate executive signees to this letter, including the CEOs of many 
Fortune 500 giants.  But let‘s just consider the particip ation of three:  top executives of Microsoft, 
Google and HP all joined the call to expand E -Rate subsidies.  Consider the simple fact that these 
three tech giants alone had  revenues of  $270 billion —more than a quarter of a trillion dollars —in 
a recent four-quarter period . Together, they produced nearly $40 billion in net income.  And yet 
their top executives still thought it necessary  to dun the FCC —and really, they were  
surreptitiously hitting up the public —for ramped -up spending on what was then a $2.4  billion a 
year program.  
 Is that greed?  Arrogance?  Or is it simply behavior conditioned by success in repeatedly 
getting what  they want at the public trough ? Almost never mentioned in these pleas for higher 
subsidies is the fact that ordinary American pho ne subscribers are the ones footing the bill for the 
E-Rate program —not the FCC or the telecom industry.  
Much of the added spending , as noted,  will go towards the installation of wireless networks. 
And yet Wi -Fi does not have a clean bill of health.  When  Lennart Hardell, professor of Oncology 
and Cancer Epidemiology at the University Hospital in Orebro, Sweden,  was asked what he 
would do if given policy authority over wireless health issues, he replied swiftly that he would 
―ban wireless use in schools and pre-school.‖  Noting that there are wired alternatives, Professor 
Hardell flatly stated: ―You  don‘t need Wi -Fi.‖60 And yet the FCC, prodded by an industry ever 
on the lookout for incremental growth opportunities, is ignoring the health of youngsters to 
promo te expanded Wi -Fi subsidies in schools across the U.S . 
And what about the merit of the program itself?  Overlooking the fraud and lobbying and Wi -
Fi safety issues for a moment, shouldn‘t schools and libraries  across the country be equipped 
with the best ele ctronic gear, accessing the Internet at the fastest speeds?  Doesn‘t the government 
owe that to its younger citizens, especially those disadvantaged by the long -referenced digital 
divide?  
Well, maybe. But a nswers to these  quest ions hinge on even more fundamental question: Do 
students actually learn more or better with access to the latest high -speed electronic gadgetry?  
It would be foolish to argue that nobody benefits from access to high -speed Internet. But the 
benefits are now here near as broad or rich as corporate beneficiaries claim.  Some researchers , for 
example,  have concluded that c omputers don‘t seem to have positive educational impact —they 
may even have negative impact —when introduced into the home or freely distributed to kids 
from low income backgrounds . 
 Duke University researchers Jacob Vigdor and Helen Ladd studied the introduction of 
computers into North Carolina homes.  They found that the academic perfor mance of youngsters 
given computers actually declined.  “The in troduction of home computer  technology is associated 
with modest but statistical ly significant and persistent negative impacts on student math and 
reading te st scores,”  the aut hors wrote in a National Bureau of Economic Research Working 
Paper.61 The impact was actually most negative on the poorer students . 
A study in the Journal of International Affairs examined t he impact of the global One Lap top 
Per Child Program (OLPC) , which has distributed millions of computers to children around the 
world.  Researchers Mark Warschauer and M organ Ames conclude:  “The analy sis reveals that 
provision of individual laptops is a utopian vision for the children in the poorest countries, 
whose educational and social futures cou ld be more effectively improved if the same investments 
were instead made on more proven and sustainable interventions.  Middle - and high -income 
countries may have a stronger rationale for providing individual laptops to children, but will 
still want to eschew OLPC’s technocratic vision.  In summary, OLPC represents the latest in a 
long line of technologically utopian schemes that have unsuccessfully attempted to solve complex 
social problems with overly simplistic solutions .‖62  
 
Access to computers in the home  may not work educational magic.  But what  about 
computers in the classroom? Don‘t  they have educational value there?  
The anecdotal evidence is mixed at best.  Consider how students in Los Angeles, newly 
equipped with flash y iPads  at a mind -boggling taxpayer cost of more than $1 billion , went abou t 
using the new tools to improve  their educational performance. ―Instead of solving math problems 
or doing English homework, as administrators envisioned, more than 300 Los Angeles Unified 
School District students promptly cracked the security setting and started tweeting, posting  to 
Facebook and playing video games.‖63 
 But l et‘s cut through  the self -serving corporate claim s and the troubling anecdotes  to hear 
from  someone who actually has had  extensive  and unique  field experience.  Kentaro  Toyama was 
co-founder of Microsoft‘s research lab in India.  Over more than five years he oversaw at least a 
dozen projects that sought to address educational problems wit h the introduction of computer 
technology.  His conclusion:  ―The value of technology has been over -hyped and over -sold.‖   
The most impor tant factor in improving schools , says Toyama, now the W.K Kellogg 
Associate Professor of Community Information at the University of Michigan, is good teachers.  
Without good , well-trained teachers, adequat e budgets  and solid school administration, 
technology does little good. ―Technology by itself never has any kind of positive impact,‖ he 
said.64 
The only schools in his experience that benefited from increased technology investment were 
those where ―the tea chers were very good, the budgets adequate.‖  The richer schools, in essence.  
But as both Vigdor and Warschauer found, the introduction of technology has by itself little if 
any p ositive effect.  For a public conditioned to believe in the virtues of new tech nology, such 
testimony is a bracing dose of cold reality.  

But what about cost?  Doesn‘t technology in the schools more efficiently replace alternative 
investments?  Cost reductions are often the most  persuasive argument for technol ogy, Toyama  
agrees . But eve n these have been overs tated.  The costs of introducing new technology run far 
beyond initial hardware and software investments, said Toyama.  In reality, the total costs of 
ownership —including maintenance, tr aining , and repair —typically run  to five or ten t imes the  
initial cost, according to Toyama. He said of the investment in technology for cost ben efits: ―I 
would say that in the long run —and even in the medium run and the short -run—that‘s probably 
the worst and most misguided conclusion to come to.‖65 
He adds: ―The  inescapable conclusion is that significant investments in computers, m obile 
phones and other electron ic gadgets in education are nei ther necessary nor warranted for  most 
school systems. In particular, the attempt to use tech nology to fix underper forming cl ass rooms  . 
. . is futile.  And for all but wealthy, well -run schools, one -to-one computer programs cannot be 
recommended in good conscience.‖66 
But that doesn‘t keep industry lobbyists from recommending them.  And it hasn‘t kep t the 
FCC for spending scores  of billions subsidizing technology to the very groups least likely to 
benefit f rom it.  
Unmoved by the arguments of res earchers  and educators like Vigdor, Warschauer , and 
Toyama, the  FCC keeps  moving  to increase  technology subsidies . Ignorin g research that disputes 
the value of technology in closing the so -called ―digital divide,‖ the FCC has even  pione ered a 
new slogan : ―the Wi -Fi gap.‖  
 In announcing that it was lifting E -Rate‘s annual budget from $2.4 billion to $3.9 billion and 
stepping up investment in wireless networking, FCC chairman Wheeler exulted that ―10 million 
students are going to experience n ew and better opportunities.‖67 The impact on consumer 
pocketbooks (and potentially on youngsters‘ health  from daily Wi-Fi exposure ) were n ot 
mentioned . 
The two Republican members of the FCC did at least recognize the pocketbook impact. ―It 
always seems  easier for some people to take more money from the American people via  higher  
taxes and fees rather than do the hard work,‖  said Commissioner Michael O‘Reilly.68  
The subsidized provision of high -speed Internet service is yet another pet project of the FCC.  
Julius Genachowski, chairman  from 2009  to 2013 , championed the transition of the USF from 
landline ph one service to broadb and. Universal broadband Internet connections would begin to 
absorb the monies collected from consumers to extend basic phone service . 
As with government subsidies for cell phone service , classroom technology , and Wi -Fi, there 
are basic questions about the  wisdom of subsidizing broadband.  Charles Davidson and Michael 
Santorelli of the New York Law School found that spending billions to exte nd broadband is a 
flawed approach  since there are many largely ignored reasons people choose not to  adopt 
broadband. ―E verybody is pushing broadband non -stop,‖ noted Davidson, director of the Law 
School‘s Advanced Communications Law and Policy Institute.  ―I think the FCC is focused on 
the wrong set of issues,‖ he said.69  
Already,  he explained, over 98% of Americans  have ac cess to wired or wireless broadband.  
The issue is not one of supply.  It‘s one of demand.  Many people —for a variety of reasons —
don‘t  really care about broadband,  he contends.  Price is one issue. Also powerful factors —but 
given almost no attention —are privac y and security concerns.  ―In our view, they should be 
focused on barriers to meaningful  broadband utilization: privacy and security ,‖ said Davidson.70 
But consumer privacy  (more on this subject in Chapter Seven)  has no well -funded lobby with 
limitless access to the FCC . 
  
Chapter Six : The Cable Connection  
The network  has also been active in diluting FCC control of the cable television industry. 
Over the years, cable has devolv ed into  major de facto  local  monopoli es. Comcast and Time 
Warner Cable, whose merger proposal was dropped in April , are dominant forces in both cable 
television and broadband Internet subscriptions . Somehow, though,  they have managed to steer 
clear of one another in specific markets, giving e ach pricing power where it faces little local 
competition . 
It‘s interesting that cable companies annual ly rank in consumer polls among  the ―most hated‖ 
or ―most disliked‖ American corporations.  Indeed, Comcast  and Time War ner Cable often top 
the ―most hate d‖ list.71 Why would these  companies —providers of the TV  programming that has 
so expanded consumer options in recent decades —be so widely scorned ? After all, t he U .S. has 
been a leader in developing both cable technology and divers e television programming.  
 The problem is that it hasn‘ t been anything close to a leader  in bri nging down subscriber 
prices . Industry consultants typically measure pricing b y the metric of average revenue per 
subscriber. Industry trackers at IH S compared the price of U .S. pay telev ision (which includes 
satellite services) to those in more than 60 other countries.  U.S. prices were the highest , with 
only Australia even coming close.  The average revenue per subscriber in the U .S. in 2013 w as 
$81. But in France it was jus t $18.55.  In Ge rmany it was $19.68.  In Japan it was just over $26.   
Pay TV Monthly Revenue Per Person : 
 

And U .S. cable prices have  risen in recent years  at rates three or more times the rate of 
inflation.  This has been going on for some time.  From 1995 to 2013 cable rates increased at a 
6.1% annual clip.  The Consumer Price Index, by contrast, rose by just 2.4%  annually . Former 
FCC  commissioner Michael  Copps  says the FCC shares a major part of the blame.  ―The FCC is 
as culpable for allowing that as much as the companie s for imposing it,‖ he said.72  
One area where the FCC has contributed to the problem is in its traditional rubber -stamping 
of merger agreements. The proposed Comcast/Time Warner Cable deal has been shelved, largely  
because of Justice Department reservation s. But a long run of earlier FCC -sanctioned  deals 
allowed Comcast and Time Warner Cable to grow to the market do minance —and attendant  
pricing power —they currently command . 
Lofty monthly cable bills pinch consumers . But it‘s more than that. Subscribers payi ng $80 a 
month a re often paying for a lot o f channels they don‘t  watch  and d on‘t want.  The FCC  has 
never required cable operators to charge for what consumers actually want to watch.  Kevin 
Martin, who chaired  the FCC from 2005 to 2009 , pushe d to ―de bundle‖  programming in hopes 
of lowering bills.  But the iss ue was never resolved. Only recently have v iable competitive 
alternatives to cable‘s ― bundled‖  packages  become available.  The sa tellite service Dish , for 
example, months ago  introduced  its Sling offering that enables consumers to opt  for smaller and 
cheaper packages . 
 In fai rness to cable operators, it should  be pointed that programmers often require oper ators 
to take unwanted or fledg ling channels alon g with their stars.  New York cable op erator 
Cablevision Systems filed suit again st Viacom in 2013, charging that in order to get po pular 
channels like MTV and Nickelodeon  it was also forced to take low -rated channels like Nicktoons 
and VH1 Soul.  But the simple truth is that  no matter who is t o blame , the cable consumer pays 
high prices, typically  for some programming he doesn‘t want. As it often does when powerful 
interests pursue dubious practices, the FCC has for the most part idly stood by . 
Still, the FCC isn‘t entirely  to blame. S ome facto rs in the g rowth of the cable giants can not 
be laid at its doorstep.  Local municipalities often granted  monopoly or duopoly status in granting 
franchises  to cable network builders . With  the huge capital investments required to cable 
metropolitan areas, thi s once seemed to make sense . 
 And over the years, the cable giants have used a variety of tactics to we aken what little local 
competi tion they may have had.  Active lobbyists on the local level, t he cable giants  have 
managed to convi nce a growing number of states to outlaw municipal systems that could threaten 
private corporate incumbents.  The FCC  for many years declined t o tangle with  the states in this 
matter , partly due to the opposition of Republican commissioners.  But the Wheeler -led 
Commission did vote recently to override state laws that limit the build -out of municipal cable 
systems . 
 Still,  many years of industry subservience  will be difficult to swiftly undo.  One linchpin  
merger shows how  FCC decision -making h as been thoroughly undermined by  the revolving 
door, lo bbying , and carefully targeted campaign  contributions.  All conspired in Comcast‘s  
pivotal 2011 buyout of NBC Universal , a deal which reinforce d Comcast‘s domination of both 
cable and broadband access.  This deal also set the stage for the recent headline -grabbing  
acrimony over the issue of net neutrality . 
In 2011, mighty Comcast  proposed to acquire NBC Unive rsal. A series of mergers including 
the 1986 acquisition of Group W assets and  the 2002 acquisitio n of AT&T‘s cable assets had 
already vaulted Comcast into cable market leadership.  In bidding for NBC Universal,  a huge step 
towards vertical integration,  Comcast w as once again raising the stakes . NBC Universal would 
give Comcast a treasure trove of progr amming, including valued sports content like NFL football 
and the Olympics . 
Suddenly, the issue was not just cable subscriber base size —where Comcast had already 
bought its way to dominance. NBC Universal would also allow Comcast to  consolidate its 
growing  power as a broadband Inte rnet provider.  And with NBC Universal‘s programming 
assets , Comcas t would gain  new leverage when negotiating  prices  to carr y the competing  
programming  content of rivals . This would prompt  a new round of  debate over net neutrality.  
Couldn‘t a programming -rich Comcast slow down rival services —or charge them more to carry 
their programming ? 
To short -circuit any pote ntial opposition to the merger,  Comcast assembled a sup erstar cast 
of lobbyists.  As Susan Crawfor d reports  in her 2013 bo ok, ―Comcast hired almost e ighty former 
governm ent employees to help lobby for approval of the merger, including several former chiefs 
of staff for key legislators on congressional antitrust commit tees, former FCC s taffers and 
Antitrust Division lawyers, a nd at lea st four former members  of Congres s.73 Such ―profligate 
hiring,‖ Crawf ord observes,  pretty much silenced the opposition to the deal.  If Comcast had 
already retained one member of a lobbying firm , the firm could not under conflict of interest 
rules object  to the deal. And Comcast had locked up key lobbying shops.  Money was both  
weapon and silencer.  
Of course, Comcast  had always been a big spender on lobbying, with outlays exceeding $12 
million ever y year since 2008.  Lobbying costs peaked in 2011 at $19.6 million, according to the 
Center for  Responsive Politics.  
For its part, t he FCC had a long history of approving most media mergers.  So it was hardly a 
great surprise when the ag ency, after exacting some relatively  minor concessions  from Comcast, 
rubber -stamped  the deal. Comcast would thus broaden its footprint as local monopoly distributor 
of cable.  And with its new programming assets, it would enhance its  leverage in negotiating 
deals to carry its r ivals ‘ programming.  It would also fortify  its position of growing strength as 
broadband Internet gatekeeper . 
 The most telling footnote to the deal would come just four months later . FCC Commission er 
Meredith Atwell Baker, who vo ted to approve the merger i n January 2011, left the FCC to 
become a top -tier Comcast  lobbyist in May. It was the ultimate —and perhaps most telling —
glide of the revolving door . 
 Baker‘s was a high -profile  defection.  But it was neither the first nor  the last. Comcast had 
successfully convinced  other FCC officials to take  their expertise and government contacts to the 
cable giant.  Comcast has long been  a master at spinning the revolving door to its own advantage.  
―Comcast has been very good at hiring everyone who is very smart,‖ said Cr awford.74 
Approval of the NBC Universal d eal was another in the long stri ng of FCC merger approvals 
that made Comcast  a nationwide monopolist that cou ld dictate both  pricing and viewer 
programming choice.  
 But the deal may have had another unintended conseq uence.  It set the stage for Comcast‘s 
subsequent battles on net neutrality.  ―Those mergers gave additional oomph to the issue of net 
neutrality,‖ noted former commissioner Copps. Speaking specifically of Comca st‘s buyout of 
NBC Universal, IH S senior analys t Eric  Brannon agreed . ―That merger laid the grounds for net 
neutrality .‖  
 In allowing Comcast to acquire major programm ing assets, the deal would sharpen  questions 
about the power of gatekeepers like Comcast to control the flow of traffic from rival  Web 
services. So in bowing to lobbyist pressure, the FCC would bring on itself a wh ole ne w set of 
pressures  by focusing public attention on  the issue of net neutrality . 
With activists rounding up comments f rom the public and hip TV personalities like HBO‘s 
John Oliver also beating the drums, net neutra lity quickly grew into a  popular issue that won the 
support of President Obama, and by proxy, his hand -picked appointee Tom Wheeler. When the 
FCC ruled in February of 2015 that i t would seek Title II authority to regulate the Internet and 
presumably block any favoritism by broadband gatekeepers , it seemed to finally  cast its lot with 
the public  against s teamrolling corporate interests  
The issue had simmered for years but reached f ull boil  when m ovie purveyor Netflix, which 
had argued that its service was slowed down by Comcast, signed a side deal ensuring better 
download speeds for its wares.  This triggered an o utburst of public concern that Comcast was 
now in position to operate ― fast‖ and ―slow‖ lanes, depending on whether a rival programmer 
could afford to ensure that Comcast provide adequate download speed.  
With  nearly 4 million comments —many  supplied or encouraged by public interest groups —
filed t o the FCC, net neutrality was  a bankable politic al issue.  And t here‘ s no question, net 
neutrality attracted publ ic interest because it gave cable viewers —long furious at the tre atment 
by the monopolists who s end them monthly bills —issues of both viewing pleasure and 
economics . 
But i t also fed into the longstanding sentimental but increasingly unrealistic view of the 
Internet as the last bastion of intellectual freedom. Internet romanticists have long seen the Web 
as a place that somehow deserve s special rules for breaking  the stranglehol d of traditional media  
and offering exciting new communications, information retrieval and shopping efficiencie s. 
Yes, the Internet is  a modern marvel.  This is beyond dispute. But some of the favors it has 
won from government over the years have had  unfortunate unintended consequences . 
In the 1990s, for example, net access providers were repeatedly exempted as an ―infant 
industry‖ from  paying access charges to the Baby Bells even though  they had to connect users 
through local phone networks. The long distance companies were then paying as much as $30 
billion a year for the privilege. But the Internet was exempted . 
 As the late 90s approached, the Internet was no longer an infant industry.  Still, the 
exemption from access charges was extended.  That exem ption essentially allowed AOL in the 
late 90s to offer unlimite d unmetered online time, a key factor in boosting u sage and siphoning 
adver tisers from print media . Why buy an ad in print that might get viewed with the tran sitory 
flip of a page when you can get round -the-clock attentio n online?75 FCC decisions to grant the 
Internet access -charge exemptions arguably accelerated the decline of print media and much of 
the quality journalism print advertising could once support . 
 Meanwhile, r etailers on the Internet were making inroads into brick and mortar retail 
business with the help of a Supreme Court -sanctioned  exemption  from  collect ing sales tax .76 
This judicial coddling of the Internet  was the death knell for many smaller mom and pop loc al 
businesses , already challenged to match online pricing . And that‘s not all.  The special favors 
continue virtually  every year,  as Congress proposes and/or passes legislation to extend special 
tax exempt ions to  Internet services . 
Well, maybe tax breaks ar en‘t such a bad idea for such an innovative and transformational 
emerging technology.  For all its faults, the Internet —gateway to all goods, rep ository of all 
things, wizardly  guide to all knowledge, enabler  of universal self-expression —is undeniably  
cool. 
But let‘s not deny that the combination of tax  advantages and deregulation was toxic.  Allow 
an industry to emerge with advantages over useful existing industries  that largely play by the 
rules —well, maybe that can be rationalized . But then fail  to hold th e upstart industry to the same 
rules , allow ing it more leeway to trample fundamental  rights because it has the technical capacity 
to do so . Well, then  you have a cruel Faustian bargain . 
With the see -no-evil deregulatory gospel  loosing all constraints , the Web would devolve  into 
a playground for co rporate  snoops an d criminals.  For all its wonders, the Internet comes at a  
cost: the loss of control over personal data, the surrender  of personal  privacy, sometimes even  
the confiscation of identity . 
Perhaps t he most favorable consequence of net neutrality —and one that has gotten 
surprisingly little attention —is that it could set the stage for privacy reform.  (More on this in 
Chapter Seven).  The FCC can now choose to exercise its Title II  power s to enforce privacy 
standards over broadband Internet.  Privacy is one area where the FCC has done a pretty good job 
in the past.  
Worth rememb ering, though, is that the hard -fought public  victory over Net Neutrality may 
be transitory . AT&T and others have t hreatened to go to court to upend the FCC rules.  And 
there‘s a fair  chance a Republican Congress will  legislate against Title II.  
 Meanwhi le, though, one supreme irony has begun to unfold in the marketplace . 
Modern -day laissez fair ideologue s love to invok e the wisdom of markets as represented by 
the ―mysteriou s hand‖ of Adam Smith . Unfortunatel y, in the absence of effective regulation , the 
putatively wise  ―mysterious hand‖  generally  seems to work its magic for  those with huge 
financial resources  and the po litical access it  buys. 
In the current cable  situation , however,  the mysterious hand may actually be working  in 
consumer -friendly  ways.  Years of regulation that f avored the cable companies have  now 
backfired as the market reacts to monopolistic pricing and content control.  
Whereas cable giants  have commanded premium month ly subscri ber prices to deliver 
packages of largely unwatched channels, the market is now beginning to burst with new 
―debundled‖ options  that are whittling away at cable‘s vast subscriber base.  
Satellite service Direct TV, as noted , now offers its streaming video  Sling TV package of 
popular networks that includes live sports and news.  Amazon, Apple, CBS,  HBO , Netflix,  Sony, 
and others  offer a variety of strea ming video options that allow  viewer s to cut the cable cord.  
Suddenly , consumers have the cherry -picking capability that bundled —and expensive —cable 
packages have never allowed . 
In this case, at least, the unintended consequences of the FCC‘s pro -industry policies may be 
producing an unexpected pro -consumer twist.  
  
Chapter Seven : What about Privacy?  
Has any issue gotten  as much lip service —and as little meaningful action?   
For all the vario us congressional bills, corporate self-regulatory schemes and presidential 
Privacy  Bill of Rights proposals, the simple truth remains that no personal information is safe on 
the Internet.  Data brokers  have built a multi -billion dollar business exchanging information used 
to build  profiles of Net users . Your shopping and surfing habits, your  health history, your 
banking data, your network  of social ties , perhaps even your t ax filing s are all pot entially 
expo sed online . Both legal and criminal e nterprises a mass  this information . And it doesn‘t go 
away . 
At any given moment people you don‘t know somehow know where you are.  They may very 
well know when you made your last bank deposit , when you had your last asthma attack  or 
menstrual period.  Corporations  encourage and pay for every bit of information  they can  use or  
sell. Creepy?  Perhaps, but as Jeff Chester, president of  the Center for Digital Democ racy points 
out: ―The basic business model that drives online is advertising.‖77 
The FCC largely escapes blame on this one.  It is th e Federal  Trade Commission that  has had 
primary responsibility for protecting Internet privacy.  The FCC does have some limited 
authority, which , some critics say, could have been exercised more vigorously.  But for the most 
part the FCC is not to blame for the rampa nt online abuse of personal privacy  and identity . 
The FCC  does however have privacy authority over the phone, cable and satellite industries.  
Until recently, at least, the FCC  has kept privacy iss ues at bay among the companies in these 
industries.  ―The FCC  has generally taken privacy very seriously,‖ noted Harold Feld, a senior 
vice president at the non -profit Public Knowledge.78  
But dynamics now in place suggest that privacy may be the next great testing ground for the 
FCC.  A new chance, perhaps, to champi on public interest.  Even before the opportunity for 
privacy enforcement under Title II  regulatory powers , the FCC faces new challenges from phone 
companies, now itching to mon etize their vast consumer data stashes the way N et companies 
have. The commonly u sed term is ― Google envy. ‖  
―Until now, ISPs (Internet Service Providers) have mostly not gotten into hot water on 
privacy —but that‘s changing,‖ observed Jonathan Mayer, a fellow a t the Center for Internet and 
Society.79 Verizon and AT&T, major providers of  mobile Internet access, have each introduced 
―super cookies‖ that track consumer behavior even if they try to delete older, less powerful, 
forms of cookies.  AT&T is actually charging its customers an extra $30 a month not to be 
tracked . 
Showdowns loom . 
In adopting Title II to enforce net neutrality , the FCC  has made broadband Internet access a 
telecom service subject to regulation as  a ―common carrier.‖  This reclassification means that the 
FCC could choose to invoke privacy authority under  Title II‘s Secti on 222.  That section, 
previously applied to phone and cable companies, mandate s the protection of consumer 
information.  Such information —called CPNI for Customer Proprietary Network Information —
has kept phone  companies f rom sell ing data on whom  you call , from where you call and how 
long you spend on the phone.  Consumers may have taken such protection for granted on their 
phone calls.  But they have no such protection on their Internet activity —which,  as noted, has 
been a mu lti-billion dollar safe house hidea way for corporate and criminal abus ers of personal 
privacy.  
Now, though, the FCC could  put broadband Internet communications under Section 222 
protection.  To Scott Cleland, a telecom industry consultant who has often been ahe ad of the 
analytic pack, this w ould be  a momentous decision . 
When the smoke clears —and it hasn‘t yet —the FCC could make consumer i dentifiers like IP 
addresses  the equivalent of phone numbers.  Suddenly , the Internet companies that have 
trafficke d in all that personal data would be  subject to the same controls as the phone and cable 
companies . 
 Cleland argues that the risk for privacy abuses extends beyond broadband access providers 
like Comcast and Verizon to Internet giants like Google and Facebook  that have until now 
flourished  with all that personal data.  ―They are at risk and they are going to live un der the 
uncertainty their business model could be ruled illegal by the FCC,‖ Cl eland said.80  
Much has been written about the legal challenges broadband access providers intend to 
mount against the FCC‘s new rules.  But Cleland argues that a very different type of legal action 
could engulf companies that have ben efited from the use and sale of private data. Trial lawyers, 
he argues, will see opportunity in rounding up massive class acti on suits of Internet users whose 
privacy has been violated.  What sorts of privacy abusers face legal action ? Anyone  who has 
―collect ed CPNI via some type of cookie, ‖ according to Cleland.  
―Right now, edge providers like Google, Facebook and Twitter are at risk of being sued by 
trial lawyers ,‖ he  said.81 
Sounds great for consumers who care  about privacy on the Internet and how it has been 
abused. But the FCC, Cleland was reminded, has never been a consumer advocate.  ―Bingo,‖ 
replied Cleland.  That‘s what makes  the FCC‘s potential move into privacy protection so 
important and so surprising , he suggests . 
There  are other signs that the FCC under Tom Wheeler migh t actually become more 
consumer -friendly on the issue of data privacy. While Whee ler has brough t some former 
associates  from lobbying groups  to the FC C, he has also  peppered his staff with respected 
privacy advocates.  Indeed, he named Gigi Sohn, longtime president of the non -profit Public  
Knowledge, as Counsellor to the Chairman  in April . 
Another appointee with a privacy background is Travis LeBlanc, head of the FCC‘s 
Enforcement Bureau. In previous employment in Californi a‘s Office of the Attorney Gen eral, 
LeBlanc was active in enforcing online privacy.  LeBlanc has  stated an interest in pr ivacy and has 
already taken action against two firms that exposed personal information —including social 
security numbers —on unprotected Internet servers . 
But many aspects of LeBlanc‘s approach to regulating Internet privacy under Title II remain 
unclear. U nfortunately, t he FCC declined repeated requests to make LeBlanc available for an 
interview.  (It also declined to answer written questions on its enforcement intentions in both 
privacy and cell tower infrastructure emissions .) 
It remains to be seen  if LeBl anc and his superiors at the FCC are really willing to take on 
privacy enforcement.  Such a stance would require great courage as the entire Internet 
infrastructure is built  around privacy abuse. It is also questionable whether the FCC would have 
the courag e to challenge Google —a rare corporate ally in the battles over  Net Neutrality . 
  
Chapter Eight : Dependencies  Power  the Network of Corruption  
As a captured agency, the FCC is a prime example of institutional cor ruption.  Officials in 
such institutions do not  need to  receive envelopes bulging  with cash.  But even their most well -
intentioned efforts are often overwhelmed by a system that favors po werful private influences, 
typically  at the expense of  public interest . 
Where there is institutio nal corruption, there are often  unde rlying dependencies that 
undermine the autonomy and integrity of that institu tion. Such is the case with th e FCC and its 
broader network of institutional corruption.  
As noted earlier, the FCC  is a single node on a corrup t netw ork that embraces Congress,  
congressional oversight committees  and Washington social life.  The network ties th e public 
sector to  the private through a friction less revolving door —really no door at all . 
Temptation is everywhere in Washington,  where mo neyed lobbyists and industry 
representatives throw the best parties and dinners.  Money also allows industry to control other 
important factors, lik e the research agenda.  All of this works together to industry‘s advantage 
because —as with other instances of institutional corruption —there are compromising 
dependencies.  Policy makers, political candidates and legislators, as well as scientific researchers 
are all compromised by their dependence on industry money . 
Dependency #1  – So much of the trouble here comes back to the core issue of campaign 
finance.  Cable, cellular and educational tech interest s know where to target their fu nds for 
maximum policy impact.  And the contributions work, seemingly buying the silence of key 
committee congressmen —even those wi th past records as progressives. Key recipients  of 
industry dollars  include Massachusetts Se nator Ed Markey a nd, until he retired, California 
Democra t Henry Waxman.  Though they  have intermittently raised their voices  on such issues as 
data privacy and cel lular health and safety,  neither has shown any great inclination to  follow 
through and  take up what would have to be a long and tough fight on  these issues.  
Dependency #2  – Democrats might be expected to challenge industry now and then.  They 
traditionally h ave d one so, after all.  But this is the post -Citizens United  era where the Supreme 
Court has  turned government into  a giant auction  house . 
Bid the highest price and you walk home with the prize —your personal congressma n, 
legislative loophole , even an  entire political party . 
 Such is the case with technolo gy industries and the Democrats . The 
communications/elec tronics industry is the third largest industry group in both lobbying and 
campaign contributions , according to the Center for Responsive Politics.  In just 2013 and 2014, 
this industry sector spent well over $750 million on lobbying.82  
 Only the finance/insurance/real estate and h ealth industries outspend the tech sector on 
lobbying . But those industry groups lean Republican. Over 62% of the finance/ insurance/real 
estate campaign contributions go  to the GOP.  Health contributions lean Republican 57 % to 43%.  
But the technolog y group leans sharply to  Democ rats, who go t 60% of contributions in the 2013 -
2014 election cycle.83 The two next largest industry g roups —energy/natural resources and 
agribusiness —also lean heavily Republican.  So of the top five industry groups whose money 
fuels and often tilts elections four are strongly Republican.  The Democrats need the tech 
industry —and they show that dependence wi th consistent suppor t, rarely raising such public 
interest issues as wireless health and safety and Internet privacy.  
Dependency #3  – Spectrum auctions give the wireless industry a money -making a ura. In 
recent Congressional testimony, an FCC official remin ded legislators that the FCC has over the 
years been a budget -balancing revenue -making force.84 Indeed, the au ctions of electrom agnetic 
spectrum, used by all wi reless communications companies to send their signals, have yielded 
nearly $100 billion in recent  years.  The most recent auction  to wireless providers produced  the 
unexpectedly high total of $43 billion . No matter that the sale of sp ectrum is contributing to a 
pea soup of electromagnetic ―smog‖ whose health consequences are largely unknown.  The 
government needs money and  Congress shows its appreciati on with consistently pro -wireless 
policies . 
Dependency #4  – Science is often the catalyst for meaningful regulation.  But what happens 
when scientists a re dependent on industry  for research funding?  Under pressure from budget 
cutters and deregulators, government funding for research on RF health effects has dried up.  The 
EPA, which once had 35 investigators in the area, has long since abandoned its efforts.85 
Numerous scientists have told me there‘s simp ly no independent research funding in the U.S. 
They are left with a simple choice: work on industry -sponsored research or abandon the field.  
  
Chapter Nine: A Modest Agenda for the FCC  
Nobody is proposing that cell phones be banned. Nor does anyone propose  the elimination of 
the Universal Service progr am or other radical reforms . But there are some  steps —and most are 
modest —that the FCC can take now to right some of the wrongs that result from long years of 
inordinate industry access and influence:  
1. Ackno wledge that  there may be health risks in wireless  communications.  Take d own the 
dismissive language. Maturely and independently discuss the research and ongoing debate on the 
safety of this techn ology . 
2. In recognition of this scientific uncertainty, a dopt a precautionary view on use of wireless  
technology.  Require prominent point -of-sale notices suggesting that users who want to reduce 
health risks can  adopt a variety of measures, including headphones, more limited usage and 
storage away from at -risk body  parts.  
3. Back of f the promotion of Wi -Fi. As Professor Lennart Hardell has noted, there are wired 
alternatives  that do not expose children to wireless risk.  
4. Petition Congress for the budgetary additions needed to expand testing of emissions on 
antenna  sites. It was Congress after all that gave industry carte blanche for tower expansion so 
long as they comply with FCC standards.  But there is evidence of vast non -compliance  and 
Congress needs to ensure that tower infrastructure is operating within the la w. 
5. Acknowledge that  children and pregnant women may be  more vulnerable to the effects of 
RF emissions and require special protection . 
6. Promote cable debundling as a way to lighten consumer cable bills, especially for those 
customers who don‘t care abo ut high -cost sports programming.  
7. Apply more rigorous analysis to properly assess  the value of technology in education.  
Evidence continues to pile up that technology in education is not as valuable as tech comp anies 
claim.  Pay less attention to tech CEOs —pay more attention to the researchers who‘ve actually 
studied the impact of trendy technology fixes on learning  
8. Take over enforcement of personal privacy rights on the Internet.  Of all the ba sic 
suggestions here, this would  require the most courage  as it would involve ch allenging  many of 
the entrenched powers of the Internet . 
  
Chapter Ten : Stray Thoughts  
Some  concluding thoughts:  
Why do  so many of the most dubious FCC policies involve t echnology?  
In large part, of course, because the FCC has authorit y over communications and that is a 
sector that has been radically transformed —along with so many others —by technology . 
Let‘s be clear, though. The problem is not technology , which  unarguably  brings countless 
benefits to modern life.  The problem is wit h the over -extension of claims for technology ‘s 
usefulness and the worshipful adulation of technology even where it has fearful consequences.  
Most fundamentally, the problem is the willingness in Washington —for reasons of both venality 
and na ïveté—to give t echnology a free  pass. 
Personally, I  don‘t believe that just because something can be done it should heedlessl y be 
allowed. Murder, rape and Ponzi schemes are all doable —but subject to prohibition and 
regulation.  Government regula tors have the respo nsibili ty to e xamine the consequences of new 
technologies and act to at least contain some of the worst.  Beyond legislators and regulators, 
public outrage and the courts can also play a  role—but these can  be muffled indefinitely by 
misinformation and bullying.  
There are precedents for industries (belatedly perhaps) acting to offset the most onerous 
consequences of their products.  In responding  to a mix of  litigation,  public  demand and 
regulatory requirement , the auto industry , for example,  has in the last 50 years substantially 
improved the safety and environmental footprint of its  products . 
Padded instrument panels, seat belts, air bags , and crumple zones  have all addressed safety 
issues.  Environmental concerns have been addressed with tightene d emissions and fuel 
consumption standards.  The response to new safety challeng es is ongoing . Before side air bags 
were widely d eployed,  sedan drivers side-swiped by much larger SUVs  were at vastly 
disproportionate risk of death and dismemberment .86 But the  deployment of side air bags has 
―substantially‖ reduced the risk of collision deaths .87 Overall, auto fatality rates per 100,000 
persons  have dropped by nearly 60% in the U.S. since  1966.88 Today, a utomakers continue to 
work on advanced safety features like  collision avoidance . 
It can be argued that most of these safety improvements came  decades after autos were in 
wide usage and only  in response to outrage at  Ralph Nader‘s 1965 revelations on the auto 
industry .89 No matter the catalysts.  The simple truth remains that  the auto industry —and its 
regulators —have for the last half -century been addressing safety and environmental issues . 
But with the overwhelming  application of money and influence , information and 
communica tions  technologies have almost totally  escaped political scrutiny, regulatory control , 
and legal discipline . 
Should the Internet have been allowed to develop into an ultra-efficient tool for lifting  
personal information that includes  financial records, health histories and social security 
numbe rs? Should wireless communication s be blindly  promoted even as new clu es keep 
suggesting  there may be  toxic  effects? Should local zoning authorities and American citizens be 
stripped of the right to protect their own health?  Should education be digitized and imposed just 
because technology companies want to develop a new market and lock in a young er customer 
base?   
All these questions can perhaps be rolled up in one : do we al l just play dead for the corp orate 
lobbyists and spinners  who promote the unexamined and unregulated application of their 
products?   
Finally,  a word about the structure of the  FCC.  With five commissioners —no more than 
three from the same party —the structure seems to make some kind of sense . 
 But in pract ice, it works out poo rly. The i dentification of commissioners by party tends to 
bring out the worst in both Republicans and Democrat s. Instead of exa mining issues with clear -
sighte d independence, the commissioners seem to retreat int o the worst caricatures of thei r 
parties.  The Republicans spout free market a nd deregulatory ideology that is most often  a 
transparent cover for  support of business interests.  The Democrats seems satisfied if they can 
implement their pet spending programs —extension of broadband wireless to depressed  urban 
and rural schools, cell phone subsidies for low income clients. The result is a Commission that 
fulminates about ideology and spends heavily to subsidize powerful interests.  
Perhaps one solution would be to expand the Commission to seven by adding t wo public 
interest Commissioners.  The public i nterest only rarely prevails at th e FCC.  So it would 
represent vast improvement  if both Republican and Democrat commissioners had to vie fo r 
support of public interest representatives in order to forge a  majori ty. The public interest, in other 
words, would sometimes carry the swing votes.  
It‘s very hard to believe, though, that Congress would ever approve such a plan . It simply 
represents too much of a threat to the entrenched political power of the two parties.  Why would 
they ever agree to a plan that dilut es that power?  
 It‘s also worth noting that the public interest is not always easy to define.  Sometimes there 
are arguably conflicting definitions.  Still,  an FCC with public interest commissioners  is an idea 
worth consideration.  It would at least require  party apologists to defend how they  so consistently 
champion the moneye d interests that have purchased  disproportionate access and  power in  
Washington .   
Appendix —Survey of Consumer Attitudes  
What does the pub lic believe about the science and pol itics of wireless health research ? 
Under what conditions wo uld people change wireless  usage patterns?  Is the FCC currently 
trusted to protect pu blic heal th? How woul d confirmation of  health risks affect trust in the FCC ? 
These are some of the questions Ann -Christin Posten90 and Norm Alster91 hoped to answer 
with an April 2015 online survey of 202  respo ndents.  Participants were recruited through 
Amazon‘ s Mechanica l Turk online platform.  All were U.S. residents and had achieved  
qualifying approval  rates in prior  Mechanical T urk surveys.  
Participants wer e asked how likely they believed the following statements to be true:  
Statement 1 . Prolonged and heavy cell phone us e can have a variety of damaging effects 
on health.  
Statement 2. Prolong ed and heavy cell phone use triple s the risk of brain tumors . 
Statement 3.  There is no scientific evidence that proves that  wireless phone usage can 
lead to cancer or a variety of other problems.  
Statement 4.  Children and pregnant women are especially vulnerable to rad iation from 
wireless phones, cell towers and Wi -Fi 
Statement 5.  Lobbying and campaign contributions have been key factors in keeping the 
government from acknowledging wireless hazards and adopting more stringent 
regulation.  
Statement 6. The U.S.  Congress  forbids local communities from  considering health 
concerns when deciding whether to issue zoning permits for wireless antennae.  
 
Two findings seem especially interesting :  
1. Statement 3  received a higher credibility rating than Statements 1 and 2 . The different 
credibility levels are statistically significant. Respondents are more likely to trust in wireless 
safety than to believe there are general or specific  health risks.  
2. The only s tatement that is a matter of uncontested fact is Stateme nt 6 on the outlawing of 
opposition to antenna s ites on health grounds.  (All other statements have been both proclaimed 
and denied .) And yet Statement 6  was least likely to be believed.  Just 1.5% of respondents 
recognized this as an ―absolutely true‖ statement.  Over 14% though t this statement was ―not true 
at all.‖  Answers to this question would seem to reflect  public ignorance on the political 
background to wireless health issues.  
 Participants were also asked how they would change behavior if claims of wirel ess health 
risks were established as  true:  
  

 

 

The gre atest impact on behavior came when respondents were asked to assume it is true that 
prolonged and heavy cell phone use triples the risk of brain tumors. More than half said they 
would ―definitely‖ restrict the amount o f time spent on  the phone.  Just over 43% would 
―definitely‖ restrict their children‘s phone use. Perha ps most surprisingly, close to  25% would 
―definitely‖  start up a new landli ne phon e account.  (This last respon se suggests it may be 
foolishly premature for the phone giants to exit the  landline business just yet .)  
The inclination of consumers to change behavior should negative health effects be confirmed 
suggests the stakes are enormous for all companies that derive revenue from wireless usage . 
This surve y points to —but cannot an swer—some critical questions:  Do wireless  companies 
better protect themselves legally  by continuing to deny the validity of all troublesome research? 
Or should they instead be positioning themselves to maintain consumer trust?  Perhaps there is 
greater financial wisdom in listening to the lawyers right now and denying all chance of harm.  If 
so, however,  why would anyone seriously concerned about health list en to the industry —or to its 
captured agency ? That‘s a questio n the FCC  will eventually need to answer . 
Trust could eventually become a central issue.  Respondent s were  initially asked to describe 
their level of trust in the wireless industry and in the FCC  as its regulator.  Not surprisingly , 
establishment of any  of the presumed health risks —or confirmation of inordinate industry 
pressure —resulted in statistically significant diminution of trust in both  the industry and the  
FCC . 
 
On a scale of 1 to 100, t he FCC  had a mean baseline trust level of 45.66 . But if the tripling of 
brain tumor risk is established as definitely true , that  number falls all the way to 24 .68. If 
―lobbying and campaign contributions‖ have been ―key  factors‖ in keeping the government fro m 
acknowledging wireless hazards , the trust level in the FCC  plummet s to 20.02.  All results were 
statistically significant . 
 It‘s clear that at this point confirmation of health dangers —or even of behin d-the-scenes  
political pressures —from wireless will substantially diminish pub lic trust in the FCC.  Skeptics 
might argue that  this gives the FCC motive to continue to downplay and dismiss further evidence 
of biological and human health effects.  Those of a more optimistic bent  might see in these 
findings rea son to encourage an  FCC  concerned about public trust  to sh ake itself loos e from 
special interest s. 

Endnotes  
                                                 
1 Former CTIA vice president John Walls in Kevin Kunze‘s documentary film Mobilize , introduced in 2014 at the California 
Independent Film Festival.  
2 November 2014 interview with Renee Sharp.  
3 December 2014 interview with Twaun Samuel.  
4 Dr. George Carlo and Martin Schram, Cell Phones,  Invisible Hazard s In The Wireless Age (Carroll & Graf, 2001), 18.  
5 Center for Responsive Politics.  
6 Id.  
7 November 2014 interview with Michael Copps.  
8 January 2015 interview with Newton Minow.  
9 Daniel Lathrop, ―From Government Service to Private Practice: Writers of Telecom Law Move to K Street,‖ Center for Public 
Integrity, October 28, 2004,  http://w ww.publicintegrity.org/2004/10/28/6597/government -service -private -practice . 
10 B. Blake Levitt and Henry Lai, ―Biological Effects from Exposure to Electromagnetic Radiation Emitted By Cell Tower Base 
Stations and Other Antenna Arrays,‖ NRC Research Press We b site, November 5, 2010.  
11 Id., 381.  
12 Id. 
13 S. Sivani and D. Sudarsanam, ―Impacts of Radio -Frequency Electromagnetic Field (RF_EMF) from Cell Phone Towers and 
Wireless Devices on Biosystem and Ecosystem – A Review,‖ Biology and Medicine  4.4 (2013): 202.  
14 Id., 206 -208. 
15 January 2015 interview with Robert Weller.  
16 Letter from Michelle C. Farquhar, Chief of the FCC‘s Wireless Telecommunications Bureau, to Thomas Wheeler, President 
and CEO of the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association, January 1 3, 1997.  
17 Id. 
18 Letter from FCC Chairman Thomas Wheeler to former FCC Commissioner Jonathan Adelstein, President and CEO, PCIA -The 
Wireless Infrastructure Association, March 14, 2014.  
19 December 2014 interview with James R. Hobson.  
20 January 2015 interview with Marvin Wessel.  
21 Id. 
22 January 2015 interview with Janet Newton.  
23 Robert Weller interview.  
24 Best‘s Briefing, ―Emerging Technologies Pose Significant Risks with Possible Long -Tail Losses,‖ February 11, 2013, 
http://www.ambest.com/directories/bestconnect/EmergingRisks.pd .  
25 Online survey conducted in April 2015 on Amazon‘s Mechanical Turk platform.  
26 CTIA, ―Policy & Initiatives: Innovation,‖ http://www.ctia.org/policy -initiatives/policy -topics/innovation . 
27 February 2015 interview with Dennis Kucinich.  
28 Alexander Lerchl, Melanie Klose, and Karen Grote et al., ― Tumor Promoti on by Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic 
Fields below Exposure Limits for Humans ,‖ Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications  459.4 (2015): 585 -590. 
29 WHO/International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), ―IARC Classifies Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields As 
Possibly Carcinogenic To Humans,‖ Press Release No. 208, May 31, 2011.  
30 Medscape, ―Brain Cancer CME Learning Center,‖ http://www.medscape.org/resource/brain -cancer/cme . 
31 Anke Huss, Matthias Egger, Kerstin Hug, Karin Huwiler -Muntener, and Martin Roosli, ―Source of Funding and Results of 
Studies of Health Effects of Mobile Phone Us e: Systemic Review of Experimental Studies,‖ Environmental  Health Perspectives  
115.1 (2007): 1 -4, 1. 
32 Id. 
                                                                                                                                                             
33 Federal Communications Commission, ― Wireless Devices and Health Concerns ,‖ http://www.fcc.gov/guides/wireless -devices -
and-health -concerns . 
34 Lennart Hardell, Michael Carlberg, Fredrik Soderqvist, and Kjell Hansson Mild, ―Case -Control Study of the Associati on 
between Malignant Brain Tumours Diagnosed between 2007 and 2009 and Mobile and Cordless Phone Use,‖ International  
Journal of Oncology 43.6 (2013): 1833 -1845 . 
35 Lennart Hardell and Michael Carlberg, ―Use of Mobile and Cordless Phones and Survival of Pati ents with Glioma,‖ 
Neuroepidemiology  40.2 (2012): 101 -108. 
36 Lennart Hardell and Michael Carlberg,  ‗Using the Hill Viewpoints from 1965 for Evaluating Strengths of Evidence of the Risk 
for Brain Tumors Associated with Use of Mobile and Cordless Phones,‖  Reviews on Environmental Health  28.2-3 (2013 ): 97-
106. 
37 Gaelle Coureau, Ghislaine Bouvier, and Pierre Lebailly, et al., ―Mobile Phone Use and Brain Tumors in the CERENAT Case -
Control Study,‖ Occupational  and Environmental Medicine  71.7 (2014): 514 -522, doi: 10.1136/oemed -2013 -101754.  
38 October 2014 interview with Lennart Hardell.  
39 December 2014 interview with Martin Blank.  
40 Id. 
41 Norm Alster, ―Cell Phones: We Need More Testing,‖ BusinessWeek , August 14, 2000, 39.  
42 Quoted in American Academy of Pediatrics, ―American Academy of Pediatrics Endorses Cell Phone Safety Bill,‖ Press 
Release, December 20, 2012, http://www.ewg.org/release/american -academy -pediatrics -endorses -cell-phone -safety -bil. 
43 Om P. Gandhi, L. Lloyd M organ, Alvaro Augusto de Salles, Yueh -Ying Han, Ronald B. Herberman, and Devra Lee Davis, 
―Exposure Limits: The Underestimation of Absorbed Cell Phone Radiation, Especially in Children,‖ Electromagnetic Biology 
and Medicine  31.1 (2012) : 34-51. 
44 November 2 014 interview  with Joel Moskowitz.  
45 February 2015 interview  with Carl Blackman.  
46 Id. 
47 Id. 
48 Lawrence Lessig, Roy L. Furm an Professor of Law and Leadership at Harvard L aw School , helped to draft the Right to Know 
ordinance and has offered pro bono legal representation to the city of  Berkeley.  Professor Lessig was director of the Lab at 
Harvard‘s Safra Center for Ethics, from which the Project on Public Narrative was spun off in  November of  2014.  
49 May 2015 interview with Berkeley City Attorney Zach Cowan  
50 December 2014 interview  with Jerry Phillips.  
51 Id. 
52 February 2015 interview  with Om P. Gandhi.  
53 Id. 
54 Radio interview on WBAI -FM, ―Wireless Radiation: What Scientists Know and You Don‘t, With Dr. Joel Moskowitz,‖ March 
10, 2015.  
55 Spencer Ante, ―Milli ons Improperly Claimed U.S. Phone Subsidies,‖ Wall Street Journal , February 11, 2013,  
http://allthingsd.com/201 330212/millions -improperly -claimed -u-s-phone -subsidies/ . 
56 Federal Communications Commission Office of Inspector General, ―Semiannual Report to Congress for the Period April 1, 
2014 - September 30, 2014,‖ 20, http://transition.fcc.gov/oig/FCC_OIG_SAR_09302014a.pdf . 
57 Federal Communic ations Commission, ―Reports on Meetings and Telephone Calls with Registered Lobbyists Regarding 
General Recovery Act Policy I ssues,‖ March 2, 2010.  
58 CTIA - The Wireless Association, ―Response to White House Paper on Universal Service Policy,‖ September 19, 2014, 
http:// www.ctia.org/docs/default -source/Legislative -Activity/ctia -usf-response -to-house -white -paper -091914.pdf?sfvrsn=0 . 
59 Open Letter from Executives of 50 Leading Companies to Tom Wheeler, Chairman of the FCC, January 30, 2014 , 
http://erate2.educationsuperhighway.org/#ceos -letter . See also David Nagel, ―50 Top Execs Urge E -Rate Modernization To 
Propel Broadband in Schools,‖ The Journal , January 30, 2014.  
60 October 2014 interview with Lennart  Hardell.  
61 Jacob L. Vigdor and Helen F. Ladd, ―Scaling the Digital Divide: Home Computer Technology and Student Achievement,‖ 
Calder Urban Institute Working Paper , No.  48, June 2010.  
                                                                                                                                                             
62 Mark Warschauer and Morgan Ames, ―Can One Laptop Per Child Save the World‘s Poor?‖ Journal of  International Affairs  
64.1 ( 2010 ): 33-51.  
63 John Rogers, ―L.A. Students Get iPads, Crack Firewall, Play Games,‖ Associated Press , October 5, 2013, 
http://bigstory.ap.org/article/la -students -get-ipads -start-playing -video -games . 
64 April 2015 interview with Kentaro Toyama.  
65 Id. 
66 Id. 
67 FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler , quoted in Gr ant Gross, ―FCC Approves Plan to Spend $1B a Year on School Wi -Fi,‖ IDG News 
Service, July 11, 2014 . 
68 Michael O‘Rielly, ―Dissenting Statement by Commissioner Michael O‘Rielly ,‖ 2, http://e -ratecentral.com/files/fcc/DOC -
328172A7.pdf , after FCC in July of 2014 voted to increase Wi -Fi spending .  
69 February 2015 interview with Charles Davidson and Michael Santorelli.  
70 Id. 
71 The University of Michigan‘s American Customer Satisfaction Index, http://www.theacsi.org/the -american -customer -
satisfaction -index . 
72 September 2014 interview with Michael Copps.  
73 Susan Crawford, Captive Audience: The Telecom Industry and Monop oly Power in the New Gilded Age  (Yale University 
Press, 2013), 212.  
74 October 2014 interview with Susan Crawford.  
75 Norm Alster, ―A Little Help from the Feds,‖ BusinessWeek , January 24, 2000, 42.  
76 1992 Supreme Court decision in Quill Corp. v. North Dakota , 504 U.S. 298 (1992).  
77 February 2015 conversation  with Jeff Chester . 
78 April 2015 interview with Harold Feld.  
79 March 2015 interview with Jonathan Mayer.  
80 April 2015 interview with Scott Cleland.  
81 Id.  
82 Center for Responsive Politics . 
83 Id. 
84 ―Testimony o f Jon Wilkins, Managing Director, Federal Communications Commission,‖ Before the Committee on Energy and 
Commerce, Subcommittee on Communications and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives, March 4, 2015.  
85 Alster, ―Cell Phones: We Need More Testing,‖ 39.  
86 Danny Hakim and Norm Alster, ―Lawsuits: This Year‘s Model,‖ New York Times , May 30, 2004, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2004/05/30/business/lawsuits -this-year-s-model.html . 
87 A.T. McCartt and S.Y. Kyrychenko, ―Efficacy of Side Airbags in Reducing Driver Deaths in Driver -Side Car and SUV 
Collisions,‖ Traffic Inj ury Prev ention 8.2 (2007): 162 -170. 
88 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, ―Traffic Safety Facts 2012,‖ 18,  http://www -
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812032.pdf . 
89 Ralph Nader, Unsafe At Any Speed: The Designed -In Dangers of the Americ an Automobile  (Grossman Publishers, 1965).  
90 Lab Fellow, Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics, Harvard University.  
91 Investigative Journalism Fellow, Project on Public Narrative at Harvard Law School.  
Theodora Scarato
Environmental Health Trust 
LD 697
Please see attached 
Harvard Press Book “Captured Agency: How the Federal Communications Commission is 
Dominated by the Industries it Presumably Regulates” 

