 
 
Treatment Research And NeuroSCience Evaluation of NeuroDevelopmental Disorders  
 
    
 
 
 
9 September 2016 
 
District Office 
200 Douglas Street Petaluma, California 94952    Dear Petaluma City School District,  I am a pediatric neurologist and neuroscientist on the faculty of Harvard Medical School and on staff at the Massachusetts General Hospital. I am Board Certified in Neurology with Special Competency in Child Neurology, and Subspecialty Certification in Neurodevelopmental Disorders. I have an extensive history 
of research and clinical practice in neurodevelopmental disorders, particularly autism spectrum 
disorders. I have published papers in brain imaging research, in physiological abnormalities in autism spectrum disorders, and in environmental influences on neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism and on brain development and function.  A few years ago I accepted an invitation to review literature pertinent to a potential link between Autism Spectrum Disorders and Electromagnetic Frequencies (EMF) and Radiofrequency Radiation (RFR). I set out to write a paper of modest length, but found much more literature than I had anticipated to review. I ended up producing a 60 page single spaced paper with over 550 citations. It is available at http://www.bioinitiative.org/report/wpcontent/uploads/pdfs/sec20_2012_Findings_in_Autism.pdf a
nd it was published in a revised and somewhat shortened form in two parts in the peer reviewed 
indexed journal Pathophysiology (2013).  More recently I published an article entitled “Connections in Our Environment: Sizing upElectromagnetic Fields,” in Autism Notebook Spring 2015 edition. In this article I describe how here is a whole series of problems at the cellular, sub-cellular and metabolic levels and immune levels that have been identified in autism. And interestingly, for every single one of those problems, there’s literature about how EMFs can create those kinds of problems.  
The argument I made in these articles is not that EMF is proven to cause autism, but rather, that EMF 
can certainly contribute to degrading the physiological integrity of the system at the cellular and molecular level – and this in turn appears to contribute to the pathogenesis/causation not only of autism but of many highly common chronic illnesses, including cancer, obesity, diabetes and heart HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL  
 
 
 
Martha R. Herbert, Ph.D., M.D.  
Assistant Professor, Neurology Director, TRANSCEND Research Program www.transcendresearch.org 
transcend@partners.org  MASSACHUSETTS  
GENERAL HOSPITAL   
 
Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging 
149 13th Street, Room 2nd Floor 
Charlestown (Boston), Massachusetts  
02129 
Phone:  617-724-5920 
martha.herbert@mgh.harvard.edu 
https://connects.catalyst.harvard.edu/prof
iles/display/Person/47629  

 
 
Treatment Research And NeuroSCience Evaluation of NeuroDevelopmental Disorders disease.. Please see this article on page 24-25 at the 
linkhttp://virtualpublications.soloprinting.com/publication/?i=252361   In fact, there are thousands of papers that have accumulated over decades –and are now accumulating at an accelerating pace, as our ability to measure impacts become more sensitive – that document 
adverse health and neurological impacts of EMF/RFR. Children are more vulnerable than adults, and 
children with chronic illnesses and/or neurodevelopmental disabilities are even more vulnerable. Elderly or chronically ill adults are more vulnerable than healthy adults.  Current technologies were designed and promulgated without taking account of biological impacts other than thermal impacts. We now know that there are a large array of impacts that have nothing to do with the heating of tissue. The claim from WiFi proponents that the only concern is thermal impacts is now definitively outdated scientifically.  Radiofrequency electromagnetic radiation from WiFi and cell towers can exert a disorganizing effect on 
the ability to learn and remember, and can also be destabilizing to immune and metabolic function. This 
will make it harder for some children to learn, particularly those who are already having learning or medical problems in the first place. And since half of the children in this country have some kind of chronic illness, this means that a lot of people are more vulnerable than you might expect to these issues.  Powerful industrial entities have a vested interest in leading the public to believe that EMF/RFR, which we cannot see, taste or touch, is harmless, but this is not true. Please do the right and precautionary thing for our children.  
I urge you to opt for wired technologies in Petaluma City School District classrooms, particularly for 
those subpopulations that are most sensitive. It will be easier for you to make a healthier decision now than to undo misguided decisions later.  Thank you. 
 
 Sincerely yours, 
 
 
Martha Herbert, PhD, MD 

To Whom It May Concern:
Dear Sirs/Madams:
I am Scientist Emeritus and Former Director of the National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences and National Toxicology Program of the National Institutes of Health.  I am currently a
Scholar in Residence at the Nicholas School of the Environment at Duke University.
Wireless networks, cell towers and cell phones create radiofrequency radiation emissions.  U.S.
FCC limits for human exposure to radiofrequency were last reviewed in 1996 and based on the
assumption that heating is the only harmful effect.  Aware that the FCC’s 1996 limits lacked the
underpinning of solid scientific data regarding long term health effects, the FDA requested
large-scale studies by the National Toxicology Program (NTP) and in 2018 the NTP studies
found clear evidence of an association with cancer in male rats. Additionally, the NTP found
heart damage and DNA damage, despite the fact that the animals were carefully exposed to
non-heating RFR levels long assumed to be safe.  The Ramazzini Institute animal studies used
even lower RFR lower exposures to approximate cell tower emissions and also found increases
of the same tumor type. The NTP studies were carefully controlled to ensure exposures did not
significantly heat the animals. The animal study findings in combination with human studies
indicate adverse effects from non heating levels of radiofrequency.
I document the importance of the NTP findings of effects from non thermal exposures in my
declaration in an Amicus Brief for the case Environmental Health Trust et al v. the FCC. The
August 13, 2021 judgment ordered the FCC to address several issues including the health
implications of long term exposures.
A mounting body of published studies associates radiofrequency radiation with adverse
negative health effects. FCC limits need to be strengthened to protect the public, especially
children and vulnerable populations, from long term exposures.
Linda S. Birnbaum, PhD
Scientist Emeritus and Former Director
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences and National Toxicology Program
Scholar in Residence, Duke University, Former President, Society of Toxicology
Adjunct Professor, Yale University and UNC, Chapel Hill, Visiting Professor, Queensland
University (Australia)
National Toxicology Program Radiofrequency Radiation
https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/whatwestudy/topics/cellphones/index.html
Amicus Brief of Joe Sandri, August 5, 2020
https://ehtrust.org/wp-content/uploads/20-1025-Amicus-Brief-Joe-Sandri.pdf
Falcioni et al., Report of final results regarding brain and heart tumors in Sprague-Dawley rats
exposed from prenatal life until natural death to mobile phone radiofrequency field
representative of a 1.8 GHz GSM base station environmental emission, Environmental
Research, Volume 165, 2018,
Pages 496-503 DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2018.01.037
Priyanka Bandara, David O Carpenter, Planetary electromagnetic pollution: it is time to assess
its impact, The Lancet Planetary Health, Volume 2, Issue 12, 2018, Pages e512-e514,ISSN
2542-5196, https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(18)30221-3.
Schuermann D, Mevissen M. Manmade Electromagnetic Fields and Oxidative
Stress—Biological Effects and Consequences for Health.International Journal of Molecular
Sciences. 2021; 22(7):3772. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22073772
Smith-Roe SL.,  et al., Evaluation of the genotoxicity of cell phone radiofrequency radiation in
male and female rats and mice following subchronic exposure, Environ Mol Mutagen 2020; 61
(2): 276-290
Institute for Health and the Environment  
     
  
 
East Campus, 5 University Place, Room A217, Rensselaer, NY 12144 -3429 
PH: 518-525-2660   FX: 518-525-2665 
www.albany.edu/ihe  
  
 
 
 
 
 
       12 September  2017 
 
All School Board Members  
Hempfield School District  
 
Dear Sirs/Madams:  
 
I am a public health physician who has been involved in issues related to electromagnetic fields (EMFs) 
for several decades. I served as the Executive Secretary for the New York Powerline Project in the 
1980s, a program of research that showed that children living in homes with elevated magnetic fields 
coming from powerlines suf fered from an elevated risk of developing leukemia.   After that project was 
completed I served as the spokesperson for New York State on issues related to both power line and 
radiofrequency EMFs.   I served as Director of the Wadsworth Laboratory of the Ne w York State 
Department of Health, as well as Dean of the School of Public Health at the University at 
Albany/SUNY. I have edited two books on effects of EMFs, ranging from low frequency fields to 
radiofrequency/ microwave radiation, or the kind emitted by  WiFi routers, cell phones, neighborhood 
antennas or cell towers  and wireless computer equipment. I served as the co -editor of the BioInitiative 
Report 2012 (Bioinitiatve.org) , a comprehensive review of the literature showing biological effects at 
non-thermal levels of exposure, much of which has since been published in the peer -reviewed journal, 
Pathophysiology  (attached).  Also, I served on the President’s Cancer Panel that examined radiation 
exposures as they relate to cancer risk,  in 2009.  Thus, this i s a subject which I know well, and one on 
which I take a public health approach rooted in the fundamental principle of the need to protect against 
risk of disease, even when one may not have all the information that would be desirable.  
 
There is clear and strong evidence that intensive use of cell phones increases the risk of brain cancer, 
tumors of the auditory nerve and cancer of the parotid gland, the salivary gland in the cheek by the ear.   
The WHO’s International Agency  for Research on Cancer has  classified the radiation from both cell 
phones and cell towers as a Class  2B “Possible Carcinogen” in 2011 . Cell towers use similar radio -
frequency radiation as cell phones (in the 1.8 to 5.0 GHz range). The difference between a cell phone 
and a cell tower env ironment, however, is that while the cell phone is used only intermittently, and at 
higher power, a cell tower  environment is continuous, serving many people at the same time.  Cell 
towers direct their beam in all directions, such that anyone nearby is con tinuously exposed to 
radiofrequency radiation.  While the intensity is much less than one would receive holding a cell phone 
to your head, the emissions from a cell tower are continuous.  Thus the aggregate exposure over time 
coming from being close to a c ell tower can be very significant.   A child in a school with a nearby cell 
tower will be exposed every moment he or she is at school.  Thus t here is a particular concern when a 
cell tower is place near to a school.    
 
 
 
College of Engineering and Physical Sciences  
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering  
Kingsbury Hall  
33 Academic Way  
Durham, NH  03824 -2619  
V: 603.862. 1357  
F: 603.862. 1832  
TTY: 7. 1.1 (Relay NH)  
www.ceps.unh.edu/ece                   ece.dept@unh.edu  
  
 
 
 
 
November 9, 2021  
 
 
The Honorable Jessica Rosenworcel, Commissioner  
Acting Chairwoman  
Federal Communications Commission  
445 12th Street, S.W.  
Washington, DC 20554  
  
Dear Chairwoman Rosenworcel,  
I am writing to request that the FCC re -open Docket #13 -84 “Reassessment of FCC Radiof-
requency Exposure Limits and Policies” and Docket #03 -137“ Proposed Changes to the 
Commission Rules Regarding Human Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields - 
in order to refresh the record before responding to the mandate of the August 13, 2021 
judgment  by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the  District of Columbia Circuit, in Environmental 
Health Trust et al. v. the FCC.  
I am Professor and Chair Emeritus at the University of New Hampshire Department of Elec-
trical & Computer Engineering and  served on the New Hampshire State Commission on 5G 
Technology. After a year of investigation we issued our final report on November 1, 2020.  
I want to ensure the fifteen recommendations of the expe rt New Hampshire State Commis-
sion are considered by the FCC. If the FCC does not re -open the record, the Report will not 
be available to the Commission as it was finalized in 2020.  
 
Sincerely  
 
Kent Chamberlin , PhD  
Professor & Chair Emeritus  
 
 
  
New Hampshire State Commission on  5G Technology Final Report Recommendations  
 
RECOMMENDATION 1  
Propose a resolution of the House to the US Congress and Executive Branch to require the 
Federal Communication Commission (FCC) to commission an independent review of the 
current radiofrequency  (RF) standards of the electromagnetic radiation in the 300MHz to 
300GHz microwave spectrum as well as a health study to assess and recommend mitigation 
for the health risks associated with the use of cellular communications and data transmit-
tal. 
  
RECOMME NDATION 2  
Require that the most appropriate agency (agencies) of the State of New Hampshire include 
links on its (their) website(s) that contain information and warnings about RF -radiation 
from all sources, but specifically from 5G small cells deployed on public rights -of-way as 
well as showing the proper use of cell phones to minimize exposure to RF -radiation, with 
adequate funding granted by the Legislature. In addition, public service announcements on 
radio, television, print media, and internet should p eriodically appear, warning of the 
health risks associated with radiation exposure. Of significant importance are warnings 
concerning the newborn and young as well as pregnant women.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 3  
Require every pole or other structure in the public ri ghts of - way that holds a 5G antenna 
be labeled indicating RF -radiation being emitted above. This label should be at eye level 
and legible from nine feet away.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 4  
Schools and public libraries should migrate from RF wireless connections for computers, 
laptops, pads, and other devices, to hardwired or optical connections within a five -year pe-
riod starting when funding becomes available.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 5  
Signal stren gth measurements must be collected at all wireless facilities as part of the com-
missioning process and as mandated by state or municipal ordinances. Measurements are 
also to be collected when changes are made to the system that might affect its radiation, 
such as changes in the software controlling it. Signal strength is to be assessed under 
worst -case conditions in regions surrounding the tower that either are occupied or are ac-
cessible to the public, and the results of the data collection effort is to be made available to 
the public via a website. In the event that the measured power for a wireless facility ex-
ceeds radiation thresholds, the municipality is empowered to immediately have the facility 
taken offline. The measurements are to be carried out by a n independent contractor and 
the cost of the measurements will be borne by the site installer.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 6  
Establish new protocols for performing signal strength measurements in areas around 
wireless facilities to better evaluate signal characterist ics known to be deleterious to hu-
man health as has been documented through peer -reviewed research efforts. Those new 
protocols are to take into account the impulsive nature of high -data -rate radiation that a 
growing –body of evidence shows as having a sign ificantly greater negative impact on hu-
man health than does continuous radiation. The protocols will also enable the summative 
effects of multiple radiation sources to be measured.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 7  
Require that any new wireless antennas located on a stat e or municipal right -of-way or on 
private property be set back from residences, businesses, and schools. This should be en-
forceable by the municipality during the permitting process unless the owners of resi-
dences, businesses, or school districts waive thi s restriction.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 8  
Upgrade the educational offerings by the NH Office of Professional Licensure and Certifica-
tion (OPLC) for home inspectors to include RF intensity measurements.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 9  
The State of New Hampshire should begin an effort to measure RF intensities within fre-
quency ranges throughout the state, with the aim of developing and refining a continually 
updated map of RF exposure levels across the state using data submitted by state -trained 
home inspectors.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 10 
Strongly recommend all new cell phones and all other wireless devices sold come equipped 
with updated software that can stop the phone from radiating when positioned against the 
body.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 11  
Promote and adopt a statewide position that would  strongly encourage moving forward 
with the deployment of fiber optic cable connectivity, internal wired connections, and opti-
cal wireless to serve all commercial and public properties statewide.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 12  
Further basic science studies are needed  in conjunction with the medical community out-
lining the characteristics of expressed clinical symptoms related to radio frequency radia-
tion exposure.The majority of the Commission feels the medical community is in the ideal 
position to clarify the clinica l presentation of symptoms precipitated by the exposure to ra-
dio frequency radiation consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) which 
identifies such a disability. The medical community can also help delineate appropriate 
protections and pro tocols for affected individuals. All of these endeavors (basic science, 
clinical assessment, epidemiological studies) must be completely independent and outside 
of commercial influence.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 13  
Recommend the use of exposure warning signs to be posted in commercial and public 
buildings. In addition, encourage commercial and public buildings, especially healthcare fa-
cilities, to establish RF -radiation free zones where employees and visitors can seek refuge 
from the effects of wireless RF emissions . 
  
RECOMMENDATION 14  
The State of New Hampshire should engage agencies with appropriate scientific expertise, 
including ecological knowledge, to develop RF -radiation safety limits that will protect the 
trees, plants, birds, insects, and pollinators.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 15  
The State of New Hampshire should engage our Federal Delegation to legislate that under 
the National Environmental Policy Act (N EPA) the FCC do an environmental impact state-
ment as to the effect on New Hampshire and the country as a whole from the expansion of 
RF wireless technologies.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 08 , 2017 
 
The Honorable Jerry Brown  
Governor, State of California  
c/o State Capitol, Suite 1173  
Sacramento, CA 95814   
 
RE: SB 649 (Hueso) – Small Cell Wireless Facilities   
Honorable Governor Brown,   
I have recently learned of proposed Bill SB 649 regarding the streamlining of small cell wireless 
facilities.  
As a member of the Physics department of Ariel University, and before that the Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, I have  studied the subtle effects of electromagnetic radiation on biology and biological 
materials. I have published more than 50 articles in the field of Dielectrics (the study of the interaction 
of materials with radio waves), including many on the interaction  of cellular frequencies with biological 
materials such as proteins and blood. My last article investigated the interaction of 5G electromagnetic 
radiation with human skin.1 One could argue that I have a certain amount of expertise.  
In light of our work an d a growing number of publications showing the frequency range of 5G can have 
serious biological effects, we believe that current efforts to accelerate the implementation of 5G should 
be delayed until additional studies are made to assess the critical impa ct on human health.  
It is not for me to lecture to elected officials on how cities should develop technologically, nor is it for 
me to try and stop the juggernaut that is the cellular industry. However, I would lik e to point out to you 
important  informati on on the possible public health implications of the explosion in unregulated cellular 
phone and wireless device use.  
The term “health” has never featured too heavily in the lexicon of the Cellular Industry. It has been 
assumed, conveniently, that any poss ible effects on the human anatomy from the use of cell phones 
would be only mild heating. And that this is something that the body could easily deal with. As a 
consequence, the governing safety limits were set in 1998 by the International Commission on Non -
Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) based on the premise that if radiofrequency radiation limits 
protected human tissue from overheating , then the pu blic was adequately protected. They considered 
that the effect to humans would at most cause the agitat ion of water inside cellular tissues that would 
dissipate as heat, similar to what a microwave oven does, but at far lower energies.  
The trouble is that our knowledge has progressed in the last 19 years and we now understand that the 
interaction of microw ave energy and our tissues is far more subtle. There is increasing evidence of non -
thermal biological consequences arising from our interaction with cellular phone radiation. A few 
examples; in 2014 a team from the University of Exeter, UK published a repo rt linking the effect of 
                                                           
1 Betzalel, Noa, Yuri Feldman and Paul Ben Ishai. “The Modeling of the Absorbance of Sub -THz Radiation by Human Skin.” IEEE 
Transactions on Terahertz Science and Technology  PP.99 (2017): 1 -9. doi: 10.1109/TTHZ.2017.2736345 .  
 
 
 
 
cellular phones on declining sperm quality.2 They based their research on over 1492 subjects from 
around the world. In 2009, Columbia University showed that radio frequencies were leading to stress 
in living cells.3 This in turn se riously affects their ability to perform, as particular cellular pathways 
were disrupted. Further evidence along this direction was provided by a group from the University of 
Rennes.4 I can add plenty more examples, but I think th at it is summed up by a re cent public 
announcement. Advisors to the World Health Organization International Agency for Research on 
Cancer (WHO/IARC), themselves well versed in radio frequencies and in cancer, have publicly stated 
that evidence has been met to classify cellular radi ation as meeting scientific criteria for a Group 1 
carcinogenic agent to humans.5,6 
As I said above, it is not my job and neither is it realistic for me to stop the placing of thousands of 
antennas throughout your state . But it is my job to point out the health hazard to you before you make 
such a momentous decision.  
Yours sincerely  
 
Dr. Paul Ben Ishai  
Department of Physics  
Ariel University  
 
 
 
CC 
Tom Dyer, Chief Deputy Legislative Affairs Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
2 Adams, J.A., et al. “Effect of mobile telephones on sperm quality: a systematic review and meta -analysis.” Environment International 70 
(2014): 106 -12. doi: 10.10 16/j.envint.2014.04.015.  
3 Blank, M. and R. Goodman. “Electromagnetic fields stress living cells.” Pathophysiology 16.2-3 (2009): 71 -8. doi: 
10.1016/j.pathophys.2009.01.006.  
4 Habauzit, D enis, et al. "Transcriptome analysis reveals the contribution of thermal and the specific effects in cellular response to mil limeter 
wave exposure." PloS One  9.10 (2014): e109435.  
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109435  
5 “Cancer Expert Declares Cell Phone and Wireless Radiation As Carcinogenic to Humans.” Environmental Health Trust (2017). 
https://ehtrust.org/cancer -expert-declares-cell-phone-wireless-radiation-carcinogenic -humans/ 
6 Carlberg, Michael and Lennart Hardell. “Evaluation of Mobile Phone and Cordless Phone Use and Glioma Risk Using the Bradford Hill 
Viewpoints from 1965 on Association or Causation.” BioMed Research International 2017 (2017): 9218486. doi: 10.1155/2017/9218486.  

Massachusetts Joint Committee on Consumer Protection
Massachusetts Joint Committee on Advanced Information Technology, the Internet and Cybersecurity Committee
24 Beacon St. Room 506
Boston, MA 02133
Subject: In Support of Technology Safety Bills S. 186, S. 187, H. 115, H. 105-114
Dear Esteemed Legislators,
I am writing in support of legislation that which reduces RFR exposure, especially for children who are more vulnerable.
I amProfessor Emeritus of Pediatrics and of Environmental& Occupational Health George Washington University School
of Medicine and Health Sciences and George Washington University Milken Institute School of Public Health .I am also
past chair of the Council on Environmental Health of the American Academy of Pediatrics, and also served on the
Children’s Health Protection Advisory Committee for the US EPA.
We assume that our federal health and environmental agencies regularly review the latest research and ensure that cell
phones and wireless devices are safe. However, U.S. agencies which regulate cell phone radiation have not shown they
have evaluated the research on children’s unique vulnerability to ensure long term safety.
The reality is that US safety regulations for cell phone radiation were last set twenty-five years ago based on science that is
now outdated.  The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) is the primary agency responsible for regulating wireless
radiation. The FCC has no expertise related to human health topics. Moreover, federal agencies like the Environmental
Protection Agency or the National Cancer Institute or the Food and Drug Administration have not carried out up-to-date
full scientific review of this growing technology.  Just like the thousands of chemicals in our environment today, wireless
radiation has not had appropriate oversight. It has slipped through the cracks.
The one agency which has carried out studies on the impact of long term exposure to electromagnetic fields and human
health is the National Toxicology Program (NTP), a component of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
TheNTP found :
●Clear evidence of an association with tumors in the hearts of male rats. The tumors were malignant
schwannomas.
●Some evidence of an association with tumors in the brains of male rats. The tumors were malignant gliomas.
●Some evidence of an association with tumors in the adrenal glands of male rats. The tumors were benign,
malignant, or complex combined pheochromocytoma.
Pediatricians have long calledfor an update to thisoutdated cell phone radiation test method because research finds
children can absorb up to 10 or more times higherwireless radiation than adults into their brain, eyesand bone marrow.
Children are not little adults. As we sadly learned with early childhood lead exposures leaving long-lasting impairments, the
developing brain is particularly susceptible. Unlikemy generation, today’s youth will be exposed for years and years.
Please support legislation that reduces children’s radiofrequency radiation exposure and call on the federal government to
strengthen human exposure limits to protect children. I am glad to answer any questions that you have.
Sincerely,
Jerome Paulson MD FAAP

 
Sacramento Office:  1107 9th Street, Suite 625, Sacramento CA 95814  Ph.  916 -333-0566 
 
 
June 26, 2017 
 
 
The Honorable Cecilia Agular-Curry, Chair 
Assembly Local Gov’t Commission 
Room 157, 1020 N Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 
 
RE:  SB 649 (Hueso) – Small Cell Wireless Facilities - -OPPOSE 
 Dear Chair Agular-Curry: 
 
Environmental Working Group (EWG) opposes SB 649 by Senator Hueso.  This bill would make the 
installation of small cell wireless facilities, such as those used to facilitate 5G networks , ministerial 
rather than discretionary at the local government level.   
The health impacts of cellular transmissions have been debated more and more passionately the last ten 
years because there are studies that raise real concerns about the effects of radio frequency (RF) ener gy 
or radiation on humans.  This is why EWG sponsored two bills by former Senator Leno (SB 1212 in 2010 and SB 932 in 2011) that would have required sellers of cell phones to inform consumers that 
minimizing exposure to cell phone radiation is prudent and in fact recommended by cell phone 
manufacturers in their included manuals. 
 
Studies on the health impacts of cell phones and their transmission infrastructure are continuing.  As 
new information becomes available, local government ought to be able to use it to help guide their 
decision-making, including locational issues such as proximity to homes, school, and hospitals.  EWG 
believes that allowing cities and counties to weigh the potential impacts of transmission networks 
before permits are issued for their construction is essential and SB 649 would prevent them from doing 
so.  And, if more definitive health concerns arise, state law would have to be changed in order to give 
local governments the flexiblity to do their due diligence. 
 
For these reasons, we must oppose SB 649 and urge a “no” vote in the Local Government Committee.  
 Sincerely, 
  
Bill Allayaud 
California Director of Government Affairs 
Environmental Working Group 
 
 
 
cc:  Senator Hueso 
 
Alliance	of	Nurses	for							
Healthy	Environments 	
  	
June 26, 2017
The Honorable Cecilia Agular-Curry, 
Chair Assembly Local Gov’t Commission Room 157, 1020 N Street Sacramento, CA 95814 
RE: SB 649 (Hueso) – Small Cell Wireless Facilities - - OPPOSE Dear Chair Agular-Curry: I am a Professor of Public Health at the University of San Francisco and a Board Member of the national 
Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments.   I am very concerned about moving forward with expanding the use of small-scale wireless technologies at the same time that there is mounting evidence of the potential for health risks from the associated radio frequency energy and radiation, particularly to children.    The Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments ascribes to the precautionary principle as it applies to human health.   We ﬁrmly believe that early warnings in the scientiﬁc literature should be heeded and that our policy development should reﬂect the synthesis of the best and latest scientiﬁc evidence.    
At this point in time, we oppose SB 649 and believe that we need an exhaustive review of the science 
before we allow signiﬁcant expansion of small cell wireless facilities, such as those to facilitate 5G networks.   The results of the literature review should inform our policies. We must be sure that vulnerable populations such as pregnant women and young children will not be unduly harmed from their proximity to unnecessary radio frequency energy.   It is important that we continue to examine what constitutes a safe distance and how we can continue to pivot when more information becomes available.   We are concerned that the passage of SB 649 will entrench us in a policy for which we have insufﬁcient assurances and which, if passed, will require the burden of effort to reverse.
For these reasons, we oppose SB 649 and urge a “no” vote in the Local Government Committee.Thank you for considering our concerns.Sincerely,
Barbara Sattler, RN, MPH, DrPH, FAAN
Board Member

Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons  
Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics  
 
Board Member  
Los Angeles Unified School District, 
Board of Education 
 
Re: Health effects of cell tower radiation 
 
 
As an active researcher on biological effects of electromagnetic fields (EMF) for over twenty 
five years at Columbia University, as well as one of the organizers of the 2007 online 
Bioinitiative Report on the subject, I am writing in support of a limit on the construction of  cell 
towers in the vicinity of schools.  
There is now sufficient scientific data about the biological effects of EMF, and in particular 
about radiofrequency (RF) radiation, to argue for adoption of precautionary measures. We can 
state unequivocally that EMF can cause single and double strand DNA breakage at exposure 
levels that are considered safe under the FCC guidelines in the USA. As I shall illustrate below, 
there are also epidemiology studies that show an increased risk of cancers associated with 
exposure to RF. Since we know that an accumulation of changes or mutations in DNA is 
associated with cancer, there is good reason to believe that the elevated rates of cancers among 
persons living near RF towers are probably linked to DNA damage caused by EMF. Because of 
the nature of EMF exposure and the length of time it takes for most cancers to develop, one 
cannot expect ‘conclusive proof’ such as the link between helicobacter pylori and gastric ulcer. 
(That link was recently demonstrated by the Australian doctor who proved a link conclusively by 
swallowing the bacteria and getting the disease.) However, there is enough evidence of a 
plausible mechanism to link EMF exposure to increased risk of cancer, and therefore of a need to 
limit exposure, especially of children. 
 
EMF have been shown to cause other potentially harmful biological effects, such as leakage of 
the blood brain barrier that can lead to damage of neurons in the brain, increased micronuclei 
(DNA fragments) in human blood lymphocytes, all at EMF exposures well below the limits in 
the current FCC guidelines.  Probably the most convincing evidence of potential harm comes 
from living cells themselves when they start to manufacture stress proteins upon exposure to EMF. The stress response occurs with a number of potentially harmful environmental factors, 
such as elevated temperature, changes in pH, toxic metals, etc. This means that when stress 
protein synthesis is stimulated by radiofrequency or power frequency EMF, the body is telling us in its own language that RF exposure is potentially harmful. 
 
 
 
 
 
There have been several attempts to measure the health risks associated with exposure to RF, and 
I can best summarize the findings with a graph from the study by Dr. Neil Cherry of all 
childhood cancers around the Sutro Tower in San Francisco between the years 1937 and 1988. 
Similar studies with similar results were done around broadcasting antennas in Sydney, Australia 
and Rome, Italy, and there are now studies of effects of cellphones on brain cancer. The Sutro 
tower contains antennas for broadcasting FM (54.7 kW), TV (616 kW) and UHF (18.3 MW) 
signals over a fairly wide area, and while the fields are not uniform, and also vary during the day, 
the fields were measured and average values estimated, so that one could associate the cancer 
risk with the degree of EMF exposure.  
 
The data in the figure are the risk ratios (RR) for a 
total of 123 cases of childhood cancer from a 
population of 50,686 children, and include a 51 cases 
of leukaemia, 35 cases of brain cancer and 37 cases of 
lymphatic cancer. It is clear from the results that the 
risk ratio for all childhood cancers is elevated in the 
area studied, and while the risk falls off with radial 
distance from the antennas, as expected, it is still 
above a risk ratio of 5 even at a distance of 3km where 
the field was 1µW/cm2.  This figure is what we can expect from prolonged RF exposure. In the 
Bioinitiative Report, we recommended 0.1µW/cm2 as a desirable precautionary level based on 
this and related studies, including recent studies of brain cancer and cellphone exposure.  
 As I mentioned above, many potentially harmful effects, such as the stress response and DNA 
strand breaks, occur at nonthermal levels (field strengths that do not cause a temperature 
increase) and are therefore considered safe. It is obvious that the safety standards must be revised 
downward to take into account the nonthermal as well as thermal biological responses that occur 
at much lower intensities. Since we cannot rely on the current stan dards, it is best to act 
according to the precautionary principle, the approach advocated by the European Union and the scientists involved in the Bioinitiative report. In light of the current evidence, the precautionary 
approach appears to be the most reasonable for those who must protect the health and welfare of 
the public and especially its most vulnerable members, children of school -age.  
 Sincerely yours, 
 
Martin Blank, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Karolinska Institutet  
Department of Neuroscience  
Experimental Dermatology Unit  
 
 
 
    
Mailing address  Visiting address   Telephone  
Experimental Dermatology Unit  Retziuslaboratoriet  Direct  468-52 48 70 58  
Department of Neuroscience  Retzius väg 8  Switchboard  468-52 48 64 00  
Karolinska Institutet  Solna   Fax 468-30 39 04 
171 77  Stockholm    Fax (KI)  468-31 11 01 
Sweden    Stockholm, December 8, 2015 
 
To: 
MCPS CEO Dr. Andrew Zuckerman [Andrew_Zuckerman@mcpsmd.org] 
MCPS Superintendent Mr. Larry Bowers [Larry_Bowers@mcpsmd.org] 
MCPS Chief Technology Officer Mr. Sherwin Collette [Sherwin_Collette@mcpsmd.org]  
MCPS Board of Education [boe@mcpsmd.org] 
840 Hungerford Drive 
Rockville, MD 20850, USA 
 cc: 
Montgomery County Council [county.council@montgomerycountymd.gov] 
 
 
  
Dear Madame or Sir, 
  My name is Olle Johansson, and I am an associate professor, heading the Experimental 
Dermatology Unit at Sweden’s Karolinska Institute in the Department of Neuroscience.  I 
understand you have recently made public pronouncements regarding the safety of Wi -Fi. As 
a neuroscientist who has been studying the biophysical and epidemiological effects of 
electromagnetic fields (EMFs) for over 30 years, I believe this designation is short-sighted.  
Wireless communication is now being implemented in our daily life in a very fast way. At 
the same time, it is becoming more and more obvious that the exposure to ele ctromagnetic 
fields not only may induce acute thermal effects to living organisms, but also non -thermal 
effects, the latter often after longer exposures. This has been demonstrated in a very large number of non-ionizing radiation studies and includes cellular DNA-damage, disruptions and alterations of cellular functions like increases in intracellular stimulatory pathways and 
calcium handling, disruption of tissue structures like the blood -brain barrier, impact on vessel 
and immune functions, and loss of fertility. Whereas scientists can observe and reproduce these effects in controlled laboratory experiments, epidemiological and ecological data 
derived from long-term exposures in well-designed case-control studies reflect this link all the way from molecular and cellular effects to the living organism up to the induction and 
proliferation of diseases observed in humans. It should be noted that we are not the only 
species at jeopardy; practically all animals, plants and bacteria may be at stake. Although epidemiological and ecological investigations as such never demonstrate causative effects, 
due to the vast number of confounders, they confirm the relevance of the controlled 
observations in the laboratories. 
  
Many times since the early 1980s I have pointed out that the public’s usage of cell phones has become the largest full-scale biological and medical experiment ever with mankind, and I 
was also the first person to firmly point out that this involuntary exposure violates the 
Nuremberg Code's principles for human experimentation, which clearly states that voluntary 
  
Karolinska Institutet  
Department of Neuroscience  
Experimental Dermatology Unit  
 
 
 
    
Mailing address  Visiting address   Telephone  
Experimental Dermatology Unit  Retziuslaboratoriet  Direct  468-52 48 70 58  
Department of Neuroscience  Retzius väg 8  Switchboard  468-52 48 64 00  
Karolinska Institutet  Solna   Fax 468-30 39 04 
171 77  Stockholm    Fax (KI)  468-31 11 01 
Sweden consent of human subjects is absolutely essential. Among many effects seen, the very serious 
one is the deterioration of the genome. Such an effect - if seen in a food item under development or in a potential pharmaceutical drug - immediately would completely ban it 
from further marketing and sale; genotoxic effects are not to be allowed or spread.  For these 
reasons above, we, scientists, can not accept that children undergo an enormous health risk  
for their present and future, by being exposed to WI-FI in kindergardens or schools (even if 
the WI-FI masts/routers are not in the children's classroom). The precautionary principle has to be respected. Furthermore, when men place cell phones in their front pocket, or laptops on 
their laps, it should be noted that experimental studies have demonstrated that after similar 
exposures there is a decrease in sperm count as well as in the quality of sperm, which is a phenomenon that could affect society’s overall ability to procreate in the future. Experiments 
in mice point to that it may be true already in 5 generations time.  
  Many other states including France, Russia, Israel and Germany, have employed various 
precautionary steps and their responses (including labelling cell phones and other transmitting devices with SAR ratings, discouraging the use of cell phones and other wireless 
gadgets by children, warning parents of the risks, and removing or restricting WiFi in schools 
and replacing it with hard-wired ethernet) as a result of the WHO/IARC classification of radiofrequency electromagnetic radiation in 2011 as a Class 2B carcinogen as well as the 
earlier classification of power-frequent magnetic fields in 2001 also as a Class 2B 
carcinogen, the information summarized in the Bioinitiative Reports of 2007 and 2012, and 
the other considerable international and independent research and reviews, that show adverse 
biological effects from electromagnetic fields, including heart palpitations, headaches, skin rashes, damage to DNA, mental health effects, impaired concentration, decreased problem-
solving capacity, electrohypersensitivity, etc., are about to set a new standard for educational 
quality with due respect to children's and staff's health.  
In the case of "protection from exposure to electromagnetic fields", it is thus of paramount 
importance to act from a prudence avoidance/precautionary principle point of view. Anything else would be highly hazardous. Total transparency of information is the key sentence he re, 
as I believe the public does not appreciate having the complete truth revealed years after a certain catastrophe already has taken place. For instance, it shall be noted, that today's 
recommended values for wireless systems, such as the SAR-values, are just recommenda-
tions, and not safety levels. Since scientists observe biological effects at as low as 20 microWatts/kg, can it truly be stated that it is safe to allow irradiation of humans at SAR 2 
W/kg, or at 100,000 times stronger levels of radiation? 
  IMBALANCED REPORTING 
Another misunderstanding is the use of scientific publications (as the tobacco industry did for 
many years) as 'weights' to balance each other. But one can NEVER balance a report 
showing a negative health effect with one showing no effect. This is a misunderstanding 
which, unfortunately, is very often used both by the industrial representatives as well as official authorities to the detriment of the general public. True balance would be reports 
showing negative health effects against exact replications showing no or positive 
effects. However, this is not what the public has been led to believe. 
  
Karolinska Institutet  
Department of Neuroscience  
Experimental Dermatology Unit  
 
 
 
    
Mailing address  Visiting address   Telephone  
Experimental Dermatology Unit  Retziuslaboratoriet  Direct  468-52 48 70 58  
Department of Neuroscience  Retzius väg 8  Switchboard  468-52 48 64 00  
Karolinska Institutet  Solna   Fax 468-30 39 04 
171 77  Stockholm    Fax (KI)  468-31 11 01 
Sweden  
NEED FOR INDEPENDENT RESEARCH In many commentaries, debate articles and public lectures - for the last 20-30 years – I have 
urged that completely independent research projects must be inaugurated immediately to 
ensure our public health. These projects must be entirely independent of all types of 
commercial interests; public health can not have a price-tag! It is also of paramount 
importance that scientists involved in such projects must be free of any carrier considerations and that the funding needed is covered to 100%, not 99% or less. This is the clear 
responsibility of the democratically elected body of every country.  
  
WHO/INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER (IARC), 2011 
Very recently (in Lyon, France, May  31, 2011) the WHO/International Agency for Research 
on Cancer (IARC) has classified radiofrequency electromagnetic fields as possibly carcinogenic to humans (Group 2B), based on an increased risk for glioma, a malignant type 
of brain cancer. This should be added to the previous (2001) 2B classification of power -
frequent (ELF) electromagnetic fields – emitted at high levels from handheld gadgets, such 
as eReaders and mobile phones – as a risk factor for childhood leukemia. Given the 2001 
very close votes (9 to 11) for moving it to 2A and all the new knowledge that has accumulated since 2001, today the association between childhood leukemia and power -
frequent (ELF) electromagnetic fields would definitely be signed into the much more serious 2A (“probably carcinogenic”) category. So, the ‘red flag’ is – unfortunately – flying very 
high. 
  INVOLUNTARY EXPOSURE 
According to Article 24 of the UNICEF’s Child Convention “children have the rig ht to … a 
clean and safe environment, and information to help them stay healthy”. We must all ensure 
that this article never is violated. This is about our social responsibility, and is very much a 
public health issue. 
  In summary, electromagnetic fields may be among the most serious and overlooked health 
issues today, and having these fields checked and reduced/removed from schools and 
kindergardens may be essential for health protection and restoration, and is a must for 
persons with the functional impairment electrohypersensitivity as for children who are more 
fragile (cf. Belyaev I, Dean A, Eger H, Hubmann G, Jandrisovits R, Johansson O, Kern M, Kundi M, Lercher P, Mosgöller W, Moshammer H, Müller K, Oberfeld G, Ohnsorge P, 
Pelzmann P, Scheingraber C, Thill R, "EUROPAEM EMF Guideline 2015 for the 
prevention, diagnosis and treatment of EMF-related health problems and illnesses", Rev Environ Health 2015; 30: 337–371). In addition, as recently discussed in a think-tank group 
here in Stockholm, it is very important to constantly educate oneself and participate in the 
general debate and public discussions to keep the information build -up active. Thus, it is of 
paramount importance to keep the "kettle boiling", never blindly trusting or accepting given 'facts', but only read and think for yourself and for your loved ones. Only so you can arrive at a genuinely working precautionary principle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The latency for development of c ancer after exposure to radiofrequency radiation is long, often up to 20 
years for brain cancer.  Thus the effects of exposing children will not be seen immediately but they will 
be elevated risk of cancer for many years to come.   
 
 
Unfortunat ely cancer i s not the only disease of concern.  Radiofrequency electromagnetic fields are 
well documented to reduce male fertility.  The last thing one wants for boy s in an elementary school is 
to have them grow up and not be able to reproduce.  Furthermore  and more immediately there is 
increasing reco gnition of the fact that some people, including children, are exceptionally sensitive to 
electromagnetic fields, and show the syndrome of electro -hypersensitivity.  This is characterized by 
headache, ‘brain fog ’ and reduced ability to learn, often accompanied by nausea and gastrointestinal 
and cardiovascular symptoms.  This is certainly not something that one wants to have occur, even if 
only in some students, in a school where they come to learn.   
 
Placement o f cell towers should be as far as possible from any place where humans are present .  Certainly 
having a cell tower near to an elementary school is dangerous to the health of every child attending the 
school. 
      
              Yours sincerely,  
 
              David O. Carpenter, M.D.  
        Director, Institute for Health and the Environment  
              University at Albany  
 
  
Karolinska Institutet  
Department of Neuroscience  
Experimental Dermatology Unit  
 
 
 
    
Mailing address  Visiting address   Telephone  
Experimental Dermatology Unit  Retziuslaboratoriet  Direct  468-52 48 70 58  
Department of Neuroscience  Retzius väg 8  Switchboard  468-52 48 64 00  
Karolinska Institutet  Solna   Fax 468-30 39 04 
171 77  Stockholm    Fax (KI)  468-31 11 01 
Sweden CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, wireless systems, such as Wi-Fi routers or cell towers, and their electromagnetic fields, can not be regarded as safe in schools, but must be deemed 
highly hazardous and unsafe for the children as well as for the staff. 
  
I encourage governments and local health and educational bodies to adopt a framework of 
guidelines for public and occupational EMF exposure that reflect the Precautionary Principle. As noted, the Precautionary Principle states when there are indications of possible adverse 
effects, though they remain uncertain, the risks from doing nothing may be far greater than 
the risks of taking action to control these exposures. The Precautionary Principle shifts the burden of proof from those suspecting a risk to those who discount it — as some nations 
have already done. Precautionary strategies should be based on design and performance 
standards and may not necessarily define numerical thresholds because such thresholds may 
erroneously be interpreted as levels below which no adverse effect can occur.  
  
Some 100 years back, we learned the hard lessons of ionizing radiation and the need for stric t 
health protections – now we must openly face the possibility that we must take a seat in life’s school and learn again. This time it is about non-ionizing radiation.   
Based on all of the above, I strongly urge you to reconsider your public stance on the 
safety of Wi-Fi, cell towers, and similar systems in schools as their non-ionizing radiation 
emissions very likely are hazardous and unsafe for students, staff and teachers. 
 With my very best regards 
Yours sincerely 
Olle Johansson  
(Olle Johansson, associate professor 
The Experimental Dermatology Unit Department of Neuroscience 
Karolinska Institute 
171 77 Stockholm 
Sweden) 
 1 A summary of current U .S. and international regulations on m icrowaves related to cell t owers 
 
Prepared By 
Dr. Joshua Dennis Booth, PhD  
July 2017  
 
 
I am writing this report as a knowledgeable voice for the  School Board,  parents, and residents of 
the East Hemp field school district with regard to the placement of cellular tower s at Rohrerstown 
Elementary School and Centerville Middle School. My knowledge comes from my experience 
with EMP-Microwave radiation, as outlined in the Personal Background  section at the end of this 
document. I ’m also a resident of the Hempfield School  District community : both a parent 
concerned about health issues and a homeowner concerned about property value. The numbers 
used here for comparison are those given for the Rohrerstown Elementary Tower at th e zoning 
board hearing on June 19th, 2017. This report is outlined as follows. First, I give an overview of 
the current U.S. laws and agencies  related to microwaves, cellular tower , and other common 
microwave devices . Second, I provide an overview of n on-U.S. laws related to microwaves. The 
second section serves to demonstrate the most important message of this report by showing the 
outdated nature of U .S. regulation, and why we should be concern ed about these towers being at 
the distance and magnitude that is being proposed by the tower’s developers.  
 
Section 1 , Background, Current U .S. regulation for key microwave devices . 
In this section, I provide background about both microwaves in general and cell technology.  
Microwave s are electromagnetic  waves that vary in frequency between 300 MHz  (i.e., near 
Radio) to 300 GHz  (i.e., near infrared).   At ~70-100 MHz the body maximally absorbs energy 
and at 3,00 0 MHz the energy is concentrated at the body surface.  This is why there are 
regulations about things like radio towers but not standard household lights.  Cell towers use 
frequency between 900MHz to 1900MHz.   These waves can also vary in strength too, and this is 
the real issue  that will be addressed in the report.  In order to accommodate these variables, a 
measurement of power density is often used. Here, we will use the units of uw/cm2 for all 
examples  as this is the unit  given to use by the cellular tower  developers, though other areas use 
other units.  Note, the Federal Communication Commission  (FCC), which is responsible for 
microwave regulation in the US,  uses a different unit of mw/cm2 for their  Maximum Permissible 
Exposure (MPE) [1]. Their proposed tower will  have a power density of a maximum of 
3.6uw/cm2.  I note as someone that has done the calculations myself that this maximum is 
slightly higher than what most likely will be the power density on day one. This view was also 
shared by the c ell tower developers at the zoning hearing.  However, t his density may increase in 
the future without notice if they sell broadcasting to other cell vendors or place higher 
wattage/gain equipment . More importantly , the duration of exposure  is one of the largest issues 
up for debate in research.  For students, this would be the whole time they are on campus for class 
and activities: seven school years, from K to 6th grade.  
 
Let us first address the FCC and the current standards set forth by the FCC for cellular tower s. 
The FCC is an independent agency formed in 1934 to regulate interstate communications. The 
FCC is funded entirely by regulatory fees paid by radio, cell, cable, television, and satellite 
companies for access to certain bandwidth in areas  [4]. They have most notably been in the news 
 2 of late because of concern s of net neutrality in which internet companies may sell user’s data. 
The only health concerns they regulate are those related to radio waves. The first standards w ere 
issued by the nonp rofit American Nationa l Standards Institute  (ANSI) in 1982. This was one 
year before the first commercially available  cell phone was approved by the FCC in 1983.  It took 
until 1985, when the FCC finally adopted the ANSI standard of 1982. This standard was issued 
in a maximum absorption of 4Watts/kilogram. In  1992, ANSI/IEEE revised the 198 2 standards.  
These revisions considered a larger frequency and restricted environmental radio frequency 
exposure. They also added the concepts of “controlled” and “uncont rolled” environments . Here 
the “controlled” is a location where “there is exposure that may be incurred by persons who are 
aware of the potential for exposure…” (e.g., work environments)  [5]. More important, they 
started to consider the duration of a single exposure : the “controlled” being an average of 6 
minutes and “uncontrolled” being an average of 30 minutes. Note they do not make mention of 
time between these exposure s but only the average exposure for a length of time . Though the 
FCC was given no tice of these changes in 1992, the FCC only made full requirements i n mid 
1996. These standards state that the “controlled” power density in the 30 -300 MHz should be 
less than 1,000 uW /cm2.  The “uncontrolled”  standard is 200 uW /cm2 [5].  Cell towers must 
only follow the “controlled” standard as they are  a known structure that can be avoided [5 ]. 
Though groups have lobbied to change this standard, the standard has not been update d for 
the past twenty-one years. One government agency that has spoken up about  this is the United 
States Depart ment of Interior. This department wrote a formal letter in 2014 pointing out that the 
FCC regulation is outdated, and the department believes that the frequency  limits are already 
having a negative impact on  animals in the environment  [8]. Recent updates to the FCC  
consumer  website recommend MPE be 580 uW/cm2, but this value has not been updated in their 
human exposure manuals [3] . 
 
Microwaves have transformed the way we live in today’s world, and cell technology is only one 
area in which microwave research is being conducted and regulated. Therefore, it makes sense to 
understand microwaves being regulated and studied  in other a reas, e.g., microwave ovens, full 
body airport scanners , and WiFi routers . 
 
Microwav es were first researched by the radiation given off of  vacuum tubes, and were  aimed at 
radar search.  By chance, an engineer name d Percy Spencer working for Raytheon Corporation 
was exposed without knowing possible side effect s to microwaves. The microwaves  ended up 
melting food in his pocket, and the microwave oven was born. Years after the first microwave 
ovens were made available for use, the Radiation Control for Health and Saf ety Act of 1968 
limited the amount of microwaves that could leak from the device to 10,000 uW /cm2 at 5cm 
(~1.97 inches) away from the oven. Two years later, this was reduce d to 1,000 uW /cm2 at 5cm 
by the U.S. Bureau of Radiological Health  (i.e., a limit si milar to FCC ’s human exposure 
manual), and only 5,000 u W/cm2 over the device’s whole lifespan [9] (up to 10 years) ! This 
lifespan limit is only three years greater than what a student would be exposed to over the whole 
time from grades K -6. In fact, the power density  of the proposed Rohrerstown Elementary 
campus tower  would be similar to having a child sit at about 12 feet away from a running 
600 Watt Microwave oven all day , every school day for seven years . However, we should 
note that the frequency of a  microwave oven is mu ch higher, i.e., about 2450 MHz.  
 
 3 Body scanners at airports are the most recent area where microwaves have cropped up  in daily 
life. Most of the first-generation  body scanners w ere “back -scatter” type that used low dose of x-
rays [10,11]. These have actively been replaced by new millimeter scanners that use microwaves. 
These new millimeter scanner s expose the person to approximately .01uW/cm2 to .6 uW/cm2 at 
various frequencies  inside the microwave frequency spectrum  for less than 6 seconds  [11]. 
Despite the very low exposure  and removal of detailed body images , passengers may opt for a 
pat-down, and young children are not required  to be scanned . This demonstrates TSA 
wanting to take reasonable health  precautions for the general public .  
 
The most common place where we find microwaves is as radiation from WiFi routers.  These 
devices are located in almost all places from coffee shops to doctor offices. Currently, the only 
regulation that the FCC has placed on such devices is a maximum strength as not to disrupt 
others and not allow ing for signal blockers [1,2]. These devices have frequency 2400 MHz band 
that is close to a microwave oven. Note that this is why your microwave oven may interrupt your 
WiFi router at times. These devices have high power density in close range, but the power 
density reduces by the sq uare of the distance resulting in  low power density far away. For 
example, at about a tenth of an inch f rom the device, the power density is about 2.65 uW/cm2.  At 
about 3.3 feet away, the power density is only .24 uW/cm2. The proposed tower at 
Rohrerstown Elementary School will have a power density that is about 1.4x stronger than 
such a router, the equivalent of having a child with about on e-and-a-half live WiFi routers 
directly beside them every school day for seven years. Imagine placing one and a half 
powered-on WiFi routers under your child’s pillow every school night for seven years. 
Given the health concerns regarding microwaves, this is not likely an action you would 
choose to take.   
 
 
Section 2, Current Non -US regulations . 
In this section, I provide an overview of the regulations on microwave s and cell towers in other 
modernized countrie s. Through these example s, I demonstrate that the U .S.’s twenty-one-year-
old protection standards lag behind those more recently updated  in other countries . Moreover, we  
have seen in the previous section that the FCC has been slow to update its protection standards 
even when pressured by large groups of engineers and scientist s like ANSI and IEEE.  Here we 
will see the more proactive approach t hat other countries are taking to protect  their residents with 
regard to microwave  public health.   
 
I first point out the World Health Organization (WHO)  that sets forth  protection  standards in 
hopes that all countries will adhere to a minimal standard of 900 uW/cm2 for cellular towers. 
The FCC’s 1996 standard  lags behind the World Health Organization’s protection standard by 
100 uW/cm2 . Our neighbor  Canada’s protection standard is now 300 uW/cm2  in developed 
areas. The FCC exceeds this protection standard by  3.33x! Next, two countries that I will point 
out are Russia and China. I selected these two countries  because of their history of lack of 
environmental and health safety regulat ions. Both countries hav e a maximum MPE of 10 
uW/cm2 [12 ]. This value represents 100x less radiation than allowed by the FCC. Though the 
proposed cell tower at Rohrerstown Elementary School would be allowed by this standard, it 
would alrea dy be 36% of the maximum.  If the proposed tower is placed without regulation from 
the school, the proposed tower’s power density could easily exceed this limit with new 
 4 equipment or selling access to other cell providers.   As we move into Europe, the regulation 
limits become even greater.  The cause of the lower limits in Europe is because of research 
coming from the Precautionary Principle expressed by most countries  [7], the BioInitative 
reports [13], and the European Union Science and Technology Options Assessments (STOA) of 
2001.  The BioInitative report of 2012 recommends  an extremely low power density of .0006 
uW/cm2, and the STOA recommending a maximum of .01 uW/cm2.  It is important to note that 
almost no country or cell towers meet these recommendations. Howe ver, the WHO - International 
Agency for Research of Cancer (IARC) has classified radio frequency electromagnetic as a 
possible carcinogenic to humans  based on studies related to the development of malignant 
types of brain cancer in humans from cell phone use i n 2011 [6]. These items are almost 
completely ignored by US regulation committees at this time, even though million s of dollars in 
damages from both the land owners and cell tower owners have been paid out all over Europe. If 
these reports become allowable  by U.S. courts, the school district itself may  be open to lawsuits. 
Mountainous countries, such as Switzerland, Lichtenstein, and Luxembourg, have set current 
rules at 9.5 uW/cm2  [12], and are currently reviewing lowering limits more. More populated 
countries have set even lower standards  on a single frequency, such as Italy’s regulation of .1 
uW/cm2. Other major countries like Germany and France are sec uring health in a different 
manner. While France does allow for power density between 455 -955 uW/cm2 (i.e., lower by as 
much as 2x the U .S.’s 1996 standard), they have put laws on where towers may be placed.  By 
law in France, no cell towers may  be placed on school property. Moreover, any citizen may have 
their home evaluated for cell tower radiation , and the public must be informed in order to vote if 
a tower should be placed  [14,15]. India’s Supreme Court in 2013 upheld that cell towers are a 
hazard to life, and the removal of all cell towers at schools, colleges, hospitals, and playground in 
the state o f Rajasthan  [16]. Other countries are following  these steps as the Council of Europe 
recommended banning all cell phones from schools.  
 
While TSA is about on par with body scanners as other governments, other countries have been 
far more protective about WiFi devices. In 2015, France ha s banned the use of WiFi  in Nursery 
schools (i.e., children less than 3 years old). WiFi in schools with children up to age 11  years old 
may only be turned on for activities that need WiFi , and must be turned off when not in use 
[14,15].  Though not law, The Russian National Committee on Non -Ionizing Radiation officially 
recommended  that WiFi  should not be used in sc hool in 2011 [18] . The Israeli Ministry of 
Education has issued guidelines banning WiFi  in classroom prior to 1st grade and limiting use 
similar to France up to third grade  [17]. Recalling from last section, the proposed tower will 
have the same power density of about 1 and ½ standard WiFi  routers next to the child’s 
head. It seems th at if we should be limiting WiFi  in the classroom to when we need it, we 
should not , in essence,  be strapping it to the head of a child.   
 
Recommendation.  
As a resident of the East Hempfield and a member of the science community, I recommend 
taking precautions for our children from microwave exposure.  This includes not situating a 
tower at Rohrerstown Elementary School or Centerville Middle School.  For a more in -depth 
look at cell phones, policy, and current research , I recommend reading [7] in its full, and paying 
attention to the  sections on children.  
 
 
 5 Personal Background  of Joshua Dennis Booth : 
I hold a BS in Applied Mathematics, MS in Computational Mathematics, and PhD in Computer 
Science and Engineering.  I previously advised CDC/NIOSH as a Biostatistician intern while 
focusing on statistical databases.  I was a Post Graduate Researcher for The Department of 
Energy’s Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque New Mexico. There I worked in the 
department of scalable algorithms providing scalable linear solver solutions to large scale 
simulations for circuit s, sold mechanics, and EMP -Microwave based applications.  I have 
published work related to  large numeric  solvers, power systems, and low voltage computing 
algorithms. I am currently an Assistant Professor  of Computer Science at  Franklin & Marshall 
College.  I am a member of SIAM, ACM, and IEEE.   
 
References:  
 
[1] Federal Communication Commission Office of Engineering & Technology (1997).  
Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radiofrequency 
Electromagnetic Fields. http://transition.fcc.gov/bureaus/oet/info/documents/ 
bulletins/oet65/oet65b.pdf  
 
[2] Federal Communication Commission (NA). GPS, Wi -Fi, and Cell Phone J ammers. 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs).  http://transition.fcc.gov/eb/jammerenforcement/jamfaq.pdf  
 
[3] Federal Communication Commission (2016).  Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Fields: 
Guidelines for Cellular and PCS Sites  [Consumer Guide]. http://tra nsition.fcc.gov/cgb/ 
consumerfacts/rf exposure.pdf  
 
[4] Federal Communication Commission (2016). About the FCC  [Consumer Guide]. 
http://transition.fcc.gov/cgb/comsumerfacts/aboutfcc.pdf  
 
[5] Federal Communication Commission (1996) [FCC 96 -326].  Guidelines for Evaluating the 
Environmental Effects of Radiofrequency Radiation.  http://transition.fcc.gov/ 
Bureaus/Engineering_Technology/Orders/1996/fcc96326.pdf  
 
[6] World Health Organization, Internal Agency for Research on Cancer (2011). Press Releas e 
208. IARC Classifies Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields as Possibly Carcinogenic to 
Humans. http://www.iarc.fr/en/media -centre/pr/2011/pdfs/pr208_E.pdf  
 
[7] Roda, C. and Perry, S. (2014). Mobile Phone Infrastructure Regulation in Europe: Science 
Chall enges and Human Rights Protection. Journal of Environmental Science & Policy. pg 204 -
214. 37. http://ac.aup.fr/~croda/publications/Roda&Perry_EnvSci&Policy_OrigManuscr.pdf  
 
[8] Willie Taylor, US Department of the Interior (2014). Letter to National Telecom munication 
and Information Administration.  http:www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/us_doi_comments.pdf   
 
[9] Davis, A. (2016).  A History of the Microwave Oven.  The Institute – The IEEE News Source. 
http://theinstitute.ieee.org/tech -history/technology -history/a-history-of-the-microwave -oven 
 
 6 [10] Accardo, J and Chaudhry, A (2014).  Radiation Exposure and Privacy Concerns 
Surrounding Full -Body Scanners in Airports.  Journal of Radiation Research and Applied 
Sciences. 7(2). pg. 198 -200. http://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/ 
S1687850714000168  
 
[11] Wu, T. , Rappaport, T. , and Collins, C (2015). The Human Body and Millimeter -Wave 
Wireless Communication Systems: Interactions and Implications.  IEEE International Conference 
on Communications (ICC).  http://ar xiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1503/1503.05944.pdf  
 
[12] Powerwatch (NA), International Guidance Levels.  http://www.powerwatch.org.uk/ 
science/intguidnace.asp  
 
[13] BioInitiative (2012).  A Rationale for Biologically -Based Exposure Standards for Low -
Intensity El ectromagnetic Radiation. http://www.bioinitiative.org/  
 
[14] Boring, N. (2015). France: Law on Public Exposure to Electromagnetic Waves Adopted. 
Library of Congress, Law Library of Congress.  http://www.loc.gov/law/foreign -
news/article/france -law-on-public-exposure-electromagnetic -waves-adopted 
 
[15] France Assemble (2015). http://www.assemblee -nationale.fr/14/pdf/ta/ta0468.pdf  
 
[16] NA (2017). Supreme Court Stays Rajastan High Court Order on Cellphone Towers.  
http://indianexpress.com/article/india/supreme -court-stays-rajathan-high-court-order-on-
cellphone -towers-467990 
 
[17] Israeli Ministry of Education (2013). Integration of Communication Equipment and End 
Devices in Schools – Health and Safety Implications. http://cms.education.gov.il/ 
EducationCMS/Appl ications/Mankal/EtsMedorim/3/3 -6/HoraotKeva/K -2013-3-3-6-11.htm 
 
[18] Russian National Committee on Non -Ionizing Radiation Protection (2011).  
Electromagnetic Fields from Mobile Phones: Health Effect on Children and Teenagers.  
https://docs.google.com/file/ d/0B1KQ639Tc1Z9TTg2WGxpTlRvb2M/edit?pli=1  
 
 

 1  
Martin Pall, PhD  
August 7, 2017 
 
Dear California Legislators, 
 
I am Dr. Martin Pall, Professor Emeritus of Biochemistry and Basic Medical Sciences at 
Washington State University. I am a published and widely cited scientist on the 
biological effects of electromagnetic fields and speak internationally on this topic. I am 
particularly expert in how wireless radiation impacts the electrical systems in our bodies. 
I have published 7 studies showing there exists exquisite sensitivity to electromagnetic 
fields (EMFs) in the voltage sensor in each cell, such that the force impacting our cells at 
the voltage sensor has massive impact on the biology on the cells of our bodies [1-7]. 
These papers are discussed in over 360,000 web sites which can be easily found by 
Googling (Martin Pall electromagnetic).  I received my PhD at Caltech, one of the top 
scientific institutions in the world. 
   
EMFs act by activating channels in the membrane that surrounds each of our cells, called 
voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs).  The EMFs put forces on the voltage sensor 
that controls the VGCCs of about 7.2 million times greater than the forces on other 
charged groups in our cells [4,6,7].  This is why weak EMFs have such large biological 
effects on the cells of our bodies!  EMFs works this way not only on human and diverse 
animal cells [1-7] but also in plant cells [7] so that this is a universal or near universal 
mechanism of action.  
 
Thousands of published studies show biological and health effects from 
electromagnetic fields. We now know the mechanism that can explain these effects. 
The mechanism is a function of the electromagnetics of each cell—not solely about 
heating effects from the radiation (on which present FCC guidelines are based). 
 
This new understanding [1-7] means we can debunk the claims of the wireless industry 
that there cannot be a mechanism for effects produced by these weak EMFs.  The 20 
years plus of industry propaganda claims are false.  Rather the thousands of studies 
showing diverse health impacts of these EMFs can be explained.  We now have a 
mechanism, one that is supported by both the biology and the physics, both of which are 
pointing in exactly the same direction.  I am sending as a separate document a list of 134 
reviews, each of which provides from 12 to over a thousand individual citation s showing 
health impacts of low intensity EMFs, EMFs that the telecommunications industry claims cannot have such effects.  These 134 reviews and thousands of primary scientific 
papers they cite show that the industry propaganda has no scientific support 
whatsoever. 
 The consensus among independent scientists on this is further confirmed by the 2015 
(and later) appeal made to the United Nations and member states, stating that the current 
EMF safety guidelines are inadequate because they do not take into consideration non -
thermal effects.  This was signed by 225 scientists from 41 countries, each of whom had 
 2 published peer reviewed studies on EMF health effects – a total of 2,000 papers 
published in this area by the signers, a substantial fraction of the total publications in this 
area. 
 
According to industry, the forces electromagnetic fields place on electrically -
charged groups in the cell are too weak to produce biological effects. However, the unique structural properties of the voltage-gated calcium channel (VGCC) protein 
can, it turns out, explain why the force on a cell’s voltage sensor from low-intensity 
EMFs are millions of times stronger than are the forces on singly-charged groups 
elsewhere in the cell. 
 It would be a disaster for the health of Californians to be exposed to the antennas 
envisioned in SB.649. The State of California would be making a grave mistake to 
proceed with supporting the commercial interests of the wireless industry with this 
legislation. Legislators would best pause to understand the gravity of the biological effects, and the ramifications for physical and mental health, as well as 
consequences from continual damage to human DNA, and learn the facts from 
scientists who are independent of the wireless industry, not from the industry 
lobbyists who have a gigantic conflict of interest. 
 
VGCC activation in cells produced by low intensity EMFs can explain long-reported 
findings that electromagnetic fields and a wide range of biological changes and health 
effects.  The first 6 of these (see below) were well documented 46 years ago in the U.S. 
Office of Naval Medical Research report, published in 1971 [8].  The others that follow 
have been extensively documented subsequently in the p eer-reviewed scientific literature: 
1) Various neurological/neuropsychiatric effects, including changes in brain structure and function, changes in various types of psychological responses and changes in behavior.  
2) At least eight different endocrine (hormonal) effects. 3) Cardiac effects influencing the electrical control of the heart, including changes in 
ECGs, producing arrhythmias, changes that can be life threatening.  
4) Chromosome breaks and other changes in chromosome structure. 5) Histological changes in the testes. 
6) Cell death (what is now called apoptosis, a process important in neurodegenerative 
diseases). 
7) Lowered male fertility including lowered sperm quality and function and also lowered 
female fertility (less studied). 
8) Oxidative stress. 
9) Changes in calcium fluxes and calcium signaling. 
10) Cellular DNA damage including single strand breaks and double strand breaks in 
cellular DNA and also 8-OHdG in cellular DNA. 
11) Cancer which is likely to involve these DNA changes but also in creased rates of 
tumor promotion-like events. 12) Therapeutic effects including stimulation of bone growth. 
13) Cataract formation (previously thought to be thermal, now known not to be).  
14) Breakdown of the blood-brain barrier. 15) Melatonin depletion and sleep disruption. 
 3 They may be low intensity but with regard to the VGCCs, electromagnetic fields  
can have a tremendously powerful impact on the cells of our bodies.   Furthermore, 
published studies showing that calcium channel blocker drugs block or greatly lower 
biological effects from electromagnetic fields confirm there is a VGCC activation 
mechanism that is causing various effects.  Higher frequency electromagnetic fields from 
5G technologies on the horizon pose even greater biological concern tha n those to which 
we are exposed today.  We should be moving, instead, to wired technologies at every opportunity, based on what we know in science today, not expanding and supporting the 
proliferation of wireless.   
 
I want to make several additional points very clear:  
 
1. The Physics and the Biology are both pointing in the same direction.  Both show that EMFs act primarily via activating the VGCCs in the cells of our bodies. 
2. DNA damage known to be produced by these EMFs occur in human sperm and may also occur in human eggs, leading to large increases in mutation in any 
children born.  It is thought that an increase in mutation frequency of 2.5 to 3 -fold 
will lead to extinction because of accumulation of large numbers of damaging mutations.  We may already be over this level, and if so, simply continuing our 
current exposures will lead to eventual extinction.  Further increases in exposures 
will be more rapidly self -destructive. 
3. Pulsed EMFs are, in most cases, more biologically active and therefore more dangerous than are non-pulsed (continuous wave) EMFs.  All cordless 
communication devices communicate via pulsations, because it is the pulsations 
that carry the information communicated.  All the industry claims of safety are 
based on a theory (only thermal effects) that was known to be wrong back in 1971 
[8] – and that was before many thousands of additional studies were published 
providing massive confirmation that industry claims are false. 
4. The industry is trying to move to much higher frequencies because these much higher frequencies allow much higher pulsations and therefore much higher 
transmission of information.  However, these higher pulsation rates make these 
ultra-high devices vastly more dangerous.  This is part of the reasons why it is so 
important to vote down SB.649. 
5. None of our wireless communication devices are ever tested biologically for safety – not cell phone towers, not cell phones, not Wi-Fi, not cordless phones, 
not smart meters and certainly not 5G phones, or radar units in cars – before they 
are put out to irradiate an unsuspecting public. 
6. The telecommunications industry has corrupted the agencies that are supposed to be regulating them.  The best example of this is that the FCC which regulates 
EMFs in the U.S. is a “captured agency”, captured by the industry it is supposed 
to regulate, according to an 8 chapter document published by the Edmond J. Safra 
Center for Ethics at Harvard University [9].  Is it any wonder, therefore, that the 
industry keeps touting that their devices are within the safety guidelines set by the 
FCC? 
 
    
 4 I urge you to do the right thing on behalf of the health of Californians and future 
generations. Please let me know if I can provide further information.  (503) 232-3883. 
 
Sincerely, 
Martin Pall, PhD (Caltech, 1968) 
Professor Emeritus of Biochemistry and Basic Medical Sciences 
Washington State University 
 
Citations:  
1. Pall ML.  2013  Electromagnetic fields act via activation of voltage -gated calcium channels to 
produce beneficial or adverse effects. J Cell Mol Med 17:958 -965. 
2. Pall ML.  2014  Electromagnetic field activation of voltage -gated calcium channels: role in 
therapeutic effects.  Electromagn Biol Med. 2014 Apr 8.  
3. Pall ML.  2015  Scientific evidence contradicts findings and assumptions of Canadian Safety Panel 6: microwaves act through voltage -gated calcium channel activation to induce biological 
impacts at non -thermal levels, supporting a paradigm shift for microwave/lower frequency 
electromagnetic field action.  Rev Environ Health 30:99 -116. 
4. Pall ML.  2015 Elektromagnetische Felder wirken über die Aktivierung spannungsabhängiger Calciumkanäle,  um günstige oder ungünstige Wirkungen zu erzeugen.  Umwelt -Medizin-
Gesellshaft 28 : 22-31. 
5. Pall ML.  2015 How to approach the challenge of minimizing non -thermal health effects of  
microwave radiation from electrical devices. International Journal of Inn ovative Research in 
Engineering & Management (IJIREM) ISSN: 2350 -0557, Volume- 2, Issue -5, September 2015; 
71-76. 
6. Pall ML.  2016  Microwave frequency electromagnetic fields (EMFs) produce widespread neuropsychiatric effects including depress ion. J Chem Neu roanat 75(Pt B):43 -51. doi: 
10.1016/j.jchemneu.2015.08.001. Epub 2015 Aug 21.  
7. Pall ML.  2016  Electromagnetic fields act similarly in plants as in animals: Probable activation of calcium channels via their voltage sensor.  Curr Chem Biol 10: 74 -82. 
8. Naval Medical Research Institute Research Report, June 1971.  Bibliography of Reported 
Biological Phenomena (“Effects”) and Clinical Manifestations, Revised,  ZR Glaser.   
9. Captured Agency: How the Federal Communications Commission Is Dominated by the Industries It Presumably Regulates, by Norm Alster. Published by Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics, 
Harvard University. An e- book under the Creative Commons 4.0 License: 
https:/creativecommons.org/licences/by/4.0/  
 
 
Sacramento Office:  1107 9th Street, Suite 625, Sacramento CA 95814  Ph .  916-333-0566 
 
 
July 26, 2017 
 
The Honorable Ben Hueso 
Member of the California State Senate 
Room 4035, State Capitol 
Sacramento, CA 95814 
 
RE:  SB 649 (Hueso) – Small Cell Wireless Facilities - OPPOSE  
 Dear Senator Hueso: 
 
Environmental Working Group (EWG) respectfully opposes your SB 649, which would make the 
installation of small cell wireless facilities, such as those used to facilitate 5G networks , ministerial 
rather than discretionary at the local government level.   
The health impacts of cellular transmissions have been debated for over ten years because there are 
studies that raise real concerns about the effects of radio frequency radiation on humans.  This is why 
EWG sponsored two bills by former Senator Leno, SB 1212 (2010) and SB 932 (2011) that would 
have required sellers of cell phones to inform consumers to minimize exposure to cell phone radiation 
by reading the manual that comes with the phone, as this is in fact recommended by cell phone 
manufacturers in their included manuals.  
 
Studies on the health impacts of cell phones and their transmission infrastructure are continuing, but 
there is already adequate existing sound science for government to proceed with caution on the roll-out 
of the new technology.  In particular, the results of the $25 million National Toxicology Program study 
(2016) that showed tumors in rats caused by a typical amount of heavy cell phone use  are to be 
reckoned with.  And, most of the past science has analyzed older cellular technology like 2G and 4G, so we are moving into uncharted waters with 5G with its different wavelengths and energy levels.   
    Local governments must be able to evaluate science and respond to the wishes of their citizens and 
neighborhoods before permits are issued for this technology and SB 649 short-circuits that process.  
This includes important decisions about locating the technology near homes, schools, and hospitals.  
We simply cannot rely upon the word of the FCC (in terms of safety standards) to protect the health of 
Californians.   
 
For these reasons, EWG will be urging a “no” vote for the Assembly floor.  We will be writing a 
separate letter to the Assembly Appropriations Committee on fiscal concerns. 
 
Sincerely, 
  
Bill Allayaud 
California Director of Government Affairs 
Environmental Working Group 
 
 
 
August	15,	2017 	
	
The	Honorable	Cecilia	Aguiar -Curry 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 					
Chair,	Assembly	Local	Government	Committee 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 							
State	Capitol	Building,	Room	5144 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 							
Sacramento,	CA	95814 	
SB	649	(Hueso) -	Wireless	Telecommunic ations	Facilities -	OPPOSE 	
Chair	 Aguiar -Curry ,	
On	behalf	of	the	undersigned,	we	write	to	register	our	opposition	to	SB	649	(Hueso)	which	would	
prohibit	local	discretionary	review	of	“small	cell”	wireless	antennas	,	including	equipment	collocated	on	
existing	 structures	or	located	on	new	“poles,	structures,	or	non -pole	structures,”	including	those	within	
the	public	right- of-way	and	buildings.	The	proposal	preempts	adopted	local	land	use	plans	by	mandating	
that	“small	cells”	be	allowed	in	all	zones	as	a	use	by -right,	including	all	residential	zones.		Because	of	
this,	this	proposal	 essentially 	provides	a	CEQA	exemption	for	installation	of	these	 facilities,	undermining	
the	ability	for	communities	to	comment	and	register	their	concerns	associated	with	previously	
mentioned	installation.		These	“small	cell”	installations	not	only	can	cause	an	aesthetic	blight,	but	can	
release	levels	of	radiation	that	we	don’t	yet	know	conclusively	the	health	impacts	they	can	impose	of	
humans,	especially	developing	bodies	and	minds	of	 children.   These	small	cell	boxes	could	pop	up	
anywhere:	grocery	stores,	outside	school,	playgrounds,	communal	places,	with	no	requirement	to	
mitigate	effects	or	understand	potential	environmental	and	health	hazards.  	
For	these	reasons,	we	urge	your	“no”	v ote	in	committee.	 	
Thank	you, 	
Jena	Price,	Legislative	Affairs	Manager 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 													
California	League	of	Conservation	Voters 	
Kyle	Jones,	Legislative	Associate		 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 					
Sierra	Club	California 	
Jane	Williams,	Executive	Director 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
California	Co mmunities	Against	Toxics 	

Devra Davis, PhD MPH FACE 
P.O. Box 58 
Teton Village, WY 83025 
 
 Jackson Hole Town Council PO Box 1687 Jackson, WY 83001  Re: Conditional Use Permit: 55’ tall Wireless Communications Tower at 275 N. Willow Street.  Dear Jackson Hole City Council,  
  I am writing in regards to the request for a Conditional Use Permit to Allow a 55’ tall Wireless Communications Tower at 275 N. Willow Street. I want t o inform you of some critically important facts 
that may have escaped your attention, and I hope that this will 
persuade you to reconsider approval of the 
tower.   
1.According to federal law, any permitted tower can eventually become 20 feet or 20% higher than the original permit with no community input.  
 A tower includes multiple antennas. Section 6409 (a) (1) of the ‘‘Middle Class Tax Relief an d Job 
Creation Act of 2012’’ says that once a Communication tower is a
pproved and installed for one 
communications provider, any other communications provider may not be denied application to install their antenna on that tower if the dimensions of the tower are not substantially changed. Unfortunately, “substantially changed” is not defined in the Law and the FCC defines substantially changed as an 
increase in height of more than 20 feet or more than 20%, whiche
ver is larger (the 20 ft-20% rule). The 
FCC also says that the tower width can be extended to 40 feet. If a community objects I understand that the community would have to provide evidence to support that objection.   Is Jackson Hole comfortable allowing the tower to go up 20 more feet (that is to 75’) and expand in width to 40‘ wi th no community input? How will this affect the view from the Town’s iconic southwest elk antler 
arch?
  
 
2.The tower location would expose the children at the nearby Teton County Recreation Center, Timber Ridge Academy, Jackson Elementary School to increased levels of radiofrequency radiation.  
 Some cities and nations are curtailing in-building wireless exposures—and moving to wired connections rather than wireless—because of growing health concerns, i.e., Haifa, Israel, France and India. The 
Council Agenda packet noted, “One key feature of the new cell si
te will be providing strong in-building 
coverage...Strong in-building coverage is often the most difficult goal to attain because of the degradation 
of the Radio Frequency (RF) signal through the building itself.”   Has the community considered that the signal will not only go though the buildings, as the Applicant notes, but also through our bodies—and that several technology-sophisticated nations are generally promoting wired connecti ons within schools?  
 A number of nations, including Israel and France, are taking ste
ps to reduce exposures, especially to 
children and pregnant teachers, as growing evidence indicates that there are health risks with such exposures.  
3.Federal Law governing towers prohibits considering health and safety issues, but the Council should be aware that a number of federal agencies are requesting that  the FCC 
strengthen their outdated FCC regulations that do not protect hu
man health and the 
welfare of migratory animals.  
 On February 7, 2014 the U.S. Department of Interior stated ​in a letter​
 ​to the National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration: 
“The second significant issue associated with communication towers involves impacts from non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation emitted by these structures. Radiation studies at cellular communication towers were begun circa 2000 in Europe and continue today on wild nesting birds. Study results have documented nest and site abandon ment, plumage deterioration, 
locomotion problems, reduced survivorship, and death (e.g., Balm
ori 2005, Balmori and Hallberg 
2007, and Everaert and Bauwens 2007). Nesting migratory birds and their offspring have apparently been affected by the radiation from cellular phone towers in the 900 and 1800 MHz frequency ranges -- 915 MHz is the standard cellular phone frequency used in the United States. 
However, the electromagnetic radiation standards used by the ​Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC) continue to be based on thermal heating, a crit
erion now nearly 30 years 
out of date and inapplicable today. ​”  
 Regulations dictate, “The communication tower shall cause no damage or disturbance to human life or wildlife as a result of radiation or electromagnetic fields.” Currently the applicant  states that the tower’s 
emissions would adhere to standards for radiation exposure set b
y the FCC. However, FCC standards may 
soon change as a result of new experimental research from a $25 million study by the U.S. National Toxicology Program finding rare tumors of the brain and heart in animals exposed to wireless radiation comparable to that of cell phones.   Outdated FCC regulations are curre ntly under review.​ (See NOI #13-84, "Reassessment of Federal 
Communications Commission Radiofrequency Exposure Limits and Pol
icies 2013”). In 2012, the 
Government Accountability Office (GAO) published their report ​“Exposure and Testing Requirements for  
Mobile Phones Should Be Reassessed”​  that calls on the FCC to “formally reassess and, if appropriate, 
change its current RF energy (microwave) exposure limit,” and “The Federal Communications Commission’s (FCC) RF energy exposure limit may not reflect the latest research….” 
 
The newly released multi-year study by The National Toxicology Program at the National Institutes 
of Health found a causal relationship between RF in cell phone frequencies and malignant brain cancers ​(glioma) as well as benign nerve tumors (schwannomas) of the heart in male rats. The study was designed to test the scientific basis on which current US radiofrequency exposure limits are based. Th e 
results of carcinogenicity show that current FCC limits are base
d on outdated and now invalid 
assumptions. The results detailed in the ​Report of Partial findings from the National Toxicology Program  
Carcinogenesis Studies of Cell Phone Radiofrequency Radiation​  indicate that non-ionizing radiation does 
have adverse effects at non-heating levels. As FCC limits only protect against heating effects, and do not account for other biological effects such as carcinogenicity, stronger protection is needed, which means the limit will be lowered.   In May 2015, over 200 scientists from 39 nations, who have authored more than 2,000 articles on electromagnetic fiel ds, appealed to the United Nations to address “the emerging public health crisis” 
related to wireless radiation. These scientists state, “the ICNI
RP guidelines do not cover long-term 
exposure and low-intensity effects” and are “insufficient to protect public health.” They also state, “the various agencies setting safety standards have failed to impose sufficient guidelines to protect the general public, particularly children who are more vulnerable to the effects of EMF.” (See the International EMF 
Scientist Appeal at 
​https://emfscientist.org​ .)  
 
4.It would be against the law in many jurisdictions and countries to erect a cell tower so close to schools.​ In India, the ​Supreme Court of India ​
upheld the High Court of the State of Rajasthan 
decision to remove all cell towers from the vicinity of schools, hospitals and playgrounds because of radiation “hazardous to life.” The Los Angeles Unified School District has established a precautionary radiofrequency threshold level that is 10,000 times lower than the current FCC standard, and the District does not allow cell towers near schools. 
  
 
 
   
5.Environmental impacts: Cell tower compounds bring hazardous materials on site. ​Tower compounds store hazardous materials on site such as banks of lead acid batteries, diesel generators and diesel fuel tanks. In several counties, these sites are considered Hazmat areas.  
 The Jackson Hole Council Agenda notification states (on page 32 of 112), “The proposed tower will not create any signific ant odors, noises, light, or pollution.” and “Atlas Tower does not anticipate there will 
be any environmental conditions created by our proposed use,” ho
wever, I did not see it noted what type 
of backup power systems these telecommunications companies will use? Cell tower diesel generators are usually turned on and tested weekly, meaning diesel fumes and exhaust are emitted into the air and the cumulative impact is considerable in terms of diesel emissions. In addition, the tanks must be refueled 
periodically, bringing diesel laden trucks into the area and pum
ping fuel into the tanks.  
 
6.Cell towers do and can catch fire and fall. ​The Applicant states the tower would “collapse not topple,” yet many cell towers have fallen over despite the best intentions of structural engineers. Towers also catch on fire. As an example, last year, a cell tower at ​Virginia Heritage High School
 
caught fire and started leaning over. What of the ​Ohio Football field tower​  fire or the ​Oregon  
School cell tower​  that caught fire and “seared bushes” below?  
 I respectfully urge you to reconsider approval of this tower and to institute a systematic review of tower siting policies in light of this new information. I and other experts who work with Environmental Health 
Trust would be pleased to advise on this matter further. In light of these concerns, I urge that this tower 
not be built at this time at this location.    Respectfully submitted,  
 Devra Davis, PhD MPH FACE ddavis@ehtrust.org www.EHTrust.org
 
Visiting Professor, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School and Ondokuz Mayis Medical School  Further information here:   American Academy of Pediatrics 2013 letter to the FCC  on children's vulnerability to RF and  the
 
importance of updating current radio frequency exposure standards.   
 2014 Letter from the U.S. Department of Interior​
 states, “The electromagnetic radiation standards used by 
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) continue to be based on thermal heating, a criterion now nearly 30 years out of date and inapplicable today.”   2002 Letter from Norbert Hankin of the EPA about the FCC guidelines​
 states that children, pregnant 
women and the elderly were not considered in the regulations and that the regulations were to protect against hearing damage only and did not consider long-term chronic exposure.  
 2008 Report:  National Academy of Sciences Report “Identification of Research Needs Relating to
 
Adverse Health Effects of Wireless Communication.”  
 Letter to the FCC by Dr. De-Kun Li, MD, PhD, MPH on the Inadequacy of FCC guidelines
 
  Why the FCC Must Strengthen Radiofrequency Radiation Limits in the U.S. by Joel M. Moskowitz,
 
Ph.D., Director Center for Family and Community Health, The UC Berkeley Prevention Research Center,  
School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley November 5, 2013  
 Alster, Norm. Captured agency: How the Federal Communications Commission is dominated by the
 
industries it presumably regulates. Cambridge, MA:  Edmund J. Safra Center for Ethics, Harvard  
University.  2015.  
 No more Falling workers:  February 2014, OSHA Alert about cell tower deaths
 
 Failure to Regulate Antennas and the Lack of FCC Monitoring of Compliance with FCC RF Safety
 
Policies The EM Radiation Policy Institute to the FCC in 2013   
 The World Health Organization’s monograph on RF radiation as a Possible Human Carcinogen in 2011
  
 
List of cell Tower Fires and Collapse compiled by Dr. David Stupin.   
          
 
892 Arlington Av. Berkeley, CA, 94707 (307) 200-9358 
www.ehtrust.org  
 
June 28, 2017  The Honorable Cecilia Aguiar-Curry Chair of the Local Government Committee  
1020 N Street, Room 157 Sacramento, CA 95814  RE: SB 649 (Hueso) – Small Cell Wireless Facilities — OPPOSE   Dear Chair Aguiar-Curry:  As a nonprofit research and policy organization dedicated to identifying and reducing environmental health hazards, Environmental Health Trust (EHT) writes to advise you of serious scientific grounds to 
reject SB 649 as advanced by Senator Hueso. I have personally se
rved as an expert advisor to the 
California Department of Health as well as the San Francisco and Berkeley City governments on matters relevant to this bill. EHT has been honored to work with California government and scientists for over a decade. At the invitation of the Israel Institute for Advanced Stu dy of the Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, EHT recently organized and chaired an 
​Expert Forum on Wireless Radiation and Health​ , 
bringing together scientists and engineers from more than ten high tech nations. Reflecting these efforts, EHT provides independent scientific research and advice on avoidable environmental health hazards to local, state and national governments.   SB 649 will pave the way for widespread introduction of 5G microwave wireless radiation frequency (RF) that has never been tested for its impact of p ublic health or the environment. Other RF microwave 
radiation such as that used by cellphones and other wireless dev
ices has been ​classified as a ‘possible  
carcinogen’​  by the International Agency for Research on Cancer in 2011 and more recently dubbed a 
‘probable carcinogen,’​  by expert researchers looking at newer information in 2015., ,  In addition, this 1 2 3
bill could result in the loss of hundreds of millions of dollars in local revenue, as the ​San Francisco  
Chronicle noted​  today.  
 By ignoring growing scientific evidence of harm, the bill effectively will ensure the widespread exposures of millions of Californians to an agent that growing numbers of scientists and nations consider a serious 
1 World Health Organization. ​“IARC classifies radiofrequency electromagnetic fields as possibly carcinogenic to  
humans,”​  WHO, Press Release, no. 208, 2011.  
2 ​ ​IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. ​"Non-ionizing radiation, Part 2:  
Radiofrequency electromagnetic fields."​  ​IARC Monographs On The Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans ​, 
vol. 102, pt. 2, 2013. 
3 ​Morgan, L. Lloyd, et al. ​"Mobile phone radiation causes brain tumors and should be classified as a probable human  
carcinogen (2A)."​  ​International Journal of Oncology, ​ vol. 46, no. 5, 2015, 1865-71.  
health threat. Recently, studies have found that the frequencies which will be used in 5G and other future 
technologies can have harmful effects , as Dr. Cindy Russell, Vice President of Community Health for the 4
Santa Clara Medical Association noted.  As articulated in their state Constitution, California cities and 5
counties have a duty to protect the health and safety of their residents.   EHT has a longstanding history of research and policy advice to state, local and national governments 
regarding strategies to reduce disease and promote health by avo
iding environmental health hazards. Our 
organization opposes the broad scale installation of untested wireless antennas and associated electrical equipment close to humans and through critical wildlife habitat and corridors. Both federal an d local 
zoning controls are needed to assure that cellular equipment are 
 installed to avoid significant and serious 
safety threats of electrical shock, fire, and radio frequency (RF) microwave radiation exposures, as well as chronic impacts on public health and the environment.  
 Consistent with public health concepts of preventing harm by reducing exposure to suspected carcinogens, EHT opposes th e usurpation and preemption of local authority that will allow federal and 
state authorities to place what state reports of the bill indica
te can be thirty thousand new radiating 5G cell 
antennas on city and county utility, light poles, and other right of ways in close proximity to city and county workers, children, residents and visitors. In some cases towers will need to be sited every 100 feet 
with antennas at a height of 30 feet or less. Local authority and duty should not be overridden by 
preemptive federal or state policies such as SB 649 which disreg
ards scientific evidence on this matter as 
outlined below.  Regarding potential health risks from RF a number of corporations advise their shareholders that they face serious risks from RF. For instance, Crown Castle’s ​2016 10-K ANNUAL REPORT​
, states that,  
“If radio frequency emissions from wireless handsets or equipment on our wireless infrastructure are demonstrated to cause negative health effects, potential future claims could adversely affect our operations, costs or revenues. The potential connection between radio frequency emissions and certain negative health effects, including some forms of cancer, has been the subject of substantial study by the scientific community in recent years. We cannot guarantee that claims 
relating to radio frequency emissions will not arise in the futu
re or that the results of such studies 
will not be adverse to us...If a connection between radio frequency emissions and possible negative health effects were established, our operations, costs, or revenues may be materially and adversely affe cted. We currently do not maintain any significant insurance with respect to these 
matters.” 
 
Most wireless companies from ​AT&T​  to ​Nokia​ to ​T Mobile​  to ​Verizon Wireless​  have issued ​similar  
warnings​ to their shareholders.  
 Regarding public health impacts, recently released research findings from the premiere test program of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) add to the body of scientific evidence 
4 Feldman, Yuri, et al. ​“Human Skin as Arrays of Helical Antennas in the Millimeter and Submillimeter Wave  
Range.” ​ Physical Review Letters ​, vol. 100, no. 128102, 2008.  
5 Russell, Cindy. ​“A 5G Wireless Future: Will it give us a Smart Nation or Contribute to an Unhealthy One?”​  Santa 
Clara Bulletin, Jan./Feb. 2017.  
indicating that RF microwave radiation can be harmful. The 10 year $25 million NIEHS National 
Toxicology Program’s ​Studies of the Toxicology and Carcinogenicity Cell Phone Radiation​  reports that 
RF produced increases rates of highly malignant very rare tumors: gliomas of the brain and schwannomas of the heart.  These experimental findings are consistent with human studies showing increased rates of 
6
gliomas and acoustic neuromas (schwann cells) among humans exposed to cell phone radiation. In addition to increased cancers, the NTP study also reported that prenatally exposed animals produced offspring with lower birth weight and 
​evidence of direct genetic damage.   
  Since the 2011 WHO/IARC classification, the peer reviewed research connecting microwave exposure to cancer has significantly strengthened. ​In ​2015, a study​
 ​replicated a 2010​ ​experiment​  ​that found that weak 
cell phone signals significantly promote the growth of tumors in mice, and that toxic chemical exposures combine with RF to more than double the tumor response.
, The Ramazzini Institute is engaged in similar 78
research with RF that is 1000 less than the NTP exposures—set to mimic radiation exposure levels caused by network equipment (e.g., cell tower antenna emissions).   Consistent with the ​NTP findings​
, the Ramazzini Institute team ​report ​ significantly lower litter weights, 
as presented at the January 2017 ​Conference on Wireless and Health​  at Israel Institute for Advanced 
Study, Hebrew University of Jerusalem.  Findings of effects at such low levels is indication of the 9
capability of low level electromagnetic radiation exposure to result in biological effects.   Other studies finding serious increased risk of glioma in regular cell phone users are of special relevance. In 2014, a ​French national study​
 linked higher cell phone exposure to increased glioma in cell phone 
users.  A newly published research ​report​  in the ​American Journal of Epidemiology ​ finds that Canadians 10
who have used cell phones for 558 hours or more have more than a doubled risk of brain cancer.  11
Previous ​published re-analysis​  of the multi country Interphone study data has found stronger positive 
associations to glioma risk among long term users and heavy users and a ​statistically significant  
association between where tumors were located and how much radiation an individual received from their phone.
,  12 13
6 ​Wyde, Michael, et al. ​"Report of Partial findings from the National Toxicology Program Carcinogenesis Studies of  
Cell Phone Radiofrequency Radiation in Hsd: Sprague Dawley® SD rats (Whole Body Exposure)."​  ​bioRxiv,​ no. 
055699, 2016.  
7 ​Lerchl, Alexander, et al. ​"Tumor promotion by exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields below exposure  
limits for humans."​  Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, ​ vol. 459, no. 4, 2015, pp. 585-90.  
8 ​Tillmann, Thomas, et al. ​"Indication of cocarcinogenic potential of chronic UMTS-modulated radiofrequency  
exposure in an ethylnitrosourea mouse model."​  ​International Journal of Radiation Biology, ​ vol. 86, no. 7, 2010, pp. 
529-41. 
9 Belpoggi, Fiorella. ​“Recent findings on wireless radiation and health from the Ramazzini Institute could reinforce  
the NTP results.”​  ​Conference on Wireless and Health ​, 2017.  
10 ​Coureau, Gaëlle, et al. ​"Mobile phone use and brain tumours in the CERENAT case-control study."​  Occupational 
Environmental Medicine, ​ vol. 71, no. 7, 2014, pp. 514-22. 
11 ​Momoli, F., et al. ​"Probabilistic multiple-bias modelling applied to the Canadian data from the INTERPHONE  
study of mobile phone use and risk of glioma, meningioma, acoustic neuroma, and parotid gland tumors."​  ​American 
Journal of Epidemiology ​, 2017. 
12 ​Turner, Michelle C., et al. ​"Investigation of bias related to differences between case and control interview dates in  
five INTERPHONE countries."​  ​Annals of Epidemiology, ​ vol. 26, 12, 2016, pp. 827-32.  
 
More recently, research carried out by physicists in Israel and others have shown that the higher millimeter wave frequencies to be used in 5G applications uniquely interacts with sweat ducts of the human skin which can then function as antennas to amplify signals. This work extends studies first produced in 1986.  The potential long-term impact of such stimulation on precancerous skin growths 
14
should be evaluated carefully, including potential super-growth of bacteria.  A ​lecture​ by Paul Ben-Ishai, 15
PhD, and published research on this issue can be found on the ​2017 Conference website., ,  1617 18
 Cancer is not the only health concern presented by wireless devices and infrastructure. Impacts on reproduction​
 and ​brain development​  have also been repeatedly reported in the peer reviewed literature in 
addition to a myriad of other adverse effects., , ,   19 20 21 22
 In light of these developments showing growing evidence of the biological impact of RF, it is imperative that new infrastructure and 5G not be introduced widely into commerce at this time. The State of California needs to critically consider the potential impact of massive new and possibly carcinogenic 
wireless exposures to their population. Before introducing addit
ional untested wireless technology into the 
environment, it is necessary to:  
●model exposures to infants, children and pregnant women; 
●conduct experimental tests on exposures’ impacts on wildlife; and 
●evaluate impacts on human systems through in vitro and in vivo toxicology 
In 2015, the ​Intern ational EMF Scientist Appeal​ , now signed by over 225 scientists from 41 nations, was 
submitted to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Director-General of the World Health Organization and U.N. Member Nations urging the development of more protective guidelines for EMF (including RF-EMF), encouraging precautionary measures, and calling for education of the public about 
13 ​Grell, Kathrine, et al. ​"The intracranial distribution of gliomas in relation to exposure from mobile phones:  
analyses from the INTERPHONE study."​  ​American Journal of Epidemiology ​, vol. 184, no. 11, 2016, pp. 818-28. 
14 ​Gandhi OP, Riazi A. “​Absorption of millimeter waves by human beings and its biological implications.”​  ​IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques ​, vol. 34, no. 2, 1986, pp. 228-235. 
15 ​Soghomonyan D, K. Trchounian and A. Trchounian. ​“Millimeter waves or extremely high frequency  
electromagnetic fields in the environment: what are their effects on bacteria?”​  Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, vol. 100, no. 11, 2016, pp. 4761-71.  
16 Feldman, Yuri and Paul Ben-Ishai.​ “Potential Risks to Human Health Originating from Future Sub-MM  
Communication Systems.”​  ​Conference on Wireless and Health ​, 2017.  
17 ​ Hayut, Itai, Paul Ben Ishai, Aharon J. Agranat and Yuri Feldman. ​“Circular polarization induced by the  
three-dimensional chiral structure of human sweat ducts.”​  ​Physical Review E ​, vol. 89, no. 042715, 2014.  
18 Feldman, Yuri, et al. ​“Human Skin as Arrays of Helical Antennas in the Millimeter and Submillimeter Wave  
Range.” ​ Physical Review Letters ​, vol. 100, no. 128102, 2008.  
19 ​Adams, Jessica A., et al. ​"Effect of mobile telephones on sperm quality: a systematic review and meta-analysis."  
Environment International, ​ 70, 2014, pp. 106-112. 
20 ​Deshmukh, P.S., et al. ​"Cognitive impairment and neurogenotoxic effects in rats exposed to low-intensity  
microwave radiation."​  ​International Journal of Toxicology ​, vol. 34, no. 3, 2015, pp. 284-90. 
21 ​Aldad, T.S., et al. ​"Fetal Radiofrequency Radiation Exposure From 800-1900 MHz-Rated Cellular Telephones  
Affects Neurodevelopment and Behavior in Mice."​  Scientific Reports, ​ vol. 2, no. 312, 2012.  
22 Sonmez, O.F., et al. ​"Purkinje cell number decreases in the adult female rat cerebellum following exposure to 900  
MHz electromagnetic field."​  ​Brain Research, ​vol. 1356, 2010, pp. 95-101. 
health risks, particularly risks to children and fetal development.  Most recently, the EMF Scientists have 23
submitted ​Comments to the FCC​  asking the FCC to critically consider the potential impact of the 5th 
generation wireless infrastructure on the health and safety of the U.S. population before proceeding to 
deploy this infrastructure.  California firefighters have lobbied to protect themselves and successfully received exemption on health grounds from the installation of these cell towers. Similarly cities and counties should be  given the needed 
local controls to protect their citizens from the health and saf
ety risks of these installations. As currently 
envisioned, transmitters can be placed in close proximity to bedrooms and schools without consideration of the health of their occupants. Research is critically needed to evaluate the public health and environmental impacts of proposed wireless facilities before deployme nt.  
 Worldwide, governments are acting to minimize exposures to child
ren as they are most vulnerable. For 
example, the Supreme Court of India upheld the High Court of the State of Rajasthan’s decision to remove all cell towers from the vicinity of schools, hospitals and playgrounds because of radiation “hazardous to life.” In Chile, the 2012 ​“Antennae Law”​
 prohibits cell antennae/towers in “sensitive 
areas”.  Please learn more about international policy actions such as these in our ​online briefing​ .   24 25
 The assumption that all wireless technology is safe has been shown through recent studies to be incorrect. EHT strongly opposes the widespread installation of 5G antennas and towers and believes that the state should move forward on its commitment to support the installation of fiber optic cables buried in the ground to every business, home, school, and hospital in California. We urge the state not to ignore this 
evidence of harm from RF. Please vote “no” vote on SB 649 and up
hold the rights of local government to 
protect public health and the environment.    Sincerely, 
 
Devra Davis, PhD, MPH 
Fellow, American College of Epidemiology Visiting Prof. Hebrew Univ. Hadassah Medical Center & Ondokuz Mayis Univ. Medical School Associate Editor, ​Frontiers in Radiation and Health President, Environmental Health Trust   
23 ​Blank, M., et al. ​"International Appeal: Scientists call for protection from non-ionizing electromagnetic field  
exposure."​  European Journal of Oncology, ​ vol. 20, no. 3/4, 2015, pp. 180-2.  
24 ​“New communications antenna law in Chile.”​  ​Communications Law: Newsletter of the International Bar 
Association Legal Practice Division ​, vol. 20, no. 1, 2013, pp. 14-16.  
25 ​“International Policy Briefing: Cautionary Policy on Radiofrequency Radiation Actions by Governments, Health  
Authorities and Schools Worldwide.”​  Environmental Health Trust, 2017.  
Page 1 of 12 
 October 30, 2017 Ronald M. Powell, Ph.D.1  
 
The Health Argument against Cell Phones and Cell Towers  
 
The biomedical evidence showing that the radiofrequency radiation emitted by cell phones and cell towers is harmful to health continues to grow.  This document summarizes the health argument against cellular technology, whatever the benefits of that technology may be.  You may wish to inform yourself about these arguments for any of several reasons:   
x You use a cell phone. 
x You encourage, or do not  discourage, the use of cell phones by family members. 
x You live in, or are contemplating moving into, a community close to a cell tower. 
x Your school, college, fire station, or police station is considering permitting the installation of a cell 
tower on its property. 
x Your community is considering permitting the installation of cellular repeaters, small-cell towers, or even full cell towers with in its jurisdiction. 
 
Below, I introduce myself, provide evidence of the harmfulness of cellular radiation , and show that U.S. 
Government is not protecting us from harm and is unlikely to do so in the near future.   That means that we 
must protect ourselves and our families at the individual and the community levels while working toward protective action by governments at the local, state, and Federal levels.  
Who am I? 
 I am a retired U.S. Government career scientist (Ph.D., Applied Physics, Harvard University, 1975).  During my 
Government career, I worked for the Executive Office of the President of the United States, the National 
Science Foundation, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology.  For those organizations, respectively, I addressed Federal research and development program evaluation, energy policy research, and measurement development in support of the electronics and electrical-equipment industries and the biomedical research community.  I currently interact with other scientists and with physicians around the world on the impact of electromagnetic fields on human health. 
 
Evidence o f harm  
 
I present below key evidence, and associated references, that the exposure of humans to radiofrequency radiation, and specifically cellular radiation, is harmful to health. 
   
In 2016, the National Toxicology Program, at the National Institutes of Health, linked  cellular 
radiation to brain and heart tumors .  
 
The National Toxicology Program (NTP), at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), just published the “Partial 
Findings” of a $2 5 million multi-year study of the impact of cellular radiation on health.   The U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration “nominated ” this NTP study .  The NTP indicated that this is the largest and most complex 
study ever conducted by the NTP.  
                                                      
1 Ronald M. Powell, Ph.D., USA, email ronpowell@verizon.net , web site https://www.scribd.com/document/291507610/ . 
Page 2 of 12 
 The NTP study exposed each of six separate groups of male rats to one of the  six possible combinations of 
three different levels of cellular radiation and two different modulation formats.   The modulation format is 
the method used to impress information on the cellular signal.  A separate seventh group of male rats was 
used as a “control”, tha t is, for comparison, and was protected from exposure to any cellular radiation.  
 The NTP study found a “likely ” causal relationship between exposure to cellular radiation and the occurrence 
of malignant (cancerous) brain tumors (glioma) and malignant nerve tumors (a form of schwannoma) of the 
heart in the male rats: 
 
The rates of occurrence of brain glioma in the male rats ranged from 0 to 3.3 percent for the six groups 
exposed to radiation.   The mean rate of occurrence was 2.0 percent across all six groups.
2 
 
The rates of occurrence of heart schwannoma in the male rats ranged from 1.1 to 6.6 percent for the 
six groups exposed to radiation.  The mean rate of occurrence was 3.5 percent across all six groups.3 
 
The seventh group of male rats, which  was used as a control and which  was protected from exposure 
to any cellular radiation, experienced no instances of brain glioma or heart schwannoma. 
 
The NTP considered its findings so important to public  health that it issued the “Partial Findings” (May 2016)  
prior to completing the full study.  The NTP then presented those findings at an international conference (BioEM2016, June 2016) attended by 300 scientists from 41 countries.   The NTP characterized the motiva tion 
for the early release of the “Partial  Findings” this way:  
 
“Given the widespread global usage of mobile communications among users of all ages, even a very 
small increase in the incidence of disease resulting from exposure to RFR [radiofrequency radiation] could have broad implications for public health.  There is a high level of public and media interest regarding the safety of cell phone RFR and the specific results of these NTP studies. “ 
 You can learn more about this study from the following  references: 
 
Reference:   NTP’s brief description  of its study.  National Toxicology Program:  Cell Phones.  
(http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/results/areas/cellphones/index.html)   
 Reference:   NTP’s published “Partial Findings” of the study.   Michael Wyde, Mark Cesta, Chad Blystone, 
Susan Elmore, Paul Foster, Michelle Hooth, Grace Kissling, David Malarkey, Robert Sills, Matthew Stout, Nigel Walker, Kristine Witt, Mary Wolfe, and John Bucher, Report of Partial Findings from the National 
Toxicology Program Carcinogenesis Studies of Cell Phone Radiofrequency Radiation in Hsd: Sprague 
Dawley® SD rats (Whole Body Exposure), posted June 23, 2016.    
(http://biorxiv.org/content/biorxiv/early/2016/06/23/055699.full.pdf ) 
 
Reference:  Informative discussion of the NTP study.   Environmental Health Trust, Frequently Asked 
Questions about the U.S. National Toxicology Program Radiofrequency Rodent Carcinogenicity Research Study.  
(http://ehtrust.org/science/facts-national-toxicology-program-cellphone-rat-cancer-study ) 
                                                      
2 In the “Partial Findings” reference cited above, the mean (average) rate of occurrence for malignant glioma in male rats was 
determined from Table 1 on page 13 as follows:  (3 + 3 + 2 + 0 + 0 + 3)/(90 + 90 + 90 + 90 + 90 + 90) = 2.0 percent. 
3 In the “Partial Findings” reference cited above, the mean (average) rate of occurrence for malignant heart schwannoma in male 
rats was determined from Table 3 on page 15 as follows:  (2 + 1 + 5 + 2 + 3 + 6)/(90 + 90 + 90 + 90 + 90 + 90) = 3.5 percent.  
Page 3 of 12 
 Reference:   Announcement of the BioEM2016 presentation.  Re sults of NIEHS’ National Toxicology 
Program GSM/CDMA phone radiation study to be presented at BioEM2016 Meeting in Ghent, 05 June 
2016 — 10 June 2016 Ghent University, Belgium. 
(http://www.alphagalileo.org/ViewItem.aspx?ItemId=164837&CultureCode=en ) 
 Reference:   Viewgraphs presented by Michael Wyde, Ph.D., NTP study scientist, at BioEM2016 
Meeting, Ghent, Belgium, June 8, 2016.   NTP Toxicology and Carcinogenicity Studies of Cell Phone 
Radiofrequency Radiation.  
(http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/research/areas/cellphone/slides_bioem_wyde.pdf ) 
 
In September 2017, the NTP presented further findings from its study of the impact of cellular radiofrequency radiation on the DNA of both mice and rats.  The NTP found the following: 
 “These results sugges t that exposure to RFR [radiofrequency radiation] has the potential to induce 
measurable DNA damage under certain exposure conditions.”   
 
Reference:  Abstract of data presented at the annual meeting of the Environmental Mutagenesis and 
Genomics Society, Raleigh, North Carolina, September 9-13, 2017.  SL Smith-Roe and others, Evaluation of the Genotoxicity of Cell phone Radiofrequency Radiation in Male and Female Rats and Mice Following Subchronic Exposure. (https://ehtrust.org/national-toxicology-program- finds -cell- phone -radiation-induces- dna-damage/ ) 
 
Further findings from the NTP are promised for 2018.   
 
The NTP study reinforces the classification of radiofrequency radiation, including cellular 
radiation, as a possible human carcinogen, made by the International Agency for Research 
on Cancer of the World Health Organization in 2011.  
 
In its “Partial Findings”  the NTP noted that its s tudy  reinforces a decision made by the International Agency for 
Research on Cancer (IARC) of the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2011.  That decision classified radiofrequency radiation, including specifically cellular radiation, as a Group 2B carcinogen (possible carcinogen for humans).  This classification was based on the increased risk of brain cancer (glioma) and acoustic neuroma (a form of schwannoma).
 4  
 
Reference :  Announcement of the IARC classification.  International Agency for Research on Cancer , 
IARC Classifies Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields as Possibly Carcinogenic To Humans, Press 
Release N o. 208, 31 May 2011.  
(http://www.iarc.fr/en/media-centre/pr/2011/pdfs/pr208_E.pdf)  
 
Reference:   Full report on the IARC classification .  IARC Monographs:  Non-Ionizing Radiation, Part 2:  
Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields, Volume 102, 2013.  
(http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol102/mono102.pdf ) 
 The findings of the NTP study, in combination with the findings of other studies conducted since 2011, have greatly increased the likelihood that the IARC will raise its classification of radiofrequency radiation to 
                                                      
4 The Mayo Clinic describes acoustic neuroma here:  http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/acoustic-
neuroma/basics/definition/CON-20023851. 
Page 4 of 12 
 Group 2A (probable carcinogen for humans) or even to Group 1 (known carcinogen for humans) in the near 
future.  
 
In 2015, hundreds of international scientists appealed to the United Nations and the World 
Health Organization to warn the public about the health risks caused by electromagnetic 
fields (EMF), including radiofrequency radiation and, specifically, cellular radiation. 
  
As of January 29, 2017, 224 scientists from 41 nations have signed an international appeal first submitted to 
the United Nations and to the World Health Organization in May 2015.  These scientists seek improved protection of the public from harm caused by the radiation produced by many wireless sources, including 
"cellular and cordless phones and their base stations, Wi-Fi, broadcast antennas, smart meters, and baby monitors" among others.  Together, these scientists “have published more than 2000 research papers and 
studies on EMF. ”  They state the following: 
 
“Numerous recent scientific publications have shown that EMF affects living organisms at levels well 
below most international and national guidelines.  Effects include increased cancer risk, cellular stress, increase in harmful free radicals, genetic damages, structural and functional changes of the reproductive system, learning and memory deficits, neurological disorders, and negative impacts on general well-being in humans.  Damage goes well beyond the human race, as there is growing evidence of harmful effects to both plant and animal life. ” 
 
Reference:   Welcome to EMFscientist.org. 
(https://www.emfscientist.org ) 
 
Reference:   International EMF Scientist Appeal:   Scientists call for Protection from Non-ionizing 
Electromagnetic Field Exposure, May 15, 2015 (updated October 10, 2016).  
(https://www.emfscientist.org/index.php/emf-scientist-appeal ) 
 Reference:   International Scientists Petition U.N. to Protect Humans and Wildlife from Electromagnetic 
Fields and Wireless Technology. (https://www.emfscientist.org/images/docs/International_EMF_Scientist_Appeal_Description.pdf ) 
 
In 2012, the BioInitiative Working Group published the most comprehensive of the recent 
analys es of the international biomedical research, showing  a multitude of biological effects 
from exposure to radiofrequency radiation, including cellular radiation, at levels below the 
current exposure guidelines set by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
  
The health risks posed by the expanding use of radiofrequency radiation in wireless devices are not limited to 
cancer, as devastating as that consequence is.  The broad range of health effects was extensively reviewed in 
the BioInitiative Report 2012.  This 1479-page review considered about 1800 peer-reviewed biomedical 
research publications, most issued in the previous five years.  The BioInitiative Report 2012 was prepared by an international body of 29 experts, heavy in Ph.D.s and M.D.s, from 10 countries, including the USA which contributed the greatest number of experts (10).  The report concluded the following:  
“The continued rollout of wireless technologie s and devices puts global public health at risk from 
unrestricted wireless commerce unless new, and far lower exposure limits and strong precautionary warnings for their use are implemented.”  
Page 5 of 12 
 Reference:   BioInitiative Working Group, Cindy Sage, M.A. and David O. Carpenter, M.D., Editors, 
BioInitiative Report:  A Rationale for Biologically-based Public Exposure Standards for Electromagnetic 
Radiation, December 31, 2012. 
(http://www.bioinitiative.org ) 
 
The BioInitiative Report 2012 documented, in its “RF Color Charts” , examples of eight categories of biological 
effects that occurred at levels below the current exposure guidelines set by the FCC:   
x stress proteins, heat shock proteins, and disrupted immune f unction  
x reproduction and fertility effects 
x oxidative damage, reactive ion species (ROS), DNA damage, and DNA repair failure 
x disrupted calcium metabolism 
x brain tumors and blood-brain barrier 
x cancer (other than brain) and cell proliferation 
x sleep, neuron firing rate, electroencephalogram ( EEG), memory, learning, and behavior 
x cardiac, heart muscle, blood-pressure, and vascular effects.  
 These biological effects were attributed to “Radiofrequency Radiation at Low Intensity Exposure” from “cell towers, Wi-Fi, w ireless laptops, and smart meters”.  
 
Reference:   See the “RF Color Charts”, accessed from the left column of the web page below.  
(http://www.bioinitiative.org ) 
 
The U.S. Government is not protecting us. 
 
The radiation exposure guidelines of the FCC do not protect us because they are outdated 
and based on a false assumption. 
 
The current radiation exposure guidelines of the FCC were adopted in 1996, 20 years ago.  Those guidelines are based primarily on an analysis by the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP) 
which was published in 1986, 30 years ago.  That was many years before the emergence of nearly all of the digital wireless devices in use today.  
“The FCC -adopted limits for Maximum Permissible Exposure (MPE) are generally based on 
recommended exposure guidelines published by the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP) in 'Biological Effects and Exposure Criteria for Radiofrequency Electromagnetic 
Fields,' NCRP Report No. 86, Sections 17.4.1, 17.4.1.1, 17.4.2 and 17.4.3. Copyright NCRP, 1986, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20814...." 
 Reference:   Federal Communications Commission, Office of Engineering & Technology, Evaluating 
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields, OET Bulletin 65, Edition 97- 01  (August 1997).  See the last paragraph on page 64. 
(http://transition.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Engineering_Technology/Documents/bulletins/oet65/oet65.pdf ) 
 Those exposure guidelines have not been substantially changed since that analysis in 1986.  They are based on the thermal assumption  that the only harm that radiofrequency radiation can cause is due to tissue heating.  
This thermal assumption has been thoroughly disproved since, as biological effects have been found to occur 
Page 6 of 12 
 at levels of radiation below, and even far below, those that cause significant tissue heating.  Such lower levels 
are commonly referred to as nonthermal  levels.  The result is that many authorities now consider the FCC ’s 
current exposure guidelines as entirely outdated and much too high (that is, much too permissive) to protect 
the public.   
 The evidence disproving the thermal assumption is based on the broadened understanding of the biological 
effects of radiofrequency radiation made possible by thousands of peer-reviewed papers published by international biomedical scientists since 1986.   The BioInitiative Report 2012 is the most recent 
comprehensive review of that research and provides many examples of bioeffects occurring at nonthermal radiation levels, as described above.  Further, the new study by the National Toxicology Program, also described above, added to the evidence disproving the thermal assumption.  That study exposed rats to levels of radiation below those that cause significant heating, and both above and below the FCC’s current exposure 
guidelines as well.  Yet, even below the FCC’s current exposure  guidelines, the male rats still developed 
malignant brain cancer (glioma) and malignant tumors (schwannomas) of the nerves of the heart. The shortcomings of the FCC’s exposure guidelines are described in detail in the following reference: 
 
Reference:   Outdated FCC “Safety” Standards :  The Five Fallacies of the Electromagnetic Radiation 
Exposure Limits. (http://ehtrust.org/policy/fcc-safety-standards/ )  
 
The F CC is not a credible source for exposure guidelines because it lacks health expertise and 
because it is too heavily influenced by the wireless industr ies that it is supposed to regulate.  
 The FCC lacks the health expertise required for developing health-related radiation exposure guidelines.  Further, the FCC seems more interested in assuring compatibility among electronic systems than in assuring the compatibility of electronic systems with human, animal, and plant life.   Since the exposure guidelines 
relate to health, it would make more sense for them to be developed by an agency with health expertise, such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).    In addition, the FCC lacks the impartiality required to be a source of credible guidelines.  The FCC is too heavily influenced by the wireless industries that the FCC is supposed to regulate.  The FCC has acted in partnership with the wireless industries by permitting wireless radiation levels far higher than the biomedical research literature indicates are necessary to protect human health.  The success of the wireless industries in capturing the FCC, the committees in the U.S. Congress that oversee the FCC, and the Executive Branch is detailed in a recent monograph from the Center for Ethics at Harvard University.  
Reference:   Norm Alster, Captured Agency:  How the Federal Communications Commission is 
Dominated by the Industries It Presumably Regulates (2015). 
http://ethics.harvard.edu/news/new-e- books -edmond-j-safra-research- lab 
 
As an example of that capture, President Obama, in 2013, appointed Thomas Wheeler, as the Chairman of the 
FCC.  At that time, Mr. Wheeler was the head of the CTIA – The Wireless Association, which is the major 
lobbying organization for the wireless industries.  This is the infamous "revolving door". 
   
Page 7 of 12 
 The FCC’s decision to fast-track Fifth Generation (5G) cellular technology without prior study 
of its health impact demonstrates the FCC’s disinterest in the public health. 
 
On Ju ly 14, 2016, the FCC adopted new rules that would promote fast-tracking the expansion of cellular 
service to new and higher frequencies as part of the Fifth Generation (5G) of cellular technology.  This decision 
will open selected frequency bands above 24 gigahertz (GHz) and up to 71  GHz.  At the same time, the FCC has 
requested comment on opening even higher frequencies, possibly above 95 GHz.  
 
Reference:   FCC Takes Steps to Facilitate Mobile Broadband and Next Generation Wireless 
Technologies in Spectrum above 24 GHz :  New rules will enable rapid development and deployment of 
next generation 5G technologies and services.  (http://transition.fcc.gov/Daily_Releases/Daily_Business/2016/db0714/DOC-340301A1.pdf ) 
 Reference:   Fact Sheet:  Spectrum Frontiers Rules Identify, Open Up Vast Amounts of New High-Band 
Spectrum for Next Generation (5G) Wireless Broadband. 
(http://transition.fcc.gov/Daily_Releases/Daily_Business/2016/db0714/DOC-340310A1.pdf ) 
 
All five commissioners of the FCC, including Chairman Thomas Wheeler, approved this expedited move to 5G .  
No commissioner call ed for evaluating the health impact before proceeding with 5G, despite the recent 
findings of the National Toxicology Program at NIH that cellular radiation likely causes tumors.  Nor did even one commissioner express any interest in, or concern about, the impact of this new technology on public 
health.  Rather, the FCC’s emphasis was on the billions of dollars to be made by proceeding to implement 5G 
as rapidly as possible, with a minimum of regulatory interference, to assure an international competitive position.  In contrast to the FCC’s disinterest in the impact of 5G o n the public health, extensive written comments from 
individual members of the public and from many interested organizations raised a host of health concerns that 
were totally ignored in the FCC ’s presentations. 
 
Reference:   July 2016 Open Commission Meeting addressing “Spectrum Frontiers” and “Advancing 
Technology Transitions”.  
(https://www.fcc.gov/news-events/events/2016/07/july-2016- open -commission-meeting ) 
 
Reference:   The FCC Approves 5G Millimeter Wave Spectrum Frontiers.  Includes excerpts from 
selected comments provided to the FCC by individuals and organizations that expressed concern about the health impact of the FCC’s plan for 5G.  
(http://ehtrust.org/policy/fcc-approves- 5g-millimeter-wave-spectrum-frontiers/ ) 
 
Reference:   Comments on FCC Docket 14-177, Spectrum Bands above 24 GHz.  All of the comments 
submitted to the FCC about the key docket leading to the implementation of 5G. 
(https://www.fcc.gov/ecfs/search/filings?proceedings_name=14-177&sort=date_disseminated,DESC ) 
 
U.S. Government agencies, and U.S. medical organizations, have disputed the validity of the FCC’s exposure guidelines. 
 
U.S. Government agencies, as well as U.S. medical organizations, have disputed the validity of the FCC’s 
thermal exposure guidelines, maintaining that they are outdated and need to be updated to provide adequate protection of human beings, including children and seniors as well as other vulnerable groups.  
Page 8 of 12 
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
 
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) would be a better agency than the FCC to entrust with setting 
radiofrequency radiation exposure guidelines because the EPA has both health expertise and environmental responsibilities.  The EPA is often cited by the FCC, and by the wireless industries, as one of the agencies that the FCC has consulted about the FCC’s exposure guidelines , as if to increase the credibility of those guidelines.  
However, the fact that the EPA has explicitly disputed  the validity of those guidelines is consistently omitted 
from those FCC citations. 
 
Specifically, in 2002, the EPA addressed the limitations of the thermal exposure guidelines of the FCC, and the similar guidelines of private organizations, including the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection: 
   
“The FCC’s current exposure guidelines, as well as those of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) and the International Commission on Non-ionizing Radiation Protection, are thermally 
based, and do not apply to chronic, nonthermal exposure situations…. The FCC’s exposure guideline is 
considered protective of effects arising from a thermal mechanism but not from all possible 
mechanisms.  Therefore, the generalization by many that the guidelines protect human beings from harm by any or all me chanisms is not justified.” 
 “Federal health and safety agencies have not yet developed policies concerning possible risk from long-term, nonthermal exposures.  When developing exposure standards for other physical agents 
such as toxic substances, health risk uncertainties, with emphasis given to sensitive populations, are 
often considered.  Incorporating information on exposure scenarios involving repeated short duration/nonthermal exposures that may continue over very long periods of time (years), with an exposed population that includes children, the elderly, and people with various debilitating physical and medical conditions, could be beneficial in delineating appropriate protective exposure guidelines.”  
 Reference:   Letters from Frank Marcinowski, Director, Radiation Protection Division, EPA, and Norbert 
Hankin, Center for Science and Risk Assessment, Radiation Protection Division, EPA, to Janet Newton, President, the EMR Network, with copies to the FCC and the IEEE, dated July 16, 2002. (http://www.emrpolicy.org/litigation/case_law/docs/noi_epa_response.pdf ) 
 
In summary, the EPA makes the following points:  (1) the FCC ‘s thermal exposure guidelines do not protect 
against all harm, only the harm caused by too much heating; (2) the FCC ’s thermal  exposure guidelines do not 
apply to “chronic, nonthermal exposure” , which is the type of exposure generated by cell towers and many 
other wireless devices; and (3) when new FCC guidelines are developed for chronic nonthermal exposures, they must accommodate "children, the elderly, and people with various debilitating physical and medical conditions" because those groups are not accommodated now.  
 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is also often cited by the FCC, and by the wireless industr ies, as one 
of the agencies that the FCC has consulted about exposure guidelines.  But the FDA is the agency that 
“nominated ” the N TP study of the possible health effects of cellular radiation , in part because of the FDA’s 
uncertainty about the validity of the FCC’s exposure guidelines:  
  
“Currently cellular phones and other wireless communication devices are required to meet the radio 
frequency radiation (RFR) exposure guidelines of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 
Page 9 of 12 
 which were most recently revised in August 1996. The existing exposure guidelines are based on 
protection from acute injury from thermal effects of RFR exposure, and may not be protective against any non-thermal effects of chronic exposures. ” 
 
Reference:   Nominations from FDA’s Center from [for] Device[s] and Radiological Health, Radio 
Frequency Radiation Emissions of Wireless Communication Devices (CDRH), Executive Summary , as 
attached to transmittal letter from William T. Allaben, Ph.D., FDA Liaison, to Dr. Errol Zeiger, Coordinator, Chemical Nomination and Selection, National Toxicology Program, May 19, 1999,
5 
(http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/htdocs/chem_background/exsumpdf/wireless051999_508.pdf ) 
 
The FDA’s wisdom in nominating the NTP study was well justified by the NTP’s publication of the “Partial 
Findings”  described above.   Those findings demonstrated both that the FCC’s exposure  guidelines are not 
protective and that the thermal assumption on which those guidelines are based is invalid.  U.S. Department of the Interior  
 In 2014 the Department of the Interior (Fish and Wildlife Service) also addressed the limitations of the FCC ’s 
thermal exposure guidelines.  The Department of the Interior was motivated by the multiple adverse effects of electromagnetic radiation on the health, and the life, of birds, particularly in connection with cell towers.   The 
Department of the Interior stated the following:  
“However, the electromagnetic radiation standards used by the Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC) continue to be based on thermal heating, a criterion now nearly 30 years out of date and 
inapplicable today.”  
 Reference:   Letter from Willie R. Taylor, Director, Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance, 
Office of the Secretary, United States Department of the Interior, to Mr. Eli Veenendaal, National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, dated 
February 7, 2014. (https://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/us_doi_comments.pdf ) 
 
American Academy of Environmental Medicine  
 The American Academy of Environmental Medicine (AAEM), which trains physicians in preparation for Board Certification in Environmental Medicine, states the following:  
“The AAEM strongly supports the use of wired Internet c onnections, and encourages avoidance of 
radiofrequency such as from WiFi, cellular and mobile phones and towers, and ‘smart meters’.”  
 
"The peer reviewed, scientific literature demonstrates the correlation between RF [radiofrequency] 
exposure and neurological, cardiac, and pulmonary disease as well as reproductive and developmental disorders, immune dysfunction, cancer and other health conditions.  The evidence is irrefutable." 
 
“To install WiFi in schools plus public spaces risks a widespread public health  hazard that the medical 
system is not yet prepared to address.”  
 
                                                      
5 This date and the referenced URL were changed when this superior reference was posted, at my request, by the NTP/NIEHS/NIH. 
Page 10 of 12 
 Reference:   American Academy of Environmental Medicine, Wireless Radiofrequency Radiation in 
Schools, November 14, 2013. 
(http: //www.aaemonline.org/pdf/WiredSchools.pdf ) 
 American Academy of Pediatrics  
 The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), whose 60,000 doctors care for our children, supports the development of more restrictive standards for radiofrequency radiation exposure in order to better protect 
the public, particularly the children.  In a letter to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), dated August 29, 2013, the AAP states the following: 
 
“Children are not little adults and are disproportionately impacted by all environmental exposures, 
including cell phone radiation.  Current FCC standards do not account for the unique vulnerability and use patterns specific to pregnant women and children.  It is essential that any new standard for cell phones or other wireless devices be based on protecting the youngest and most vulnerable 
populations to ensure they are safeguarded throughout their lifetimes.”  
 
Reference:   American Academy of Pediatrics, letter dated August 29, 2013 addressed to The Honorable 
Mignon L. Clyburn, Acting Commissioner, Federal Communications Commission, and The Honorable Dr. 
Margaret A. Hamburg, Commissioner, U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (http://apps.fcc.gov/ecfs/document/view?id=7520941318 ) 
 
After reviewing the “Partial Findings” from the new study by the National Toxicology Program at the National 
Institutes of Health, described above, the American Academy of Pediatrics cautioned parents about the use of cell phones by their children:  
“In light of the findings, the Academy continues to reinforce its recommendation that parents should 
limit use of cell phones by children and teens. ” 
 
Reference:   American Academy of Pediatrics, AAP responds to study showing link between cell phone 
radiation, tumors in rats, May 27, 2016. (http://www.aappublications.org/news/2016/05/27/Cancer052716 ) 
 
The Telecommunications Act of 1996, in combination with the FCC’s exposure  guidelines, 
empowers the wireless industries to mandate the exposure of the public to levels of 
radiofrequency radiation already found harmful to health. 
 
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 bars state and local governments from objecting to the placement of cell 
towers on environmental/health grounds unless the FCC’s exposure  guidelines would be exceeded.  
Specifically, the Act states the following : 
 
“No State or local government or instrumentality thereof may regulate the placement, construction, 
and modification of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the Commission's [FCC’s ] 
regulations co ncerning such emissions.”  
  
Page 11 of 12 
 Reference:    Telecommunications Act of 1996, Section 704 Facilities Siting; Radio Frequency Emission 
Standards, page 117. 
(http://transition.fcc.gov/Reports/tcom1996.pdf ) 
 This Act, in combination with t he FCC’s permissive exposure guidelines, strips state and local governments of 
the right to protect their own residents from levels of radiofrequency radiation already shown to be harmful 
to health.  In effect, this Act transfers to the wireless industries the right to mandate  the exposure of the 
public, including those most vulnerable to harm, to radiofrequency radiation without the need for further 
governmental action.  State and local governments can still resist, but to do so they must confront this Act 
which is designed to frustrate their success.   Even so, some governments do heroically resist and some do 
succeed. 
 
Protecting ourselves and our families 
 
We can act on our own to protect ourselves and our families, but only partially.   
 Instead of increasing our exposure to cellular radiation, and to the radiation from other digital wireless devices, we can decrease our exposure and improve our chances for good health.  Desirable steps in this direction include the following:  
x Reduce or stop the use of cell phones.  Reserve them for emergencies or other essential uses. 
x Replace cordless telephones with corded telephones. 
x Establish wired (Ethernet) interconnections between routers and the wireless devices that the routers 
support.  Then turn off the wireless capabilities, such as Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, of them all. 
x “Opt out ” of the wireless smart meter on your residence, if your state or local electric power company 
permits.  Many states, but not all, have an opt- out provision. 
x Alert family members about the health risks posed by wireless devices, particularly for vulnerable 
groups such as pregnant mothers, unborn children, young and teenage children, adult males of reproductive age, seniors, the disabled, and anyone with a chronic health condition.  Everyone is vulnerable, but these groups are more so.  Reference:  For more information on reducing radiation at home, please see Ronald M. Powell, Ph.D., 
How to Reduce the Electromagnetic Radiation in Your Home, which is document (10) on the following  
list.  (https://www.scribd.com/document/291507610/) 
 
We can obtain better protection if we work together. 
 
We can contribute o ur efforts to the hundreds of new organizations that are emerging nationwide to raise 
awareness about the health risks posed by the radiation exposure from wireless devices in homes, in the 
workplace, in schools, and in public places, especially where children are present .  Through the Internet, look 
for organizations that address the intersection of health with cell phones, cordless phones, Wi- Fi, smart 
meters, and wireless desktop computers, laptops, and tablets.  These wireless devices are the principal sources of radiofrequency radiation in the home.  Take care for our children.  Today's adults grew up in an environment with  much less radiofrequency radiation 
than exists today.  Today’s children are not so lucky.  To have the same chance at a healthy life, they need a lot 
of help.  Unfortunately, the levels of radiofrequency radiation in our environment are rising exponentially as 
Page 12 of 12 
 governments and wireless industries continue to promote, and even mandate, the exposure of the public to 
ever higher levels of radiofrequency radiation, with no limit in sight.  That means that many of our children will become chronically ill, and many will die, while still young adults.   This is a tragedy in the making.  To stop it 
will require greatly increased awareness of the  problem and serious polit ical action at multiple levels of 
government.   That is no small task, but we all can help.  We can join with others to become a part of the 
solution for ourselves and our families, but especially for our children and our grandchildren.  
 
Beatrice Alexandra Golomb, MD, PhD  
Professor of Medicine  
UC San Diego School of Medicine  
9500 Gilman Drive, #0995  
La Jolla, CA 92093 -0995 
Phone: 858 558-4950 x201 
         August 18, 2017 
To whom it may concern, 
 I urge in the strongest terms that you vigorously oppose California SB 649.    If this bill passes, many people will suffer greatly, and needlessly, as a direct result . 
 
This sounds like hyperbole. It is not.  
My research group at UC San Diego alone has received hundreds of communications from people who 
have developed serious health problems from electromagnetic radiation, following introduction of new technologies. Others with whom I am in communication, have independently received hundreds of similar reports. Most likely these are a tip of an iceberg of tens or perhaps hundreds of thousands of affected person. As each new technology leading to further exposure to electromagnetic radiation is introduced – and particularly introduced in a fashion that prevents vulnerable individuals from avoiding it – a new group become sensitized to health effects. This is particularly true for pulsed signals in the radiowave and microwave portion of the spectrum, the type for which the proposed bill SB 640 will bypass local control.   Mechanisms by which health effects are exerted  have been shown to include oxidative stress (the type 
of injury against which antioxidants protect ,see optional section below), damage to mitochondria (the energy producing parts of cells), damage to cell membranes
1, 21, and via these mechanisms, an impaired 
“blood brain barrier”3-5 (the blood brain barrier defends the brain against introduction of foreign 
substances and toxins; additionally, disruption can lead to brain edema6), constriction of blood vessels 
and impaired blood flow to the brain7, and triggering of autoimmune reactions8, 9. Following a large 
exposure, that depresses antioxidant defenses, magnifying vulnerability to future exposures, some persons no longer tolerate many other forms and intensities of electromagnetic radiation that previously caused them no problem, and that currently cause others no problem. But this group deserves – nay needs -- the right to be able to avoid these exposures.   Affected individuals not only experience “symptoms” that “merely” cause them distress and suffering, when they are exposed – symptoms like headaches
10, 11, ringing ears10, 11 and chest pain10 from 
impaired blood flow, heart rhythm abnormalities10, 11, and inability to sleep10, 11. These symptoms arise 
from physiological injury. Moreover, many experience significant health problems that can include 
seizures11, heart failure, hearing loss12-14 and severe cognitive impairment11, 15. The mechanisms 
involved are those also involved in development and progression of neurodegenerative conditions including Alzheimer’s disease
16.   
 
 
Fully half who were employed when their problems developed lost their job because of the 
problem, among participants of a survey we conducted. They reported that their condition had cost 
them up to 2 million dollars to date. Many had lost their homes. A number became homeless, and have swelled the ranks of so-called “EMF refugees”
17-19. Among those affected, many were previously high 
functioning individuals – engineers, doctors, lawyers. The best and the brightest are among those whose lives – and ability to contribute to society – will be destroyed. High profile individuals with 
acknowledged electrohypersensitivity include, for instance,  Gro Harlem Brundtland – the former 3- time 
Prime Minister of Norway and former Director General of the World Health Organization
20; Matti 
Niemela, former Nokia Technology chief21; as well as the wife of Frank Clegg22, who former ly headed 
Microsoft Canada and is current head of Canadians for Safe Technology23. 
 
Each new roll-out of electromagnetic technology for which exposure is obligatory, swells the ranks 
of those who develop problems with electromagnetic fields (EMF) .- particularly following a 
significant exposure to pulsed radiowave-microwave radiation, and particularly when people have no 
ability to avoid it.   Many state that they didn’t give credence to the problem  (if they had heard of it at all)  until they 
themselves fell prey to it.  
 
This is not a psychologically driven condition. Multiple objective physiological changes reflecting 
mechanisms of injury have been shown in persons with this condition
24, 25.  
 The role for oxidative stress, that has been shown in innumerable studies  (below), is affirmed  by 
evidence of a link of this condition to genetic variants in antioxidant defenses , that are less avid in 
defending against oxidative stress
307
.  People cannot manipulate their genes, to produce such an outcome 
by suggestibility.  
 
An analysis by a University of Washington researcher showed that most studies funded by 
industry reported failure to show physiological effects. However, most studies without such 
industry bias affirmed  effects. This is redolent of findings shown in medicine26, regarding which the 
former editor in chief of the BMJ (the British Medical Journal), Richard Smith, noted, based on findings of a study, “This {result} suggests that, far from conflict of interest being unimportant in the objective and pure world of science where method and the quality of data is everything, it is the main factor determining the result of studies.”
27. So where articles deny injury from nonionizing radiowave-
microwave radiation, there is commonly a stake aligned with financial benefit from such denial.  
 Those who are affected are in desperate need of protection  by our elected officials . They need 
creation of safe spaces and housing, and roadways to allow travel, not removal of any prospect of one; protection of local rights to make decisions - not removal of any recourse or ability to avoid what 
injures them . They are far more strongly in need of protections than a great many protected classes  – 
their problems arose due to actions of others, against which they were given no control – and can be 
reversed, in most cases, if the assault on them is rolled back. Through no fault of their own, and in some cases against their will (e.g. before opt out was permitted with smart meters), they were subjected to an 
 
exposure that has altered their lives as they knew them, and forced them – needle ssly - to the margins of 
society. 
 
Let our focus be on safer, wired and well shielded technology – not more wireless. 
 
This legislation, if passed, and the resulting unrestricted roll-out of this technology, will 
predictably and directly injure and disable a new group , and add depth of suffering to those already 
affected. 
 In other spheres we abridge freedoms to protect the vulnerable few. We require that every schoolchild be vaccinated, supposedly to protect the vulnerable few who may not respond effectively to a vaccine. The need to protect the vulnerable group is deemed to be so great that it justifies the decision to abridge individual rights.   
In contrast, this bill seeks to abridge individual freedoms, and local rights, in the service of 
harming a vulnerable group, and creating a new one .  
(The common factor appears to be that in both cases, the direction is aligned with a powerful industry 
that influences political decisions.)  Luckily, no abridgment of individual rights and freedoms is required to protect,t here.  If any group can opt out  (such as, I understand, firefighters*)
28; then every group deserves that equal 
right. Others should not be second class citizens, subject to fewer protections. 
 It would go far to helping this cause if anyone complicit in promoting or passing the legislation  (and then after that, their families) were required to be the first subjected, for a substantial test period, to the greatest amount of exposure that anyone else (and their families) may be subjected to, when new 
policies of this type are rolled out. It will still not do them equal damage; because they may not represent the vulnerabilities that others will have; but such a policy might help them to think twice. That  is a bill I 
would strongly endorse.  
Most who are now affected – were not, until they were. T his may become you – or your child or 
grandchild . Moreover, if you have a child, or a grandchild, his sperm, or her eggs (all of which she will 
already have by the time she is a fetus in utero), will be affected by the oxidative stress damage created 
by the electromagnetic radiation, in a fashion that may affect your future generations irreparably.  It was noted above that, among survey completers, fully half of those who were employed at the time they developed electrosensitivity, lost employment due to this problem. (This may understate the scope of the tragedy, since this most-affected group may be least likely to be able to respond to an online survey.) Many who previously had no problem navigating in the world are now restricted from 
access to basic services  like hospital care, post offices and libraries because of these problems. With 
each new introduction of technology that exposes many to yet a new nondiscretionary source of 
electromagnetic radiation, particularly (but not exclusively) that which emits pulsed radiation in the radiowave-microwave part of the spectrum, a new group of people are affected; and the suffering of those who are already affected increases greatly.   
 
 
Please, defend the public and our future. Protect the rights of the individual and the locality, against a form of incursion that will lead to serious harm to some – and set a terrible precedent. Vote no on California SB 649, and urge that everyone else do the same.  Sincerely,  Beatrice Alexandra Golomb, MD, PhD Professor of Medicine UC San Diego School of Medicine 
 
 
*Comment on the fire fighter exemption:“The legislature granted an exemption from SB 649 to the 
firefighters who requested it for health reasons. Throughout California firefighters have long complained of often disabling symptoms from cell towers on their stations. Cities frequently rent out space on fire stations to add to city revenue. …Symptoms experienced by the firefighters have included neurological impairment including severe headache, confusion, inability to focus, lethargy, inability to sleep, and inability to wake up for 911 emergency calls. Firefighters have reported getting lost on 911 calls in the same community they grew up in, and one veteran medic forgot where he was in the midst of basic CPR on a cardiac victim and couldn’t recall how to start the procedure over again…Prior to the installation of the tower on his station, this medic had not made a single mistake in 20 years. A pilot study (2004) of California firefighters showed brain abnormalities, cognitive impairment, delayed reaction time, and lack of impulse control in all 6 firefighters tested (https://ecfsapi.fcc.gov/file/7022117660.pdf). This study led to the overwhelming passage of Resolution 15 by the International Association of Firefighters in Boston in August 2004. Res. 15 called for further study and was amended to impose a moratorium on the placement of cell towers on fire stations throughout the US and Canada.”
15 28  
Clearly, others who experience similar problems also deserve protections.  
Optional – More on the Science 
There is a robust literature showing that electromagnetic radiation, including in 
nonionizing frequencies, and at levels
29, 30 below those that are  cause thermal effects 
(heating) – causes physiological effects, injury, and cell death –not only in humans but many animals and plants
3, 7, 31-49. Unsurprisingly, industry has sought – against the tide of 
evidence to the contrary - to maintain that radiation must be ionizing or heating to cause injury.   
Scores or hundreds of studies show that radiation, including specifically radiowave-
microwave spectrum radiation, and including low-level exposure, can impair antioxidant 
defenses, increase “oxidative stress” (free radical injury) and damage mitochondria, the energy producing parts of cells
1, 2, 34, 50 -6930, 70-104105-13646, 137-171.  These effects occur with 
ionizing and nonionizing radiation, at thermal and subthermal levels. (Indeed, much or most of the damage by ionizing radiation, and radiation above the thermal limit, occurs by mechanisms also documented to occur without ionization, and below the thermal limit.) These 
 
mechanisms cohere with the mechanisms documented to play a role in symptoms and health 
conditions that are reported in those who are electrosensitive – extending to seizures172-176, 
heart failure177-184 and cognitive decline5, 32, 57, 108, 185 -195. 
 
These mechanisms have known involvement in induction of brain cancer, metabolic 
diseases like obesity and diabetes, autism, autoimmune disease, and neurodegenerative 
conditions , conditions that have exploded. In each case these have been linked, or 
presumptively linked, in some studies to electromagnetic radiation8, 9, 16, 34, 196 -219. 
 
Such radiation also has effects on sperm33, 100, 220 -228; and the DNA of sperm229 (consistent 
with recent news reports of marked recent declines in sperm counts and function)..  
Such radiation also has toxic effects in pregnancy
230, to the fetus and subsequent 
offspring231-235 including at low levels236, and is tied to developmental problems in later 
life, including attention deficit and hyperactivity31, 235-241. It is critical to defend pregnant 
women (and eggs of girls who may at a later time become pregnant) from exposures with such 
toxicity. 
 
Electromagnetic radiation across much or most of the spectrum (not excluding visibl e 
light) has been shown to depress levels of melatonin40, 72, 242 -252, which is best known for its 
role in sleep (and indeed, impaired sleep is the most consistent symptom in affected individuals
10, 11).   
 
Melatonin is in fact a critical antioxidant that defends the body against harm from many  
toxic exposures253-266 including electromagnetic radiation itself  61, 66, 67, 82, 101, 107, 118, 121, 138, 
144, 151, 204, 249, 267 -284- reducing the oxidative stress  that is implicated in cancer, metabolic 
diseases like obesity and diabetes, autism, autoimmune disease, bipolar disorder and 
neurodegenerative conditions, and that also plays a role in heart attack and stroke9, 285-329330-
343.   
 
Radiation, and specifically radiation in the radiowave-microwave portion of the 
spectrum can also depress levels of other critical antioxidant systems that also defend the 
body against chemical, radiation, and other sources of injury. These other antioxidant systems include the glutathione system, superoxide dismutase and catalase
81, 102, 115, 116, 233, 344 -358 - 
which are also involved in defending against health problems.   
This suggests that depression of antioxidant defenses due to electromagnetic radiation 
may magnify risk of chemically induced health effects (and depression of antioxidant systems due to some chemicals may amplify risk of harm from electromagnetic 
radiation).  Indeed just such effects have been reported
359, 360. 
 
  
 
References.  
 
1. Benderitter M, Vincent-Genod L, Pouget JP, Voisin P. The cell membrane as a biosensor of oxidative 
stress induced by radiation exposure: a multiparameter investigation. Radiat Res 2003;159:471- 83. 
2. Baureus Koch CL, Sommarin M, Persson BR, Salford LG, Eberhardt JL. Interaction between weak low 
frequency magnetic fields and cell membranes. Bioelectromagnetics 2003;24:395- 402.  
3. Tang J, Zhang Y, Yang L, et al. Exposure to 900 MHz electromagnetic fields activates the mkp -1/ERK 
pathway and causes blood -brain barrier damage and cognitive impairment in rats. Brain Res 
2015;1601:92- 101.  
4. Nittby H, Brun A, Eberhardt J, Malmgren L, Persson BR, Salford LG. Increased blood- brain barrier 
permeability in mammali an brain 7 days after exposure to the radiation from a GSM -900 mobile phone. 
Pathophysiology 2009;16:103 -12. 
5. Zhang. Exposure to 900 MHz electromagnetic fields activates the mpk -1/ERK pathway and causes blood-
brain barrier damage and cognitive impairment  in rats. Brain Res 2015;1609:92 -101.  
6. Adair JC, Baldwin N, Kornfeld M, Rosenberg GA. Radiation- induced blood -brain barrier damage in 
astrocytoma: relation to elevated gelatinase B and urokinase. J Neurooncol 1999;44:283- 9. 
7. Aalto S, Haarala C, Bruck A , Sipila H, Hamalainen H, Rinne JO. Mobile phone affects cerebral blood flow 
in humans. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2006;26:885 -90. 
8. Ivanov AA, Grigor'ev Iu G, Mal'tsev VN, et al. [Autoimmune processes after long- term low -level exposure 
to electromagnetic f ields (the results of an experiment). Part 3. The effect of the long -term non -thermal 
RF EMF exposure on complement -fixation antibodies against homologenous tissue]. Radiats Biol 
Radioecol 2010;50:17 -21. 
9. Grigor'ev Iu G, Mikhailov VF, Ivanov AA, et al. [ Autoimmune processes after long -term low -level 
exposure to electromagnetic fields (the results of an experiment). Part 4. Manifestation of oxidative 
intracellular stress- reaction after long -term non -thermal EMF exposure of rats]. Radiats Biol Radioecol 
2010;50:22 -7. 
10. Lamech F. Self -reporting of symptom development from exposure to radiofrequency fields of wireless 
smart meters in victoria, australia: a case series. Altern Ther Health Med 2014;20:28- 39. 
11. Halteman E. Wireless utility meter safety impact s survey: Final Results Summary. Sept 13 
2011;( http://emfsafetynetwork.org/wp -content/uploads/2011/09/Wireless- Utility -Meter-Safety -
Impacts -Survey -Results -Final.pdf) . 97.  
12. Alsanosi AA, Al-Momani MO, Hagr AA, Almomani FM, Shami IM, Al- Habeeb SF. The acute auditory 
effects of exposure for 60 minutes to mobile`s electromagnetic field. Saudi Med J 2013;34:142- 6. 
13. Karaer I , Simsek G, Gul M, et al. Melatonin protects inner ear against radiation damage in rats. 
Laryngoscope 2015. 
14. Celiker H, Ozgur A, Tumkaya L, et al. Effects of exposure to 2100MHz GSM- like radiofrequency 
electromagnetic field on auditory system of rats. B raz Otorhinolaryngol 2016;S1808 -8694:302221.  
15. Foster S. Health exemption for firefighters sends a message to the world. GALLERY;Posted on June 26, 
2017.  
16. Sobel E, Davanipour Z, Sulkava R, et al. Occupations with exposure to EMFs: a possible link for 
Alzheimer's disease. Amer J Epidemiol 1995;142:515 -24. 
 
17. Stein Y. Environmental refugees. UNESCO 10th World Conference on ZBioethics, Medical Ethics and 
Health Law 2015;Jerusalem, Israel:Jan 6- 8. 
18. Frompovich CJ. Environmental refugees: Electromagnetic hypersensitivity (EHS) sufferers. 
Naturalblazecom 2016;Jan 28.  
19. http://www.emfanalysis.com/emf -refugee/ . 
20. ; http://articles.latimes.com/2010/feb/15/health/la- he-electromagnetic- syndrome1 -2010feb15 . 
21. http://stopsmartmetersorguk/former -nokia -chief-mobile -phones -wrecked -my-health/ . 
22. ; http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/frank -clegg/post_5393_b_3745157.html . 
23. Clegg F. Electrohypersensitivity Is Real. The Huffington Pos t, Canada 2013;June 12, 2013. 
24. Belpomme D, Campagnac C, Irigaray P. Reliable disease biomarkers characterizing and identifying 
electrohypersensitivity and multiple chemical sensitivity as two etiopathogenic aspects of a unique 
pathological disorder. Rev  Environ Health 2015;30:251 -71. 
25. Heuser G, Heuser SA. Functional brain MRI in patients complaining of electrohypersensitivity after long term exposure to electromagnetic fields. . Rev Environ Health 2017;Jul 5. 
26. Golomb BA. Conflict of Interest in Med icine  
http://thesciencenetwork.org/programs/beyond -belief -candles- in-the-dark/beatrice -golomb:  Beyond Belief: 
Candles in the Dark, sponsored by The Science Network (tsntv.org), session entitled “This is Your Brain on Politics” Salk Institute. La Jolla, CA. Oct 5; 2008. 
27. Smith R. Conflicts of interest: how money clouds objectivity. J R Soc Med 2006;99:292 -7. 
28. International Association of Fire Fighters Division of Occupational Health SaM. Position on the health 
effects from radio frequency/ microwave (RF/MW) radiation in fire department facilities from base stations for anttennas and towers for the conduction of cell phone transmissions. 2006.  
29. Gurler HS, Bilgici B, Akar AK, Tomak L, Bedir A. Increased DNA oxidation (8- OHdG) and protein oxidation 
(AOPP) by low level electromagnetic field (2.45 GHz) in rat brain and protective effect of garlic. Int J 
Radiat Biol 2014;90:892 -6. 
30. Jajte J, Zmyslony M. [The role of melatonin in the molecular mechanism of weak, static and extremely 
low frequency (50 Hz) magnetic fields (ELF)]. Med Pr 2000;51:51 -7. 
31. Hardell L, Sage C. Biological effects from electromagnetic field exposure and public exposure standard s. 
Biomed Pharmacother 2008;62:104 -9. 
32. Deshmukh PS, Nasare N, Megha K, et al. Cognitive impairment and neurogenotoxic effects in rats 
exposed to low -intensity microwave radiation. Int J Toxicol 2015;34:284- 90. 
33. Avendano C, Mata A, Sanchez Sarmiento CA, Doncel GF. Use of laptop computers connected to internet 
through Wi -Fi decreases human sperm motility and increases sperm DNA fragmentation. Fertil Steril 
2012;97:39- 45 e2.  
34. Barnes F, Greenenbaum B. Some Effects of Weak Magnetic Fields on Biological Systems: RF fields can 
change radical concentrations and cancer cell growth rates. IEEE Power Electronics Magazine 2016;3:60 -
8. 
35. Blank M, Goodman R. Comment: a biological guide for electromagnetic safety: the stress response. 
Bioelectromagnetics 2004;25 :642- 6; discussion 7 -8. 
 
36. Burlaka A, Selyuk M, Gafurov M, Lukin S, Potaskalova V, Sidorik E. Changes in mitochondrial functioning 
with electromagnetic radiation of ultra high frequency as revealed by electron paramagnetic resonance 
methodsX. Int J Radiat  Biol 2014;90:357 -62. 
37. Derias EM, Stefanis P, Drakeley A, Gazvani R, Lewis-Jones DI. Growing concern over the safety of using 
mobile phones and male fertility      {THERMAL + NONTHERMAL}. Arch Androl 2006;52:9 -14. 
38. Diem E, Schwarz C, Adlkofer F, Jahn O, Rudiger H. Non- thermal DNA breakage by mobile -phone radiation 
(1800 MHz) in human fibroblasts and in transformed GFSH -R17 rat granulosa cells in vitro. Mutat Res 
2005;583:178- 83. 
39. Ferreira AR, Knakievicz T, Pasquali MA, et al. Ultra high frequency-e lectromagnetic field irradiation 
during pregnancy leads to an increase in erythrocytes micronuclei incidence in rat offspring. Life Sci 2006;80:43- 50. 
40. Halgamuge MN. Pineal melatonin level disruption in humans due to electromagnetic fields and ICNIRP limits. Radiat Prot Dosimetry 2013;154:405 -16. 
41. Mancinelli F, Caraglia M, Abbruzzese A, d'Ambrosio G, Massa R, Bismuto E. Non-thermal effects of 
electromagnetic fields at mobile phone frequency on the refolding of an intracellular protein: myoglobin. J Ce ll Biochem 2004;93:188 -96. 
42. Lai H. Research on the neurological effects of nonionizing radiation at the University of Washington. Bioelectromagnetics 1992;13:513 -26. 
43. Lerchl A, Kruger H, Niehaus M, Streckert JR, Bitz AK, Hansen V. Effects of mobile p hone electromagnetic 
fields at nonthermal SAR values on melatonin and body weight of Djungarian hamsters (Phodopus sungorus) - BODY WT CHG. J Pineal Res 2008;44:267 -72. 
44. Leszczynski D, Joenvaara S, Reivinen J, Kuokka R. Non- thermal activation of the hsp 27/p38MAPK stress 
pathway by mobile phone radiation in human endothelial cells: molecular mechanism for cancer - and 
blood -brain barrier -related effects. Differentiation 2002;70:120- 9. 
45. Lixia S, Yao K, Kaijun W, et al. Effects of 1.8 GHz radiofrequency f ield on DNA damage and expression of 
heat shock protein 70 in human lens epithelial cells. Mutat Res 2006;602:135 -42. 
46. Sahin D, Ozgur E, Guler G, et al. The 2100MHz radiofrequency radiation of a 3G- mobile phone and the 
DNA oxidative damage in brain. J C hem Neuroanat 2016;75:94 -8. 
47. Song JM, Milligan JR, Sutherland BM. Bistranded oxidized purine damage clusters: induced in DNA by 
long -wavelength ultraviolet (290 -400 nm) radiation? Biochemistry 2002;41:8683- 8. 
48. Yurekli AI, Ozkan M, Kalkan T, et al. GS M base station electromagnetic radiation and oxidative stress in 
rats. Electromagn Biol Med 2006;25:177 -88. 
49. Tafforeau M, Verdus MC, Norris V, et al. Plant sensitivity to low intensity 105 GHz electromagnetic 
radiation. Bioelectromagnetics 2004;25:403-7. 
50. Ciejka E, Jakubowska E, Zelechowska P, Huk-Kolega H, Kowalczyk A, Goraca A. [Effect of extremely low 
frequency magnetic field on glutathione in rat muscles]. Med Pr 2014;65:343- 9. 
51. Consales C, Merla C, Marino C, Benassi B. Electromagnetic fields, oxidative stress, and 
neurodegeneration. Int J Cell Biol 2012;2012:683897.  
52. Copeland ES. Production of free radicals in reduced glutathione and penicillamine by thermal hydrogen atoms and X -radiation. Int J Radiat Biol Relat Stud Phys Chem Med 1969;16:1 13-20. 
 
53. Cravotto G, Binello A, Di Carlo S, Orio L, Wu ZL, Ondruschka B. Oxidative degradation of chlorophenol 
derivatives promoted by microwaves or power ultrasound: a mechanism investigation. Environ Sci Pollut 
Res Int 2010;17:674 -87. 
54. Crouzier D, Perrin A, Torres G, Dabouis V, Debouzy JC. Pulsed electromagnetic field at 9.71 GHz increase 
free radical production in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). Pathol Biol (Paris) 2009;57:245- 51. 
55. de Moraes Ramos FM, Schonlau F, Novaes PD, Manzi FR, Boscolo FN, de Almeida SM. Pycnogenol 
protects against Ionizing radiation as shown in the intestinal mucosa of rats exposed to X -rays. 
Phytother Res 2006;20:676 -9. 
56. Devi PU, Ganasoundari A. Modulation of glutathione and antioxidant enzymes by Ocimum sanctum and 
its role in protection against radiation injury. Indian J Exp Biol 1999;37:262- 8. 
57. Deshmukh PS, Banerjee BD, Abegaonkar MP, et al. Effect of low level microwave radiation exposure on 
cognitive function and oxidative stress in rats. Indian J Biochem Bioph ys 2013;50:114 -9. 
58. Dimri M, Joshi J, Chakrabarti R, Sehgal N, Sureshbabu A, Kumar IP. Todralazine protects zebrafish from 
lethal effects of ionizing radiation: role of hematopoietic cell expansion. Zebrafish 2015;12:33- 47. 
59. Dimri M, Joshi J, Shrivastava N, Ghosh S, Chakraborti R, Indracanti PK. Prilocaine hydrochloride protects 
zebrafish from lethal effects of ionizing radiation: role of hematopoietic cell expansion. Tokai J Exp Clin Med 2015;40:8- 15. 
60. Durovic B, Spasic -Jokic V. Influence of occupa tional exposure to low- dose ionizing radiation on the 
plasma activity of superoxide dismutase and glutathione level. Vojnosanit Pregl 2008;65:613 -8. 
61. El-Missiry MA, Fayed TA, El-Sawy MR, El- Sayed AA. Ameliorative effect of melatonin against gamma -
irradiation -induced oxidative stress and tissue injury. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 2007;66:278 -86. 
62. Falone S, Mirabilio A, Carbone MC, et al. Chronic exposure to 50Hz magnetic fields causes a significant 
weakening of antioxidant defence systems in aged rat brain.  Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2008;40:2762- 70. 
63. Fitzgerald MP, Madsen JM, Coleman MC, et al. Transgenic biosynthesis of trypanothione protects 
Escherichia coli from radiation -induced toxicity. Radiat Res 2010;174:290 -6. 
64. Giannopoulou E, Katsoris P, Parthymou A, Kardamakis D, Papadimitriou E. Amifostine protects blood 
vessels from the effects of ionizing radiation. Anticancer Res 2002;22:2821 -6. 
65. Goraca A, Ciejka E, Piechota A. Effects of extremely low frequency magnetic field on the parameters of 
oxidat ive stress in heart. J Physiol Pharmacol 2010;61:333 -8. 
66. Goswami S, Haldar C. UVB irradiation severely induces systemic tissue injury by augmenting oxidative 
load in a tropical rodent: efficacy of melatonin as an antioxidant. J Photochem Photobiol B 201 4;141:84-
92. 
67. Goswami S, Sharma S, Haldar C. The oxidative damages caused by ultraviolet radiation type C (UVC) to a 
tropical rodent Funambulus pennanti: role of melatonin. J Photochem Photobiol B 2013;125:19- 25. 
68. Groen HJ, Meijer C, De Vries EG, Mul der NH. Red blood cell glutathione levels in lung cancer patients 
treated by radiation and continuously infused carboplatin. Anticancer Res 1996;16:1033- 7. 
69. Guler G, Seyhan N, Aricioglu A. Effects of static and 50 Hz alternating electric fields on super oxide 
dismutase activity and TBARS levels in guinea pigs. Gen Physiol Biophys 2006;25:177 -93. 
70. Guler G, Turkozer Z, Tomruk A, Seyhan N. The protective effects of N- acetyl -L-cysteine and 
epigallocatechin -3-gallate on electric field -induced hepatic oxidat ive stress. Int J Radiat Biol 
2008;84:669- 80. 
 
71. Gultekin FA, Bakkal BH, Guven B, et al. Effects of ozone oxidative preconditioning on radiation- induced 
organ damage in rats. J Radiat Res 2013;54:36 -44. 
72. Halgamuge MN. Critical time delay of the pineal melatonin rhythm in humans due to weak 
electromagnetic exposure. Indian J Biochem Biophys 2013;50:259- 65. 
73. Irmak MK, Fadillioglu E, Gulec M, Erdogan H, Yagmurca M, Akyol O. Effects of electromagnetic radiation 
from a cellular telephone on the oxidant an d antioxidant levels in rabbits. Cell Biochem Funct 
2002;20:279- 83. 
74. Jagetia G, Baliga M, Venkatesh P. Ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.), a dietary supplement, protects mice 
against radiation-induced lethality: mechanism of action. Cancer Biother Radio pharm 2004;19:422 -35. 
75. Jagetia GC, Malagi KJ, Baliga MS, Venkatesh P, Veruva RR. Triphala, an ayurvedic rasayana drug, protects 
mice against radiation -induced lethality by free -radical scavenging. J Altern Complement Med 
2004;10:971- 8. 
76. Jagetia GC, Venkatesha VA, Reddy TK. Naringin, a citrus flavonone, protects against radiation- induced 
chromosome damage in mouse bone marrow. Mutagenesis 2003;18:337 -43. 
77. Jurkiewicz BA, Bissett DL, Buettner GR. Effect of topically applied tocopherol on ultraviolet r adiation -
mediated free radical damage in skin. J Invest Dermatol 1995;104:484 -8. 
78. Kalns J, Ryan KL, Mason PA, Bruno JG, Gooden R, Kiel JL. Oxidative stress precedes circulatory failure 
induced by 35 -GHz microwave heating. Shock 2000;13:52- 9. 
79. Karslio glu I, Ertekin MV, Taysi S, et al. Radioprotective effects of melatonin on radiation- induced 
cataract. J Radiat Res (Tokyo) 2005;46:277 -82. 
80. Kim KC, Piao MJ, Cho SJ, Lee NH, Hyun JW. Phloroglucinol protects human keratinocytes from ultraviolet 
B radiation by attenuating oxidative stress. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2012;28:322 -31. 
81. Klebanoff SJ. The effect of x -radiation on the glutathione metabolism of intact erythrocytes in vitro. J 
Gen Physiol 1958;41:725 -36. 
82. Koc M, Taysi S, Emin Buyukokuroglu M, Bakan N. The effect of melatonin against oxidative damage 
during total -body irradiation in rats. Radiat Res 2003;160:251 -5. 
83. Koiram PR, Veerapur VP, Kunwar A, et al. Effect of curcumin and curcumin copper complex (1:1) on 
radiation -induced ch anges of anti- oxidant enzymes levels in the livers of Swiss albino mice. J Radiat Res 
2007;48:241- 5. 
84. Kowalski S. Changes of antioxidant activity and formation of 5 -hydroxymethylfurfural in honey during 
thermal and microwave processing. Food Chem 2013;1 41:1378 -82. 
85. Koylu H, Mollaoglu H, Ozguner F, Naziroglu M, Delibas N. Melatonin modulates 900 Mhz microwave-
induced lipid peroxidation changes in rat brain. Toxicol Ind Health 2006;22:211- 6. 
86. Koyu A, Ozguner F, Yilmaz H, Uz E, Cesur G, Ozcelik N. The protective effect of caffeic acid phenethyl 
ester (CAPE) on oxidative stress in rat liver exposed to the 900 MHz electromagnetic field. Toxicol Ind 
Health 2009;25:429 -34. 
87. Lai H, Singh NP. Melatonin and a spin -trap compound block radiofrequency electro magnetic radiation -
induced DNA strand breaks in rat brain cells. Bioelectromagnetics 1997;18:446- 54. 
88. Lai H, Singh NP. Melatonin and N -tert- butyl -alpha- phenylnitrone block 60 -Hz magnetic field -induced 
DNA single and double strand breaks in rat brain cel ls. J Pineal Res 1997;22:152 -62. 
 
89. Lai H, Singh NP. Magnetic -field -induced DNA strand breaks in brain cells of the rat. Environ Health 
Perspect 2004;112:687 -94. 
90. Lantow M, Schuderer J, Hartwig C, Simko M. Free radical release and HSP70 expression in t wo human 
immune -relevant cell lines after exposure to 1800 MHz radiofrequency radiation. Radiat Res 
2006;165:88- 94. 
91. Lee BC, Johng HM, Lim JK, et al. Effects of extremely low frequency magnetic field on the antioxidant 
defense system in mouse brain: a c hemiluminescence study. J Photochem Photobiol B 2004;73:43 -8. 
92. Lee JH, Park JW. The effect of alpha- phenyl -N-t- butylnitrone on ionizing radiation -induced apoptosis in 
U937 cells. Free Radic Res 2005;39:1325 -33. 
93. Li HT, Schuler C, Leggett RE, Levin RM. Differential effects of coenzyme Q10 and alpha- lipoic acid on two 
models of in vitro oxidative damage to the rabbit urinary bladder. Int Urol Nephrol 2011;43:91 -7. 
94. Li P, Zhao QL, Wu LH, et al. Isofraxidin, a potent reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger, protects 
human leukemia cells from radiation -induced apoptosis via ROS/mitochondria pathway in p53-
independent manner. Apoptosis 2014;19:1043 -53. 
95. Lin SY, Chang HP. Induction of superoxide dismutase and catalase activity in different rat tissues and 
protection from UVB irradiation after topical application of Ginkgo biloba extracts. Methods Find Exp 
Clin Pharmacol 1997;19:367 -71. 
96. Lourencini da Silva R, Albano F, Lopes dos Santos LR, Tavares AD, Jr., Felzenszwalb I. The effect of 
electromagnetic  field exposure on the formation of DNA lesions. Redox Rep 2000;5:299 -301.  
97. Low WK, Sun L, Tan MG, Chua AW, Wang DY. L-N- Acetylcysteine protects against radiation- induced 
apoptosis in a cochlear cell line. Acta Otolaryngol 2008;128:440- 5. 
98. Lulli M, Witort E, Papucci L, et al. Coenzyme Q10 protects retinal cells from apoptosis induced by 
radiation in vitro and in vivo. J Radiat Res 2012;53:695 -703.  
99. Maaroufi K, Save E, Poucet B, Sakly M, Abdelmelek H, Had- Aissouni L. Oxidative stress and prevention of 
the adaptive response to chronic iron overload in the brain of young adult rats exposed to a 150 kilohertz electromagnetic field. Neuroscience 2011;186:39 -47. 
100.  Mailankot M, Kunnath AP, Jayalekshmi H, Koduru B, Valsalan R. Radio frequency electromagn etic 
radiation (RF -EMR) from GSM (0.9/1.8GHz) mobile phones induces oxidative stress and reduces sperm 
motility in rats. Clinics (Sao Paulo) 2009;64:561 -5. 
101.  Manda K, Anzai K, Kumari S, Bhatia AL. Melatonin attenuates radiation- induced learning deficit and 
brain oxidative stress in mice. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars) 2007;67:63 -70. 
102.  Manda K, Bhatia AL. Pre -administration of beta-carotene protects tissue glutathione and lipid 
peroxidation status following exposure to gamma radiation. J Environ Biol 2003;2 4:369 -72. 
103.  Manda K, Reiter RJ. Melatonin maintains adult hippocampal neurogenesis and cognitive functions after 
irradiation. Prog Neurobiol 2010;90:60 -8. 
104.  Martinez -Samano J, Torres- Duran PV, Juarez -Oropeza MA, Elias- Vinas D, Verdugo -Diaz L. Effects of acute 
electromagnetic field exposure and movement restraint on antioxidant system in liver, heart, kidney and 
plasma of Wistar rats: a preliminary report. Int J Radiat Biol 2010;86:1088 -94. 
105.  Mathew ST, Bergstrom P, Hammarsten O. Repeated Nrf2 stimulation using sulforaphane protects 
fibroblasts from ionizing radiation. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2014;276:188- 94. 
 
106.  McArdle AH. Protection from radiation injury by elemental diet: does added glutamine change the 
effect? Gut 1994;35:S60 -4. 
107.  Meena R, Kumari K, Kumar J, Rajamani P, Verma HN, Kesari KK. Therapeutic approaches of melatonin in 
microwave radiations -induced oxidative stress- mediated toxicity on male fertility pattern of Wistar rats. 
Electromagn Biol Med 2014;33:81 -91. 
108.  Megha K, Deshmukh PS, Banerjee BD, Tripathi AK, Abegaonkar MP. Microwave radiation induced 
oxidative stress, cognitive impairment and inflammation in brain of Fischer rats. Indian J Exp Biol 2012;50:889- 96. 
109.  Mishra S, Reddy DS, Jamwal VS, et al. Semiquinone derivative isolated from Bacillus sp. INM- 1 protects 
cellular antioxidant enzymes from gamma -radiation -induced renal toxicity. Mol Cell Biochem 
2013;379:19- 27. 
110.  Mitchell JB, Russo A. The role of glutathione in radiation and drug induced cytotoxicity. Br J Cancer Sup pl 
1987;8:96- 104.  
111.  Molla M, Gironella M, Salas A, et al. Protective effect of superoxide dismutase in radiation- induced 
intestinal inflammation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2005;61:1159- 66. 
112.  Morabito C, Rovetta F, Bizzarri M, Mazzoleni G, Fano G, Mariggio MA. Modulation of redox status and 
calcium handling by extremely low frequency electromagnetic fields in C2C12 muscle cells: A real -time, 
single -cell approach. Free Radic Biol Med 2010;48:579 -89. 
113.  Moustafa YM, Moustafa RM, Belacy A, Abou- El-Ela SH, Ali FM. Effects of acute exposure to the 
radiofrequency fields of cellular phones on plasma lipid peroxide and antioxidase activities in human erythrocytes. J Pharm Biomed Anal 2001;26:605- 8. 
114.  Musaev AV, Ismailova LF, Shabanova AB, Magerramov AA, Iusifov E, Gadzhiev AM. [Pro- and antioxidant 
effect of electromagnetic fields of extremely high frequency (460 MHz) on brain tissues in experiment]. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult 2004:19 -23. 
115.  Mukundan H, Bahadur AK, Kumar A, et al. Glutathione level and its relation to radiation therapy in 
patients with cancer of uterine cervix. Indian J Exp Biol 1999;37:859 -64. 
116.  Navarro J, Obrador E, Pellicer JA, Aseni M, Vina J, Estrela JM. Blood glutathione as an index of radiation-
induced oxidative stre ss in mice and humans. Free Radic Biol Med 1997;22:1203 -9. 
117.  Okano H. Effects of static magnetic fields in biology: role of free radicals. Front Biosci 2008;13:6106- 25. 
118.  Oktem F, Ozguner F, Mollaoglu H, Koyu A, Uz E. Oxidative damage in the kidney i nduced by 900 -MHz -
emitted mobile phone: protection by melatonin. Arch Med Res 2005;36:350- 5. 
119.  Oral B, Guney M, Ozguner F, et al. Endometrial apoptosis induced by a 900- MHz mobile phone: 
preventive effects of vitamins E and C. Adv Ther 2006;23:957 -73. 
120. Ozguner F, Altinbas A, Ozaydin M, et al. Mobile phone- induced myocardial oxidative stress: protection 
by a novel antioxidant agent caffeic acid phenethyl ester. Toxicol Ind Health 2005;21:223 -30. 
121.  Ozguner F, Bardak Y, Comlekci S. Protective effects of melatonin and caffeic acid phenethyl ester against 
retinal oxidative stress in long-term use of mobile phone: a comparative study. Mol Cell Biochem 2006;282:83- 8. 
122.  Ozguner F, Oktem F, Armagan A, et al. Comparative analysis of the protective effects of melatonin and 
caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) on mobile phone -induced renal impairment in rat. Mol Cell Biochem 
2005;276:31- 7. 
 
123.  Ozguner F, Oktem F, Ayata A, Koyu A, Yilmaz HR. A novel antioxidant agent caffeic acid phenethyl ester 
prevents long- term mobile phone exposure -induced renal impairment in rat. Prognostic value of 
malondialdehyde, N- acetyl -beta -D-glucosaminidase and nitric oxide determination. Mol Cell Biochem 
2005;277:73- 80. 
124.  Ozyurt H, Cevik O, Ozgen Z, et al. Quercetin protects ra diation -induced DNA damage and apoptosis in 
kidney and bladder tissues of rats. Free Radic Res 2014;48:1247 -55. 
125.  Pall ML. Scientific evidence contradicts findings and assumptions of Canadian Safety Panel 6: 
microwaves act through voltage -gated calcium channel activation to induce biological impacts at non -
thermal levels, supporting a paradigm shift for microwave/lower frequency electromagnetic field action. Rev Environ Health 2015;30:99 -116.  
126.  Patruno A, Tabrez S, Pesce M, Shakil S, Kamal MA, Reale M. Effects of extremely low frequency 
electromagnetic field (ELF -EMF) on catalase, cytochrome P450 and nitric oxide synthase in erythro-
leukemic cells. Life Sci 2015;121:117 -23. 
127.  Patwardhan RS, Sharma D, Checker R, Thoh M, Sandur SK. Spatio- temporal cha nges in glutathione and 
thioredoxin redox couples during ionizing radiation-induced oxidative stress regulate tumor radio-resistance. Free Radic Res 2015;49:1218- 32. 
128.  Paul P, Bansal P, Nayak PG, Pannakal ST, Priyadarsini KI, Unnikrishnan MK. Polyphenolic fraction of Pilea 
microphylla (L.) protects Chinese hamster lung fibroblasts against gamma -radiation -induced cytotoxicity 
and genotoxicity. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol 2012;33:107 -19. 
129.  Pei H, Chen W, Hu W, et al. GANRA- 5 protects both cultured cells a nd mice from various radiation types 
by functioning as a free radical scavenger. Free Radic Res 2014;48:670 -8. 
130.  Piao MJ, Hyun YJ, Oh TH, et al. Chondracanthus tenellus (Harvey) hommersand extract protects the 
human keratinocyte cell line by blocking fr ee radicals and UVB radiation- induced cell damage. In Vitro 
Cell Dev Biol Anim 2012;48:666 -74. 
131.  Pillai S, Oresajo C, Hayward J. Ultraviolet radiation and skin aging: roles of reactive oxygen species, 
inflammation and protease activation, and strategies for prevention of inflammation -induced matrix 
degradation - a review. Int J Cosmet Sci 2005;27:17 -34. 
132.  Rabbani ZN, Salahuddin FK, Yarmolenko P, et al. Low molecular weight catalytic metalloporphyrin 
antioxidant AEOL 10150 protects lungs from fractionated radiation. Free Radic Res 2007;41:1273- 82. 
133.  Regoli F, Gorbi S, Machella N, et al. Pro- oxidant effects of extremely low frequency electromagnetic 
fields in the land snail Helix aspersa. Free Radic Biol Med 2005;39:1620- 8. 
134.  Reliene R, Pollard JM, Sobol Z, Trouiller B, Gatti RA, Schiestl RH. N- acetyl cysteine protects against 
ionizing radiation -induced DNA damage but not against cell killing in yeast and mammals. Mutat Res 
2009;665:37- 43. 
135.  Roginskaya M, Bernhard WA, Razskazovskiy Y. Protection of DNA against direct radiation damage by 
complex formation with positively charged polypeptides. Radiat Res 2006;166:9 -18. 
136.  Saenko Y, Cieslar-Pobuda A, Skonieczna M, Rzeszowska- Wolny J. Changes of reactive oxygen and 
nitrogen species and mitochondrial  functioning in human K562 and HL60 cells exposed to ionizing 
radiation. Radiat Res 2013;180:360 -6. 
137.  Sainz RM, Reiter RJ, Tan DX, et al. Critical role of glutathione in melatonin enhancement of tumor 
necrosis factor and ionizing radiation -induced apopt osis in prostate cancer cells in vitro. J Pineal Res 
2008;45:258- 70. 
 
138.  Sener G, Jahovic N, Tosun O, Atasoy BM, Yegen BC. Melatonin ameliorates ionizing radiation- induced 
oxidative organ damage in rats. Life Sci 2003;74:563 -72. 
139.  Sener G, Kabasakal L, Atasoy BM, et al. Ginkgo biloba extract protects against ionizing radiation -induced 
oxidative organ damage in rats. Pharmacol Res 2006;53:241 -52. 
140.  Seyhan N, Guler G. Review of in vivo static and ELF electric fields studies performed at Gazi Biophysics 
Department. Electromagn Biol Med 2006;25:307 -23. 
141.  Shafiee H, Mohammadi H, Rezayat SM, et al. Prevention of malathion-induced depletion of cardiac cells 
mitochondrial energy and free radical damage by a magnetic magnesium -carrying nanoparticle. Toxicol  
Mech Methods 2010;20:538 -43. 
142.  Sharma R, Tiku AB. Emodin, an anthraquinone derivative, protects against gamma radiation- induced 
toxicity by inhibiting DNA damage and oxidative stress. Int J Radiat Biol 2014;90:275- 83. 
143.  Shi S, Wang G, Wang Y, Zhang L, Zhang L. Protective effect of nitric oxide against oxidative stress under 
ultraviolet -B radiation. Nitric Oxide 2005;13:1 -9. 
144.  Shirazi A, Mihandoost E, Mohseni M, Ghazi-Khansari M, Rabie Mahdavi S. Radio- protective effects of 
melatonin against irradi ation-induced oxidative damage in rat peripheral blood. Phys Med 2013;29:65-
74. 
145.  Simko M. Cell type specific redox status is responsible for diverse electromagnetic field effects. Curr 
Med Chem 2007;14:1141 -52. 
146.  Simko M, Droste S, Kriehuber R, Weis s DG. Stimulation of phagocytosis and free radical production in 
murine macrophages by 50 Hz electromagnetic fields. Eur J Cell Biol 2001;80:562 -6. 
147.  Sirerol JA, Feddi F, Mena S, et al. Topical treatment with pterostilbene, a natural phytoalexin, effect ively 
protects hairless mice against UVB radiation -induced skin damage and carcinogenesis. Free Radic Biol 
Med 2015;85:1- 11. 
148.  Smith -Pearson PS, Kooshki M, Spitz DR, Poole LB, Zhao W, Robbins ME. Decreasing peroxiredoxin II 
expression decreases glutathione, alters cell cycle distribution, and sensitizes glioma cells to ionizing radiation and H(2)O(2). Free Radic Biol Med 2008;45:1178 -89. 
149.  Song L, Wang D, Cui X, Hu W. The protective action of taurine and L- arginine in radiation pulmonary 
fibrosis. J E nviron Pathol Toxicol Oncol 1998;17:151 -7. 
150.  Stevens RG. Electromagnetic fields and free radicals. Environ Health Perspect 2004;112:A726; author reply A.  
151.  Taysi S, Koc M, Buyukokuroglu ME, Altinkaynak K, Sahin YN. Melatonin reduces lipid peroxidatio n and 
nitric oxide during irradiation -induced oxidative injury in the rat liver. J Pineal Res 2003;34:173- 7. 
152.  Thotala D, Chetyrkin S, Hudson B, Hallahan D, Voziyan P, Yazlovitskaya E. Pyridoxamine protects 
intestinal epithelium from ionizing radiation- induced apoptosis. Free Radic Biol Med 2009;47:779 -85. 
153.  Tofani S, Barone D, Berardelli M, et al. Static and ELF magnetic fields enhance the in vivo anti- tumor 
efficacy of cis- platin against lewis lung carcinoma, but not of cyclophosphamide against B16 melanotic 
melanoma. Pharmacol Res 2003;48:83 -90. 
154.  Tulard A, Hoffschir F, de Boisferon FH, Luccioni C, Bravard A. Persistent oxidative stress after ionizing 
radiation is involved in inherited radiosensitivity. Free Radic Biol Med 2003;35:68- 77. 
 
155.  Tunez I, Drucker- Colin R, Jimena I, et al. Transcranial magnetic stimulation attenuates cell loss and 
oxidative damage in the striatum induced in the 3 -nitropropionic model of Huntington's disease. J 
Neurochem 2006;97:619 -30. 
156.  von Deutsch AW, Mitchell CD,  Williams CE, et al. Polyamines protect against radiation- induced oxidative 
stress. Gravit Space Biol Bull 2005;18:109 -10. 
157.  Vujaskovic Z, Batinic -Haberle I, Rabbani ZN, et al. A small molecular weight catalytic metalloporphyrin 
antioxidant with superox ide dismutase (SOD) mimetic properties protects lungs from radiation- induced 
injury. Free Radic Biol Med 2002;33:857 -63. 
158.  Wolf FI, Torsello A, Tedesco B, et al. 50- Hz extremely low frequency electromagnetic fields enhance cell 
proliferation and DNA dam age: possible involvement of a redox mechanism. Biochim Biophys Acta 
2005;1743:120- 9. 
159.  Xu Y, Parmar K, Du F, Price BD, Sun Y. The radioprotective agent WR1065 protects cells from radiation 
damage by regulating the activity of the Tip60 acetyltransferas e. Int J Biochem Mol Biol 2011;2:295 -302.  
160.  Yakymenko I, Tsybulin O, Sidorik E, Henshel D, Kyrylenko O, Kyrylenko S. Oxidative mechanisms of 
biological activity of low -intensity radiofrequency radiation. Electromagn Biol Med 2015;35:186- 202.  
161.  Yang Y, Li B, Liu C, et al. Hydrogen-rich saline protects immunocytes from radiation- induced apoptosis. 
Med Sci Monit 2012;18:BR144 -8. 
162.  Yokoyama H, Sato T, Ogata T, Ohya-Nishiguchi H, Kamada H. In vivo longitudinally detected ESR 
measurements at microwave re gions of 300, 700, and 900 MHz in rats treated with a nitroxide radical. J 
Magn Reson 1997;129:201- 6. 
163.  Yokus B, Cakir DU, Akdag MZ, Sert C, Mete N. Oxidative DNA damage in rats exposed to extremely low 
frequency electro magnetic fields. Free Radic Res 2005;39:317 -23. 
164.  Yoshida T, Goto S, Kawakatsu M, Urata Y, Li TS. Mitochondrial dysfunction, a probable cause of 
persistent oxidative stress after exposure to ionizing radiation. Free Radic Res 2012;46:147 -53. 
165.  Yoshikawa T, Tanigawa M, Tanigawa T, Imai A, Hongo H, Kondo M. Enhancement of nitric oxide 
generation by low frequency electromagnetic field. Pathophysiology 2000;7:131 -5. 
166.  Zhang R, Kang KA, Piao MJ, et al. Eckol protects V79- 4 lung fibroblast cells against gamma -ray radiation -
induced apop tosis via the scavenging of reactive oxygen species and inhibiting of the c -Jun NH(2) -
terminal kinase pathway. Eur J Pharmacol 2008;591:114- 23. 
167.  Zhou BR, Yin HB, Xu Y, et al. Baicalin protects human skin fibroblasts from ultraviolet A radiation- induced  
oxidative damage and apoptosis. Free Radic Res 2012;46:1458 -71. 
168.  Zhu W, Xu J, Ge Y, et al. Epigallocatechin-3- gallate (EGCG) protects skin cells from ionizing radiation via 
heme oxygenase -1 (HO -1) overexpression. J Radiat Res 2014;55:1056- 65. 
169.  Zmy slony M, Palus J, Dziubaltowska E, et al. Effects of in vitro exposure to power frequency magnetic 
fields on UV- induced DNA damage of rat lymphocytes. Bioelectromagnetics 2004;25:560 -2. 
170.  Zmyslony M, Politanski P, Rajkowska E, Szymczak W, Jajte J. Acute exposure to 930 MHz CW 
electromagnetic radiation in vitro affects reactive oxygen species level in rat lymphocytes treated by 
iron ions. Bioelectromagnetics 2004;25:324- 8. 
171.  Zmyslony M, Rajkowska E, Mamrot P, Politanski P, Jajte J. The effect of weak 5 0 Hz magnetic fields on 
the number of free oxygen radicals in rat lymphocytes in vitro. Bioelectromagnetics 2004;25:607- 12. 
 
172.  Petty RK, Harding AE, Morgan- Hughes JA. The clinical features of mitochondrial myopathy. Brain 
1986;109 ( Pt 5):915- 38. 
173.  Frantseva MV, Velazquez JL, Hwang PA, Carlen PL. Free radical production correlates with cell death in 
an in vitro model of epilepsy. Eur J Neurosci 2000;12:1431 -9. 
174.  DiMauro S, Andreu AL, De Vivo DC. Mitochondrial disorders. J Child Neurol 2002;17 Suppl 3:3S35 -45; 
discussion 3S6 -7. 
175.  Marin -Garcia J, Goldenthal MJ, Filiano JJ. Cardiomyopathy associated with neurologic disorders and 
mitochondrial phenotype. J Child Neurol 2002;17:759 -65. 
176.  Kouchaki E, Motaghedifard M, Banafshe HR. Effect of mobile phn e radiation on pentylenetetrazole-
induced seizure threshold in mice. Iran J Basic Med Sci 2016;19:800 -3. 
177.  Madmani ME, Yusuf Solaiman A, Tamr Agha K, et al. Coenzyme Q10 for heart failure. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2014;6:CD008684.  
178.  Taub PR, Ramirez-Sanchez I, Ciaraldi TP, et al. Alterations in skeletal muscle indicators of mitochondrial 
structure and biogenesis in patients with type 2 diabetes and heart failure: effects of epicatechin rich 
cocoa. Clin Transl Sci 2012;5:43 -7. 
179.  Indik JH, Goldman S, Gaballa MA. Oxidative stress contributes to vascular endothelial dysfunction in 
heart failure. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2001;281:H1767 -70. 
180.  Sharma R, Davidoff MN. Oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction in heart failure. Congest Heart Fa il 
2002;8:165- 72. 
181.  Wolfram R, Oguogho A, Palumbo B, Sinzinger H. Enhanced oxidative stress in coronary heart disease and 
chronic heart failure as indicated by an increased 8 -epi-PGF(2alpha). Eur J Heart Fail 2005;7:167 -72. 
182.  White M, Ducharme A, Ibrahim R, et al. Increased systemic inflammation and oxidative stress in patients 
with worsening congestive heart failure: improvement after short -term inotropic support. Clin Sci (Lond) 
2006.  
183.  Kang D, Hamasaki N. Alterations of mitochondrial DNA in common diseases and disease states: aging, 
neurodegeneration, heart failure, diabetes, and cancer. Curr Med Chem 2005;12:429- 41. 
184.  Kerimoglu G, Mercantepe T, Erol, H.S. 
Turgut, A, Kaya H, Colakoglu S, Odaci E. Effects of long term exposure to 900 megahertz electromagnetic field on 
heart morphology and biochemistry of male adolescent rats. Biotech Histochem 2016;Aug 11: 1 -10 
{Epub ahead of print}.  
185.  Finsterer J. Cognitive decline as a manifestation of mitochondrial disorders (mitochondrial dementia). J 
Neurol Sci 2008;272:20 -33. 
186.  Reiter RJ, Tan DX, Pappolla MA. Melatonin relieves the neural oxidative burden that contributes to 
dementias. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004;1035:179 -96. 
187.  Popescu BO, Toescu EC, Popescu LM, et al. Blood- brain barrier alterations in ageing and dementia. J 
Neurol Sci 2009;283:99 -106.  
188.  Pappolla MA, Chyan YJ, Poeggeler B, et al. Alzheimer beta protein mediated oxidative damage of 
mitochondrial DNA: prevention by melatonin. J Pineal Res 1999;27:226 -9. 
189.  Matsubara E, Bryant- Thomas T , Pacheco Quinto J, et al. Melatonin increases survival and inhibits 
oxidative and amyloid pathology in a transgenic model of Alzheimer's disease. J Neurochem 2003;85:1101- 8. 
 
190.  Feng Z, Qin C, Chang Y, Zhang JT. Early melatonin supplementation alleviates oxidative stress in a 
transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Free Radic Biol Med 2006;40:101- 9. 
191.  Nittby H, Grafstrom G, Tian DP, et al. Cognitive impairment in rats after long-term exposure to GSM- 900 
mobile phone radiation. Bioelectromagnetic s 2007.  
192.  Kim JY, Kim HJ, Kwon KN, Park MJ. Effects of radiofrequency field exposure on glutamate- induced 
oxidative stress in mouse hippocampal HT22 cells. Int J Radiat Biol 2016;Sept 20:1 -22  {Epub ahead of 
print}.  
193.  Mugunthan N, Shanmugasamy K, Anbalagan J, Rajanarayanan S, Meenachi S. Effects of long term 
exposure of 9001800 MHz radiation emitted from 2G mobile phone on mice hippocampus - A 
histomorphometric study. J Clin Diagn Res 2016;10:AF01 -6. 
194.  Killin LOJ, Starr JM, Shiue IJ, Russ TC. Envir onmental risk factors for demenita: a systematic review. BMC 
Geriatrics 2016;12 Oct:DOI: 10.1186/s12877 -016-0342 -y. 
195.  Sonmez OF, Odaci E, Bas O, Kaplan S. Purkinje cell number decreases in the adult female rat cerebellum 
following exposure to 900 MHz el ectromagnetic field. Brain Res 2010;1356:95 -101.  
196.  Herbert MR, Sage C. Autism and EMF? Plausibility of a pathophysiological link – Part I. Pathophysiology 
2013;20:191- 209.  
197.  Zueva NA, Kovalenko AN, Gerasimenko TI, Man'kovskii BN, Korpachova TI, Efimo v AS. [Analysis of 
irradiation dose, body mass index and insulin blood concentration in personnel cleaning up after the 
Chernobyl nuclear plant accident]. Lik Sprava 2001:26 -8. 
198.  Grigor'ev Iu G, Grigor'ev OA, Ivanov AA, et al. [Autoimmune processes afte r long -term low -level 
exposure to electromagnetic fields (the results of an experiment). Part 1. Mobile communications and changes in electromagnetic conditions for the population. Needs for additional substantiation of the existing hygienic standards]. Ra diats Biol Radioecol 2010;50:6 -11. 
199.  Grigor'ev Iu G, Grigor'ev OA, Merkulov AV, Shafirkin AV, Vorob'ev AA. [Autoimmune processes after 
long -term low -level exposure to electromagnetic fields (the results of an experiment). Part 2. General 
scheme and cond itions of the experiment. Development of RF exposure conditions complying with 
experimental tasks. Animal's status during the long- term exposure]. Radiats Biol Radioecol 2010;50:12 -
6. 
200.  Grigor'ev Iu G, Shafirkin AV, Nosocskii AM. [New data for proving t he presence of significant effects of 
electromagnetic exposure (to autoimmune changes in rats)]. Radiats Biol Radioecol 2011;51:721- 30. 
201.  Brainard GC, Kavet R, Kheifets LI. The relationship between electromagnetic field and light exposures to 
melatonin and breast cancer risk: a review of the relevant literature. J Pineal Res 1999;26:65- 100.  
202.  Milham S. A cluster of male breast cancer in office workers. Am J Ind Med 2004;46:86 -7. 
203.  Milham S, Ossiander E. Electric typewriter exposure and increased fe male breast cancer mortality in 
typists. Med Hypotheses 2007;68:450- 1. 
204.  Naziroglu M, Tokat S, Demirci S. Role of melatonin on electromagnetic radiation- induced oxidative stress 
and Ca2+ signaling molecular pathways in breast cancer. J Recept Signal Tra nsduct Res 2012;32:290 -7. 
205.  Zhao G, Lin X, Zhou M, Zhao J. Relationship between exposure to extremely low- frequency 
electromagnetic fields and breast cancer risk: a meta-analysis. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol 2014;35:264- 9. 
206.  Coureau G, Bouvier G, Lebailly P , et al. Mobile phone use and brain tumours in the CERENAT case -
control study. Occup Environ Med;71:514 -22. 
 
207.  Carlberg M, Hardell L. Decreased survival of glioma patients with astrocytoma grade IV (glioblastoma 
multiforme) associated with long -term use of mobile and cordless phones. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 2014;11:10790 -805.  
208.  Carlberg M, Hardell L. Evaluation of Mobile Phone and Cordless Phone Use and Glioma Risk Using the 
Bradford Hill Viewpoints from 1965 on Association or Causation. Biomed Res Int 2017;2017:9218486.  
209.  Carlberg M, Koppel T, Ahonen M, Hardell L. Case -control study on occupational exposure to extremely 
low-frequency electromagnetic fields and glioma risk. Am J Ind Med 2017;April 10 (epub ahead of print).  
210.  Carlbert M, Ha rdell L. Evaluation of mobile phone and cordless phone use and glioma risk using the 
Bradford Hill viewpoints from 1965 on. Association or causation? Biomed Res Int 2017;Epub Mar 
16:https:// www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2017/9218486/   
211.  Hardell L, Carlberg M, Hansson Mild K. Use of mobile phones and cordless phones is associated with 
increased risk for glioma and acoustic neuroma. Pathophysiology 2013;20:85- 110.  
212.  Hardell L, Carlberg M, Soderqvist F, Mild KH. Pooled analysis of case- control studies on acoustic 
neuroma diagnosed 1997 -2003 and 2007-2009 and use of mobile and cordless phones. Int J Oncol 
2013;43:1036- 44. 
213.  Hardell L, Carlberg M. Use of mobile and cordless phones and su rvival of patients with glioma. 
Neuroepidemiology 2013;40:101 -8. 
214.  Hardell L, Carlberg M. Using the Hill viewpoints from 1965 for evaluating strengths of evidence of the 
risk for brain tumors associated with use of mobile and cordless phones. Rev Enviro n Health 2013;28:97 -
106.  
215.  Hardell L, Carlberg M, Hansson Mild K. Pooled analysis of case- control studies on malignant brain 
tumours and the use of mobile and cordless phones including living and deceased subjects. Int J Oncol 2011;38:1465- 74. 
216.  Hard ell L, Carlberg M, Soderqvist F, Mild KH. Case- control study of the association between malignant 
brain tumours diagnosed between 2007 and 2009 and mobile and cordless phone use. Int J Oncol 2013;43:1833- 45. 
217.  Hardell L, Carlberg M. Mobile phone and cor dless phone use and the risk for glioma - Analysis of pooled 
case -control studies in Sweden, 1997- 2003 and 2007 -2009. Pathophysiology 2015;22:1- 13. 
218.  Lerchl A, Kruger H, Niehaus M, Streckert JR, Bitz AK, Hansen V. Effects of mobile phone electromagnetic 
fields at nonthermal SAR values on melatonin and body weight of Djungarian hamsters (Phodopus sungorus). J Pineal Res 2008;44:267 -72. 
219.  Lerchl A, Klose M, Grote K, et al. Tumor promotion by exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields 
below exposure limits for humans. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2015;459:585 -90. 
220.  Adams JA, Galloway TS, Mondal D, Esteves SC, Mathews F. Effect of mobile telephones on sperm quality: 
a systematic review and meta -analysis. Environ Int 2014;70:106 -12. 
221.  Houston BJ,  Nixon B, King BV, De Iuliis GN, Aitken RJ. The effects of radiofrequency electromagnetic 
radiation on sperm function. Reproduction 2016;152:R263 -R76.  
222.  Atasoy HI, Gunal MY, Atasoy P, Elgun S, Bugdayci G. Immunohistopathologic demonstration of 
deleterious effects on growing rat testes of radiofrequency waves emitted from conventional Wi -Fi 
devices. J Pediatr Urol;9:223 -9. 
 
223.  Abeleva EA. [Changes of the Nature of Radiation -Induced Mutation in Spermatids of Drosophila under 
the Influence of Arginine]. Ra diobiologiia 1964;4:426 -31. 
224.  Hong R, Zhang Y, Liu Y, Weng EQ. [Effects of extremely low frequency electromagnetic fields on DNA of 
testicular cells and sperm chromatin structure in mice]. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi 
2005;23:414- 7. 
225.  Ugras MY, Kurus M, Ates B, Soylemez H, Otlu A, Yilmaz I. Prunus armeniaca L (apricot) protects rat testes 
from detrimental effects of low -dose x- rays. Nutr Res 2010;30:200 -8. 
226.  Den Boer PJ, van Loon AA, Mackenbach P, van der Schans GP, Grootegoed JA. Effect of glutathione 
depletion on the cytotoxicity of xenobiotics and induction of single -strand DNA breaks by ionizing 
radiation in isolated hamster round spermatids. Journal of reproduction and fertility 1990;88:259- 69. 
227.  Liu C, Duan W, Xu S, et al. Exposure to 1800 MHz radiofrequency electromagnetic radiation induces 
oxidative DNA base damage in a mouse spermatocyte -derived cell line. Toxicol Lett 2013;218:2 -9. 
228.  Yan JG, Agresti M, Bruce T, Yan YH, Granlund A, Matloub HS. Effects of cellular phone emissions on 
sperm motility in rats. Fertil Steril 2007;88:957 -64. 
229.  Aitken RJ, Bennetts LE, Sawyer D, Wiklendt AM, King BV. Impact of radio frequency electromagnetic 
radiation on DNA integrity in the male germline. Int J Androl 2005;28:171 -9. 
230.  Guler G, Tomruk A, Ozgur E, Seyhan N. The effect of radiofrequency radiation on DNA and lipid damage 
in non -pregnant and pregnant rabbits and their newborns. Gen Physiol Biophys 2010;29:59 -66. 
231.  Borhani N, Rajaei F, Salehi Z, Javadi A. Analysis of DNA fragmentation in mouse embryos exposed to an 
extremely low- frequency electromagnetic field. Electromagn Biol Med 2011;30:246 -52. 
232.  Sedeghi T, Ahmadi A, Javadian M, et al. Preterm birth among women living within 600 meters of high 
voltage overhead power lin es: a case- control study. Rom J Intern Med 2017;Apr 18:{Epub ahead of 
print}.  
233.  Bahreymi Toossi MH, Sadeghnia HR, Mohammad Mahdizadeh Feyzabadi M, et al. Exposure to mobile 
phone (900 -1800 MHz) during pregnancy: tissue oxidative stress after childbirth. J Matern Fetal 
Neonatal Med 2017;Apr 23  {Epub ahead of print}:1 -6. 
234.  Sudan M, Kheifets L, Arah O, Olsen J, Zeltzer L. Prenatal and Postnatal Cell Phone Exposures and 
Headaches in Children. Open Pediatr Med Journal 2012;6:46 -52. 
235.  Aldad TS, Gan G, Gao XB, Taylor HS. Fetal radiofrequency radiation exposure from 800- 1900 mhz -rated 
cellular telephones affects neurodevelopment and behavior in mice. Sci Rep;2:312.  
236.  Shahin S, Singh VP, Shukla RK, et al. 2.45 GHz microwave irradiation- induced oxidative stress affects 
implantation or pregnancy in mice, Mus musculus. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 2013;169:1727- 51. 
237.  Othman H, Ammari M, Sakly M, Abdelmelek H. Effects of prenatal exposure to WiFi signal on postnatal 
development and behavior in rat: Influence of  maternal restraint. Behavioral Brain Research 
2017;36:291- 302.  
238.  Zarei S, Mortazavi SMJ, Mehdizadeh AR, et al. A Challenging Issue in the Etiology of Speech Problems: 
The Effect of Maternal Exposure to Electromagnetic Fields on Speech Problems in the O ffspring. Journal 
of Biomedical Physics & Engineering 2015;5:151 -4. 
239.  Divan HA, Kheifets L, Obel C, Olsen J. Prenatal and postnatal exposure to cell phone use and behavioral 
problems in children. Epidemiology 2008;19:523 -9. 
 
240.  Divan HA, Kheifets L, Obel C, Olsen J. Cell phone use and behavioural problems in young children. J 
Epidemiol Community Health 2012;66:524 -9. 
241.  Birks L, Guxens M, Papadopoulou E, et al. Maternal cell phone use during pregnancy and child 
behavioral problems in five birth cohort s. Environment International 2017.  
242.  Reiter RJ. Alterations of the circadian melatonin rhythm by the electromagnetic spectrum: a study in environmental toxicology. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 1992;15:226- 44. 
243.  Reiter RJ. Static and extremely low frequenc y electromagnetic field exposure: reported effects on the 
circadian production of melatonin. J Cell Biochem 1993;51:394 -403.  
244.  Reiter RJ. Electromagnetic fields and melatonin production. Biomed Pharmacother 1993;47:439 -44. 
245.  Reiter RJ. Melatonin supp ression by static and extremely low frequency electromagnetic fields: 
relationship to the reported increased incidence of cancer. Rev Environ Health 1994;10:171- 86. 
246.  Fernie KJ, Bird DM, Petitclerc D. Effects of electromagnetic fields on photophasic cir culating melatonin 
levels in American kestrels. Environ Health Perspect 1999;107:901- 4. 
247.  Griefahn B, Kunemund C, Blaszkewicz M, Lerchl A, Degen GH. Effects of electromagnetic radiation 
(bright light, extremely low-frequency magnetic fields, infrared ra diation) on the circadian rhythm of 
melatonin synthesis, rectal temperature, and heart rate. Ind Health 2002;40:320 -7. 
248.  Jarupat S, Kawabata A, Tokura H, Borkiewicz A. Effects of the 1900 MHz electromagnetic field emitted 
from cellular phone on nocturnal melatonin secretion. J Physiol Anthropol Appl Human Sci 2003;22:61 -3. 
249.  [Melatonin in the environmental medicine diagnosis in connection with electromagnetic fields: statement of the commission "Methods and Quality Assurance in Environmental Medicine"  ]. 
Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz 2005;48:1406 -8. 
250.  Rapoport SI, Breus TK. [Melatonin as a most important factor of natural electromagnetic fields impacting 
patients with hypertensive disease and coronary heart disease. P art 1]. Klin Med (Mosk) 2011;89:9 -14. 
251.  Dyche J, Anch AM, Fogler KA, Barnett DW, Thomas C. Effects of power frequency electromagnetic fields 
on melatonin and sleep in the rat. Emerg Health Threats J 2012;5.  
252.  Qin F, Zhang J, Cao H, et al. Effects of 1800 -MHz radiofrequency fields on circadian rhythm of plasma 
melatonin and testosterone in male rats. J Toxicol Environ Health A 2012;75:1120 -8. 
253.  Bagchi M, Balmoori J, Ye X, Bagchi D, Ray SD, Stohs SJ. Protective effect of melatonin on naphthalene-
indu ced oxidative stress and DNA damage in cultured macrophage J774A.1 cells. Mol Cell Biochem 
2001;221:49- 55. 
254.  Abdel Moneim AE, Ortiz F, Leonardo- Mendonca RC, et al. Protective effects of melatonin against 
oxidative damage induced by Egyptian cobra (Naja haje) crude venom in rats. Acta Trop 2015;143:58 -65. 
255.  Abd-Elghaffar S, El-Sokkary GH, Sharkawy AA. Aluminum- induced neurotoxicity and oxidative damage in 
rabbits: protective effect of melatonin. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 2005;26:609 -16. 
256.  Abdel -Wahab MH , Arafa HM, El-Mahdy MA, Abdel- Naim AB. Potential protective effect of melatonin 
against dibromoacetonitrile- induced oxidative stress in mouse stomach. Pharmacol Res 2002;46:287 -93. 
257.  Abdel -Wahhab MA, Abdel-Galil MM, El- Lithey M. Melatonin counteracts o xidative stress in rats fed an 
ochratoxin A contaminated diet. J Pineal Res 2005;38:130 -5. 
258.  Abraham P, Kolli VK, Rabi S. Melatonin attenuates methotrexate- induced oxidative stress and renal 
damage in rats. Cell Biochem Funct 2010;28:426 -33. 
 
259.  Agil A, Reiter RJ, Jimenez-Aranda A, et al. Melatonin ameliorates low-grade inflammation and oxidative 
stress in young Zucker diabetic fatty rats. J Pineal Res 2013;54:381 -8. 
260.  Aksoy N, Vural H, Sabuncu T, Aksoy S. Effects of melatonin on oxidative- antioxidat ive status of tissues in 
streptozotocin -induced diabetic rats. Cell Biochem Funct 2003;21:121- 5. 
261.  Aktas C, Kanter M, Erboga M, Mete R, Oran M. Melatonin attenuates oxidative stress, liver damage and 
hepatocyte apoptosis after bile -duct ligation in rats . Toxicol Ind Health 2014;30:835 -44. 
262.  Albendea CD, Gomez -Trullen EM, Fuentes -Broto L, et al. Melatonin reduces lipid and protein oxidative 
damage in synaptosomes due to aluminium. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2007;21:261 -8. 
263.  Al-Malki AL. Synergestic effec t of lycopene and melatonin against the genesis of oxidative stress induced 
by cyclophosphamide in rats. Toxicol Ind Health 2014;30:570 -5. 
264.  Aranda M, Albendea CD, Lostale F, et al. In vivo hepatic oxidative stress because of carbon tetrachloride 
toxici ty: protection by melatonin and pinoline. J Pineal Res 2010;49:78- 85. 
265.  Arushanian EB. [Limitation of oxidative stress as the main factor of the universal protective properties of 
melatonin]. Eksp Klin Farmakol 2012;75:44 -9. 
266.  Bagheri F, Goudarzi I, Lashkarbolouki T, Elahdadi Salmani M. Melatonin prevents oxidative damage 
induced by maternal ethanol administration and reduces homocysteine in the cerebellum of rat pups. Behav Brain Res 2015;287:215 -25. 
267.  Aynali G, Naziroglu M, Celik O, Dogan M, Yariktas M, Yasan H. Modulation of wireless (2.45 GHz)-
induced oxidative toxicity in laryngotracheal mucosa of rat by melatonin. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2013;270:1695- 700.  
268.  Bardak Y, Ozerturk Y, Ozguner F, Durmus M, Delibas N. Effect of melatonin against oxidative stress in 
ultraviolet -B exposed rat lens. Curr Eye Res 2000;20:225 -30. 
269.  Argun M, Tok L, Uguz AC, Celik O, Tok OY, Naziroglu M. Melatonin and amfenac modulate calcium entry, 
apoptosis, and oxidative stress in ARPE- 19 cell culture exposed to b lue light irradiation (405 nm). Eye 
(Lond) 2014;28:752- 60. 
270.  Ayata A, Mollaoglu H, Yilmaz HR, Akturk O, Ozguner F, Altuntas I. Oxidative stress- mediated skin damage 
in an experimental mobile phone model can be prevented by melatonin. J Dermatol 2004;31: 878-83. 
271.  Bhatia AL, Manda K. Study on pre-treatment of melatonin against radiation- induced oxidative stress in 
mice. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol 2004;18:13 -20. 
272.  Guney Y, Hicsonmez A, Uluoglu C, et al. Melatonin prevents inflammation and oxidative stress caused by 
abdominopelvic and total body irradiation of rat small intestine. Braz J Med Biol Res 2007;40:1305- 14. 
273.  Jang SS, Kim HG, Lee JS, et al. Melatonin reduces X- ray radiation -induced lung injury in mice by 
modulating oxidative stress and cytok ine expression. Int J Radiat Biol 2013;89:97 -105.  
274.  Kim BC, Shon BS, Ryoo YW, Kim SP, Lee KS. Melatonin reduces X- ray irradiation -induced oxidative 
damages in cultured human skin fibroblasts. J Dermatol Sci 2001;26:194 -200.  
275.  Koc M, Taysi S, Buyukokuroglu ME, Bakan N. Melatonin protects rat liver against irradiation- induced 
oxidative injury. J Radiat Res 2003;44:211 -5. 
276.  Manda K, Ueno M, Anzai K. Melatonin mitigates oxidative damage and apoptosis in mouse cerebellum induced by high -LET 56Fe particl e irradiation. J Pineal Res 2008;44:189- 96. 
 
277.  Naziroglu M, Celik O, Ozgul C, et al. Melatonin modulates wireless (2.45 GHz)- induced oxidative injury 
through TRPM2 and voltage gated Ca(2+) channels in brain and dorsal root ganglion in rat. Physiol Behav 
2012;105:683- 92. 
278.  Oksay T, Naziroglu M, Dogan S, Guzel A, Gumral N, Kosar PA. Protective effects of melatonin against 
oxidative injury in rat testis induced by wireless (2.45 GHz) devices. Andrologia 2012.  
279.  Sener G, Atasoy BM, Ersoy Y, Arbak S, Sengoz M, Yegen BC. Melatonin protects against ionizing 
radiation -induced oxidative damage in corpus cavernosum and urinary bladder in rats. J Pineal Res 
2004;37:241- 6. 
280.  Sharma S, Haldar C. Melatonin prevents X- ray irradiation induced oxidative damagein p eripheral blood 
and spleen of the seasonally breeding rodent, Funambulus pennanti during reproductively active phase. Int J Radiat Biol 2006;82:411- 9. 
281.  Sokolovic D, Djindjic B, Nikolic J, et al. Melatonin reduces oxidative stress induced by chronic exp osure of 
microwave radiation from mobile phones in rat brain. J Radiat Res 2008;49:579 -86. 
282.  Taysi S, Memisogullari R, Koc M, et al. Melatonin reduces oxidative stress in the rat lens due to 
radiation -induced oxidative injury. Int J Radiat Biol 2008;84: 803- 8. 
283.  Tok L, Naziroglu M, Dogan S, Kahya MC, Tok O. Effects of melatonin on Wi- Fi-induced oxidative stress in 
lens of rats. Indian J Ophthalmol 2014;62:12 -5. 
284.  Yilmaz S, Yilmaz E. Effects of melatonin and vitamin E on oxidative- antioxidative statu s in rats exposed to 
irradiation. Toxicology 2006;222:1 -7. 
285.  Albers DS, Beal MF. Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in aging and neurodegenerative 
disease. J Neural Transm Suppl 2000;59:133 -54. 
286.  Ansari MA, Joshi G, Huang Q, et al. In viv o administration of D609 leads to protection of subsequently 
isolated gerbil brain mitochondria subjected to in vitro oxidative stress induced by amyloid beta- peptide 
and other oxidative stressors: relevance to Alzheimer's disease and other oxidative stres s-related 
neurodegenerative disorders. Free Radic Biol Med 2006;41:1694 -703.  
287.  Arumugam S, Thandavarayan RA, Arozal W, et al. Quercetin offers cardioprotection against progression 
of experimental autoimmune myocarditis by suppression of oxidative and en doplasmic reticulum stress 
via endothelin -1/MAPK signalling. Free Radic Res 2012;46:154- 63. 
288.  Barnham KJ, Masters CL, Bush AI. Neurodegenerative diseases and oxidative stress. Nat Rev Drug Discov 
2004;3:205- 14. 
289.  Bashir S, Harris G, Denman MA, Blake DR, Winyard PG. Oxidative DNA damage and cellular sensitivity to 
oxidative stress in human autoimmune diseases. Ann Rheum Dis 1993;52:659 -66. 
290.  Belch JJ, Mackay IR, Hill A, Jennings P, McCollum P. Oxidative stress is present in atherosclerotic 
periphera l arterial disease and further increased by diabetes mellitus. Int Angiol 1995;14:385- 8. 
291.  Benz CC, Yau C. Ageing, oxidative stress and cancer: paradigms in parallax. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:875- 9. 
292.  Bernstein AI, Miller GW. Oxidative signaling in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Toxicol Sci 
2010;114:159- 61. 
293.  Bonnefont -Rousselot D. Obesity and oxidative stress: potential roles of melatonin as antioxidant and 
metabolic regulator. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets 2014;14:159 -68. 
294.  Butterfield DA, Castegna A, Drake J, Scapagnini G, Calabrese V. Vitamin E and neurodegenerative 
disorders associated with oxidative stress. Nutr Neurosci 2002;5:229 -39. 
 
295.  Butterfield DA, Howard BJ, LaFontaine MA. Brain oxidative stress in animal models of accelerated aging 
and the age -related neurodegenerative disorders, Alzheimer's disease and Huntington's disease. Curr 
Med Chem 2001;8:815 -28. 
296.  Ceriello A, Motz E. Is oxidative stress the pathogenic mechanism underlying insulin resistance, diabetes, 
and cardiovascular disease? The common soil hypothesis revisited. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 
2004;24:816- 23. 
297.  Chang YC, Chuang LM. The role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes: from 
molecular mechanism to clinical implication.  Am J Transl Res 2010;2:316 -31. 
298.  Chauhan A, Chauhan V. Oxidative stress in autism. Pathophysiology 2006;13:171- 81. 
299.  Chauhan A, Chauhan V, Brown WT, Cohen I. Oxidative stress in autism: increased lipid peroxidation and 
reduced serum levels of cerulo plasmin and transferrin --the antioxidant proteins. Life Sci 2004;75:2539-
49. 
300.  Dhaun N, Kluth DC. Oxidative stress promotes hypertension and albuminuria during the autoimmune 
disease systemic lupus erythematosus. Hypertension 2012;59:e47; author reply e 8. 
301.  Dobrian AD, Davies MJ, Schriver SD, Lauterio TJ, Prewitt RL. Oxidative stress in a rat model of obesity-
induced hypertension. Hypertension 2001;37:554 -60. 
302.  Donkena KV, Young CY, Tindall DJ. Oxidative stress and DNA methylation in prostate cance r. Obstet 
Gynecol Int 2010;2010:302051.  
303.  Facheris M, Beretta S, Ferrarese C. Peripheral markers of oxidative stress and excitotoxicity in 
neurodegenerative disorders: tools for diagnosis and therapy? J Alzheimers Dis 2004;6:177 -84. 
304.  Gilgun -Sherki Y , Melamed E, Offen D. Oxidative stress induced- neurodegenerative diseases: the need for 
antioxidants that penetrate the blood brain barrier. Neuropharmacology 2001;40:959 -75. 
305.  Henriksen EJ, Diamond- Stanic MK, Marchionne EM. Oxidative stress and the eti ology of insulin 
resistance and type 2 diabetes. Free Radic Biol Med 2011;51:993- 9. 
306.  Hoeldtke RD, Bryner KD, VanDyke K. Oxidative stress and autonomic nerve function in early type 1 
diabetes. Clin Auton Res 2011;21:19 -28. 
307.  Islam MT. Oxidative stres s and mitochondrial dysfunction -linked neurodegenerative disorders. Neurol 
Res 2017;39:73 -82. 
308.  James SJ, Cutler P, Melnyk S, et al. Metabolic biomarkers of increased oxidative stress and impaired 
methylation capacity in children with autism. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:1611 -7. 
309.  Kaffe ET, Rigopoulou EI, Koukoulis GK, Dalekos GN, Moulas AN. Oxidative stress and antioxidant status in 
patients with autoimmune liver diseases. Redox Rep 2015;20:33 -41. 
310.  Karbownik M, Reiter RJ. Melatonin protects against oxidative stress caused by delta -aminolevulinic acid: 
implications for cancer reduction. Cancer Invest 2002;20:276- 86. 
311.  Karbownik M, Reiter RJ, Burkhardt S, Gitto E, Tan DX, Lewinski A. Melatonin attenuates estradiol-
induced oxidative damage to DNA: relevance for cancer prevention. Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 2001;226:707- 12. 
312.  Kern JK, Jones AM. Evidence of toxicity, oxidative stress, and neuronal insult in autism. J Toxicol Environ 
Health B Crit Rev 2006;9:485 -99. 
313.  Khandrika L, Kumar B, Koul S, Maroni P, Koul HK. Oxidative stress in prostate cancer. Cancer Lett 2009. 
 
314.  Kovacic P, Jacintho JD. Systemic lupus erythematosus and other autoimmune diseases from endogenous 
and exogenous agents: unifying theme of oxidative stress. Mini Rev Med Chem 2003;3:56 8-75. 
315.  Kumagai S, Jikimoto T, Saegusa J. [Pathological roles of oxidative stress in autoimmune diseases]. Rinsho 
Byori 2003;51:126 -32. 
316.  Kumagai S, Nobuhara Y, Saegusa J. [Oxidative stress and autoimmune diseases]. Nihon Naika Gakkai 
Zasshi 2003;92: 1096 -103.  
317.  Kupczyk D, Rybka J, Kedziora-Kornatowska K, Kedziora J. [Melatonin and oxidative stress in elderly 
patients with type 2 diabetes]. Pol Merkur Lekarski 2010;28:407 -9. 
318.  Lin MT, Beal MF. Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases. Nature 
2006;443:787- 95. 
319.  Mariani E, Polidori MC, Cherubini A, Mecocci P. Oxidative stress in brain aging, neurodegenerative and 
vascular diseases: an overview. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 2005;827:65 -75. 
320.  McGinnis WR. Oxidative stress in autism. Altern Ther Health Med 2005;11:19. 
321.  Moreno -Otero R. May oxidative stress contribute to autoimmune hepatitis pathogenesis, and can 
antioxidants be of value as adjuvant therapy for refractory patients? Dig Dis Sci 2013;58:1440 -1. 
322.  Nguyen AM, Rao NA. Oxidative photoreceptor cell damage in autoimmune uveitis. J Ophthalmic Inflamm 
Infect 2011;1:7 -13. 
323.  Pandi -Perumal SR, BaHammam AS, Brown GM, et al. Melatonin antioxidative defense: therapeutical 
implications fo r aging and neurodegenerative processes. Neurotox Res 2013;23:267 -300.  
324.  Pereira EC, Ferderbar S, Bertolami MC, et al. Biomarkers of oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction in glucose intolerance and diabetes mellitus. Clin Biochem 2008;41:1454- 60. 
325.  Pillarisetti S, Saxena U. Role of oxidative stress and inflammation in the origin of Type 2 diabetes --a 
paradigm shift. Expert Opin Ther Targets 2004;8:401 -8. 
326.  Rao AV, Balachandran B. Role of oxidative stress and antioxidants in neurodegenerative  diseases. Nutr 
Neurosci 2002;5:291 -309.  
327.  Rodrigues P, de Marco G, Furriol J, et al. Oxidative stress in susceptibility to breast cancer: study in 
Spanish population. BMC Cancer 2014;14:861.  
328.  Rose S, Melnyk S, Pavliv O, et al. Evidence of oxidative damage and inflammation associated with low 
glutathione redox status in the autism brain. Transl Psychiatry 2012;2:e134.  
329.  Rossignol DA, Frye RE. A review of research trends in physiological abnormalities in autism spectrum disorders: immune dysregulat ion, inflammation, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and 
environmental toxicant exposures. Mol Psychiatry 2012;17:389- 401.  
330.  Shah AA, Sinha AA. Oxidative stress and autoimmune skin disease. Eur J Dermatol 2013;23:5- 13. 
331.  Sheridan J, Wang LM, Tosetto M, et al. Nuclear oxidative damage correlates with poor survival in 
colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer 2009;100:381 -8. 
332.  Sondergaard ES, Gogenur I. [Oxidative stress may cause metastatic disease in patients with colorectal 
cancer.]. Ugeskr Laeger 2014;176.  
333.  Srinivasan V. Melatonin oxidative stress and neurodegenerative diseases. Indian J Exp Biol 2002;40:668 -
79. 
 
334.  Sun GY, Wood WG. Recent developments in understanding oxidative mechanisms and contributions of 
glial cell activation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and lipids and signaling pathways to neurodegenerative 
diseases. Preface. Mol Neurobiol 2010;41:53 -4. 
335.  Udensi UK, Tchounwou PB. Dual effect of oxidative stress on leukemia cancer induction and treatment. J 
Exp Clin Cancer Res 2014;33:1 06. 
336.  Valko M, Rhodes CJ, Moncol J, Izakovic M, Mazur M. Free radicals, metals and antioxidants in oxidative 
stress- induced cancer. Chem Biol Interact 2006;160:1- 40. 
337.  Vessby J, Basu S, Mohsen R, Berne C, Vessby B. Oxidative stress and antioxidant st atus in type 1 diabetes 
mellitus. J Intern Med 2002;251:69 -76. 
338.  Wells PG, McCallum GP, Chen CS, et al. Oxidative stress in developmental origins of disease: 
teratogenesis, neurodevelopmental deficits, and cancer. Toxicol Sci 2009;108:4- 18. 
339.  Yamamot o T. Autoimmune mechanisms of scleroderma and a role of oxidative stress. Self Nonself 
2011;2:4- 10. 
340.  Yao Y, Walsh WJ, McGinnis WR, Pratico D. Altered vascular phenotype in autism: correlation with 
oxidative stress. Arch Neurol 2006;63:1161 -4. 
341.  Yu JH, Kim H. Oxidative stress and cytokines in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer. J Cancer Prev 
2014;19:97- 102.  
342.  Zephy D, Ahmad J. Type 2 diabetes mellitus: Role of melatonin and oxidative stress. Diabetes Metab 
Syndr 2015;9:127 -31. 
343.  Zoroglu SS, A rmutcu F, Ozen S, et al. Increased oxidative stress and altered activities of erythrocyte free 
radical scavenging enzymes in autism. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2004;254:143- 7. 
344.  Torbenko VP, Bogdanova IA, Gerasimov AM. [Effect of a combined radiation lesion on the enzyme 
activity of the glutathione redox system of the rat liver]. Biull Eksp Biol Med 1983;95:48- 50. 
345.  Erden M, Bor NM. Changes of reduced glutathion, glutathion reductase, and glutathione peroxidase 
after radiation in guinea pigs. B iochem Med 1984;31:217 -27. 
346.  Evans JW, Taylor YC, Brown JM. The role of glutathione and DNA strand break repair in determining the 
shoulder of the radiation survival curve. Br J Cancer Suppl 1984;6:49 -53. 
347.  Boyer TD, Vessey DA, Kempner E. Radiation inactivation of microsomal glutathione S -transferase. J Biol 
Chem 1986;261:16963 -8. 
348.  Connor MJ, Wheeler LA. Depletion of cutaneous glutathione by ultraviolet radiation. Photochem 
Photobiol 1987;46:239 -45. 
349.  Singh LR, Uniyal BP, Mukherjee SK, Sarkar SR, Sharma SK. Effect of whole body gamma- radiation on 
glutathione reductase of rat tissues. Strahlenther Onkol 1987;163:337- 9. 
350.  Leus NF, Kolomiichuk SG, Lishchenko VB. [Activity of glutathione-S-transferase in the blood plasma, liver 
and crystalline le ns tissues as affected by low doses of ionizing radiation and polychromatic light]. Ukr 
Biokhim Zh 1997;69:54 -9. 
351.  Grande S, Luciani AM, Rosi A, et al. Radiation effects on soluble metabolites in cultured HeLa cells 
examined by 1H MRS: changes in concentration of glutathione and of lipid catabolites induced by 
gamma rays and proton beams. Int J Cancer 2001;96 Suppl:27 -42. 
352.  Rathgen GH. [Radiation- induced changes of the glutathione content of some rat organs modified by 
cysteine]. Strahlentherapie 1970 ;139:243 -50. 
 
353.  Rathgen GH, Lieser H. [Significance of glutathione in radiation effect studies and chemical radiation 
protection]. Strahlentherapie 1972;143:670 -6. 
354.  Sarkar SR, Singh LR, Uniyal BP, Chaudhuri BN. Effect of whole body gamma radiation on reduced 
glutathione contents of rat tissues. Strahlentherapie 1983;159:32 -3. 
355.  Rosi A, Grande S, Luciani AM, et al. Role of glutathione in apoptosis induced by radiation as determined 
by 1H MR spectra of cultured tumor cells. Radiat Res 2007;167:268 -82. 
356.  Tanita J, Tsuchida S, Hozawa J, Sato K. Expression of glutathione S-transferase- pi in human squamous 
cell carcinomas of the pharynx and larynx. Loss after radiation therapy. Cancer 1993;72:569 -76. 
357.  Vartanyan LS, Gurevich SM, Kozachenko AI, Nagler LG, Lozovskaya EL, Burlakova EB. Changes in 
superoxide production rate and in superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase activities in 
subcellular organelles in mouse liver under exposure to low doses of low -intensity radiation. 
Biochemistry (Mosc) 2000;65:442 -6. 
358.  Woodward GE. The effect of ultra -violet, radium and X- ray radiation on glutathione in pure solution. 
Biochem J 1933;27:1411 -4. 
359.  Byun YH, Ha M, Kwon HJ, et al. Mobile phone use, blood lead levels, and attention deficit hyperactivity 
symptoms in children: a longitudinal study. PLoS One 2013;8:e59742.  
360.  Sanie -Jahromi F, Saadat Z, Saadat M. Effects of extremely low frequency electromagnetic fields and 
cisplatin on mRNA levels of some DNA repair genes. Life Sciences 2016;3205:30588 -4. 
 
 


Theodora Scarato 
Environmental Health Trust 
LD 697
Documentation submitted includes letters by doctors and scientists on the issue of the 
health effects of cell towers and cell phones and wireless to children. 
Thank you very much, 
Theodora Scarato 
Executive Director or Environmental Health Trust 
entrust.org 
