Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=venv20
Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable
Development
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/venv20
Environmental Procedures at the FCC: A Case
Study in Corporate Capture
Erica Rosenberg
To cite this article:  Erica Rosenberg (2022) Environmental Procedures at the FCC: A Case Study
in Corporate Capture, Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development, 64:5-6,
17-27, DOI: 10.1080/00139157.2022.2131190
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00139157.2022.2131190
Published online: 12 Dec 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
View related articles 
View Crossmark data

With infrastructure including millions of miles of fiber optic cable and lines, 
thousands of towers, earth stations and satellites, and hundreds of thousands 
of small cells,1 the telecommunications industry leaves a significant environ-
mental footprint: wetlands filled, viewsheds marred, cultural resources dam-
aged, and habitat destroyed. As the agency overseeing telecommunications, the Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) regulates radio, TV , satellite, cable, and both wireline 
and wireless communications—and associated entities like Verizon, AT&T, and broadcast and 
radio corporations. It also plays a critical role in providing universal broadband and telecom-
munications access, and authorizing facilities associated with wireline and wireless build-outs. 
Y et the FCC fails to fulfill its mandatory duties under the National Environmental Policy Act 
(NEPA) in multiple and significant ways.2by Erica RosenbergQ1
Towers have a breadth of 
individual and cumulative 
environmental impacts, 
many of which, such as visual 
impacts and tree removal, are 
not properly considered in the 
FCC’s environmental  
review processes.
iStock/BackyardProduction
 ENVIRONMENT 17 WWW . TAND FONLINE . COM/VENV OCTOBER/DECEMBER 2022
18 ENVIRONMENT
WWW.TANDFONLINE.COM/VENV VOLUME 64 NUMBERS 5-6Like all federal agencies, the FCC 
must follow environmental laws, includ -
ing NEPA, which requires it to assess 
potential environmental effects of its 
actions before it authorizes, funds, or 
licenses projects and communications 
infrastructure. These effects include 
visual and ecological impacts, and radio 
frequency emission exceedances, caused 
by the proliferation of wireless technol-
ogy and the networks constructed to 
deploy it. The agency is supposed to fol-
low legal requirements to assess such 
environmental impacts and, in doing so, 
to consider the concerns of communities 
and citizens.
It does neither. For most deployments 
it authorizes, the FCC rarely completes 
any environmental review or makes 
NEPA documents available to the public; 
instead, with little FCC oversight or 
enforcement, industry is delegated the 
task of determining how much environ-
mental review is appropriate for its 
deployments and in most cases, is not 
required to submit documentation of 
those determinations.
In licensing and authorizing facilities 
associated with telecommunications, 
broadband, and broadcasting technolo -
gies, the FCC intentionally and rou-
tinely fails to meet its environmental 
obligations and epitomizes “regulatory 
capture. ” It treats environmental laws as 
obstacles to be circumvented or ignored, 
first by promulgating rules that fall 
short of what NEPA requires and then 
by failing to properly implement and 
enforce its own substandard rules. The 
chronic failure has cumulative, incalcu -
lable, and largely unknown environ-
mental impacts.
Combined with statutory authority 
that curtails local government authority 
to regulate or block telecom deployment 
in their jurisdiction, public and local 
voices in what is deployed and where are 
further diminished.3 Equally important, 
the agency suppresses and dismisses the 
voices of communities and citizens con-
cerned about these encroachments. As 
wireless infrastructure proliferates under 
the auspices of an agency that flouts 
 federal law, unabated and unaccounted 
for environmental impacts will only 
multiply.NEPA: An Instrument of 
Democracy and Accountability
NEPA, a Nixon–era law and one emu -
lated around the world, outlines a process 
for decision-making about “major f  ed-
eral actions, like dam-building, off- 
shore drilling, and highway expansions.4 
Council on Environmental Qual ity 
implementing rules define major federal 
actions broadly to include “new and con -
tinuing activities, including programs 
entirely or partly financed, assisted, con -
ducted or app  roved by federal agencies. ” 
They also include “approval of specific 
projects, such as construction or man-
agement activities located in a defined 
geographic area. Projects include actions 
approved by permit or other regulatory 
decision as well as federal and federally 
assisted activities. ”5
NEPA requires the government to dis -
close broadly defined environmental 
impacts of proposed actions—and to 
consider alternatives—including not 
undertaking the action.6 It allows the 
public, from local governments to tribes 
to citizens, to participate in the decision.7
The greater the potential environmental 
impacts of a project, action, or policy, the 
more analysis and the more opportunities 
for public input and challenge. NEPA 
requires a full-scale environmental review 
(environmental impact statement) for 
major actions with potentially great envi-
ronmental effects like a highway, a shorter 
assessment (environmental assessment) for 
actions that may have less significant 
impacts, and exemptions from analysis for 
categories of routine actions (categorical 
exclusions), like removing brush, that the 
agency has determined individually or 
cumulatively have no significant environ-
mental effect. Although a categorical exclu -
sion may exist for an action, in any given 
case, extraordinary circumstances such as 
the presence of environmentally sensitive 
resources can remove an action from a cat -
egorical exclusion and require either a doc -
umented categorical exclusion or more 
NEPA review. For example, even if the 
United States Forest Service categorically 
excludes brush removal on small tracts, 
brush removal in critical habitat for endan -
gered species would require the agency to 
consider and document that its action would still not require an environmental 
assessment or conduct an environmental 
assessment.
As a procedural statute, NEPA can-
not stop environmentally harmful proj -
ects, but it can substantially improve 
the imprint of an action by, for example, 
rerouting a power line to protect a 
stream, or bringing information about 
wildlife to light so that licensees can 
take mitigation measures. In short, 
NEPA, by mandating transparency and 
accountability, is an instrument of 
democracy and good governance. 
NEPA also requires that agencies pro-
mulgate policies or rules implementing 
NEPA in accordance with Council on 
Environmental Quality rules, and in 
consultation with the Council on 
Environmental Quality.
FCC’s Failure to Consider 
Major Federal Actions
Council on Environmental Quality 
rules place many of the FCC’s licensing 
and funding activities squarely within the 
definition of a major federal action. Y et 
the FCC has construed major federal 
actions narrowly or has simply not con-
sidered whether its actions are major 
federal actions. Consequently, the agency 
has not considered actions like providing 
financial assistance to carriers for deploy -
ment of small cells and build-outs with 
associated cable-laying and transmission 
lines as major federal actions.8
In 2018, the agency went as far as to 
deem all licensing of small cell facilities, 
which it authorizes as part of a license to 
carriers, as not requiring environmental 
review because they were not major fed-
eral actions.9 Termed by industry as 
unobtrusive—“smaller than a pizza box 
or backpack”10—small cell facilities can 
be significantly larger and are placed on 
buildings or associated poles. In its order, 
the agency both eliminated federal envi-
ronmental review of small cells and sig-
nificantly limited local authority over 
small wireless infrastructure deployment.
In her dissent to the order, FCC 
Commissioner Jessica Rosenworcel 
noted that 5G would require millions of 
miles of fiber and up to 800,000 small 
 ENVIRONMENT 19 OCTOBER/DECEMBER 2022
WWW.TANDFONLINE.COM/VENV 
The FCC is authorizing the deployment of hundreds of thousands of small cells with little public input or environmental review.
cells by 2026. The order thus “runs 
roughshod over the rights of our Tribal 
communities and gives short shrift to our 
most basic environmental and historic 
preservation values. ”11 She noted that the 
Mobility Fund, which supports carriers 
in bringing wireless services to under -
served areas, would support updated 
wireless service, to the tune of $4.53 bil-
lion. Y et in effect, she states, the FCC 
reads “projects carried out with financial 
assistance” (a requirement of the National 
Historic Preservation Act) as well as 
NEPA out of the law.12 It also “removes 
many larger wireless facilities from envi -
ronmental oversight. ”13
The FCC’s efforts to eliminate small 
cell review were struck down by the D.C. 
Circuit in United Keetoowah v. FCC,14 a 
case brought by the Natural Resources 
Defense Council and several tribes. The 
court found: “The scale of the deploy-
ment the FCC seeks to facilitate, partic-
ularly given its exemption of small cells that require new construction, makes it 
impossible on this record to credit the 
claim that small cell deregulation will 
‘leave little to no environmental foot-
print. Order  ¶ 41. ’ ”15
Appropriately, the FCC considers 
licensing spectrum and registering towers 
to be major federal actions that trigger 
NEPA. However, while the FCC recog-
nizes that its grant of geographic licenses 
to carriers triggers NEPA, it issues the 
licenses without any knowledge of how the 
licensee will deploy infrastructure in its 
build-out. In most cases, it cannot know 
because the carrier may not have finalized 
its build-out plans for construction of tow -
ers, transmission lines, and small cell facil -
ities over time. In fact, the agency does not 
prepare and never has prepared an envi-
ronmental impact statement on a build 
out—or on any other major federal action; 
it has only prepared one programmatic 
environmental assessment, which was in 
response to a lawsuit.16 Instead, it requires NEPA review only on a facility-by-facility 
basis, which also circumvents a NEPA 
requirement to consider cumulative 
effects.17 Segmenting a project into smaller 
components is illegal, and the FCC’s 
approach is another way it flouts the law.
FCC’s Inadequate NEPA Rules
FCC NEPA rules undermine NEPA 
at every turn—they are inadequate both 
as written and as implemented. The 
rules’ unusual structure and an agency 
that interprets its rules in favor of the 
carriers mean that most projects proceed 
without adequate environmental review 
and consideration.
Unlike other agencies’ rules, FCC 
rules do not identify categories of actions 
that do not require further NEPA review; 
rather, the rules categorically exclude all  
actions the agency takes except for those 
that meet a limited set of itemized 
extraordinary circumstances.18 In other 
iStock/deyangeorgiev
20 ENVIRONMENT
WWW.TANDFONLINE.COM/VENV VOLUME 64 NUMBERS 5-6instances, the FCC deems its actions cat -
egorically excluded. For example, con-
struction of submarine cables, which 
indisputably has potentially significant 
environmental impacts to reefs, ocean 
floors, and marine life, is explicitly 
excluded from review following a 1974 
FCC order asserting that the environ-
mental consequences are negligible.19
In dismissing the petition brought by 
an environmental nongovernmental 
organization to require more environ-
mental review for a number of FCC 
actions, including those involving sub-
marine cables, the 1974 order acknowl-
edged environmental damage from 
cables in Maine and the U.S. Virgin 
Islands but illogically found no need for 
environmental review because the proj-
ects violated state law and permits.20
By not considering FCC actions major 
federal actions and by relying on a broad 
and unsupported categorical exclusion, 
countless activities with potentially sig-
nificant environmental impacts or actual impacts proceed with little or no NEPA 
review or public involvement. Unlike 
many agencies, FCC lacks a NEPA coor -
dinating office and most bureaus within 
the agency have no NEPA expertise or 
even awareness of the obligations the 
statute confers on the agency.
Streamlined Effects: The 
NEPA Checklist
The agency also skirts its NEPA obli-
gations through its procedures and prac -
tice around “effects” consideration. It 
defines effects narrowly and by doing so, 
removes actions from public notice and 
comment. Most egregiously, it delegates 
the initial consideration of effects to 
applicants and licensees—telecom com-
panies, for the most part—to determine 
whether an environmental assessment is 
warranted or whether the project is cat-
egorically excluded, and because the 
review is not submitted to the FCC, it typically performs no  subsequent review 
of the applicants’ documentation.
Council on Environmental Quality 
regulations define effects broadly.21 FCC 
rules and practices limit the consider -
ation of environmental effects. They also 
limit the extraordinary circumstances 
that would warrant a higher level of envi -
ronmental review (i.e., an environmental 
assessment) and public input for the 
action—through both its narrow list of 
circumstances and its narrow interpreta -
tion of those circumstances. Those lim-
ited circumstances are actions involving 
facilities that: may affect Indian cultural 
sites or historic resources (i.e., National 
Historical Preservation Act triggers); 
may affect threatened or endangered spe -
cies or their habitat; may involve signifi-
cant changes in surface features (such as 
to wetlands or forests); are in a floodplain 
if equipment is not raised; exceed radio 
frequency emissions limitations; involve 
high-intensity lights in residential areas; 
are in wilderness areas or wildlife 
Wireless infrastructure is changing  the character of historic buildings and neighborhoods.
iStock/gkordus
 ENVIRONMENT 21 OCTOBER/DECEMBER 2022
WWW.TANDFONLINE.COM/VENV refuges; or are more than 450 feet tall in 
light of potential impacts to migratory 
birds.22 These circumstances are referred 
to as “the NEPA checklist. ”
Even so, FCC has in effect gutted 
most elements of the checklist. For 
example, for the floodplain trigger,23 as 
long as equipment is raised for a facility 
in a floodplain, no environmental 
assessment is required, although no evi -
dence of raising the equipment or a local 
permit need be submitted. Although 
required by Council on Environmental 
Quality (which unfortunately approved 
the 2018 rule change), no cumulative 
effects of building in floodplains are 
considered. Similarly, applicants often 
fail to submit an environmental assess-
ment when they have received a federal 
or state wetlands permit, so again, no 
evidence is submitted to the agency or 
for public review.To eliminate another environmental 
assessment trigger, rule changes in 2020 
allow projects that affect historic proper -
ties and cultural resources to proceed 
without an environmental assessment.24 
“Change in surface features” has in prac -
tice required consideration of wetlands 
impacts (i.e., whether a federal permit is 
needed), rather than considering large-
scale vegetation or soil removal, or grad -
ing of sensitive habitats. Thus, even if 
several acres are bulldozed or dozens of 
trees cleared, an environmental assess-
ment is not required.
A comprehensive NEPA review for tele -
communications infrastructure is both pos -
sible and required by other agencies. For 
instance, the National Telecommunications 
and Information Administration, which 
also supports expanding broadband access 
and adoption, considers a breadth of effects 
under NEPA that the FCC’s checklist fails to consider.25 National Telecommunications 
and Information Administration, for exam -
ple, requires consideration of cumulative 
effects.26
Delegation of Review: Fox 
Guarding the Hen House
Even more extraordinary than its fail-
ure to consider a breadth of environ-
mental effects for most of its actions is 
the FCC’s delegation of consideration of 
environmental effects to the applicant or 
licensee. In other words, self-interested 
parties conduct the NEPA checklist 
environmental review. Under Council 
on Environmental Quality rules, the fed -
eral agency is ultimately responsible for 
the environmental document, regardless 
of who prepares it.27 Y et under FCC pro -
cedures, the agency never even sees the 
Tall, guyed towers kill millions of birds a year.
iStock/Susan Vineyard
22 ENVIRONMENT
WWW.TANDFONLINE.COM/VENV VOLUME 64 NUMBERS 5-6initial environmental review document -
ing that a categorical exclusion, rather 
than a more extensive environmental 
review, is supported—except in the 
unlikely event it requests checklist doc-
umentation following a complaint.
No other agency allows the applicant 
to make the initial determination of 
whether a project is categorically exc  luded 
or requires an environmental assessment. 
Other agencies require submission of doc -
umentation of that determination or make 
the determination themselves. Instead, 
the FCC relies on applicants to be truthful 
in their dealings with the agency—yet 
rarely if ever has it enforced against appli-
cants who make false statements on its 
forms. Applicants submit documentation 
only when checklist review triggers an 
environmental assessment. This approach 
to ensuring compliance with the NEPA 
rule is at best unrealistic and at worst, a 
license to deceive.
No FCC oversight ensures that appli-
cants have done their due diligence to consider the checklist circumstances 
properly or to even review the circum-
stances at all. With no agency or public 
awareness, applicants can simply categor -
ically exclude their projects that involve 
even larger scale impacts. In East Fishkill, 
New Y ork, for example, more than 50 trees 
were cleared from a forested area along a 
highway known for its scenic views, with 
no environmental assessment.28
Incorrect, confusing, or inadequate 
filing instructions further ensure that 
the applicant’s work will be incomplete.29 
The instructions themselves fail to even 
reflect the inadequate rules because they 
omit Endangered Species Act consider -
ations, do not capture National Historical 
Preservation Association requirements, 
omit wetlands concerns, and include 
outdated floodplain requirements. 
Similarly, NEPA checklist guidance used 
until June 2022 did not even reflect the 
rules on environmental assessment trig -
gers or environmental assessment con-
tent requirements.30The checklist allows for only a very nar -
row set of environmental assessment trig-
gers. In theory, FCC rules do allow for 
consideration of non-checklist effects or 
effects missed in the checklist review—
those raised by members of the public and 
those raised by the FCC on its own 
motion.31 In reality, this almost never hap -
pens. The FCC inevitably fails to consider 
some potentially significant effects outside 
of the checklist because it relies entirely on 
the public to identify them, it never initi-
ates its own review, it relies on self-inter -
ested applicants to review projects, and it 
views its mission as facilitating deployment.
Lack of Notice and Public 
Availability of Documents
Limiting notice and public availability 
of documents is another way the agency 
fails to meet fundamental NEPA respon -
sibilities. Council on Environmental 
Quality rules require both notice of 
The effects of cell towers in sensitive areas like coastal zones and wetlands are not fully considered in the FCC’s NEPA process.
iStock/shaunl
 ENVIRONMENT 23 OCTOBER/DECEMBER 2022
WWW.TANDFONLINE.COM/VENV actions and opportunities for public 
comment.32 In fact, the rules require that 
agencies make “diligent efforts” to involve 
the public in implementing their NEPA 
procedures.33 Instead, the FCC makes 
diligent efforts to exclude the public from 
raising concerns under NEPA.
Applicants and licensees submit no 
documentation of their determination that 
their project is categorically excluded, and 
the agency does not track categorically 
excluded actions. With the applicant con-
ducting the initial environmental review 
of whether the project is categorically 
excluded by assessing the list of extraordi-
nary circumstances (i.e., the NEPA check -
list), as well as preparing the environmental 
assessment, the burden falls on the public 
to learn of the proposed action and to raise 
a potential effect.
But categorically excluded actions, 
including authorization of certain towers, 
do not receive public notice; only applica-
tions for towers that require registration 
(generally taller than 199 feet) are put on 
notice, and those may or may not have asso -
ciated environmental assessments. In addi -
tion to towers under 200 feet not posing an 
air hazard, these stealth projects that the 
agency has no record of include small wire -
less facilities associated with 4G and 5G.
That the public has no access to this 
information is particularly problematic 
in the radio frequency context, where 
applicants are required to meet radio fre -
quency emissions standards or submit an 
environmental assessment. If the appli-
cants do analyze the checklist and radio 
frequency studies at all, they routinely 
categorically exclude small wireless facil -
ities, despite growing public concern 
about radio frequency associated with 
such technologies. Without access to the 
documented checklist, the public has lit -
tle to no basis on which to refute or com -
ment on checklist conclusions on radio 
frequency. And given the streamlined 
process, citizens often find out about 
facilities only after they are built.
Lack of Transparency: Notice 
of EAs
While the public is completely disen-
franchised on categorically excluded proj -
ects, the situation with environmental assessments is only slightly better. If an 
environmental assessment is required 
because the applicant identified a trigger 
on the NEPA checklist, the tower or other 
structure must be registered. But it is not 
the environmental assessment itself that is 
publicly noticed—it is the application for 
the tower registration or license modifica -
tion. The notice serves only to notice for 
30 days that an application for an antenna 
structure at a particular location has been 
submitted. Members of the public inter -
ested in that structure must track down the 
application in the antenna structure regis-
tration system and then see whether an 
environmental assessment is attached. To 
find environmental assessments that are 
“accessible, ” a member of the public would 
have to know that a proposed antenna 
structure registration included an environ -
mental assessment.
Hence, notice is hardly “public. ” Rather 
than being posted on a readily accessible, 
centralized site for NEPA documents,34 the 
registration application and the associated 
environmental assessment, if done, are 
buried in a hard-to-access, byzantine web -
site.35 Without project coordinates or an 
exact site location, it is difficult to get into 
the website and, once in, to find the envi-
ronmental documents. To complicate mat -
ters further, environmental assessments 
associated with licensee towers that do not 
need to be registered (i.e., short towers) are 
noticed separately and are buried on a dif -
ferent webpage.36
Comments Deemed 
“Complaints”
Even if the public manages to over -
come FCC hurdles and ascertain infor -
mation about a proposed facility, it faces 
nearly insurmountable obstacles to get its 
concerns heard or addressed. Under 
NEPA, the burden of looking at effects is 
a federal obligation—it is not up to the 
public to establish a case but merely to 
apprise the agency of potential effects to 
consider; the comment period allows the 
agency to meet its NEPA obligations by 
giving the public an opportunity to raise 
effects or alternatives not considered in 
the environmental review process.
But rather than a standard, fair, or 
open comment process in which the agency considers and responds to con-
cerns raised by the public, the FCC 
administers an adversarial complaints 
process that requires the public to meet a 
high burden of proof about a potential 
effect that may have been overlooked in 
the checklist or inaccurately docu-
mented.37 With a process that unfairly 
shifts the burden of raising and establish-
ing environmental concerns from the 
agency to the public, the outcome is 
always the same. The FCC virtually never 
finds that complaints are valid. To dismiss 
them or resolve them in the applicant’s 
favor so that the project can proceed, it 
routinely finds that the complainant has 
not provided specific enough detail or an 
adequate scientific showing for the agency 
to consider an effect.
Compounding the unlikelihood that 
the public will learn about a project and 
be able to weigh in is a timing issue. 
When the public finds out about a project 
that the applicant has deemed categori-
cally excluded (either by doing the 
checklist or failing to do the checklist), 
there is no timeline to comment on or 
complain about the project. With no 
notice and no timeline for these projects 
that proceed with no agency awareness, 
the public often learns about the projects 
when construction begins or, just as 
likely, when the facility is already built.
Because the applicant need not consider 
aesthetics, for example, a tower visible from 
a state park could be deemed categorically 
excluded and built before the public sees the 
impact to its viewshed. Rarely, if ever, will 
the FCC decide an environmental assess-
ment is required under the circumstances 
because the applicant ostensibly did what 
was required of it by assessing the minimal 
checklist. Furthermore, in terms of failure 
to comply with NEPA, environmental 
assessments are submitted so late in the 
process that a meaningful alternatives anal -
ysis—a hallmark and requirement of 
NEPA38—is foreclosed.
Aesthetic Effects: The 
Greatest Impacts Never 
Addressed
Perhaps most egregious is the agen-
cy’s approach to aesthetic impacts. 
24 ENVIRONMENT
WWW.TANDFONLINE.COM/VENV VOLUME 64 NUMBERS 5-6Applicants should be required to con-
sider aesthetic impacts because, by the 
FCC’s own account in its rulemaking, 
visual impacts are by far the most sig-
nificant impact a tower could have.39 As 
originally promulgated, FCC’s NEPA 
regulations triggered an environmental 
assessment when facilities were to be 
located “in areas which are recognized 
either nationally or locally for their spe -
cial scenic or recreational value. ”40 
Again and again in the rulemaking, 
visual effects were cited as the greatest 
impact, as well as an impact to be miti-
gated.41 Y et in 1985, the FCC decided 
the standard was “unduly vague, ” and 
that it was unnecessary for applicants to 
submit environmental assessments in 
cases that “may raise aesthetic con-
cerns. ”42 It also noted that “aesthetic 
concerns may more appropriately be 
resolved by local, state, regional or local 
land use authorities”43—although NEPA 
is an independent federal obligation.
On the rare occasion when the FCC 
does consider aesthetics, its examina-
tion is generally limited to consider -
ation of impacts to nationally designated 
scenic trails and historic sites (the  
latter falling under visual effects  
under National Historical Preservation 
Association) or to national parks, 
although nothing in NEPA or Council 
on Environmental Quality rules limits consideration of aesthetic impacts 
solely to those designated areas. This 
practice precludes consideration of 
impacts to, for example, scenic tourist 
areas or state or locally designated bat-
tlefields and parks. In 2014, AT&T built 
a tower in Fort Ransom, North Dakota, 
visible from a nearby National Scenic 
Tail and Scenic Byway, without having 
to consider aesthetic impacts.44 Towers 
have been built in the viewsheds of, for 
example, a National Scenic Trail in 
Vergennes, Michigan, an iconic bridge 
in New Y ork, a civil rights site in  
Selma, Alabama, and on Dewey Beach, 
Delaware’s sand dunes, with little 
notice, consideration of visual impacts, 
or mitigation.
Little Compliance, Little 
Enforcement
With no oversight to ensure appli-
cants have done the due diligence 
required to consider the checklist and no 
on-the-ground inspections, lack of com -
pliance with the rules is rampant
Large-scale projects with multiple 
facilities built without NEPA review 
include hundreds of towers in Alaska 
built by GCI.45 Between 2001 and 2015, 
T-Mobile built hundreds of towers in 22 
states without environmental review.46 In New Mexico and Texas, Plateau 
Telecommunications built 58 towers 
with no National Historical Preservation 
Association review.47 Telalaska built 28 
towers near and in sensitive areas in 
Alaska with no repercussions.48 With 
no Enforcement Bureau action, the 
Wireless Telecommunications Bureau 
and Alliant Energy Corporation agreed 
in 2017 to a compliance plan after 
Alliant built 109 towers and 93 poles 
without NEPA review.49 Railroad non-
compliance was so widespread that  
the FCC entered into a settlement  
agreement with several railroads that  
created a $10 million cultural resources 
fund for 11,000 constructed poles  
that had not gone thru National  
Historical Preservation Association or 
NEPA review.50
Smaller-scale projects and individual 
towers also have significant impacts. For 
example, in 2019, licensees in Broward 
County, Florida, cleared 36 trees and 
built a driveway through a forested wet -
land before completing environmental 
review.51 In Sabana Grande, Puerto 
Rico, a tower builder in 2014 bulldozed 
critical habitat for an endangered bird.52 
Dozens of sacred sites have been simi-
larly destroyed or damaged across the 
country, as have multiple cultural 
resources and historic and archaeolog-
ical sites.
Although towers can alter iconic views, the FCC does not require licensees to consider aesthetic impacts.
iStock/4kodiak
 ENVIRONMENT 25 OCTOBER/DECEMBER 2022
WWW.TANDFONLINE.COM/VENV Many of these failures to comply with 
environmental requirements come to light 
as National Historical Preservation 
Association violations, rather than as 
NEPA violations, because the National 
Historical Preservation Association pro-
cess, as part of the checklist, requires photo 
documentation and official state and tribal 
review. Complaints from these officials or 
the public and self-reporting—often unin -
tentionally with photos submitted through 
increasingly rare environmental assess-
ment submissions53—are generally the sole 
bases for enforcement.
Conveniently for an agency intent on 
deployment, the FCC’s Enforcement 
Bureau operates under a one-year statute 
of limitations—one year from the time 
the facility was built, not from when the 
agency learned of the violation. As a 
result, by the time the agency learns of 
the violation and decides to take action, 
it is often prohibited from levying fines 
against the violator.
When the agency does take action, it 
amounts, with few exceptions, to a slap on 
the wrist. In 2016, six licensees got admon -
ishment letters with no penalties and little 
agency publicity.54 For the past decade or so, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau 
admonishment letters, which number 
from zero to six per year, warn of the 
potential for increased fines and punish-
ments if violators break rules again. But 
the agency could not fine the violators and 
does not track the letters. Fines are rare 
and if levied, de minimis.55 At most, pen-
alties are ordered once or twice a year, and 
tower removal, which would be a reason-
able and authorized remedy for violations, 
is never ordered.
In one instance, clearing guy-wire 
areas for a 1,500-foot broadcast tower in 
Punta Gorda, Florida, destroyed 2.6 acres 
of treed habitat for bonneted bats, an 
endangered species. As mitigation, the 
applicant paid $28,000 to the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service, while the FCC 
issued a Finding of No Significant Impact 
and imposed a fine of $28,000.56
Ex Post Facto NEPA: A 
Concept Not Contemplated by 
NEPA
To address instances of noncompli-
ance, the agency has instead devised an ex post facto NEPA process under which 
the violators conduct and submit an 
after-the-fact checklist or environmen-
tal assessment. If an environmental 
assessment is required, these half-built 
or fully built projects then receive the 
FONSIs that are a prerequisite for con-
struction. Enforce ment action may, but 
more likely will not, follow; with no 
repercussions, a 485-foot broadcast 
tower in Chattanooga, Ten nessee, was 
built and operating for months before it 
got its FONSI in 2021.57
Since 2002, the agency has used a 
clearance process for noncompliant 
towers (i.e., those that have not  
gone through the National Historical 
Preservation Association and NEPA 
process).58 For example, on March 28, 
2012, the FCC “cleared” with a post-  
construction review the 58 towers that 
Plateau Telecommunications had built 
in violation of historic preservation pro -
cedures.59 Other elements of the requi-
site NEPA review were ignored—and 
are often ignored in this process.
Regardless, NEPA may not be done 
retroactively, and the substantive value 
of this follow-up exercise is unclear. It 
Cell towers are altering and marring  views across the country.
iStock/ronstik
26 ENVIRONMENT
WWW.TANDFONLINE.COM/VENV VOLUME 64 NUMBERS 5-6is hard to assess damage to a site never 
evaluated for the presence of, for exam -
ple, wetlands, sensitive species, historic 
resources, or sacred sites before clear -
ing took place. More importantly, given 
the dearth of documentation, little 
means for the agency to discover vio-
lations, and lack of oversight at the 
agency, it is unclear just how many 
projects that impact environmentally 
sensitive areas are constructed with 
improper or no checklist review, or get 
started without waiting for a FONSI to 
construct; most of the sites where  
environmental damage occurred and 
the degree of destruction will never 
be known.
By routinely clearing towers with 
post-construction checklist reviews, the 
agency creates incentives for tower com -
panies and carriers to build their towers 
and, if necessary, do paperwork later. 
Given the lax enforcement and the stat-
ute of limitations issue, this approach from industry’s perspective would be 
quite reasonable.
Conclusion: Prospects for a 
More Accountable FCC
Clearly, the FCC’s NEPA process falls 
short of what NEPA and Council on 
Environmental Quality require.
• It ignores major federal actions 
requiring environmental review, 
such as its distribution to industry 
of billions of dollars that support 
build-outs for updated wireless 
service, or improperly deems cer -
tain major federal actions non- 
major federal actions to circumvent 
NEPA.
• Its NEPA rules create an unsup-
ported and overbroad categorical 
exclusion so that, for example, sat-
ellite licensing and submarine cable 
licensing are excluded from review.• With little oversight or tracking, it 
delegates environmental review of 
NEPA determinations to industry 
proponents of the project.
• It fails to vigorously enforce its 
rules so that industry noncompli-
ance is rampant.
• It fails to provide adequate notice 
and opportunities for public 
comment.
• It fails to make environmental doc -
uments, including radio frequency 
emissions studies, publicly avail-
able or readily accessible.
• It routinely ignores or dismisses 
public comments and concerns and 
places an unfair burden of proof on 
the public when it raises concerns.
These practices serve to facilitate 
deployment for carriers while ignoring 
environmental rules and the public. 
Besides environmental costs, the FCC’s 
approach bespeaks a lack of transparency 
Beyond visual impacts, cell towers built in pristine areas can affect sensitive species and ecosystems.
iStock/Daniel White
 ENVIRONMENT 27 OCTOBER/DECEMBER 2022
WWW.TANDFONLINE.COM/VENV and accountability that undermines good 
governance and erodes democracy. It also 
bespeaks an agency completely captured 
by the entities it is tasked with regulating.
Recent Biden-era NEPA implementing 
rules60 require agencies to revisit their 
NEPA rules and procedures by September 
2023.61 They also require that the agencies 
have the capacity to comply with NEPA,62 
something the FCC has to date lacked. 
Perhaps when Council on Environmental 
Quality reviews the FCC’s procedures this 
time, it will scrutinize the rules more care-
fully and hold the agency to a higher stan -
dard for NEPA compliance.
An environmental and public lands policy attorney with 
over 30 years of experience, including in agencies, 
Congress, and academia, Erica Rosenberg worked at 
the FCC's Wireless Telecommunications Bureau from 
2014 to 2021; for the last six of those years, she was 
Assistant Chief of the Competition and Infrastructure 
Policy Division.
NOTES
1. Unlike macro-cells or wireless cell towers, a small cell 
installation consists of radio equipment and antennas 
placed every few meters on structures such as street-
lights, buildings, or poles.
2. 42 U.S.C. §4371 et seq .
3. Telecommunications Act of 1996, Section 704, 
47 U.S.C §332.
4. 40 CFR §1508.18 (1978). Note: Unless otherwise not-
ed, NEPA regulations cited are 1978 regulations (i.e., 
pre-Trump and Biden-era regulations). The FCC was 
bound by those regulations until April 2022.
5. 40 CFR §1508.18.
6. 40 CFR §1508.8.
7. 40 CFR §§1501.2(d)2), 1.1501.7((a)(1), 1.1503.1, 
1.1506.6.
8. Other agencies, such as the National 
Telecommunications and Information Admini-
stration (NTIA), do conduct NEPA reviews for such 
actions.
9. See Accelerating Wireless Broadband Deployment 
by Removing Barriers to Infrastructure 
Investment (“Infrastructure Order”) (WT Docket 
17-79, FCC 18-30), (March 22, 2018), 33 FCC 
Rcd 3102 (4).
10. See CTIA blog, March 27, 2018 ctia.org/news/what 
-is-a-small-cell.
11. 11. See Infrastructure Order, Rosenworcel dissenting 
statement.
12. 12. Id.
13. 13. Id.14. United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians v. FCC, 
933 F. 3d 728 (D.C. Cir. 2019).
15. Id. at 741. Between the time the Order was issued and 
the decision handed down, however, countless small 
wireless facilities were deployed without NEPA re-
view.
16. Final Programmatic Environmental Assessment for 
the Antenna Structure Registration Program, FCC 
(March 13, 2013).
17. See 40 CFR §1508.7(cumulative impacts); §1508.8 
(b) (effects include cumulative).
18. 47 CFR §1.1306(a).
19. 49 FCC 2d 1313,para. 14(a) (1974); see also  47 CFR 
§1.1306 Note 1. (EA requirements do not “encom-
pass the construction of new submarine cables sys-
tems. ”)
20. See In the matter of Public Employees for 
Environmental Responsibility, FCC 01-319, n. 46.
21. See §1501.3; §1508.1(g)(1) (definition of effects in-
cludes aesthetic, health, economic, etc.).
22. 47 CFR § 1.1307.
23. 47 CFR §1.1307(a)(6).
24. Declaratory Ruling and Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking, In the Matter of Implementation of State 
and Local Governments’ Obligation to Approve Certain 
Wireless Facility Modification Requests Under Section 
6409(a) of the Spectrum Act of 2012, FCC 20-75A (June 
9, 2020), paras. 45–50. 35 FCC Rcd 5977.
25. https://broadbandusa.ntia.doc.gov/sites/default/
files/2021-07/July%202021%20BB%20Infra%20
Webinar_FINAL%20Presentation_0.pdf , p. 23.
26. See id. at p. 50.
27. See generally 40 CFR §1506.5.
28. See letter from Michael S. Fishman, Conservation 
Biologist, Edgewood Environmental Consulting, to 
Noelle Rayman USFS biologist, Cortland, NY , 
November 13, 2020, Re: Determination of Adverse 
Effects from Wireless EDGE—WEC-NY-23 Cell 
Tower 90 Carpenter Road, East Fishkill, Dutchess 
County, NY 41°34’40.37”N, 73°47’03.84”W .
29. See, e.g., Form 601 instructions (https://www.fcc.gov/
sites/default/files/fcc-form-601.pdf ): Item 22.
30. 30. See “FCC Environmental Assessment” (checklist) 
(undated).
31. See 47 CFR §§1.1307(c) and (d).
32. 40 CFR §1506.6 (provide public notice of availability 
of environmental documents).
33. 40 CFR §1506.6(a).
34. 40 CFR §1506.6 (“provide public notice of NEPA re-
lated-hearings … and the availability of environmen-
tal documents”).
35. wireless2.fcc.gov/UlsApp/AsrSearch/asrApplication-
Search.jsp (application) and wireless2.fcc.gov/Uls 
App/AsrSearch/asrApplicationSearch.jsp (environ-
mental notice).
36. wireless2.fcc.gov/UlsApp/AsrSearch/asrApplication-
License.jsp.
37. In American Bird Conservancy, v. CTIA, 516 F.3d 
1027, 1033 (D.C. Cir. 2008). the court admonished 
the FCC for setting too high a standard.
38. See 40 CFR §1508.9 (EAs include consideration of 
alternatives).
39. See, e.g., 49 FCC 2d 1313 (1974), para. 32 (“we have 
stressed the visual or aesthetic impacts of [such] fa-
cilities as their primary environmental effect”).40. Id. at para. 14.
41. See, e.g., id., at paras. 18, 23, 27, 28, 32.
42. 986 WL 292182, 60 Rad. Reg. 2d, para. 11 (November 
25, 1985).
43. Id. at para. 122.
44. AT&T Mobile Services, Inc. Construction of Tower 
Fort Ransom, North Dakota; Complaints of the 
Sheyenne River Valley National Scenic Byway, Don 
Busta, Judith L. Morris, and the North Country Trail 
Ass’n, Memorandum Opinion and Order, 30 FCC 
Rcd 11023, 11032, para. 28 (WTB/CIPD 2015).
45. See Consent Decree (DA 15-1179) (October 20, 
2015).
46. Phoenix Towers International acquired the towers 
and in 2016, sought to bring them into compliance.
47. 27 FCC Rcd. 2972 (March 29, 2012) (letter to 
Gregory W . Whitaker from Dan Abeyta, WTB).
48. See email from Amy Summe, Shannon and Wilson, to 
Erica Rosenberg, Assistant Chief, Competition and 
Infrastructure Policy Division, Wireless Bureau, FCC 
re: Towers, after-the-fact NEPA compliance, February 
14, 2020.
49. See email from Michelle Yun, Senior Attorney, 
Alliant to Jiaming Shang, Attorney Advisor, Wireless 
Telecommunications Bureau, FCC and attachment 
“Final Compliance Plan.pdf (May 23, 2017).
50. https://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-announces-ac-
tions-facilitate-ptc-implementation; https://www.in-
dianz.com/News/2014/06/04/tribes-take-role-in-
major-rail.asp .
51. See ASR No. 1136027, Broward County, West 
Hollywood Telecommunications facility, filed 
November 2019 (attached EA).
52. See ASR No. A1062663, Wise Towers, filed December 
29, 2016 (attached EA and filings).
53. See., e.g., ASR No. A1179538 (attached EA, dated 
December 8, 2020, for a 610-foot tower in Weedville, 
PA indicates that the applicant cleared several acres 
of sensitive species habitat before completing envi-
ronmental review).  (Appendix III, pp. 17-18).
54. See, e.g., letter to Kenneth Meyers, President and 
CEO, United States Cellular Corporation from 
Jeffrey Steinberg, Deputy Chief, CIPD, WTB, June, 
16, 2016, re: Violation of FCC Environmental Rules.
55. See, e.g., In re: Western Wireless Corp, FCC 03-109 
(May 6, 2003) (tower built near several historic sites 
and operating in violation of environmental rules 
fined $200,000). The fine was ultimately rescinded on 
November 17, 2004.
56. See Consent Decree, In re: Fort Myers Broadcasting 
Company (DA21- 1365) (November 2, 2021).
57. See FONSI letter to Brian Fuqua, Greater 
Chattanooga Public TV Corp from Erica Rosenberg, 
Assistant Chief, Competition and Infrastructure 
Policy Division, Wireless Bureau, FCC (April 14, 
2021).
58. In 2009, over 1,000 AT&T towers built pre-2001 
without NEPA documentation were “cleared. ” Letter 
from Jeffrey Steinberg Deputy Chief, SPCD to 
Jeanine Poltronieri, AT&T (January 16, 2009).
59. 27 FCC Rcd 2972 (March 29, 2012) (letter to Gregory 
W . Whitaker from Dan Abeyta, WTB, FCC).
60. 40 CFR §100 et seq. (April 20, 2022).
61. See 40 CFR §1507.3 (2022).
62. See id.
