LD 697 Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and 
Insect Population and the Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children 
Testimony of Bill Sponsor Rep. Tracy Quint 0fHodgdon 
March 7, 2023 
LD 697 tasks the University of Maine with investigating the effects of so- 
called 5G technology on bird, bee and insect populations, and long-term 
effects on children. 
My young adult children and several constituents brought this issue to my 
attention when they learned there are questions of biological harm from 
today's wireless technology. When I looked into it, I discovered the State of 
Maine has no science-based technology safety information to provide to 
the public. 
As some of you are aware, I have been a registered nurse for 25 years sol 
looked for the science. I was surprised by what I did not know. 
The Science and Risks 
Let me start with the environmental studies. I have learned that the earth's 
natural electromagnetic field, which is meant to regulate the electrical 
systems of all living cells, pulses just 7.83 times per second, that's 
measured in Hertz. 
Currently our wireless signals carry our data back and forth using man- 
made microwaves that pulse at a million times per second in the Megahertz 
range, and a billion times per second in the Gigahertz range. Again, the 
earth pulses atjust 7 times per second. Invisible man-made radiation 
overpowers that.E 
Our birds, bees and pollinators have built-in navigation systems that are 
meant to be synchronized with the earth's electromagnetic field, that's 
how they get back and forth to their nests and hives. The science shows the 
increasing electropollution is dysregulating their navigation systems. 
4G, or fourth generation technology, uses long waves to carry data and 
signals. 5G, or fifth generation, uses these longer waves too but is now 
Maine H.P.466 Rep. Tracy Quint Testimony Page 1 of4
adding an additional layer of short millimeter waves that are about the 
same size as many of our pollinators. Studies show these man-made 
frequencies are a leading cause of bee colony collapse and disappearing 
species. 
l found the non-industry funded science on the biological impact to you and 
land our children to be concerning. 
The U.S. National Toxicology Program at the National institutes of Health is 
the global gold standard for toxics research. They have completed a g; 
million-dollar study that concludes ”clear evidence" cell phone radiation 
causes cancer and DNA damage. 
Our biological cells cannot keep up with the damage done by this radiation. 
Repeated studies around the world document wireless radiation causes 
infertility, neurotoxicity, immunosuppression and more. 
The science explains several mechanisms of harm and I'll share four with 
you:» 
1. First, this radiation causes blood cells to clump together, known as 
the Rouleau Effect(pubmed.nlm.nih). Our red blood cells should be 
free floating to bring oxygen to our organs and when the blood cells 
coagulate together, they cannot deliver the oxygen to where it needs 
to be. Those in the medical field know that oxidative stress isa 
precursor to many chronic illnesses. 
2. Second, our cells communicate to each other through electrical 
impulses. it is these electrical signals we are measuring when we do 
an EKG of the heart or an EEG of the brain. Science shows the 
radiation pulses from wireless technology dysregulates our body’s 
electrical signaling and can cause a host of downstream illnesses. 
3. Third, we have a membrane called the blood-brain-barrier to keep 
toxins from entering the brain. The science shows these pulsations of 
microwave radiation are penetrating and can cause permiability of 
the blood—brain barrier. 
4. Fourth, our circadian rhythm is synchronized to the earth's natural 
light cycles. In the hours of darkness during sleep, our brain releases 
melatonin from the pineal gland to regulate sleep and aid in cell 
Maine H.P.466 Rep. Tracy Quint Testimony Page 2 of4
repair and regeneration. Unfortunately, the brain cannot distinguish 
between natural daylight and this man-made light energy form of 
wireless radiation. So, the brain thinks it's daylight when we are 
surrounded by wireless signals at night and doesn't properly release 
melatonin. This helps to explain why we have a lot of people, 
including children, who are not sleeping properly anymore. This can 
have neurological and cognitive effects. 
Why We Don't KnowA 
Although wireless harm may be news to you and I, since 2002 the United 
States Access Board's indoor Environmental Quality Proiect has indicated 
electromagnetic sensitivities may be considered disabilities under the 
Americans with Disabilities Act. They even have recommended 
accommodations posted on-line. 
The World Health Organization in 2011 already classified this radiation asa 
Group 2B Possible Human Carcinogen. Now that the animal studies have 
been completed, scientists are calling for this radiofrequency microwave 
radiation to be reclassified as Group 1: Carcinogenic to Humans. The WHO 
has reopened their investigation but it will take years to complete. 
Harvard Law School Center for Ethics published a report called Captured 
Aqency: How the Federal Communications Commission is Dominated by the 
Industries it Presumably Reaulates. Harvard documents how the FCC, which 
is supposed to set safety standards, is run by former telecom employees 
looking out for wireless industry interests instead of public safety. They 
liken wireless industry tactics to the big tobacco playbook. The wireless 
industry dominates messaging and keeps the public in the dark while they 
promote convenience from their toxic products. 
What Other States are Doing 
New Hampshire is on the cutting edge with the wireless issue. In 2019 they 
passed a law to investigate. At the end of 2020 they issueda 
groundbreaking Final Report on Commission to Study the Environmental 
and Health Effects of E volvina 5G Technoloqy. They document the FCC and 
the FDA's refusal to answer their questions. 
Maine H.P.466 Rep. Tracy Quint Testimony Page 3 of4
New Hampshire makes 15 recommendations to educate the public on 
wireless risks and preventive measures. The New Hampshire report is being 
heralded by the European Parliament as a good model to follow. 
Please know that New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Vermont, Connecticut, 
New York and others this session have legislation addressing wireless 
radiation so we are in good company in addressing concerns. 
A Word of Caution 
l’d like to ask that we be very careful to focus on non-industry funded peer- 
reviewed science, and fact-check with independent experts what the 
wireless industry lobbyists tell us. New Hampshire discovered they 
routinely provide disinformation and half-truths. 
At the same time New Hampshire was investigating, a law was passed in 
Oregon to assess wireless impact on children in schools. Oregon used 
university resources to prepare a fact-based draft report that was 
submitted to the Oregon Health Authority. Unfortunately, a' 
|ournalist's 
expose reveals corruption at the Oregon Health Authority. They removed 
the important facts of harm from their final report. 
lt's also important to know the FCC was sued in 2021 for ignoring 11,000 
pages of evidence of harm. Yet they have done nothing to address the court 
order to update their hazardous public radiation exposure limits. 
Closing Remarks 
Technology is progressing so rapidly and Maine citizens deserve to have 
answers to their questions and concerns. Like me, they should not have to 
search through mountains of information. As representatives, we should 
demand to have this infonnation readily available proving that we have done 
our due diligence in addressing this public health issue. Title 22, Chapter 
160 shows that our state at one time had an Advisory Committee on 
Radiation. In this amended version, I would like to request, that instead of 
the University eompliling this study, We have a Commission to do this study. 
Maine H'.P.466 Rep. Tracy Quint Testimony Page 4 of4
l
