Virginia Farver
Fort Collins
LD 697
Dear Energy, Utilities & Technology Committee.
My name is Virginia Farver and I live in CO.  I lost a son in 2008 from GBM Brain 
Cancer, and Rich was a student at SDSU in San Diego.  There is a cell tower outside 
of a building and room where my son spent much of his time on campus.  To make a 
long story short, the cell tower after many months of research is called HPWREN 
(High Performance Wireless Research & Educational Network) a backbone node to 
the UCSD Supercomputer Center.  HPWREN is also 'Mission Control for San Diego 
Gas & Electric.'  4 men who all worked in one room and one building on campus 
were diagnosed with brain cancers.  Last fall I received a list of 9 more victims and 
throughout the years since this cancer cluster, there have been many deaths on 
campus from cancer, near this cell tower.  Many who were young.  You see, the 
HPWREN/SDG&E tower has killed many and will continue to do so, unless or until 
the utilities are held culpable in these killings.  I take the death of my son very, very, 
very seriously.  There is no amount of money or power that could ever make me, or 
my family whole again.  This government has put smart meters and infrastructure on 
most homes and businesses throughout this country.  This MUST Stop!  I was a 
plaintiff via the CHD (Childrens Health Defense) with Robert Kennedy Jr against the 
FCC.  We won the case on August 13, 2021.  I'm asking you to do your diligence 
researching 5G.  The FCC is a captured agency by industry, and they are not a 'Health
Agency, they are a spectrum allocation agency."  No one is in a position in any 
agency, to review health concerns!  5G MUST be investigated before any more 
infrastructure is installed.  I'm finding that most people are not viewing our current 
government as credible.  The FCC and other departments need to turn around or be 
abolished.  Why would anyone want to radiate our homes, businesses, schools, or 
anywhere the public meets.  We already are seeing a decline in insect populations 
throughout the US.  Plus, these 5G emissions make any illness or pathogen much 
more virulent.  There are no pluses but for industry and this has gone far enough.  
Please, turn this around and quickly!
The attachment of the HPWREN cell tower shows lots of dead tree foliage and I have 
many documents of illegal emissions.  With governmental immunity, how many 
parents would have a child on a college campus these days?  I'd say ZERO!  This is 
going to destroy our health care system we currently have.  All unnecessarily.  
Sincerely,
Virginia Farver
