I am the Oxford County ARES (Amateur Radio Emergency Services) Emergency Coordinator in the Maine 
Section of the ARRL (American Radio Relay League), a national association for amateur radio and CERT 
(Community Emergency Response Team) Amateur Radio Communications Coordinator.
 I am writing in regard to LD-697   "Resolve, to Study the Effects of 5G Technology on Bird, Bee and Insect 
Populations and the Effects of Long-term Exposure on Children "
The wording in the text of HP 466/LD-697 could be interpreted to include the Amateur Radio Service, and other 
communications services that use “radio frequency emissions.”   The Maine State Legislature issued a joint 
resolution in February, 2023 recognizing the public service that the 4,500 amateur (Ham) radio operators 
contribute here in Maine. They are crucial during times of emergency, and many licensed hams support their 
local and state Emergency Management Agencies.
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) already requires licensed amateur radio operators to conduct 
RF exposure evaluations on their ham radio systems when they are first set up, and whenever they make a 
change, such as installation of new antennas, new radios, or more powerful amplifiers in permitted frequency 
bands by the FCC. 
Over-the-air communications have been a norm for more than a century. First responders, military, commercial, 
private, and other agencies rely upon the radio frequency (RF) spectrum, including many of the frequency 
segments used by 3G, 5G, etc. If such RF emissions were severely regulated or limited more than they already 
are, it would be a disaster for local, state, and national communications and disaster preparedness.
I have been a ham radio operator for 26 years. I and the Oxford amateur radio operators strive to maintain safe 
levels of radio emissions for everyone and everything by following the guidance of the FCC regulations and good
radio practice rules.  Keeping our families, the general public, pets, and livestock safe is just one part our 
practice. It is also a requirement that we keep up to date on the latest technology and safety practices.  This 
includes any changes in the maximum permissible levels of exposure issued by the FCC and medical research 
(like cancer and behavioral medical research.)
Several members of my family are beekeepers, including Tom and Andrea Bachelder of Buckfield.  They tell me 
that the only negative impact they have experienced with their beehives are pesticides, mites and bears.
If any legislation is introduced into the Maine Legislature to restrict, prohibit, or otherwise regulate such 
emissions, the Amateur Radio Service and other public safety communications should be exempt. Please 
remember that the amateur radio service is protected by federal and Maine statute.
Thank you for considering this and for your service to the State of Maine.
Wayne Strout
Amateur Radio Operator N1YIS
Sumner, Maine (formally Buckfield, Maine)
