Abby Cadorette
PTA
LD 928
Mar 21, 2023
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Abby Cadorette
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Abby Cadorette. I live in Old Town and attend the University of Maine in Orono. 
I am writing as a student, activist, and concerned citizen to urge you to vote “ought to pass” 
on LD 928.
I grew up just down the river from the University of Maine, in Bangor. As a kid, I loved 
exploring the outdoors, and that quite frankly is something Maine is known for. Maine holds 
such a special place in my heart and is where I see myself living in the future. However, there
needs to be a proposed amendment to the Maine State constitution securing these rights to 
all people of Maine, regardless of race, ethnicity or income.
All Mainers deserve the right to clean air, clean water, and a healthy environment, and that is 
exactly what the PTA is aiming to fix.
By adding this amendment to Maine’s State constitution, we would be securing these rights 
previously listed above, for future generations. Laws are able to be undone, but the 
Constitution is permanent.
The PTA will also strengthen environmental justice in the state by ensuring all people, 
regardless of race, ethnicity or income, have the same rights to clean water and air and 
healthy environments. All government officials would be held responsible to protect all 
communities equitably.
Other states like Pennsylvania, Montana and recently New York have passed a similar kind of
environmental amendment. PA & MT amendments are being used to advance drinking water 
protections from PFAS contamination, which is increasingly becoming a problem here in 
Maine, and prevents state legislators from taking environmental protection funds. They are 
also mandating consideration of impacts before allowing environmentally damaging 
operations to persist and are securing cleanup of toxic contamination, just to name a few.
The Pine Tree Amendment would ensure the right to clean air and water and a healthy 
environment to all communities and future generations of Maine.This not only helps preserve 
the environment of a place I hold so dear to my heart, but also preserves the wellbeing of my 
loved ones and my community members.
Respectfully submitted, 
Abby Cadorette

