To: Maine Legislature Committee on
Environment and
Natural Resources
From: Amy Eshoo, Maine Climate Action Now
Date: March 20, 2023
Re:
LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to
the Constitution of Maine to Establish a
Right to a Healthy Environment
OUGHT TO PASS
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich,
and Honorable
members of the Committee on
Environment and Natural Resources
, my name is Amy
Eshoo. I am a resident of North
Yarmouth and Director of Maine Climate Action Now (MCAN), a statewide coalition of
grassroots organizations who support transformative action in response to the climate crisis. We
hold social, racial, and economic justice as critical to the transition to zero carbon emissions by
2030
and demand the equitable implementation of clean
renewable energy, ecological land-use
practices, and bold community-led action for a more resilient Maine.
In our coalition’s work we see protecting the rights of both the natural world and of future
generations as vital to climate justice. We support systemic change in order to bring us all to a
just and equitable future. LD 928 would bring protections to our natural resources for all the
people of Maine. We know that we have not done so in the past and can see the wide rippling
effects of such neglect: for example in the PFAS contamination that we must all face in our land,
water, bodies, food and animals.
Our right to a clean and healthy environment is fundamental and should be enshrined in our
state Constitution permanently.
The Pine Tree Amendment ensures that our lawmakers will consider environmental impacts in
any lawmaking. It will ensure that all the good work that has been done here in Maine on behalf
of the environment will not be rolled back by a future administration or legislature.
As a justice organization we believe that the Pine Tree Amendment will strengthen
environmental justice by protecting all communities equitably regardless of race, ethnicity or
income to have the same rights to clean water and air and healthy environments.
Protecting the health of our waters, air, land and wildlife is essential to our future well-being and
that of generations to come. MCAN urges you to vote OUGHT TO PASS for LD 928.

Amy Eshoo
Maine Climate Action Now
LD 928
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Honorable members of the Committee
on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Amy Eshoo. I am a resident of 
North Yarmouth and Director of Maine Climate Action Now (MCAN), a statewide 
coalition of grassroots organizations who support transformative action in response to 
the climate crisis. We hold social, racial, and economic justice as critical to the 
transition to zero carbon emissions by 2030 and demand the equitable implementation
of clean renewable energy, ecological land-use practices, and bold community-led 
action for a more resilient Maine. 
In our coalition’s work we see protecting the rights of both the natural world and of 
future generations as vital to climate justice. We support systemic change in order to 
bring us all to a just and equitable future. LD 928 would bring protections to our 
natural resources for all the people of Maine. We know that we have not done so in 
the past and can see the wide rippling effects of such neglect: for example in the 
PFAS contamination that we must all face in our land, water, bodies, food and 
animals.
Our right to a clean and healthy environment is fundamental and should be enshrined 
in our state Constitution permanently.
The Pine Tree Amendment ensures that our lawmakers will consider environmental 
impacts in any lawmaking. It will ensure that all the good work that has been done 
here in Maine on behalf of the environment will not be rolled back by a future 
administration or legislature.
As a justice organization we believe that the Pine Tree Amendment will strengthen 
environmental justice by protecting all communities equitably regardless of race, ethnicity or 
income to have the same rights to clean water and air and healthy environments.
 
Protecting the health of our waters, air, land and wildlife is essential to our future well-being 
and that of generations to come. MCAN urges you to vote OUGHT TO PASS for LD 928.

