March 22, 2023 
To: Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
From: Audrey Hufnagel 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Honorable members of the Joint Committee on Environment 
and Natural Resources, my name is Audrey Hufnagel. I am from Damariscotta and I am a junior in high 
school at Lincoln Academy. I am writing to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 928. 
I have been advocating for the Pine Tree Amendment since last session and one of the things I love about 
this bill is the way it brings people together. I have seen ﬁrsthand the extensive grassroots network of 
supporters of the movement: farmers and ﬁshermen, democrats and republicans, businesses and young 
people. I have seen the energy around the Pine Tree Amendment from people in my school and community 
and people around the state. 
I think that part of the reason for this energy and broad support is that the Pine Tree Amendment unites 
people around the idea of protecting the outdoor places that make our state so beautiful and unique. We all 
have connections to places that we love and want to protect. For me, it is the Damariscotta River, the 
beautiful estuary I have grown up alongside. When I was younger, I explored the shores of the river. 
collecting mud and shells. Now, I like to go on runs along the river or kayak with my friends in the summer. 
Last summer, I worked doing research on shellﬁsh populations in the estuary. The Damariscotta River isa 
unique, beautiful and fragile environment. LD 928 will protect it so others can enjoy it as I have. 
Not only do we need a clean. healthy environment to enjoy, we also need it to live and thrive. The Pine Tree 
Amendment would include the right to clean air, clean water and a healthy environment in the Constitution 
as fundamental rights. It sets a standard that guides government decision making around environmental 
issues and provides a backstop to prevent protections from being rolled back. 
Furthermore, the Pine Tree Amendment secures these rights for all people. All people, regardless of income, 
race, ethnicity or any other identity. deserve to have clean air to breathe, clean water to drink and a healthy 
environment. The Pine Tree Amendment is not just about protecting the environment. it is about securing 
environmental justice. 
Finally, the Pine Tree Amendment secures these rights for future generations. As a young person in the state 
of Maine, I want to see these beautiful places I love protected for generations to be able to enjoy. I wanta 
future where there is still clean air to breathe and clean water to drink. In order to ensure this, these rights 
must be protected now. This bill is about our future and I urge you to act now and vote “ought to pass” on 
LD 928.
