 
 
 
March  22nd, 2023  
 
Senator Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
Representative Lori Gramlich , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in OPPOSITION to L.D. 928: RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a netw ork of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in respectful opposition to L.D. 928.  
 
The Chamber supports a healthy environment one that protects our natural resources and our peo ple of all ages . 
The Chamber was involved in identical legislation from the 130th Legislature, which was L.D. 489, and while 
we appreciate that the sponsor has put forward the amended version from last legislative session which is 
narrower  in scope, the bu siness community still has significant concerns.  
 
Maine businesses are committed to protecting our environment. In compiling our, “Making Maine Work” 
report , we surveyed businesses across the state and according to those businesses, “Maine’s two greatest 
economic development assets are its quality of life and its quality of place." Our quality of life is measured in 
large part by the state's natural resources  and its physical beauty. Maintaining the pristine nature of our 
surroundings is vitally important to continuing to attract more businesses. Maine has one of the most pristine 
and cleanest environments not only in our country but the world. The State of Ma ine has done a great job in 
protecting our environment and the Maine State Chamber of Commerce believes the current regulatory structure 
in place is the correct one and a constitutional amendment is not necessary and could potentially lead to 
unintended co nsequences.  
 
By enshrining environmental protections in the constitution and elevating them above the current statutory 
framework this would lead to one outcome – a more litigious regulatory environment at the local and state level. 
We would pose the ques tion – is there a problem not being addressed? All one needs to do is to look out the 
window and see that protecting our environment in Maine is everyone’s priority and the State of Maine, 
specifically the Maine Legislature has done a great job and has bee n responsive to people of Maine. Our clean 
 
 
 water and air prove this. We believe we need to continue to be vigilant and proactive in protecting our 
environment, but a constitutional amendment is not necessary and could have unintended consequences.  
 
Our last point of concern is the proposed legislation has the potential to stop or slow down the permitting 
process, which could result in job loss, investment loss, and have a negative impact on Maine’s economy and 
business community. This constitutional amendment is vague and can be interpreted in different ways and will 
vary among different individuals. Vagueness leads to uncertainty, and uncertainty leads to litigation.  
Businesses and investors need a consistent and reliable regulatory  process. Maine a lready has strict 
environmental laws and a strict permitting process in place, and we feel L.D. 928 is  unnecessary. The Chamber 
is a member of the Maine Climate Council, and we support the high -level goals. We are urgently combating the 
negative economic a nd environmental impacts of climate change, and to achieve these goals, we have the 
confidence in the state agencies who are currently doing the work to protect our environment.  
 
We would respectfully ask the committee to vote, “ought not to pass” on L.D.  928.  
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
