Testimony of the Environmental Priorities Coalition 
In support of LD 928 
“RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment ” 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
March 22, 2023 
Good morning Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. My name is Beth Ahearn andI 
offer testimony on behalf of the Environmental Priorities Coalition (EPC). The 
EPC is a partnership of thirty-seven conservation, environmental, and public health 
organizations who unify around a common agenda every year. The EPC represents 
over 120,000 members in Maine who want to protect the good health, good jobs, 
and quality of life that depend upon a healthy environment. LD 928, 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to 
Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment ” is one of the priority bills 
for our coalition this year. Thank you to Rep. O’Neil for sponsoring this priority 
legislation. 
Why is such a Constitutional Amendment necessary? Maine people, our 
livelihoods, and outdoors culture require a healthy environment to thrive. Maine’s 
identity and economy are based on its natural assets. Our heritage industries and 
the workers who power them; farmers, ﬁshermen, and foresters, as well as our 
tourism businesses, depend on a healthy environment to prosper. Clean air to 
breathe, clean water to drink, and a healthy enviromnent for Work and recreation 
contribute to the health and general well-being of all people in Maine. 
Currently, there is no foundational principle to guide state policymakers at every 
level of govemment in their deliberations to protect the basic essentials for life; 
clean air, clean water, and healthy ecosystems, for today and future generations.
We must prioritize lasting environmental protections and ongoing climate action. 
Maine’s natural resources; our forests, minerals, aquifers and marine waters are 
prime targets for out-of-state extractive and commercial-sized industries and must 
be managed, preserved and protected for all people in Maine, including future 
generations. Maine people entrust the stewardship of these natural resources to 
policymakers at every level of govemment, yet our environmental laws and 
regulations can be weakened or overtumed as administrations and legislatures 
change. The discovery of toxics like PFAS seeping through our fannlands and 
waters shows the vulnerability of our environment, the need to uphold its integrity, 
and the gaps in our current legal protections. 
Constitutionally protected environmental rights provide the strongest foundation on 
which to build a resilient and sustainable Maine for today and the future. 
Like other provisions in Maine’s Declaration of Rights that protect the inalienable 
rights of all people in our state: freedom of speech; the right to grow, raise, 
produce, and consume food of your choice; the right to keep and bear arms. 
The Pine Tree Amendment (PTA) would require the government at all levels to 
protect rights to a clean and healthy environment. The PTA would provide 
guidance to lawmakers and state agencies and ensure that our laws and regulations 
are interpreted, applied, and enforced in service to that constitutional obligation, 
assuring govemment accountability. The PTA would enshrine environmental 
justice in Maine’s Constitution, demonstrating the State’s pennanent commitment 
to equity and providing legal standing to those who believe their envirornnental 
rights have been violated. 
We urge you to vote unanimously “Ought to Pass” on LD 928 in order to protect 
current and future generations from environmental harm.
