March 20, 2023
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Bonnie (Heather) Hardy
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution 
of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Heather Hardy and I live in the village of Round Pond, in Bristol. I am a Maine 
Master Naturalist, a teacher, a musician, and a concerned citizen. I am writing to urge you to 
vote “ought to pass” on LD 928. 
I graduated from the Maine Master Naturalist Program in 2020. Part of the requirements after 
graduating is to volunteer to teach others about the importance and beauty of nature and to teach 
about the connections in nature and how we are all intertwined. Some of us graduates have not 
only volunteered but have also been employed to pass on our knowledge. I work for Hidden 
Valley Nature Center in Jefferson teaching 4th grade classes. It is truly a beautiful thing to see 
children connecting to nature. 
Children deserve, need, and should have the right to explore and play in natural places that are 
clean and healthy. We won’t have a community of healthy children if they don’t have a healthy 
environment with clean air to breathe and clean water to drink.
Children know how important it is to have a clean environment. One 4th grade girl sadly told me 
that soon there will be more plastic in the ocean than there are living beings. Some other kids 
spoke up saying how upset this makes them. They want pollution to be prevented.
Children are concerned about our world and don’t like to see any kind of trash in the woods and 
along the trails at the nature center. They understand that our environment needs to be clean. 
We, as adults, need to be able to let children know that they will always have a clean 
environment. 
Research shows that we all feel better emotionally, physically, and mentally when we have been 
out in the fresh air. Everything is connected. It is time for Maine to make living in a healthy 
environment a right that cannot be taken away from us. Our children are counting on us to make 
this happen.
Respectfully submitted, 
Bonnie (Heather) Hardy
