PO BOX 263 •254 ALEXANDER REED RD 
 RICHMOND, ME  04357
PHONE: 207-737-4092 • FAX: 207-737-7150
 E-MAIL: MRWA@MAINERWA.ORG
WEBSITE: WWW.MAINERWA.ORG
To:  Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Joint Committee for 
Environment and Natural Resources
From:   Bradley Sawyer, Deputy Director
Date:  March 22, 2023
Re: Testimony Neither For Nor Against, L.D. 928, RESOLUTION, Proposing an 
Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy 
Environment
The Maine Rural Water Association is a member-driven non-profit organization based in 
Richmond that specializes in training, technical assistance, and advocacy on behalf of our almost 
300 members. The majority of our membership is made up of water and wastewater utilities from 
around the state and are committed to ensuring clean and safe drinking water and a healthy 
environment through the proper treatment of wastewater. 
As public health and environmental professionals we applaud the sponsors desire to 
protect the natural environment and share those goals. We believe that this version of the Pine 
Tree Amendment is less prescriptive than the one previously proposed and as such we offer brief 
testimony neither for nor against, instead of in opposition, as we did in the 130th Legislature. 
Utilities around the state are, however, concerned with potential unintended 
consequences of this legislation. While the bill mandates that the State “conserve, protect, and 
maintain the State's natural resources, including, but not limited to, its air, water, land and 
ecosystems” we will not know what the practical implication of that language is until it is 
litigated by the court system. In Maine we have a history of local control of public drinking 
water and many operators, managers, and trustees worry that this legislation could lead to the 
end of that. 
Water has been a hot topic recently, and for good reason, it is absolutely critical to human 
life and society as we know it. That being said, Maine is in a far better place to combat some of 
these issues than other states that are regularly in the news. For starters, we have an abundance of 
water. Public drinking water systems, fire protection, commercial bottling, and industry still 
combine to use just a fraction of the water available in Maine. Our aquafers also recharge faster 
than those of western states and continue to provide world-class water to Maine communities. 
In short, while we do not oppose this legislation, we are concerned with the potential 
impacts and urge the committee to make clear that the legislative intent is not to wrestle control 
of public drinking water utilities away from their local communities. There is currently a robust 
and comprehensive regulatory regime in place and any addition to that from the state would 
serve as an additional hardship to the boots on the ground that provide this needed service every 
day. 
If you have any questions or concerns, please do not hesitate to reach out to me at 
Bradley.Sawyer@MaineRWA.org or 207-737-9014. 
