Calla Ruff
Brunswick
LD 928
3/21/2023
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Calla Ruff
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Calla Ruff and I live in Brunswick and go to Waynflete School. 
I am writing as a student to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 928.
Maine is my home. I grew up on day hikes and kayak excursions in the Midcoast 
region, learning to love every second spent outdoors. We had a book detailing many 
of the local hikes and outlets and a goal to hit as many as possible. I am intimately 
familiar with the way the air smells in fall and the squish of mud beneath my shoes 
from March deep into April. When it came time to take my senior photos, the only 
logical place was Thorne Head in Bath. I dragged our family friend/photographer 
along the farther trails, stopping periodically to climb trees and admire the river. I 
visited Baxter State Park for the first time last summer and the euphoria I felt at the 
top of Katahdin was incomparable. My first time in the County was for the nordic 
skiing state races, and I was in awe of the sheer quantity of snow and the unbelievable
beauty of the trails at the Outdoor Center. No matter where you go in the state you 
will find nothing but natural beauty. This is what makes Maine special. 
-The PTA ensures that all Mainers have the right to a clean and healthy environment for 
generations to come. 
-Our Maine identity is about our outdoors, woods, waterways, ocean, hiking, hunting, and 
fishing. All Mainers deserve a right to this way of life for generations to come.
-No person in Maine, whether today or decades into the future, should have to question their 
right to a clean and healthy environment.
-Our state is defined by our extraordinary environment - it is who we are and what we value, 
as individuals and as a state.  Protecting the health of our waters, air, land and wildlife is 
essential to our future well-being and prosperity.
I have gotten to love Maine in all its beautiful natural glory for my whole life. It 
defines Maine and it has defined my childhood. Everybody deserves the right to that 
as well, whether they grow up in Maine or choose it later in life. Let Maine remain 
glorious. Let Maine remain protected. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Calla Ruff
