Celeste Carey
Newcastle
LD 928
Celeste Carey
Newcastle, ME
 
Senator Chair Brenner, Representative Chair Gramlich, and members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee, I am writing as a Maine citizen in 
support of L.D. 928, the "RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment."
If we want a climate we humans can continue to thrive in, we will need to be proactive about 
this. Green Amendments like The Pine Tree Amendment, as this resolution is called, provides
us that opportunity.
 
Of course, when you look at the latest U.N. Report on global warming, “thriving” is a 
somewhat relative term. We could have been doing better. Two of Maine's greatly significant 
environmental news stories focus on PFAS – the forever chemicals – and the movement of 
our lobster populations toward colder waters. We have polluted our soil, some of it farming 
soil. The Gulf of Maine is getting too warm, too full of micro-plastics, and too acidic. 
Restoration ecology1 is not a perfect practice of science, nor is it conservation; we won't be 
going back exactly to where we once were environmentally.
Our natural resources here in Maine, Vacationland, are at risk. Industrial-sized 
businesses are over-running municipalities' interests, municipalities' Home Rule 
rights. This was noted in last week's Marine Resources Committee's public hearing 
testimony on a bill to protect Maine fisheries from the effects of industrial 
recirculating aquaculture operations. Towns were looking for reasonable regulations 
so to defend themselves. They weren't finding help where they had expected it and 
Home Rule rights did not matter enough. The goal of supporting small scale marine 
harvesting may be losing out.
Then there is our wildlife. “At least 18 native species of wildlife are known to have 
become extinct historically within Maine’s borders, including nine insect species (1 
beetle and 8 butterflies and moths),” according to the Maine Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife. We have endangered species and threatened species. You 
probably know about the Atlantic Puffin being endangered here. I couldn't tell you 
about most of our fauna, though I easily take note of the bob cat that on rare occasion 
visits right up to the house. One time it was winter and the snow was coming down. 
The cat stared at me and I back at him.  Perhaps the cat thought I should be part of its 
food chain. I just never saw such up close beauty here at home. 
I hope you vote for the Pine Tree Amendment so other generations can have such 
magic moments as I have with the bob cat.
Thank you. 
Celeste Carey
Newcastle
1. Smithsonian Restoration Ecology 
https://serc.si.edu/research/research-topics/biodiversity-conservation/restoration-ecolo
gy 
