Date: March 21, 2023 
To: Environment & Natural Resources Committee 
From: Cole Cochrane, Maine Youth Action 
Re: Testimony in support of LD 928, Resolution, Proposing an 
Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean 
and Healthy Environment 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and the honorable members of the Enviromnent and 
Natural Resources Committee. My name is Cole Cochrane, I am a senior at Thomton Academy 
in Saco, and I am here on behalf of Maine Youth Action, a statewide youth advocacy group that 
represents hundreds of young Mainers from various backgrounds. I have come to testify in 
support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to 
Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Enviromnent. 
As a state, we cherish the prestige and awe of our natural environment. I do not know a single 
person that lives here that does not take pride in our forests, our rivers, and our mountains. I 
know all of you on the committee today can resonate with the significance Maine’s enviromnent 
has on our lives. However, what we hold dear in our hearts is on the line. Our environment faces 
imminent threats to its health and integrity. Issues such as pollution, rising emissions, and 
encroaching development poses dangers to the health of our ecosystems. They also have severe 
effects on the public’s health, and jeopardizes the sustainability of our communities. What I ﬁnd 
most concerning, however, is that these problems we are experiencing now will exacerbate over 
time. I am certainly not the ﬁrst person to tell you this, but climate change is an existential threat 
to our future and future generations. And as part of that future generation, I feel a responsibility 
to tell the people making decisions today that we need to think transformatively when it comes to 
our climate action. We have done excellent work over the past few years, but I am old enough to 
have seen the swings of politics and I ﬁnd it imperative that we have a measure that protects the 
basics of enviromnental rights, as well as something that can last for future generations 
regardless of who holds office. This is why I see the Pine Tree Amendment as a crucial pieceof
legislation. By adding in only a couple sentences into our constitution, we empower Mainers and 
their communities to protect what they hold dear. We can preserve the health of our ecosystems, 
promote sustainability, and hold those accountable that endanger it. As a youth advocate, I ﬁnd it 
to be critical for my generation to have the Pine Tree Amendment as a tool in order to support 
our efforts in environmental rights and protection. I hope you may consider the voice of the 
youth during this process and I respectfully urge the committee to vote “ought to pass” on LD 
928. I thank you for your time and service.
