Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
committee,
My name is Doretta Colburn and I live in Waterford. I am testifying in support of LD 928: a Resolution 
Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment 
and I urge you to vote “ought to pass.”
I speak today on behalf of the Maine Council of Churches, the leading organization of Protestant 
Christian churches in our state, representing seven denominations statewide which include 437 
churches with a total membership of more than 55,000. We support a mission statement in which 
“we promote the full humanity and dignity of every person, the sacredness of all Creation, and 
the opportunity for everyone to achieve their full potential.” 
As a pastor, I have spent over 30 years listening to the heartbeat of human need, as well as the 
pulse of the earth in all of its wonder and beauty that provides us sustenance. They are 
inseparable. There is an interconnection between of all things upon which the fulfillment and 
vitality of our planet and everything in it and on it depends. John Muir, an ecological thinker of 
the mid and late 1800’s, often referred to as the Father of National Parks, understood that sacred 
connection. He once said, “when we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to 
everything else in the Universe.” Indeed, there is no true independence, but rather an 
interdependence that only thrives when the essential elements of a healthy and well-balanced 
ecosystem are able to flourish and thus foster growth. To that end, it is critical that we take 
responsible action to ensure that the environment upon which we depend is well protected so that 
everyone and every living thing can benefit from its health and achieve their potential. 
We raise a small herd of bison and laying hens on our farm, as well as grow vegetables, berries 
and fruit trees. We understand the critical importance of healthy soil, clean water, and good air 
quality upon which our crops and our animals depend. These necessities are the lifeblood of our 
farm without which we could not provide healthy food to our neighbors and our family. They are 
the lifeblood for all of us. It is our responsibility to honor the sacredness of Creation, to value 
every person’s right to health and opportunity, and to do our part in protecting the very things 
that give us abundant life – a healthy, balanced environment without which none of us can thrive. 
As partners in the interconnected tapestry of life, woven together in a sacred life-sustaining bond, 
it is not only our duty, but an act of wisdom to respect the resources of the Earth, using them 
responsibly and with reciprocity, protecting their vitality so that all who depend upon them will 
prosper. We must be advocates for one another. We must be advocates for the environment that 
gives us life. When our planet thrives, we will thrive. That is why I urge you to vote “ought to 
pass” on LD 928. 
Respectfully submitted, Doretta Colburn 
