TESTIMONY OF ERNEST W. HILTON, ESQ., P .E.LD 928—Ought to PassRESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine To Establish a Right to a Healthy EnvironmentJoint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources March 22, 2023Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, greetings:An amendment to the Maine constitution which would afﬁrm and protect our right to a clean and healthy environment is under discussion in the Legislature.  Brieﬂy, the Pine Tree Amendment will initiate a process to amend the Maine constitution to provide that the State ”shall conserve” our natural resources including air, water, land and ecosystems “for the beneﬁt of all people”, including future generations.  As might be imagined, there is opposition to what would seem fairly straightforward. While I grew up on a farm in Starks, Somerset County, where my family has lived for close to 250 years, I worked for a number of years in underground coal mines and later as a mining engineer primarily in Appalachian coal country.  I’ve seen the multi-decade, multi-generational economic devastation from mis-guided, short-sighted regulatory practices- acid mine drainage damaging streams, mountains torn apart, water resources devastated, economic prospects diminished, health compromised.  We’ve seen much the same here in Maine with toxic waste issues, including from past efforts at mining, and now, of course, the intractable problem of PFAS contamination of our soil, water and wildlife. Regarding PFAS, we should all recognize the attraction to farmers of “free” nutrients in sludge as a very inviting prospect.  But, nationwide, society is now facing a long term price tag in the billions of dollars as we discover the ubiquity of PFAS toxins throughout our lives. Having kicked around for 70 years, I believe we need to look further down the road.  As an attorney and an engineer here in Maine, as a staffer with the PUC and as a past member and chair of the Board of Environmental Protection, I’ve observed the results of 
past poorly-visioned projects from a number of different perspectives.  This poverty of vision usually arises out of a lack of long-term thinking.  It arises out of a narrow focus on short term economics.  The Pine Tree Amendment would help assure longer term thinking.  It would assure the burden of proof of acceptability of a project started and remained on the applicant, would assure the burden remained appropriately signiﬁcant, and would help blunt the political pressure which occasionally thwarts effective decision-making.     Are there concerns over the amendment becoming a source of litigation?  Sure. But as an attorney, I wonder whether opponents aren’t confusing or conﬂating real fact ﬁnding and discussion about the merits of a project, and pejoratively calling it litigation.  We often determine in the aftermath that subjecting a project to greater scrutiny would have been a good thing.Therefore, I urge you to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 928. Thank you for your consideration, Ernest W. Hilton, Esq., P .E.Starks, ME  04911Law Ofﬁce of Ernest W. Hilton4 Heald St., P .O. Box 162Madison, ME  04950
Ernest Hilton
Starks
LD 928
TESTIMONY OF ERNEST W. HILTON, ESQ., P.E.
LD 928—Ought to Pass
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine To Establish 
a Right to a Healthy Environment
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources
 
March 22, 2023
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, greetings:
An amendment to the Maine constitution which would affirm and protect our right to 
a clean and healthy environment is under discussion in the Legislature.  Briefly, the 
Pine Tree Amendment will initiate a process to amend the Maine constitution to 
provide that the State ”shall conserve” our natural resources including air, water, land 
and ecosystems “for the benefit of all people”, including future generations.  As might
be imagined, there is opposition to what would seem fairly straightforward. 
While I grew up on a farm in Starks, Somerset County, where my family has lived for close to 250 
years, I worked for a number of years in underground coal mines and later as a mining engineer 
primarily in Appalachian coal country.  I’ve seen the multi-decade, multi-generational economic 
devastation from mis-guided, short-sighted regulatory practices- acid mine drainage damaging streams,
mountains torn apart, water resources devastated, economic prospects diminished, health compromised.
  We’ve seen much the same here in Maine with toxic waste issues, including from past efforts at 
mining, and now, of course, the intractable problem of PFAS contamination of our soil, water and 
wildlife.
 
Regarding PFAS, we should all recognize the attraction to farmers of “free” nutrients in sludge as a 
very inviting prospect.  But, nationwide, society is now facing a long term price tag in the billions of 
dollars as we discover the ubiquity of PFAS toxins throughout our lives.
 
Having kicked around for 70 years, I believe we need to look further down the road.  As an attorney 
and an engineer here in Maine, as a staffer with the PUC and as a past member and chair of the Board 
of Environmental Protection, I’ve observed the results of past poorly-visioned projects from a number 
of different perspectives.  This poverty of vision usually arises out of a lack of long-term thinking.  It 
arises out of a narrow focus on short term economics.  The Pine Tree Amendment would help assure 
longer term thinking.  It would assure the burden of proof of acceptability of a project started and 
remained on the applicant, would assure the burden remained appropriately significant, and would help
blunt the political pressure which occasionally thwarts effective decision-making.    
 
Are there concerns over the amendment becoming a source of litigation?  Sure. But as an attorney, I 
wonder whether opponents aren’t confusing or conflating real fact finding and discussion about the 
merits of a project, and pejoratively calling it litigation.  We often determine in the aftermath that 
subjecting a project to greater scrutiny would have been a good thing.
Therefore, I urge you to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 928. 
Thank you for your consideration,
 
Ernest W. Hilton, Esq., P.E.
Starks, ME  04911
Law Office of Ernest W. Hilton
4 Heald St., P.O. Box 162
Madison, ME  04950
