Grace Nichols
Portland, ME
LD 928
Your Honorable State Representatives,
I ask you to codify into law the following language:  "Article 1, Section 25. 
Environmental rights. The people of the State have the right to a clean and healthy 
environment and to the preservation of the natural, cultural and healthful qualities of 
the environment. The State may not infringe upon these rights. The State shall 
conserve, protect and maintain the State’s natural resources, including, but not limited
to, its air, water, land and ecosystems for the benefit of all the people, including 
generations yet to come."
This is a no brainer.  This is what Maine says it stands for.  And Maine has done very 
well by our environment.  We have some of the best air in the country.  We do not 
struggle with fossil fuel extraction interests here.  But we do have challenges, as there 
are in every state of the union, in balancing the desires of industry with the rights of 
the people and other organisms who call Maine home.
My former home of New York State passed this amendment to our Constitution.  
There, we have endless environmental justice struggles and a need to assert the right 
of every person to clean air, water and a healthy environment.  New York is often 
targeted as a place we should frack (we defeated that) or a place we should burn 
garbage for energy (we keep defeating that one, though it's not a complete victory.)  
We know that putting that expectation into law is a strong first step to making our 
duty towards all our citizens a reality.  There too, we have struggled with PFAS.  In 
Cohoes, north of Albany, a company named Norlite incinerated it (in the form of 
firefighting foam) and then the ash from that process fell on the public housing 
development next door.  For a very long time.  Yes, we need the amendment.
But here in Maine, too, we have challenges with some entities convincing our state 
that it was safe to put sewage sludge on our fields as fertilizer.  Now we have PFAS 
on people's farms and possibly in the food.  There are always environmental 
challenges -- and an amendment to our State Constitution makes it perfectly clear 
where we stand.
As these amendments are proposed in state after state, it would be so lovely if Maine 
were in the first five states to adopt one.  Dirigo. We are leaders!  
Let's act like leaders and stand with Pennsylvania, Montana and New York in saying 
that our deepest unity is based on our love for our land and our waters, and we will 
never betray them.
