Ian Doherty
Falmouth
LD 928
3/31/23
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of
the committee
From: Ian Doherty
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment 
My name is Ian Doherty and I am a student at Falmouth High School. I am writing as 
a concerned citizen in support of the Pine Tree Amendment. The Pine Tree 
Amendment is crucial because it ensures that all Mainers have the right to a clean and
healthy environment and that legislatures, governors, permits, laws and more will be 
made with the respect to honoring our rights to a clean environment. Most 
importantly, the Constitution is permanent, meaning the Amendment would serve as a
clear anchor for environmental rights in Maine. 
As I’m sure you are all aware, as climate change and global warming continue to 
increase, taking action against such issues is becoming more and more paramount. 
However, there is nothing in our state Constitution that guarantees the right to a safe 
environment, which let’s face it, is critical for our state to thrive, not to mention the 
world. The Pine Tree Amendment would change this, allowing the voices of many 
people to be heard, and helping to cement the right to a clean environment as a pillar 
of our state constitution, and a right of the people which cannot be taken away. 
Secondly, unlike much of our political and governmental atmosphere, the Pine Tree 
Amendment would remain unchanged. With this amendment written in the pages of 
the Maine State Constitution, the right to a clean environment would be steadfast, and
something that the people of Maine can rely on to make their voices and stories heard.
Furthermore, the impacts of this amendment would be felt in all legislatures, 
governors, permit policies, and more in Maine. In short, this amendment would help 
prevent organizations, companies, and legislation from being passed that would 
inhibit or be detrimental to the right to a healthy environment. Even as our political 
climate changes and shifts through the years, the balance of power following in its 
wake, the right to a healthy environment would remain as part of our Constitution 
always. 
Now let me ask you, “What comes to mind when you think of Maine?” You surely 
think about the placid yet chilling water of our lakes and rivers, or our picturesque 
shoreline with lighthouses dotted around the sheer granite cliffs. Or maybe you think 
of our lobsterman, working tirelessly for hours on end to bring such a delicacy to our 
tables, keeping one of Maine’s most long-lasting industries alive. 
Throughout my life, I have always been passionate and involved in the environment 
around me. As an avid birder, sailor, rock climber, and lover of the outdoors, climate 
change and the health of the environment is especially important to me. For instance, 
nearly every fall I travel to the tiny island of Monhegan in the Gulf of Maine to 
experience the full spectrum of bird migration in our wonderful state. However, on 
each trip the same sentiment is repeated, “It’s just not like the good old days.” Of 
course, climate change is the reason. Every year, as warmer temperatures persist, the 
migration of our feathered friends changes, every consecutive year they arrive later 
and later. This doesn’t just disappoint fellow birders, but it creates huge problems for 
the birds themselves as their navigation is thrown off by storms and they become 
exhausted. Therefore, Maine needs the Pine Tree Amendment. It would be a bold step
to ensuring that the environment and birds of our great state continue to prosper. 
Furthermore, as citizens of the great state of Maine, we have always been viewed as 
stewards of the land. Our icy-cold rivers and streams, craggy mountains, and exquisite
coastlines are the soul of our state. C’mon people, they don’t call it “Vacationland” 
for nothing. But this beauty and splendor of our Maine lands are changing fast, and 
not for the better. If we don’t take action to save our state’s environment, it will have 
far-reaching consequences, and it will only be yet another thorn in our fight for our 
values. Without a clean environment, the fight to treat and protect all of our 
communities equally, equal justice for all, and much more, will be even more of an 
uphill battle. This will continue to further segregate Maine people and will make not 
only our goals for the future but will make future generations of Maine people have to
live in a state without its glory. And let’s not forget, we will not be the first to pass 
such an amendment. New York and Pennsylvania have already stepped up to the 
plate, passing similar environmental amendments. And these have worked wonders, 
helping to create standards for environmental modification projects, helping promote 
clean drinking water for all, and much more. Most importantly, these amendments 
have brought the consideration of environmental impacts to the fore, putting clear 
standards and checks on the green-lighting of potentially environmentally harmful 
projects and operations. We could do the same. We could be the ones to pass a similar
amendment, one that will serve as the foundation for a long-term clean environment, 
as well as future legislation, and action in our great state. By taking this step, the 
precedent for a clean environment would be set, one that can’t be overridden by 
politics and legislation. 
Sadly, I know this amendment will certainly not solve all of our environmental issues.
We have a long way to go to secure a clean, healthy environment, and allow ourselves
a sigh of relief. However, the Pine Tree Amendment is a bold step to continuing the 
conversation of our environment further, to institute real action and real change. It 
may be one small parchment of paper, but for everyone that calls Maine home, it just 
might be the golden ticket for keeping our environment safe for generations to come. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Ian Doherty
