March 20, 2023
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Jason Anthony
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution 
of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Jason Anthony and I live in the village of Round Pond, in Bristol. I was born in 
Boothbay. I am an outdoorsman and hunter, a writer (Maine’s 2014 Literary Fellow), a former 
teacher, and a concerned citizen. I am writing to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 928. 
One of the reasons I love Maine is that everyone here, regardless of politics, respects the 
state’s wild natural beauty. It’s past time that the Maine Constitution reflected that common 
respect. The Pine Tree Amendment provides that opportunity. 
The Maine economy, from fishing and hunting to tourism, relies on a healthy environment. 
The Pine Tree Amendment is a bipartisan solution to protect the right to clean air and water for 
future Maine generations. 
Safeguarding a healthy Maine environment is essential for Maine’s future economy. Maine 
is likely to see rapid population growth this century as climate-intensified droughts, fires, 
flooding, and sea-level rise make life less hospitable elsewhere in the U.S., particularly in the 
South and Southwest. Good constitutional protections will prepare the state for that future. 
As the world changes, and as Maine changes, we need a constitutional guardrail to ensure 
state government considers the future of business and the rights of citizens as it decides whether 
to issue permits that may sacrifice the quality of our air, water, and farmland. 
Two states, Pennsylvania and Montana, have had similar constitutional amendments for 
fifty years. (New York has recently joined the club too.) These amendments have been used 
only in cases where the state had issued permits or passed laws that amounted to serious 
violations of the public trust. In PA, for example, the state tried to ban towns from putting limits 
on fracking. Here in Maine, the PTA will provide guidance that ensures government decision-
making considers environmental impacts early in the process when prevention of pollution, 
degradation and environmental harm is most possible.
The Pine Tree Amendment is the finest kind of legislative opportunity. It is a values-based 
precautionary approach to protecting what all the people of Maine hold dear: the place we call 
home. Please, vote “ought to pass” on LD 928. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Jason Anthony
