March 21, 2023
To:  Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of 
the Environment and Natural Resources committee
From:  Jennifer Armstrong
Re:  Testimony in Support of LD 928 – A Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Jennifer Armstrong in live and work in Kennebunkport, Maine.
I am writing as a business owner, activist, and concerned citizen to urge you to vote 
“ought to pass” on LD 928.
I grew up in Northeast Ohio, and as I sit here today, writing to you, I am extremely 
concerned about my parents, family and friends who live devastatingly close to East 
Palestine, Ohio (the location of the recent toxic train derailment disaster).  An enormous 
amount of hazardous chemicals has contaminated air and water in these 
environmentally challenged communities.  Relaxed regulations have led to the 
catastrophic conditions people are suffering from today, and the unknown effects that 
are sure to surface in the future.  
-  The foundational right of clean air, clean water and a healthy environment is 
essential in moving Maine forward, to protect our citizens today, and for 
generations to come.
-  The amendment would give our elected officials a beneficial environmental lens 
with which to view ALL issues through.  The secured permanent right of clean air, 
clean water and a healthy environment is essential to our livelihood.
- ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE-- The Pine Tree Amendment will ensure ALL 
communities- regardless of race, income level or ethnicity- have equal rights to 
clean water and air and healthy environments, and it will be the duty of 
government officials to protect ALL communities equitably.
My hope is that all Mainers will be protected from devastating, harmful, health- 
threatening events and disasters like the one that has transpired in my home state.
I urge you to support the PINE TREE AMENDMENT- our health is in your hands.
Thank you for your time and consideration of this testimony.
Respectfully,
Jennifer Armstrong
Kennebunkport, ME

