MITCHELL 
TARDY 
IACKSON 
Testimony of Jim Mitchell on behalf of Irving Woodlands 
In opposition to L.D. 928 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to 
Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment 
March 22, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and Honorable Members of the 
Committee: I am Jim Mitchell; I reside in Freeport and I am testifying on behalf 
of Irving Woodlands in opposition to LD 928. 
Irving owns approximately 1.25 million acres of forestland in Maine and 
has been here since 1946. The company owns and operates sawmills in Dixfield 
and Ashland and operates the Eastern Maine Railway and Maine Northern 
Railway. The company invests heavily in silviculture in the State; we grow more 
wood than we harvest every year and since 1985 have planted over 79 million 
trees in Maine — about 60% of the total trees planted in Maine for forestry 
purposes. 
We appreciate the sponsor’s intent in putting forward LD 928 but we 
respectfully oppose the measure being approved by the Legislature for 
consideration by the voters to amend Maine’s constitution. 
Lawmaking almost inevitably comes with the risk of unintended 
consequences. But, through careful deliberation, legislators seek to minimize 
that risk by weighing arguments pro and con and by robustly evaluating 
competing interests in search of the public interest. A constitutional amendment 
demands an even higher level of scrutiny and deliberation, not to usurp the will 
of the citizenry, but because of the promise implicit in the high threshold to puta 
constitutional amendment on the ballot: two—thirds of each body must approve 
the measure for the question to be considered by the voters. 
So, what exactly are the possible unintended consequences of this 
proposed amendment to Maine’s constitution? The proposed amendment 
prohibits the State from infringing on “the preservation of the natural, cultural, 
and healthful qualities of the environment. ” Yet, how will courts determine what 
constitutes “preservation ” of those qualities? Can the “higher law” of the 
constitution rely on standards adopted in statute? Does this prohibition block 
the State and its instrumentalities and subdivisions (e.g. municipalities) from 
permitting any development that could be perceived to impact the natural, 
104 Sewall Street, Augusta, ME 04330 - Tel. 207-622-1365 - wwwmitchelltardyjackson.com
cultural and healthful qualities of the environment? These risks cast doubt on 
the constitutionality of existing natural resource protection and land use laws 
and regulations established over many years in Maine. And, consequently, 
government decisions to permit development could be subject to constitutional 
challenge should the proposed amendment be approved by the voters. 
Applied to the natural resources owned by the people of Maine, the 
mandate that the State shall consen/e, protect and maintain the State’s natural 
resources, including its air, water, land and ecosystems, undermines, if not 
usurps, the natural right of all Maine people in Article I, Section 1, of the Maine 
Constitution, to acquire, possess and protect property and the protection in 
Article I, Section 23 of the Maine Constitution, that private property shall not be 
taken for public uses without just compensation. 
At its root, LD 928 seeks to protect what we all value: our Maine quality of 
life. The drafters of Maine’s Constitution followed a venerable American tradition 
of declaring natural rights; thus, these are not grants of privilege but inherent in 
us as humans: “All people are born equally free and independent, and have 
certain natural, inherent and unalienable rights, among which are those of 
enjoying and defending life and liberty, acquiring, possessing and protecting 
property, and of pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness. ” Limitations on 
the use of property goes to the heart of the perennial question of where the 
state’s power ends and a person’s liberty begins. And, over many years Maine’s 
legislators and those who execute the laws seek to strike the proper balance to 
ensure both the protection of our natural resources and the possibility of 
regulated commerce. And, our quality of life depends on both a protected 
environment and reasonable commerce. 
The possibility of constitutional confusion that leads to litigation seeking to 
halt longstanding, legal silvicultural and manufacturing practices is a real risk. 
That risk must be taken into account by prudent businesspeople and could 
thereby chill future investment in forestry practices that are of major importance 
to Maine’s economic and ecological health. As society seeks to mitigate the 
impacts of carbon on the environment, Maine is in an enviable position: we are 
the most heavily forested state in the nation. Trees are an efficient, cost-effective 
means of carbon capture. Encouraging more tree planting and more investment 
in silviculture will advance Maine’s climate goals and, simultaneously, make one 
of our leading industries, forest products, even stronger. 
Therefore, we respectfully urge the Committee to vote ought not to pass on 
the Resolution before you. Thank you for considering these comments.
