Testimony in support of L.D. 928 
John M. Glowa, Sr. 
30 Meadow Wood Drive 
South China, ME 04358 
My name is John M. Glowa, Sr. I live in South China. I was a Democratic candidate for 
governor in 2022 and I am speaking today in support of L.D. 928. I am an environmentalist and 
a wildlife activist. I was employed by the Maine Dept. of Environmental Protection for nearly 
thirty years and I am the founder and president of The Maine Wolf Coalition, Inc. 
My first remarks concern the environment. As someone who was on the inside, I will say that 
many decisions, actions and inactions by the Maine DEP are based not on what is best for the 
environment and the people of Maine, but on what is politically expedient. This political 
expedience endangers the lives of Maine people and harms the environment. The Maine DEP 
is one reason why, unfortunately, this constitutional amendment is so sorely needed. 
On the wildlife side, I have advocated for more than fifty years for wildlife management 
policies that put the ecosystem and the resource first. For the last thirty years, I have worked 
for natural wolf recovery in Maine to help to restore the ecosystem. I have learned that the 
people of Maine have no legal right to challenge in a court of law the actions and inactions of 
the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. I have taken the state to court several times 
because of its mis-management of the moose herd and violations of its statutory mandates. 
Even though Maine's fish and wildlife resources belong to ALL of the people of Maine in 
accordance with the Public Trust Doctrine, under current law, the people of Maine have no 
legal standing to challenge the state government in matters related to fish and wildlife 
management. This not democracy. This is fascism posing as democracy. 
This constitutional amendment will help to right many wrongs. For example, Maine law 
deliberately does not require that science even be considered by the state in its management 
of fish and wildlife. Maine law also does not require that all Mainers be given a seat at the fish 
and wildlife table. A healthy environment and ecosystem are our God given rights. Please 
affirm these rights by voting in support of L.D. 928. Thank you.
