Karen Prieto
Brunswick
LD 928
03/21/23
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Karen Prieto, she/ her/ Mx, Brunswick
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Karen Staples Prieto, and I ask you to please vote "ought to pass" on LD 
928.
As an only child growing up on River Road in Topsham, my hangouts were any 
undeveloped area that I could reach on my bike. The pine grove and steep gully 
behind my house; the quarries and power lines near Mallet drive, the farmlands on 
Meadow Road. A special favorite was the area northeast of the rail line - a realm 
filled with blueberry shrubs, frog bogs with cattails, and mysterious sandy sinkholes. 
Like most of my childhood haunts, that area has long since been developed into a 
shopping center, but I did not witness the transformation: My connection to our 
natural world was set aside when I moved to Orlando for school and worked my way 
back up the East Coast building a career. 
Not until I returned to Maine in 2019, joining my mother in Brunswick's Willow 
Grove, did I realize what I was missing. Breathing the clear air one evening brought 
back the amazing natural connection that I lost after moving out of state. I started a 
community pollinator garden and discovered the Brunswick-Topsham Land Trust's 
amazing trails. I hear birds in the mornings and frogs at night, and I feel at home once
again. Without these elements, Maine would not be Maine - the natural world is an 
inseparable part of who we are as a state.
I'm worried that we are losing our critical natural elements at an accelerating pace. 
Last week I attended a Friends of Merrymeeting Bay webinar about alarming 
decreases in bird and bat populations. A couple weeks before that, I learned about 
Maine Big Night and the need to protect amphibians during spring migrations. Before
that, bees and other pollinator insects. The bad news is piling up. I'm afraid that if we 
don't draw the line and prioritize climate and the environment, it will be too late.
Like many Mainers, I'm trying to do my part by buying local, sustainably-farmed 
food, composting, recycling, steering away from plastics, and driving less. But my 
and others' efforts could be undermined at any time by ignorance, corporate greed, or 
hastily-made, uninformed legislative decisions.
I believe Mainers critically need the Pine Tree Amendment to ensure that 
environmental impacts will come first in all proposed legislation, and that this 
environment-first philosophy remains solidly in place for future generations and 
administrations.
The PTA will guide our government to look closely at the environmental impact of all
proposals up front, thereby maximizing our ability to avoid environmental harm. One 
example of the importance of the PTA is the proposed lithium mine in Newry*: 
Investing time to examine scientifically-informed information and identify the most 
environmentally-sound approach could protect against irreversible damage and future 
regrets.
Let's not wait until we've lost our natural connection to realize how much we value it -
protect it now by elevating environmental protections to a constitutional right. Please 
vote "ought to pass" on LD 928. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely,
Karen Prieto
* Cough, K. (2023, March 14). "Couple hoping to mine lithium deposit in Newry urge
lawmakers to “clarify” state mining laws." The Maine Monitor. Retrieved March 21, 
2023 from 
https://www.themainemonitor.org/couple-hoping-to-mine-lithium-deposit-in-newry-u
rge-lawmakers-to-clarify-state-mining-laws
