Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Woe-President 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Melrose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chapter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Ernest Carle 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Mul|iken Court is PO Box 836 it Augusta, ME 04332-0836 tr Telephone: 207-626-0005 is Email: into@mainewoodlandowners.org it Website: wwwmainewoodlandowners org AAINE 
DODLAD CDVVNERS COMMUNITY ~‘?’ ~ 
ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Karla Black 
Deputy Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
In Opposition to 
LD 928 
“Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a 
Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment ” 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Karla Black, 
Deputy Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today in opposition 
to LD 928, “Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to 
Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment. ” 
This resolution provides “The people of the State have the right to a clean and healthy 
environment and to the preservation of the natural, cultural and healthful qualities of 
the environment. The State may not infringe up on these rights. The State shall 
conserve, protect and maintain the State’s natural resources, including, but not limited 
to, its air, water, land and ecosystems for the beneﬁt of all the people, including 
generations yet to come.” 
We are here today opposing this resolution not because we don’t care about our 
environment or enacting laws to protect it, but because this resolution is vague and 
will lead to years of litigation and challenges. 
It is unclear how this resolution would impact woodland owners. This has the 
potential to impact nearly everything a woodland owner does. If a woodland owner 
decides to conduct a harvest, would he then be violating his neighbor ’s right to a clean 
and healthy environment, or to the preservation of the natural, cultural and healthful 
qualities of the environment? Under a Maine Forest Service Rule, landowners are 
allowed in certain circumstances to drop logs into streams to help create habitat for 
certain ﬁsh. Would conducting this activity violate the rights of another landowner 
who owns the next lot along the same stream if they don’t agree with the practice? 
Would building a woods road into a woodland property violate the preservation of the 
natural qualities of the environment? The questions are endless and the answers are 
unknown. 
In 2021, the legislature passed a resolve for another constitutional amendment 
involving the “Right to Food” that was ultimately enacted by the people of Maine. 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - IRC 501(c)(3)
This constitutional amendment is now being litigated in court by those wishing to hunt on 
Sundays. The plaintiffs claim their right to food under the new amendment trumps the long- 
standing legislative enactment prohibiting Sunday hunting. This despite testimony during 
legislative hearings on the right to food resolution that no laws on the books, including hunting 
laws, would be impacted if the right to food amendment were passed. The word “hunting” was 
even removed from an early draft of the proposal. Now, the issue is before the state Supreme 
Court to decide what the amendment means. 
I don’t think anyone could have predicted that the Right to Food Amendment would be used to 
challenge the Sunday hunting prohibition, but that is where we are today. Efforts to repeal 
Sunday hunting have failed countless times before in the legislature and the Right to Food 
amendment is now being used to try and upset the will of the Maine people. We should be 
weary of the unintended consequences that will ﬂow from enacting another constitutional 
amendment that isn’t well deﬁned. 
For these reasons, we oppose LD 928 and urge this Committee to vote ought not to pass on this 
resolution.
