 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Eric Venturini, Executive Director  of the Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine  
Testimony in Opposition  
LD 928, RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a 
Clean and Healthy Environment  
Senator Stacy Brenner , Representative  Lori Gramlich , and esteemed members of the Committee on  the 
Environment and Natural Resources , my name is Eric Venturini and I am the Executive Director of the 
Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine . In this role I strive to represent the diverse voices of Maine’s 485 
wild blueberry producers.  
Wild blueberries are one of Maine’s  icons, a veritable gem that is understood and appreciated for its 
cultural, economic, and environmental significance to the state. Our farmers and businesses work 
closely with University of Maine Extension to sustainably  grow and harvest this berry. As an industry we 
have shifted from burning fields as a management method —a traditional method going back thousands 
of years —to mowing which reduces our carbon emissions. This crop is quite possibly the most 
sustainable fruit that you can purchase in the supermarket, as demonstrated by its continued 
management and harvest for literally thousands of years. Part of the vision of the Wild Blueberry 
Commission itself is to “…promote…the social, economic, and environmental sustainab ility of Maine’s 
wild blueberry farms and food processors…”  
It is because of this commitment to sustainability that we so carefully considered our position on this bill 
prior to providing you with this testimony in opposition.  
We see two major problems wit h the proposed constitutional amendment .  
1. There is a  complete lack of legal clarity around terms such as, “clean  and healthy ” and “natural, 
cultural and healthful qualities ”, and  
2. The environment, our waterways, the air we breathe, are all already protect ed under  state and  
federal law.  
Lack of legal clarity  
The broad, all -encompassing scope of the proposed amendment is too vague and will effectively turn 
the judicial  branch into policymakers . What does “clean and healthy” mean to you? What does “natural, 
cultural and healthful” mean? What do these terms mean to a farmer? What does it mean to a farmers’ 
neighbor? To the State? A judge? If this amendment becomes part of Maine’s constitution, th e 
 
 
 
5784  York  Complex  Suite  52  Orono,  ME 04469 -5784   207-581-1475   wbcm@maine.edu  individuals that define “clean and healthy” will be litigators and courts. Under this constitutional 
amendment, a  farmer spread ing manure on her fields could be challenged in court for  violat ing their 
neighbor’s right to “clean air.”  A farmer using Integ rated Pest Management to monitor and conduct 
targeted treatments in their field to control an invasive  pest, following all State and Federal laws and 
regulations that guide pesticide usage, could be  sued for infringing upon a citizen’s right to a “c lean and 
healthy environment.”  
Existing federal law  
The Clean Water Act1 establishes and regulates quality standards for surface waters. The Clean Air Act2 
comprehensively regulates air emissions of hazardous pollutants to protect public health and welfare.  
The Toxic Substances Control Act3 requires reporting, record keeping , testing, and imposes restrictions 
on specific chemical substances.  The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act4 regulate s the 
registration, distribution, sale, and use of pesticides. These regulations are specific and predictable , 
providing specific laws and regulations pertaining to specific pollutants, chemicals, and scenarios. 
Specificity in law  and regulation  allow  businesses  and individuals  to comply and avoids the pitfalls  of risk 
and uncertainty  posed by overly broad and sweeping constitutional amendments .  
On behalf of wild blueberry farms and businesses in the state of Maine, I oppose this bill. Thank you for 
the opportunity to present our comments.  
 
 
1 EPA Summary of the Clean Water Act ( epa.gov/laws -regulations/summary -clean -water -act) 
2 EPA Summary of the Clean Air Act ( epa.gov/laws -regulations/summary -clean -air-act) 
3 EPA Summary of the Toxic Substances Control Act ( www. epa.gov/laws -regulations/summary -toxic -substances -
control -act) 
4 EPA Summary of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act 
(https://www.epa.gov/enforcement/federal -insecticide -fungicide -and-rodenticide -act-fifra-and-federal -
facilities#Summary ) 
