Kristina	Grimaldi,	J.D.	Candidate,	University	of	Maine	School	of	Law	225	Evans	Street,	South	Portland,	ME	04106	DATE:	March	21,	2023	TO:	Senator	Stacy	Brenner,	Representative	Lori	Gramlich,	and	Honorable	members	of	the	Environment	and	Natural	Resources	Committee	Re:	Testimony	in	Support	of	LD	928,	a	Resolution	Proposing	an	Amendment	to	the	Constitution	of	Maine	to	Establish	a	Right	to	a	Healthy	Environment	Senators,	Representatives,	and	members	of	the	Environment	and	Natural	Resources	Committee,	my	name	is	Kristina	Grimaldi,	I	am	a	resident	of	South	Portland	and	a	student	at	the	University	of	Maine	School	of	Law.	I	am	writing	today	to	to	urge	you	to	vote	“ought	to	pass”	on	LD	928.	At	the	University	of	Maine	School	of	Law	I	took	a	course	entitled	‘Right	to	a	Clean	Environment,’	studying	the	history,	enactments,	and	use	of	similar	environmental	rights	amendments.		Like	other	amendments,	the	Pine	Tree	Amendment	has	the	potential	to	serve	as	an	important	tool	to	protect	the	environment	and	mitigate	the	harmful	effects	of	climate	change	while	also	ensuring	equitable	access	to	a	clean	environment	for	marginalized	communities.		While	there	are	already	environmental	laws	and	protections	in	place,	there	still	exists	environmental	degradation	which	puts	the	health	of	the	ecosystem	and	the	public	at	stake.	The	PTA	will	provide	for	greater	protection	for	all	people	and	serve	as	another	tool	to	hold	the	government	accountable	where	current	laws	are	lacking.		Looking	at	other	states	that	have	passed	similar	amendments,	there	has	been	no	signi_icant	evidence	that	such	amendments	have	harmed	the	state’s	economy,	an	argument	frequently	cited	by	opponents.	In	contrast,	there	is	a	need	for	the	PTA	to	protect	natural	resources	for	1which	our	state’s	vital	industries	rely—	such	as	_ishing,	lobstering,	timber,	and	tourism.	Giving	more	protection	to	the	environment	will	bene_it	Maine	now	and	in	the	future,	as	tourism,	business,	and	public	health	all	rely	on	maintaining	natural	resources	and	a	healthy,	clean	environment.	 The Precedents and Potential of State Green Amendments, Rockefeller Institute of 1Government Center for Law & Policy Solutions ( July 2021), https://rockinst.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/CLPS-green-amendments-report.pdf.
