Linda Woods
Waterville
LD 928
March 16, 2023
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Linda Woods 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Linda Woods, and I live in Waterville.  I am writing as an activist and 
retired teacher to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 928.
Maine: “Vacationland,” an iconic tagline that promotes the value of Maine’s outdoor 
heritage. Our identity is about our outdoors, our woods and our waters.  People enjoy 
our seasonal activities like hiking, hunting, fishing, skiing, and snowmobiling.  
Current Maine residents need to do what we can to protect these important resources 
for ourselves and our guests as well as for those in the future. That is why I support 
LD 928, “An Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a 
Healthy Environment.”  The Pine Tree Amendment to Maine’s Constitution protects 
Maine’s clean and healthy environment and preserves the natural, cultural, 
recreational and scenic qualities that define our brand.  It is important that these 
resources be protected with the same legal strength as other political, civil, property 
and human rights.  
Maine people want this Pine Tree Amendment.  We understand the importance of a 
livable future where we all can thrive.  Every time a Land for Maine’s Future Bill has 
been on the ballot, it has passed. We want our waters to be clean and our land to be 
available for various forms of recreation. The Pine Tree Amendment would ensure 
protection of current public lands and increase the likelihood of adding more in the 
future.    
I have dedicated most of my life to being a voice for the environment.  If the Pine 
Tree Amendment is added to Maine’s Constitution, the work done by dedicated 
preservationists would be protected from future decisions by subsequent governors or 
legislators with differing opinions.   I could rest easier knowing a healthy 
environment with multiple opportunities for outside recreation has been protected.    
That is why I support LD 489, the Pine Tree Amendment.  It will transform the way 
we think about our future by protecting our way of life.  Ah, Maine, “the way life 
should be.” 
Respectfully submitted, 
Linda Woods 

