Luke Sekera-Flanders
Orono
LD 928
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, members of the ENR Committee,
My name is Luke Sekera - Flanders. I am an undergraduate student at the University 
of Maine and an organizer with Community Water Justice. Though I could not make 
it to speak with you today, I am grateful for the opportunity to offer my support for 
the Pine Tree Amendment.
I come from the town of Fryeburg, Maine. We have been the site of one of Poland 
Spring’s major bulk water extraction operations since they secured a 45 year contract 
with the town’s private water supplier. The public’s voice and our right to clean, 
drinkable water were not taken into consideration during that process. Nor were the 
long term environmental implications of drawing millions upon of gallons from an 
aquifer with little oversight and the looming impacts of climate change on our water 
cycle. 
I was among the Fryeburg residents involved with the challenge to the 45 year 
contract in court. While I was not a plaintiff, of voting age, or familiar with the 
scientific and legal language that surrounded me, I began to see for myself that not 
only was this contract wrong, but that the system we were supposed to rely on for 
help was not meeting our pleas for transparency and accountability. We also recently 
found out that our town’s drinking water contains severe levels of PFAS chemicals, 
and likely has for decades.
This is a common reality for communities facing environmental exploitation by 
industry. Especially for marginalized communities, the interests of capital are 
consistently overrepresented while the people who are devastated are often excluded 
or dismissed from the process of determination for these profiteering endeavors. 
Everybody needs clean air and water. The importance of maintaining a balanced 
relationship with the natural world which we are a part of is far more important than 
short-sighted goals of immediate financial gain which only benefits an extremely 
limited number of people. With the uncertainty brought about by changes in our 
climate, I urge that as policy makers, you all take into deep consideration not only our
well being and survival, but those of the countless generations that will follow us, 
who will one day rely on the same resources we are responsible for today. 
The Pine Tree Amendment is one critical step we can take in the legal process to 
empower communities such as mine to better defend the environment and future 
generations. This amendment is an affirmation of basic, irrefutable truths which must 
inform environmental, economic and social policies moving forward if it is our goal 
to protect the water for future generations.
Thank you for reading this testimony.
Respectfully,
Luke Sekera - Flanders

