1w 
5,, 4' 
, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
, A, 2 STATE HOUSE STATION »-‘~ 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002' 
(207) 2237-1400 
Margaret O>Neil TTYZ 287-4469 
21 Sheila Circle 
Saco, ME 04072 
Phone: (207) 590-1679 
Margaret.O ’Neil@1egis1ature.1naine.gov
' 
March 22, 2023p 
Testimony of Rep. Maggie O’Neil-presenting 
LD 928, Resolution,_Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine To Establish a Right to a Clean and 
Healthy Environment_ 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Senator Bremaer, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Representative 
Maggie ()'Neil. I represent House District 129, which is in Saco. I come before you 
today to present LD 928, “Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment. ” 
This bill will amend our state’s constitution to protect Mainers’ right to a healthy 
enviromnent. I am going to talk about a couple of things this moming. 
1. Why amend the Constitution? 
Our Constitution is the foundational document that sets out our values and the most 
important rights that We want to protect. For example, right now our Bill of Rights
protects the freedom of religion, freedom of assembly, right to due process, and the 
right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. It doesn’t recognize the 
foundational right to a healthy environment, including clean air and clean water. 
Such a protection is in line with our values and essential to include among our Bill 
of Rights protections going forward. 
Article I (the Bill of Rights section) of Maine’s Constitution was drafted to protect 
us against different ways that government could (a) actively encroach upon our 
rights or (b) fail to protect us. These rights were considered essential to living ina 
democratic society. 
As an example, our constitution protects free speech, even if that speech is 
unpopular, hateful, or ugly. That’s because we have decided that the free exchange 
of ideas is foundational to a democratic society. Our constitution also protects us 
against unreasonable searches and seizures, so that agencies cannot come into our 
homes or search us Without meeting a minimum protective standard. Speech 
protections and search and seizure protections create a backstop against 
government encroachments. 
By protecting our right to a healthy environment in the Constitution, we will create 
a parallel backstop that (a) protects us from something govemment might do that 
actively infringes upon that right or (b) protects us in situations when govemmentl 
doesn’t do enough to protect us. It will be an added check on our system. 
2. How will the amendment protect us?
a. Encourage proactive government decision-making. A right to a healthy 
environment will help ensure that our government ’s decision-making processes 
prioritize environmental protection and pollution prevention, rather than simply 
pollution permitting and management. Government will take this right into account 
when creating laws and regulations to issuing decisions and permits. It will 
encourage government to address environmental issues of concem early in the 
process when problems are less complicated and costly to remedy and before 
investments have been made.’ 
b. Create a backstop for gaps in law. The amendment will create a backstop when 
gaps exist in our environmental laws. When a gap in law is identiﬁed—as we 
found with PFAS contamination —the Legislature takes time to learn about and 
address that gap through legislation. Sometimes we take years to address a 
problem. If Mainers have this backstop in our Constitution, our people, businesses, 
and natural resources will still be protected in the meantime. Our constituents will 
have a backstop to protect their health while the Legislature is catching up with the 
situation at hand. 
c. Protect our health and strengthen environmental justice. The future-focus of the 
amendment is important. Enviromnental hann comes with costs, including those 
related to health, cleanup, decreased property values, and ﬂooding or drought. 
Disproportionately, the costs are bome by those who lack political power, 
including low-income communities, indigenous communities, communities of 
color, and rural or urban communities. The amendment will protect our natural 
resources equitably for all Mainers.A
If a harmful decision is made or if government does not do enough to keep us safe, 
we will have a backstop to protect us into the ﬁJ.lIL1I‘6. If a future legislature or 
governor comes into ofﬁce seeking to undennine those protections or roll them 
back, the amendment can serve as a backstop to ensure those protections remain in 
place and effective. This amendment is as much about protecting our legacy as 
lawmakers who care about the enviromnent, as it is about strengthening 
enviromnental protection when and where needed. 
3. Doesn’t Maine already have strong laws to protect us? 
Maine has a more robust system of environmental protections than many other 
states. That’s good for Maine people. However, Mainers still need .a backstop for 
when gaps in law inevitably emerge. 
It is impossible for statute to cover every possible circumstance. Our laws establish 
standards and guide regulations, but there will always be circumstances that we 
could not anticipate. Think about emerging contaminants such as PFAS that we 
could not previously imagine. When these circumstances arise, our constitution 
can help us address shortcomings in our laws while the Legislature and agencies 
catch up. 
Additionally, the amendment will provide overall guidance to help ensure 
government agencies and ofﬁcials are interpreting and applying the laws passed by 
us, the Legislature, as robustly as needed to protect our state’s natural resources 
and Maine people’s enviromnental rights. 
4. What other states have adopted these protections?
A number of other states have adopted environmental rights amendments. In 
designing this text with other legislators and advocates, we looked to Pennsylvania 
New York, and Montana’s amendments. In those states, similar amendments have 
provided protections for serious issues of community and environmental harm to 
water, air, land, and human health. Frivolous suits have not been asserted. Maya 
Rossum, an attorney who specializes in this area of law, is available to provide 
context about how these amendments have operated in other states. 
Generally, other states have not expressed that complying with environmental 
rights amendments results in an overwhelming or unnecessary burden. 
Government integrates the constitutional mandate into its decision-making process 
and operation. That means government is more likely to identify problems 
upstream, avert costly enviromnental harm, and protect our ﬁnancial resources as 
well as our environmental health and safety. Avoided harms and costs justify the 
inclusion of that effort.~ 
5. An essential backstop and guiding principle. 
In sum, this amendment creates both (a) a backstop against what could go wrong 
and (b) a guiding principle for government decision-making. It’s hard to say 
exactly how this backstop ‘ will protect us in the future, and that’s why it’s so 
important. I think that anyone in Maine would recognize that without a healthy 
enviromnent —-—without clean air, clean water, and stable ecosystems —we would 
have trouble enjoying any other rights or freedoms. Before I can engage in 
dissenting speech or seek to protect my home from unreasonable searches, I need 
to have clean air to breathe.9
We propose this amendment to our Constitution because a healthy environment is 
essential to all else. Government has a role to help protect health and safety. This 
amendment will push our government in the right direction and create a ﬁnal 
backstop for our most fundamental human needs. 
Thank you for your attention. I’m here to answer any questions.
