Mary Laughlin
Limington
LD 928
March 22, 2023
To:  Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Members of the Environment 
and Natural Resources Committee
From: Mary Laughlin
Re:  Testimony in support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment
Good Morning,
I am writing to support amending the Bill of Rights of the Maine Constitution to include the 
language of LD 928, the "Pine Tree Amendment."
LD 928 will protect Maine's natural resources "including but not limited to, its air, water, land, 
and ecosystems for the benefit of all the people, including generations yet to come."
I believe that this principle deserves to be a constitutional right along with the other rights 
enumerated in Article 1 of the Maine Constitution.
Constitutional protections to our environment will be life-saving and cost-saving for Mainers.
In my town some years ago, a drinking well was found to be contaminated by benzene.  
The process to discover the source of this contamination, along with achieving its 
remediation, was a long one. The DEP was involved.  Surely this process was costly in terms 
of staff time and citizen concern. I believe that a constitutional right to a clean and healthy 
environment will strengthen my town and state's commitment to preventing pollution before 
the results are more disastrous to our public health and our economy.
It has been said that as Maine goes so goes the nation.
We are not the first state to incorporate environmental protections into our state constitution. 
But let us not be the last. 
If we wait, future generations will ask--correctly--why we did not do this now, when we have 
the chance to enshrine their right to a clean and healthy environment in our constitution.
For Maine's economy, for public health for all, and for the health of future generations come,  I
urge you to vote "ought to pass" on  LD 928.
Thank you.
Sincerely,
Mary Laughlin
Limington
