188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
   
 
March 22nd, 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Senate Chair  
Representative Gramlich, House Chair  
Members  of the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 RE: AGC Maine ’s Opposition to LD 928 “ RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and  Healthy Environment ” 
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Environment and Natural Resources  my name  is Matthew  Marks,  I am a Principal at Cornerstone  
Government  Affairs,  and sending this on behalf  of my client  The Associated  General Contractors  of 
Maine.  AGC  Maine  is a statewide  commercial  construction  trade  association  and a Chapter  of AGC  
America  which  was founded  in 1918  with  27,000 contractors,  suppliers,  and service  providers  
nationwide .  
 
AGC  Maine  is concerned  with  the uncertainty  this bill provides  to future  development  if this 
constitutional amendment  was enacted.  Maine  has been  a leader in establishing  both  climate  goals  and 
policy,  including laws  and regulations,  that apply  to the commercial and residential  activity.  We have  a 
robust  permitting process  with  both  laws  and rules  enacted  to protect  the interest of our residents  
today  and future  generations.  The existing  rules  and laws  provide  a level  of certainty  for the 
construction  industry,  with  few exceptions,  and we are concerned  the language  of this bill is unclear  and 
broad .  
 
The legislature  continues  to add new  laws  that reflect  emerging  technology,  construction  practices , and 
development  activity.  Maine  has a State  Board  that reviews  international building  codes  and integrates  
those  with  Maine  laws  and rules.  Projects  can be subject  to state,  local,  and federal review process  that 
considers  the air, land,  and water  of our great  state.  When  concerns  or adjustments  are found,  agencies  
and the legislature  has been  swift  to analyze,  present  facts,  debate,  and adjust  where  needed .  
 
AGC  Maine  supports  the sentiment  of protecting our natural resources  and construction  practices  
continue  to evolve  based  on new  laws,  but also technology  and public  feedback.  The association  
believes  it’s important  to have  discussions  based  on specific  requirements  and this bill opens  questions  
by an individual’s  interpretation  of what  constitutes  their  rights.  I ask the Committee,  why would  that 
intent  be left in the hands  of the courts,  not specifically  addressed  by those  charged  with  that duty?   
 
While  it appears  the intent  is to fill any regulatory  gap and not the creation  of litigation  between  
residents  and businesses  we should  certainly  anticipate  lawsuits  will be brought  for that purpose.  There 
is little  doubt  that regulations  will continue  to be adapted  to respond  to emerging  industries  we have  
faith  that both  agencies  and lawmakers  will respond  accordingly.   
188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
AGC  Maine  respects  the continued  discussion  on environmental  improvements  and suggests  the 
Committee allow  debate on specific  language  on Maine ’s environmental  laws  that is clear  to both  
residents  and the regulated  community.  I appreciate  the opportunity  to share  our views  and welcome  
any questions.    
