TESTIMONY OF MICHELLE HEN KIN 
LD 928—Ought to Pass 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
To Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
March 22, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished Members of the 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, greetings: 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in wholehearted support of LD928, also 
known as the Pine Tree Amendment. My name is Michelle Henkin and I live in New 
Harbor, on the Pemaquid Peninsula. I am an artist, a farmer, a lover of the natural 
world, and a believer in fairness, justice and the importance of being a good steward. 
The resolution before you would amend the Maine State Constitution to establish the 
right to a clean and healthy environment for all people in Maine, including generations 
yet to come. The question has been raised many times since the Pine Tree Amendment 
was ﬁrst introduced in the 130th Legislature, "Why do we need to amend the 
Constitution? We already have strong laws and regulations protecting the environment 
in Maine.” 
Because I am sure that the testimony of others will address the reality that laws and 
regulations can be repealed, undermined and poorly enforced, I will focus on the 
words currently in the Constitution because words shape both our reality and our 
imagination, and they determine what is possible legally. 
I'd like to start by looking at the Declaration of Rights section of the Maine 
Constitution, which is where the Pine Tree Amendment would be placed. It begins by 
stating that ”All people are born equally free and independent, and have certain 
natural, inherent and unalienable rights, among which are those of enjoying and 
defending life and liberty, acquiring, possessing and protecting property, and of 
pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness."
For me, one of the most important parts of the Pine Tree Amendment is that it will 
redress an imbalance baked into the Declaration of Rights. Article 1 explicitly states 
that private property rights are protected while my rights (and those of my family, 
friends, community and descendants) to what is essential to our ability to survive and 
thrive, namely clean air and clean water and healthy ecosystems, are not explicitly 
mentioned. Thus, while large corporations have the right to do business, individuals do 
not have a legally enforceable right to live in a clean and healthy environment. In our 
courts and agencies, the rights of business or government to negatively impact 
Maine's environment are generally given higher standing under the law and in 
decision-making because the people of Maine do not have a constitutionally 
protected legal right to air they can breathe and water they can drink. 
What if the framers of Maine's Constitution had been able to look into the future and 
had seen that there would come a time when technologies would exist that could 
threaten the air we breathe, the water we drink, and the ecosystems we rely on for our 
food, our safety, and our sense of place? I believe they would have included the right 
to a clean and healthy environment if they could have imagined the necessity of 
protecting it. 
The Pine Tree Amendment is not some pretty sounding, aspirational thought 
experiment. Nor is it a recipe for endless litigation or the ruin of the economy. 
Environmental rights amendments with Bill of Rights placement have been time-tested 
and proven to be effective protection when bad corporate actors or misguided 
government fail to take environmental impacts into consideration, and people and 
communities are harmed. These are not neighbor-to-neighbor conﬂicts or minor 
infractions. These are environmental harms that rise to the level of a constitutional 
violation. 
The track record in Pennsylvania and Montana, and now New York, shows that there 
are relatively few cases brought each year citing their environmental rights 
amendments, and when cases are brought, they are meaningful and necessary to 
protect the welfare of the surrounding communities. Rather than decrying the 
possibility that the Pine Tree Amendment will be used by the people who face an 
environmental threat, or by municipalities facing State overrides of environmental 
protections voted on by their residents, we should be thankful that there will bea 
means to take action when there is a clear and substantial need to hold government 
accountable for legislation harmful to the environment or for a faulty permit that puts 
communities at risk.
The Pine Tree Amendment will both obligate and allow the courts to balance the 
competing interests of government and corporate activity and the health of Maine's 
people. Passage of the Pine Tree Amendment will not mean that environmental 
concerns will supersede economic concerns. Simply put, both interests will havea 
voice and a seat at the table. Better decisions will be made that will result in the 
avoidance of costly clean-ups, negative health impacts, and the loss or diminishment of 
the natural beauty we enjoy in Maine and want future generations to enjoy as well. 
I urge you to vote ‘Ought to Pass’ on LD 928. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Michelle Henkin
