PhOl’l6 (207) 761-5616 
M N E C H A E R www.sierra<:|ub.org/maine 
W SIERRA CLUB B%'*@5l?53X53 
To: Committee On Environment and Natural Resources 
From: Nathan Davis, Ph.D., Sierra Club Maine 
Date: March 22, 2023 
Re: Testimony in Support of L.D. 928: RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Committee On Environment 
and Natural Resources, my name is Nathan Davis, and l am testifying on behalf of Sierra Club 
Maine, representing over 22,000 supporters and members statewide. Founded in 1892, Sierra 
Club is one of our nation’s oldest and largest environmental organizations. We work diligently to 
amplify the power of our 3.8 million members nation-wide as we work towards combating 
climate change and promoting a just and sustainable economy. To that end, we urge you to vote 
“ought to pass” on L.D. 928: Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment, also known as the Pine Tree 
Amendment. 
We’d first like to recognize the tremendous grassroots enthusiasm that the Pine Tree 
Amendment has engendered, especially among the youth of Maine. We ﬁnd it heartening that 
the fragmentation and isolation that afflict our age have in this instance failed to disperse a tide 
of common feeling: that the natural environment of Maine is worth protecting not only by law and 
by custom, but by the foundational text of our state government, which LD 928 proposes to 
amend forthis purpose. 
Our Constitution and others like it specify a form of government and some of the mechanics of 
that government, but that's not all that they do. They also establish elemental and binding 
principles of government. In the Constitution of Maine ring the bells of human aspiration, of hope 
in an expansive and expanding future ofjustice, common welfare, tranquility, and the blessings 
of liberty. The very Preamble of our Constitution exalts those goals as Objects of Government. 
In our times of astounding technological and scientific capacity, that language may seem 
anachronistic or even naive, but I think there is nothing naive about it. The Constitution of Maine 
is not merely a dry specification of the powers of branches of government, and it’s worth reading 
aloud Article l, Section 1 to remind ourselves of this: 
“All people are born equally free and independent, and have certain natural, inherent and 
unalienable rights, among which are those of enjoying and defending life and liberty, acquiring, 
possessing and protecting property, and of pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness. ” 
ls that the language of people afraid of lawsuits? ls it the language of people who hesitate in 
asserting their rights as humans for fear that such an assertion might impede the ﬂows of 
capital? It is not. It is the language of people who understand that the shared aspirations and
joys of humanity transcend the strictures that commerce and government would impose on 
them, and that these aspirations and joys merit pride of place as the first rights enumerated in 
the list of rights which forms the first Article of the Constitution of Maine. A technocratic vision of 
our Constitution as a narrow document with narrow aims is a narrow idea for narrow minds. 
The first line of the Sierra Club‘s mission statement is: “To explore, enjoy, and protect the wild 
places of the earth.” We are blessed in Maine with an abundance of wild places, from the 
awesome ridges and peaks of Katahdin, to the wind-whipped and salt-scoured headlands of the 
Cutler Coast, to the serene and remote headwaters of the Allagash, to our vanishing coastal 
marshes which each spring vibrate into an efflorescence that calls us anew to stewardship. 
There is no question in our minds - none - that these places deserve Constitutional protection at 
the same level as the right of possessing and protecting property, or the right to bear arms, or 
the right to freedom from corporal punishment under military law, or any of the other rights 
enumerated in the twenty-five existing sections of Article I. The question you face is whether the 
right to a clean and healthy environment is fundamental to what Maine is and what Maine will 
become in a future that belongs to the youth now reckoning with the environmental 
heedlessness of our era. The gravity and joy which intermingle in the voices of these youth are 
the seeds from which will spring this future. 
Sierra Club Maine urges you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 928. Thank you for your time and 
consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Nathan Davis, Ph.D. 
Sierra Club Maine 
Legislative Team member
