TESTIMONY OF NOA LUNA BADERLD 928—Ought to PassRESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine To Establish a Right to a Healthy EnvironmentJoint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources March 22, 2023Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and honorable members of the Committee, greetings. My name is Noa Bader, and I am here to testify in support of amending the Maine Constitution to guarantee the right to a healthy environment.I work on an oyster farm on North Haven.  The testimony I am submitting is similar to the one I submitted last session, as my conviction that we deserve to have the Pine Tree Amendment added to our Constitution has only strengthened and the state of our environment has only gotten worse in these last two years.I am still living the existential experience of youth. It is so easy to feel hopeless. I have quite a few friends who have no hope for the future, and even I can feel tempted to walk through life lacking hope, like a well run dry... all positivity and optimism evaporated with that last drop of water. Life without hope is not a life worth living. We need hope and optimism, faith in ourselves, each other, and in our future, otherwise the point of living is lost. I want to know that the State of Maine recognizes my right to clean air, pure water and a healthy environment. Without these, I have no hope or trust in my future.Action or inaction are choices we make. Each action has the ability to inﬂuence and encourage others to stand up to protect our air and water; and has an equal opportunity to normalize inaction, carelessness and lack of responsibility and accountability. “Will we give up out of hopelessness? Or will we persevere and try our utmost to ﬁght for the protection of the environment.”I refuse to give in to hopelessness. As a youth who cares deeply about the environment and equitable rights for all people, I feel a deep sense of responsibility to try my hardest to advance the ideals I declare as important. In Maine a large portion of our identity is built upon our deep care for the outdoors; forests, waterways, and ocean, and all Mainers deserve a right to enjoy the beauty of Maine’s outdoors, for generations to come. I intend to ﬁght for the adoption of the Pine Tree Amendment so that my future children and grandchildren are sure to be able to experience and beneﬁt from Nature just as I and those before me have done.I want the State of Maine to commit to the preservation and protection of the environment we rely on. This shared hope, and faith is what will bring us together, and it will be the binding agreement, encouraging us to fully commit ourselves, and become true stewards of the earth, together.
I believe The Pine Tree Amendment is a way to ensure our rights to a clean and healthy environment into the future. The upcoming generation has the opportunity to take full initiative and make environmental justice and climate policy our top priority and the Pine Tree Amendment would enable us to do so. If you adopt this legislation, you are giving us the hope we need. You have the opportunity and power to enact this amendment. You hold that responsibility to younger generations; to grant us our right to a future.So I ask you to vote, Ought to Pass on LD 928. Thank you.
Noa Bader
North Haven
LD 928
TESTIMONY OF NOA LUNA BADER
LD 928—Ought to Pass
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine To Establish a Right to
a Healthy Environment
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
March 22, 2023
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and honorable members of the Committee,
greetings. 
My name is Noa Bader, and I am here to testify in support of amending the Maine 
Constitution to guarantee the right to a healthy environment.
I work on an oyster farm on North Haven.  The testimony I am submitting is similar 
to the one I submitted last session, as my conviction that we deserve to have the Pine 
Tree Amendment added to our Constitution has only strengthened and the state of our
environment has only gotten worse in these last two years.
I am still living the existential experience of youth. It is so easy to feel hopeless. I 
have quite a few friends who have no hope for the future, and even I can feel tempted 
to walk through life lacking hope, like a well run dry... all positivity and optimism 
evaporated with that last drop of water. Life without hope is not a life worth living. 
We need hope and optimism, faith in ourselves, each other, and in our future, 
otherwise the point of living is lost. I want to know that the State of Maine recognizes
my right to clean air, pure water and a healthy environment. Without these, I have no 
hope or trust in my future.
Action or inaction are choices we make. Each action has the ability to influence and 
encourage others to stand up to protect our air and water; and has an equal 
opportunity to normalize inaction, carelessness and lack of responsibility and 
accountability. “Will we give up out of hopelessness? Or will we persevere and try 
our utmost to fight for the protection of the environment.”
I refuse to give in to hopelessness. As a youth who cares deeply about the 
environment and equitable rights for all people, I feel a deep sense of responsibility to
try my hardest to advance the ideals I declare as important. In Maine a large portion 
of our identity is built upon our deep care for the outdoors; forests, waterways, and 
ocean, and all Mainers deserve a right to enjoy the beauty of Maine’s outdoors, for 
generations to come. 
I intend to fight for the adoption of the Pine Tree Amendment so that my future 
children and grandchildren are sure to be able to experience and benefit from Nature 
just as I and those before me have done.
I want the State of Maine to commit to the preservation and protection of the 
environment we rely on. This shared hope, and faith is what will bring us together, 
and it will be the binding agreement, encouraging us to fully commit ourselves, and 
become true stewards of the earth, together.
I believe The Pine Tree Amendment is a way to ensure our rights to a clean and 
healthy environment into the future. The upcoming generation has the opportunity to 
take full initiative and make environmental justice and climate policy our top priority 
and the Pine Tree Amendment would enable us to do so. If you adopt this legislation, 
you are giving us the hope we need. ​You have the opportunity and power to enact this
amendment. ​You​ hold that responsibility to younger generations; to grant us ​our r​ight 
to a future.
So I ask you to vote, Ought to Pass on LD 928. 
Thank you.
