Noah Abbott
Cape Elizabeth
LD 928
March 19th, 2023
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of
the committee
From: Noah Abbott
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Noah Abbott, and I live in Cape Elizabeth. I am writing as a student to 
urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 928.
I am deeply concerned about the environment because it has played such an important
role in my life. So many of my best memories are out in nature, going on hikes and 
other outdoor activities. It really scares me that our environment is consistently 
worsening, and future generations may not get to have those wonderful experiences I 
did.
Maine's identity is closely tied to the outdoors, including the woods, waterways, 
ocean, hiking, hunting, and fishing. It is essential that every Mainer has the right to 
enjoy this way of life for generations to come.
No individual, whether living in Maine today or in the future, should have to worry 
about their right to a clean and healthy environment.
Maine's unique environment is central to our values and way of life. It is crucial that 
we protect the health of our waters, air, land, and wildlife for our future well-being 
and prosperity.
By establishing a right to a healthy environment in the Maine Constitution, the PTA 
would ensure that all legislators, governors, laws, and permits honor this right. While 
laws can be made and unmade, a constitutional amendment is permanent and provides
lasting protection.
As a student who treasures the memories of outdoor activities in Maine, I feel a 
responsibility to protect our environment. I am deeply concerned about the 
degradation of our environment and the impact it will have on future generations. It is
disheartening to see that we are not doing enough to protect our state's natural 
resources. That's why LD 928 is so important, as it would establish a constitutional 
right to a healthy environment. Maine's identity is deeply rooted in our natural 
resources, and this resolution would ensure that every Mainer has the right to clean 
air, water, and land. By passing LD 928, we can guarantee that no individual, whether
today or in the future, has to worry about their right to a clean and healthy 
environment. We need to take action now to protect our environment, so that future 
generations can also have the opportunity to experience the beauty of Maine's 
outdoors.
Respectfully submitted,
Noah Abbott
