Nola Meek
Portland
LD 928
Wednesday March 20, 2023 
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Nola Meek
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Nola Meek. I live in the city of Portland and I am writing as a student, 
activist, and concerned citizen to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 928.
I am from a family that values our time outdoors and the lesson we can learn from 
nature and our environment. As I have grown up I find my values aligning more and 
more with the integrity and lessons I have learned from spending my childhood in the 
outdoors. It is my hope that the generations after me will also be able to take school 
trips to their local mountain or park and that they will not be burdened with the threat 
of an unclean or unhealthy environment. 
No person in Maine today, or for generations to come, should question their right to a clean 
and healthy environment. 
Environmental justice is a topic that will affect everyone and the Pine Tree Amendment 
strengthens the right to clean water, air, and healthy environments regardless of one's race, 
ethnicity, or income. The PTA also ensures that it is the duty of all government officials to 
protect all communities equitably. 
In Maine part of our identity and how we are defined is by our extraordinary environment. 
People from all walks of life enjoy the outdoors and all Mainers deserve the right and ability to
continue enjoying the outdoors for many more generations. 
The Pine Tree Amendment is essential because it will provide guidance for our government to
ensure its decision-making considers environmental impacts early in the process when 
prevention of pollution, degradation, and environmental harm is most possible.
I urge you to pass LD 928 not only for our current generation and their benefit, but 
also for all future generations and to preserve Maine’s unique environment. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Nola Meek 

