Testimony in Opposition to LD 928 
“Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish 
a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment. ” 
 
March 2 2, 2023  
Peter Triandafillou  
 
Good afternoon  distinguished members of the Committee on The Environmen t and Nat ural 
Resources . My name is Peter Triandafillou, and I live in Orono. I am retired from Huber 
Resources Corp (HRC) based in Old Town. I am submitting testimony in opposition to LD 928. 
 
LD928 puts too much policy decision making in the cour ts and takes it out of the legislative and 
executive bran ches. Maine has a deep and functional process for enacting environmental 
policy . It requires public hearings and work  sessions before you an d other committees . In these 
sessions, both legislators and ci tizens have the opportunity to voice their concerns and help 
steer new policy . In the executive branch, subject matter experts in agenci es work with the 
public and stakeholders to craft appropriate rules t o implement policy enacted by the 
legislature. Major rules are then reviewed by commit tees like yours that either approve them 
or send the m back to the agency for further work.  
 
This detailed give and take of public input he lps create rules and regulations that address policy 
directives. The process is understandably lengthy, but this give all parties – the legislature, 
agencies , and the public – the opportunity to fully explore, debate, and cr aft rules and 
regulations.  
 
LD928 shor t circuits the en tire process. Well crafted public policy and rules and regula tions can 
be challenged by any one who feels that their constitutional righ t to a cl ean e nvironment  has 
been abridged . The challenge goes to the  courts , who can discard en vironm ental law based on 
their interpretation of th e proposed amendment. In effec t, LD928 takes the power and process 
of making environ mental policy away from the legislature, public, and exec utive branch  and 
gran ts it to indiv iduals and the courts.  
 
Make no mistake, this proposal is specifically designed to bypass the normal process of enacting 
and crafting environmental law and regulations , including deliberations before this committee . 
Entities that do not wi sh to take the time  and effort to en act public po licy, or who are 
unsati sfied with the legislative process will use this amendment to bypass you and the rest of 
Maine’s public .  
 
LD928 is bad public p olicy and an unneeded an d dangerous change to our constitution. I urge 
you to vote ou ght not to pass on this proposal. Thank you for your time.  
 
