Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
In Opposition To
LD 928 - Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and 
Healthy Environment
March 21, 2023
Sen. Brennan, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and Natural 
Resource Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony in opposition to LD 
928, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy 
Environment, on behalf of Maine Municipal Association which represents the interests of municipal 
government before the legislature.  The positions of the Association are determined by our 70-member 
Legislative Policy Committee (LPC) who are elected by the councils and selectboards in each of Maine’s 
35 Senate districts. 
As we have seen with the most recent amendment referendum on the Right To Food, the 
aspirational goals of Constitutional amendments are subject to challenges asserting rights that were not 
the intent of the drafters, according to their testimony anyway. Courts are the only entity that can 
determine the limits and scope of Constitutional rights which makes such efforts an automatic trial lawyer 
employment act. These are public funds that are better used in direct service of environmental protection 
goals not funding legal challenges. 
Constitutional amendments are restrictive, open communities to legal challenges for delivery or 
protection of resources, and generally only established concretely through the creation of case law to 
those legal challenges. Once settled, case law can strip a community, or this legislature, of the flexibility 
necessary to respond to fundamental human rights issues. Neither treaty law nor customary international 
law provide for such a right within human rights discourse though there are multiple elements of human 
rights law that correspond with sustainable management of ecosystems and biodiversity. There is a deep 
relationship between a clean and healthy environment and the enjoyment of all natural and inherent 
human rights and fundamental freedoms. 
It is this inter-relationship between a healthy environment and all other rights established in 
customary international law that require as much flexibility in interpretation of environmental rights as 
possible for the government entities establishing regulation and enforcement mechanisms. 
Environmental regulation and goals have consistently been increased and advanced by the actions 
of local governments who nibbly respond to the desires of their residents. Municipalities consistently use 
their ordinance authority to limit pollution to bodies of water, remove harmful products from waste 
streams, and limit the spread of chemicals that can effect an organic farm or the health of those sharing 
drinking water resources with their neighbors. Long before such efforts become politically palatable at the 
state level.
Municipalities need investment in state support to meet the climate and environmental goals that 
extend beyond municipal boundaries and not the advancement of constitutional language that will 
potentially handcuff these future efforts to be leveraged to the maximum extent practicable. They do not 
need public expenditure to run a referendum to affirm what is already known and actively pursued. 
Official urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 928 and keep local funds necessary to run this 
referendum in service of environmental protection priorities at both the state and local level. 
