Senator Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
Committee-
Good morning, I'm Richard Nelson and I am writing to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on 
LD 928.  I have often stood before the committee as that fisherman from Friendship, 
speaking of the fisheries or the effects that climate and greenhouse gases have on them 
and the world. But even though the lobster industry serves as a prime example that 
conservation and protecting the environment go hand in hand with economic health, 
today it matters little if the speaker is a lobsterman, teacher, or even legislator. The issue 
at hand is so fundamentally basic and is shared between us, as humans beings, as is the 
air we breathe and the water we drink. Each of us is dependent on the life sustaining 
environment and resources around us on this planet. Today this unquestionable 
relationship finds a bit of confusion when stated as a human right. We hear the calls for 
our “Right to health care,” “Right to good paying jobs,” “Paid time off from jobs,” or even, 
“Rights to basic housing.” As much as these calls are based on good concepts and 
intentions, some might wonder if people should ever have left the womb. The Pine Tree 
Amendment has no association with the precepts of “All about me,” or “Have it all now,” 
or with the politics of individual needs met by the efforts of others. On the contrary, it's 
about sharing, sharing the resources of this planet with all and sustaining it for future 
generations. Not to inhibit economic health now but to allow for its continued abundance. 
About recognizing and protecting our symbiotic relationship with our environment, simply 
-we take care of it, it takes care of us. A lifetime working on Maine’s waters has allowed 
me to witness this first hand. Should not those blessings be shared with our 
grandchildren and beyond? I look at this amendment as a missing block in the 
foundation of Maine's Constitution, one that is needed to set a level with the desires of its 
citizens. An ideal not meant as an obstruction in our chosen course, but as a navigational 
aid for our Government and Judiciary in maintaining it.  -Thank You
Richard Nelson
Friendship, Maine
fvpescadero@yahoo.com

