n _,,~=t .
_ 
‘Q 
Richard A. BennettV‘ 
p 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 18 Augusta, Maine 04333 ' V‘ 
MI‘ 
THE MAINE SENATE 
13 lst Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard Bennett 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
LD 928 "RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean 
and Healthy Environment ” 
March 22, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Enviromnent and Natural Resources: I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 
communities in Western Maine in the State Senate. I am pleased to cosponsor LD 928, “RESOLUTION, 
Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy 
Enviromnent ”—also known as the Pine Tree Amendment. 
The proposed Amendment is predicated on the fact that a core condition of human life and core to our state’s 
identity is a healthy environment and a clean outdoors. This Amendment will hold our govemment accountable to 
protect these as basic rights. 
The Pine Tree Amendment would be added to Article l., the Declaration of Rights in the Maine Constitution. This 
enumeration of rights therefore precedes the mechanisms and applications of governmental powers, the checks and 
balances, the legal deﬁnitions which follow. Indeed, the expression of these rights foremost in our founding 
document is designed as a limitation on the governmental power that is thereafter constructed. 
The Declaration of Rights are the bedrock principles and legal protections that you can expect if you live in Maine. 
The Pine Tree Amendment ﬁts comfortably and contentedly in this context. What commonality is more important 
for Mainers than our bountiful, beautiful outdoors — the clean winds of Katahdin, the lapping waves of Sebago, the 
bends of coastal shoreline? What says Maine more than cross-country skiing on a crisp March morning, dipping 
your paddle in Chesuncook Lake, feeling the earth awaken around your tree stand in November, traversing the 
boulders of Mahoosuc Notch, or hearing the buoy bell at eventide? 
Our way of life in Maine demands recognition and protection as a right of the people. Sadly, our government has 
shown that it cannot always be trusted. Sometimes its policies are swayed unduly by centers of inﬂuence, such as 
globe-straddling corporations that may think of Maine as a market, as a means to an end, rather than as the unique 
place it is, where there is a special interconnectedness between the people and the lands and waters on which we 
live, play, work, and ﬁnd sustenance. Thus, the Pine Tree Amendment will help safeguard the harmonizing 
elements of our way of life, our shared values and our common culture. 
I ask for your favorable consideration and thank you for your attention. 
Fax." (207)287-1527 * TTY (207) 287-1583 * Message Service I-800-423-6900 * Web Sire: legislature.mainegov/senate
