Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health
In Support of LD 928, “RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to 
Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment”
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee
March 22, 2023
Good morning Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and 
Natural Resources Committee. My name is Sarah Woodbury. I am the director of advocacy for Defend 
Our Health. Defend Our Health’s mission is to make sure that everyone has equal access to safe food 
and drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic-free and climate friendly.  I am here to 
testify in support of LD 928, “RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment.”
LD 928 would enshrine in our constitution the right of all Mainers to have clean environment. Maine 
is known as vacationland because of our beautiful beaches, lakes, and mountains. Our identity and 
economic success are tied to our natural environment. Farmers, fishermen, foresters, and tourism 
businesses depend on a healthy environment to prosper. All Mainers are entitled to clean air, clean 
water, and a healthy environment for work and recreation and LD 928 would enshrine those rights in 
our constitution. While state policymakers work hard to make sure that they are protecting these 
basic rights, there is currently no foundational principle to guide state policymakers at every level of 
government in their deliberations to protect these basic essentials. LD 928 would change that.
Maine is currently dealing with a PFAS contamination crisis. The legislature has worked hard over 
the past four years to put into place laws to protect the health of all Mainers from PFAS 
contamination going forward by passing source reduction legislation, halting state-sanction programs 
that contributed to farmland contamination, and providing resources to impacted communities. 
Passage of LD 928 would make it easier for impacted communities to act on issues like PFAS, 
without having to wait for legislative action, which isn’t always guaranteed. For instance, 
Pennsylvania used their Green Amendment, which is their version of LD 928 to submit a legal 
petition arguing that the state’s inaction on PFAS in drinking water was in violation of the Green 
Amendment. Ultimately, their governor used language under the Green Amendment to move on 
water standards for PFAS in drinking water. Pennsylvania set PFAS drinking water standards, citing 
their constitutional obligation to do so under the Green Amendment. If LD 928 had been in place, it 
may have allowed movement on PFAS contamination sooner. It could be used in the future to help 
push for action on other sources of contamination.
LD 928 would provide guidance to lawmakers and state agencies and ensure that our laws and 
regulations are interpreted, applied, and enforced in service to that constitutional obligation, assuring 
government accountability. Therefore, Defend Our Health urges you to vote unanimously “ought to 
pass” on LD 928.
Thank you for your time.
