Scarlet Labbé-Watson
Watershed School
LD 928
March 20, 2023
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Scarlet Labbé-Watson
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Scarlet Labbé-Watson  and I go to school at Watershed School. 
I am writing as a student to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 928.
I care deeply about this issue as an upcoming voter and youth. I want to live in a place
where I know I will have my basic needs met. Everyone needs clean water to survive, 
and because of that it should be protected by law. If people do not have a clean 
environment they will have more health struggles, and fear (because they aren’t sure 
if they will be poisoned by the air they breathe or water they drink).
Our right to a clean and healthy environment should be as fundamental as our right to vote
Our state is defined by our extraordinary environment - it is who we are and what we value, 
as individuals and as a state.  Protecting the health of our waters, air, land and wildlife is 
essential to our future well-being and prosperity.
The PTA will strengthen environmental justice by ensuring all communities – regardless of 
race, ethnicity or income – have the same rights to clean water and air and healthy 
environments and the duty of all government officials to protect all communities equitably.
Pennsylvania, Montana and most recently New York have already passed this kind of 
environmental amendment. PA & MT amendments are being used to prevent harmful gold 
mining operations; advance drinking water protections from PFAS contamination; prevent 
state legislators from raiding environmental protection funds; require consideration of science 
and impacts before permitting environmentally damaging operations; secure cleanup of toxic 
contamination, and more.
Last year my families’ tap water began to run red with sediment. We didn’t 
understand what was going on or how to fix it. It was terrifying to know that I 
couldn’t drink the water I was provided with. After an expensive water test we found 
we had high levels of Coliform in our well water and that we needed to shock our 
well with bleach to get rid of it. In the meantime we needed to walk to our neighbors 
everytime we wanted water. We were very lucky that we have such a generous 
community but many people who cannot drink their well water are not so lucky and 
are forced to buy overpriced water from monopolies to get their basic needs met. 
After not one, but two shocks of bleach and over six months of undrinkable water we 
could have our tap water again. Needing to carry three gallons of water from my 
neighbors gave me an important perspective on how important that resource is. It is 
both essential and fragile. There are people in more extreme situations than my family
and it is everyone’s responsibility to make sure they are taken care of. Protecting 
these resources cannot wait, contamination and depletion of resources is already 
happening and can have dire consequences!
Respectfully submitted, 
Scarlet Labbé-Watson
