To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and honorable members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee
From: Shirley Hager, Chesterville, ME, shirley.hager@maine.edu; 207-491-0982
RE: Support for LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
Date: March 22, 2023 
My name is Shirley Hager, I live in Chesterville, Maine, and I am writing to you as a concerned 
citizen to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 928. 
The time to act on climate change is now and, to this end, states and municipalities need every 
possible tool to use in this effort. We can no longer afford half-measures or to feel complacent 
because we live in a state currently with abundant water or a comparatively livable climate. 
Every one of us, if we think we not impacted presently by climate change, soon will be. I just 
returned from a trip to North Carolina where I spent time helping my brother move away from 
the Intercoastal Waterway where he has lived for 49 years. Five years ago, his neighborhood 
was devastated by Hurricane Florence and, as soon as we were allowed, we went down to help 
him then too. If you have never experienced the aftermath of a hurricane and/or flooding, you 
cannot imagine the physical, emotional, and economic impact. To see entire neighborhoods 
with all their household belongings piled eight feet high on their sidewalks and people sitting on 
their porches with their heads in their hands...it is an image that never leaves you.  Every one of 
us, or our friends and families, will soon be impacted in some way by what is coming if we do 
not act.
On Monday of this week, the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
issued a report stating that we are already likely to miss the goal of limiting global warming to 
2.7 degrees Fahrenheit above preindustrial temperatures. The report states that beyond that 
threshold, scientists have found, climate disasters will become so extreme that people cannot 
adapt: https://newspaper.pressherald.com/infinity/article_popover_share.aspx?guid=e4de6cf2-3230-44b5-8884-
6dd6df434841 
This same report states that we already have the knowledge and the technology to avert this 
crisis, but governments are not acting quickly enough. Policy falls behind what is possible. I 
urge you to use this opportunity to give Maine the policies and the tools that it needs to protect 
the health of our waters, air, land and wildlife that are essential to our well-being, indeed our 
existence. A constitutional amendment would ensure that all future legislatures, Governors, 
laws and permits would protect our precious environment and way of life here in Maine. Please 
support LD 928.
Thank you.
