Testimony 
In support of LD 928: 
”RESOLUTlON, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to 
Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment" 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
Committee: My name is Susan Inches and l am a resident of North Yarmouth. I've been an 
environmental advocate, organizer, and educator for many years. l'm here to testify in support of LD 
928. 
Amending the state Constitution should not be taken lightly. Its important that we only do so when 
there is a good reason, and when the life and well-being of Maine people are at stake. LD 928 checks all 
of these boxes. Let me explain: 
Why Do We Need Environmental Rights? 
Our state constitution gives us the right to free speech, the right to own a gun, the right to assemble. 
But we don't have the right to breathe clean air, drink clean water, or live in a healthy environment. 
These essential elements of life are not protected by our state constitution. 
This puts Maine people——especially future generations--at risk from harmful developments that could 
threaten their health and life. 
LD 928 establishes in statute what we know is true: Our Maine economy and way of life depends ona 
clean and healthy environment. 
A 30+ Year Track Record with No Unintended Consequences 
Environmental rights were established in Montana and Pennsylvania in the 19705, and have been tested 
over the past 30 years. These rights have protected communities from serious environmental harm. 
There have been no surprises, and no unintended consequences. There's a lot we can learn from them. 
The Pennsylvania legislature passed a law that allowed fracking for gas in any location, including 
schoolyards, town parks, and neighborhoods. The law superseded local zoning. A citizen's group sued 
the state based on their constitutional environmental rights. They won. The fracking law was 
overturned and local zoning was reinstated. 
In Montana, a gold mine was permitted. The mine would have dumped millions of gallons of toxic 
effluent into the Blackfoot River, a pristine trout habitat. A citizen's group there challenged the permit, 
and it was overturned. The goldmine was never built. 
One of the most frequently asked questions is whether the Pine Tree Amendment would lead to a lot of 
litigation. Based on experience in other states, the answer is no. 
Five to seven cases each year in Montana and Pennsylvania mention environmental rights. And most of 
these are citations, adding strength to existing cases. Rarely are environmental rights used to initiate a 
case.
The reason for so few cases is simple: lawyers are penalized for bringing cases that are frivolous. They 
will not risk their reputation or license on a case without merit. For a case to rise to the level of violating 
constitutional rights, serious environmental harm has to be proven. 
Providing Guidance for Important Developments 
Maine has a significant lithium deposit, estimated to be worth over $1 billion. Rare Earth minerals 
important to manufacturing electronics have been found in Aroostook County. Four commercial scale 
aquaculture farms are currently proposed for Maine, and a new large scale wind facility and 
transmission line in Aroostook County are under consideration. 
Large and important developments are here, and more are on the way. We want good development in 
Maine—this is essential to our economy and growth. The Pine Tree Amendment would assure that 
these projects are developed in an environmentally sensitive way that takes the health of the people 
and Maine communities into consideration. 
Some argue that Maine's environmental laws and rules are good enough and we don't need 
constitutional rights. But we have seen environmental laws and rules come and go, as the Blaine House 
and Legislature changes hands. Some years environmental laws are enforced vigorously. Other years not 
so much. The Pine Tree Amendment would assure that the health of Maine people and communities are 
always part of policy making. 
Tackling environmental consequences early when policy is being made, is much easier and less costly 
than after the fact. Imagine if we had had environmental rights when municipal sludge was approved for 
spreading on farmland. We might have required testing and discovered PFAS contamination in the 
sludge before spreading it. 
Sending the Right Message to Corporate Polluters 
There is a growing recognition across the country that people need protection from a variety of 
threats, from toxic chemicals to greenhouse gases. Most of these threats are caused by 
corporate polluters. 
A recent example is Cancer Alley, an 80 mile stretch on the Mississippi that has the highest 
cancer and covid death rates in the country. The state of Louisiana recently permitted four new 
plastics plants in the small town of Welcome located there. 
The new permits did not take existing pollution into account. The cumulative effect of toxic 
emissions from the new plants would have far exceeded EPA guidelines. Residents sued the 
state based on an environmental rights clause in the Louisiana constitution. The permit was 
overturned (and is now being appealed). 
In another example, 26 cases have been filed by states and cities claiming damages from 
greenhouse gas emissions. Plaintiffs argue that taxpayers should not have to pay for damage 
due to flooding, fires, storms, and sea level rise that they did not cause.
Constitutional environmental rights would strengthen these cases. The Pine Tree Amendment 
could be cited by Maine's attorney general if Maine were to sue for damages due to PFAS, 
climate change, or any other environmental threat. 
Currently, eleven states are actively campaigning to add an environmental rights to their 
constitutions. Voters in the state of New York added environmental rights to their constitution 
by referendum in 2021. Montana and Pennsylvania already have them. 
Maine should join these other jurisdictions and send the message to corporate polluters that we 
take public health seriously. 
Environmental Justice for All 
The Pine Tree Amendment would provide environmental protection for all Maine citizens, 
without exception. Typically in the US, toxic facilities are located in places where residents have 
the least ability to fight back. These are sometimes called "sacrifice zones" . Fortunately, this has 
not happened too many times in Maine. 
But the pressure is growing. How are we going to handle the growing stream of solid waste? 
What are we going to do with PFAs contaminated sludge? What about plastics? 
The Pine Tree Amendment would assure that no group of Mainers would be unfairly exposed. 
The Pine Tree Amendment can prevent environmental injustice before it starts. 
Let the Voters Decide 
As with all constitutional amendments, LD 928 will go to citizen referendum if it passes the 
House and Senate. A vote for the Pine Tree Amendment would give Maine voters a chance to 
decide if clean air, clean water and a healthy environment is important to them. 
Please support LD 928 and give Maine citizens, communities, and future generations a better 
chance for a clean and healthy life. 
I'm happy to answer any questions you may have. 
For more information: wwwpinetreeamendrnentorg, forthegenergtiognsorg
