March 21, 2023 165 Steves Road Boothbay, Maine 04537  To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the committee From: Tom Moroney  Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment  My name is Tom Moroney and I live in Boothbay, Maine. I am writing as a concerned citizen to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 928. I and my family are relatively new Maine residents, relocating to the midcoast in 2018. Following a 35-year international engineering career, settling in vacationland seemed like a wise decision. Our early time soon collided with the pandemic and like many; we avoided our social networks. Instead, we replaced them with ecological networks, embracing the outdoors. We felt fortunate and blessed to be in Maine. We walked our coastal beaches; hiked trails within protected preserves; traveled inland marveling at majestic views atop Quill Hill; and rode Route #1 up the Boldcoast eventually reaching West Quoddy Lighthouse. Often evenings were spent on the Damariscotta in quiet darkness, stargazing – usually treated to a continuous shower of falling stars.   That brings me to today and my support of LD 928. I believe it incumbent for political leadership to adopt this constitutional amendment, demanding the protection and preservation of the natural, cultural, and healthful aspects of all Maine environments. Not only should today’s citizens have this right, but every future generation should have the same right, to live within and experience all of Maine’s vibrant and diverse ecosystems. After three decades around the U.S. and the world, in the resource extractive industry, I know the importance this legislation could play in holding industry accountable as it pursues its business objectives. ‘Sustainable’ business objectives that work responsibly, in concert with, not at a detriment to the environment, are what we need. From my private sector experience, I know this is possible.   • There is no reason that our right to a clean and healthy environment shouldn’t be as fundamental as our right to vote. • Maine is defined by our extraordinary environment and its ecosystems - it is who we are and what we value. Protecting the health of our waters, air, land and wildlife is essential to our future well-being and prosperity. • A clean and healthy environment is essential to vibrant, quality communities today and tomorrow. The PTA will help safeguard our right to breathe clean air and drink clean water by focusing communities on environmental stewardship.  LD 928 is Maine’s chance to lead through collective obligation, balancing sustainable prosperity while protecting and preserving our quality places.  Respectfully submitted,   Tom Moroney March 21, 2023    
