Wendy Schlotterbeck
Auburn
LD 928
March 22,2023
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Wendy Schlotterbeck
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Wendy Schlotterbeck and I have lived in Auburn, Maine for 31 years.
I am writing as a retired high school teacher, former youth minister, active community 
volunteer and concerned citizen to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 928.
The natural beauty of our state; the blue skies, pristine snow covered trails, rivers, 
lakes and ocean are integral to our way of life and economy. So many of the jobs in 
Maine depend on the soil, water, forests and ocean ecosystems. We need to act now to
preserve these endangered treasures.
The PTA ensures that all Mainers have the right to a clean and healthy environment for 
generations to come. 
Our right to a clean and healthy environment should be as fundamental as our right to vote.
The PTA would ensure that all Legislatures, Governors, laws, and permits will honor the 
rights we should have to a healthy environment. Laws can be made and unmade, but the 
Constitution is permanent.
Pennsylvania, Montana and most recently New York have already passed this kind of 
environmental amendment. PA & MT amendments are being used to prevent harmful gold 
mining operations; advance drinking water protections from PFAS contamination; prevent 
state legislators from raiding environmental protection funds; require consideration of science 
and impacts before permitting environmentally damaging operations; secure cleanup of toxic 
contamination, and more.
I spent long summers on a Maine coast island and fell in love with the rocks, trees, 
ocean and sunsets. These natural offerings are threatened by runaway climate change 
which we can do little to mitigate. However by passing LD 928 there is a chance we 
in Maine can help protect our environment, water and air to help delay or reverse the 
mass extinction on the world’s horizon
I urge you to vote to pass on LD 928 and send it to the people for their vote.
Thank you.
Respectfully,
Wendy Schlotterbeck,79 Skillings Corner Rd Auburn, Maine 04210
