Wyatt Adams
Portland
LD 928
3/19/2023
To: Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and Honorable members of the 
committee
From: Wyatt J Adams
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 928, a Resolution Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to a Healthy Environment
My name is Wyatt Adams, I am a current junior at Waynflete living in the city of 
Portland. I am writing as a student and outdoor enthusiast to urge you to vote “ought 
to pass” on LD 928.
I will admit freely that I am not a Mainer by birth but that does not lessen how much I
care about the state I now call home. Perhaps that fact can make my slightly 
roundabout message more understandable. Ever since the age of five, I have spent my
winters in Vermont, running through snowy birch forests with my brother and skiing. 
I have always felt such awe in the quiet presence of these woods, whether I am 
standing amongst the trees watching the snow fall or looking out over the valley 
below me as I make my way down a mountain. It is this awe and the feeling that I 
could just slip away into the woods that I enjoy most about the outdoors; it always 
seems to sneak up on you when you least expect it. Over the years though, have found
these moments growing increasingly fleeting as the winter snows have grown less and
as swathes of forest are taken down to build yet another unreasonably large house or 
hotel. It leaves a strange feeling of impurity, as though something of the natural world
ought to be standing there. Another moment, not even a minute's walk from my home,
was when a series of trees were taken down over the course of the weekend for what 
seemed like no point. They had stood there for longer than I have been alive doing no 
harm to any of the houses or the single road nearby. They were gnarled old things that
had survived the coastal wind and salt from the seas but they weren't at risk of falling 
down any time soon. And yet, over the course of the weekend, each tree was taken 
down one by one and turned into sawdust. Nothing has replaced them in the four 
years since they have been cut down and all that remains are four stumps in a grassy 
area alongside a road.
I know these two stories are superficial and only touch on a small part of what this 
resolution will do but it is important nonetheless. Who is to say that those who come 
after us do not deserve the same chances to look out on an untouched landscape and 
marvel at its beauty?
And that is what this resolution will do:
 - Safeguard the right of all Mainers, current and future generations, to a clean and healthy environment
 - Maintain our state's image as a beautiful place to experience the outdoors and all its varied associated
activities 
I have watched two states I have come to love slowly degrade as we humans have 
impacted the surrounding areas to what we believe to be a minute degree, only for it 
to have drastic consequences. I wish for Maine to remain the state it is: a vibrant place
for all to enjoy and marvel at its outdoors no matter the season.
Respectfully submitted, 
Wyatt J Adams
