 
 
 
 
1 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF ZACHARY L. HEIDEN , ESQ.  
 
Ought To Pass  – LD 928 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of  
Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESO URCES  
 
March  22, 202 3 
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources , greetings . My name is Zachary 
Heiden , and I am the Chief Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to vote that this bill ought to pass .  
 We offer this support after careful consideration and reflection, and we do not do so  
lightly. Amending the Constitution —the basic framework for the operation of our state, which  
defines the relationship between the government  and the public it serves —is a serious  
undertaking. But, threats to a healthy environment deserve a serious response. In 2017, the  
Lancet Commission on Pollution and Health found that pollution is the largest environmental  
cause of disease and premature de ath in the world, killing 15 times as many people in 2015 as all  
global wars and conflicts combined.1 In 2016, the World Health Organization found that 92% of  
the world’s population breaths substandard air.2 Here in Maine, a healthy natural environment is  
one of the things that distinguishes us, but it is out of reach for many of our residents. In one of  
our most densely -populated cities , South Portland, residents have raised alarms about emissions  
from the industrial tank farms that exist next to schools and residential neighborhoods.3 
 
1 See Phillip J. Landrigan et al., The Lancet Commission on po llution and health , Lancet 2018, 391:462 -512. 
2 Merrit Kennedy, 92 Percent Of The World's Population Breathes Substandard Air , WHO Says, Sept. 27, 2016, 
NPR, https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo -way/2016/09/27/495654086/who -says-92-percent -of-the-
worldspopul ation -breathes -sub-standard -air. 
3 Sabrina Shankman, They Built a Life in the Shadow of Industrial Tank  Farms. Now, They’re Fighting for Answers. , 
Dec. 7, 2019, Inside Climate News, https://insideclimatenews.org/news/07122019/south -portland -oil-tank-farm -
airpollution -health -hazard -asthma -testing/ .  
  
 
Penobscot Nation residents have raised serious concerns about the Juniper Ridge landfill.4 A 
healthy natural environment sustains our lives, our families, our busines ses, and our  
communities. And once it is gone, it is almost impossible to get back.  
We are moved to offer our support to this proposal because we regard the Constitution as  
the bedrock protection for the most fundamental rights, and because enshrining protection for the  
right to a healthy environment in the Constitution is the strongest way of safeguarding against  
political fickleness. It has been well documented that individuals and communities who lack  
power in the political scrum are most at risk of being denie d access to a healthy environment,  
which has long term consequences for their health and economic well -being. These include racial  
and ethnic minority communities, Indigenous communities, and low -income communities.5 The 
first step towards addressing this injustice is acknowledging the importance of a healthy  
environment.  
Because there is no stronger place in which to lodge that acknowledgement, we urge you 
to vote ought to pass . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Lisa Pohlmann, Maine has become a dumping ground for New England. That must stop. , Dec. 6, 2020, Bangor 
Daily News, https://bangordailynews.com/2020/12/06/opinion/contributors/maine -has-become -a-dumping -
groundfor -new-england -that-must -stop/  
5 See Leona F. Davis and Mónica D. Ramírez -Andreotta, Participatory Research for Environmental Justice: A 
Critical Interpretive Synthesis , Environmental Health Perspectives Vol. 129, No. 2 (Feburary 16, 2021) .  
