1 
 Testimony of Jeff McCabe  
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989  
In support of LD 1607, An Act to Stabilize the Pension Funds of the Maine Public Employees Retirement 
System, Sponsored by Senator Teresa Pierce  
Before the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
April 24, 2023, State House Room 228 and Electronically  
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee on Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs, I’m Jeff McCabe, director of politics and legislation for the Maine Service Employees Association, 
Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Un ion. We are a labor union representing over 13,000 
Maine workers, including workers for all three branches of Maine State Government.  We’re here i n 
support of LD 1607, An Act to Stabilize the Pension Funds of the Maine Public Employees Retirement 
System . 
For retirees the  Perfect Storm  continues  – the storm created by the 2011  cuts and fueled by inflation . 
Like a natural disaster, retirees risk losing homes  and being forced to  ration medication and food in 
some cases. It is clear that the cuts made in 2011 to  the pension benefit have created a much wors e 
outcome th an elected officials ever imagined. Retirees did not just have to tighten their belts –  as the 
expression goes.  
Shifting gears for a moment , current State of Maine employees and public school teache rs continue to 
see retirement benefits erode. We strongly believe stopping the ongoing erosion of the pension plan  
through the Maine Public Employees Retirement System  is vital to help address ongoing recruitment 
and retention issues. Across Maine S tate Government , one in six  job is  currently vacant. Members of this 
committee have asked me what can be done outside of wages to help  fill these vacancies . One solution  
is improving the pension system by restoring the pension cuts  of 2011 . 
We want appreci ate the ongoing bipartisan interest and support in having key conversations around 
fixing the pension cuts of 2011. These conver sations are ongoing and they build upon work of the last 
legislative session when the Legislature recognized the challenges , including the challenge of inflation.  
Inflation was 5.4% , yet the maximum cost- of-living adjustment in MainePERS is 3%. However, this 3% 
cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) is a misleading since it only applies to roughly the first $24,000 in 
pension income . For many, the COLA is more accurately at 1.6% or lower as it relates to their overall 
pension . But last session , the Legislature lifted the COLA from 3% to 4% for a year and lifted the base 
amount the COLA applies to by the full inflationary amount. The cost  was over $100 million to make 
these changes. While we are extremely grateful  for these actions , impacted retirees still lost 1.4% 
compared to inflation . Current year retirees received the maximum 3% COLA (again a misleading 
statistic since it only applies to roughly the first $24,000 in benefits) ,yet inflation was 9.1%.   
We are aware  and supportive  of an amendment to the bill and know the Maine Education Association 
(MEA) will be speaking to it :  “The bill currently reads that resources in the Fund should be “ equal to the 
difference between the amount of the payments made toward the obligation for the unfunded actuarial 
liability in the year in which the amount is transferred and the amount of those payments for the year preceding the year in which the amount is transferred.”  As I described above, the payoff of the “legacy UAL” will come in FY28, and therefore under this writing the Fund will only see funding dedicated to it in FY 29.  We suggest the Committee consider depositing the difference betw een the FY28 contribution to 
the UAL and expected payment in the current year and we continue this for at least 5 years.  Under this 
2 
 scenario, each year the state will compare its UAL payment to the FY 28 figure and deposit the difference 
into the Retireme nt Improvement Fund.  “ 
When you keep trying the same thing repeatedly but are not successful , then why not try a different 
approach ? This is not an immediate fix for pension issues but a great step. These pension issues are 
complex and we must do all we ca n to find the pieces to complete the puzzle of trying to fix  them .  
Thank you for your time and I stand ready to answer questions.   
 
