Rob Peale 2023 Tes.mony on LD 1607 An Act to Stabilize the Pension Funds of the Maine Public Employees Re.rement System (MPERS) Senator Rotundo, Representa.ve Sachs, and members of the CommiKee on Appropria.ons and Financial Aﬀairs:   My name is Rob Peale and I am a Readﬁeld resident. I am also a re.red State of Maine 30-year employee. While I am not opposed to this bill, and admiKedly don’t fully understand exactly what it would do, it does not appear to provide what is needed to create a permanent and sustainable recovery of at least a por.on of the pension beneﬁts taken from state employees and teachers back in 2011. The 2011 cuts have greatly harmed many former teachers and public employees and, over the long term, will put us further and further behind private sector workers’ social security beneﬁts which get annual cost of living adjustments (COLAs) that match the general rate of inﬂa.on. Since many MPERS re.rees do not get social security beneﬁts due to careers spent mainly in public sector employment, our pension beneﬁts play the same role as social security beneﬁts for private sector workers. The amount of the average MPERS beneﬁt is similar to the amount of the average social security beneﬁt. However only social security beneﬁts have COLAs indexed to the actual rate of inﬂa.on while MPERS beneﬁts have a COLA capped at 3% by law and the COLA only applies to a por.on of the MPERS pension amount. What our MPERS re/rees need most is for addi/onal money to be put directly into MPERS to fund both current and future pension improvements, something this proposed bill does not appear to do.  Given the current surplus, this year would be a very good .me to put more money back into MPERS. It is especially cri.cal to raise the 
pension base for COLAs if the goal is truly to improve our pension beneﬁts. One example of a way to do this would be to retro-ac.vely raise the September 2022 COLA from 3 % to 9.1% (annual inﬂa.on as of June 30, 2022 when annual COLA is set) and contribute enough money to the re.rement system to pay the retro-ac.ve beneﬁt and raise the pension base by the same percentage going forward. This is exactly what was done by the prior legisla.ve session to bring our COLA for 2021 up to 5.4%, the rate of inﬂa.on as of June 30th, 2021. Again it is especially cri.cal to raise the pension base for COLAs if we really want our MPERS pension beneﬁts to keep up with social security beneﬁts over the long term rather than occasionally provide one-.me hand-outs such as the governor’s one-.me 1% addi.onal COLA included in the recently passed budget. Given the size of this year’s surplus it is very unfortunate the governor did not propose more substan.ve addi.ons to MPERS beneﬁts. While passing LD 1607 would be beKer than nothing, it looks more like another band-aid than a cure. The weaknesses of this bill are many.  It establishes a fund but does not put the money into MPERS where it would be beKer protected from the machina.ons of future legislatures and governors. It would only provide funding when there is a surplus and unfortunately there are many ways to make surpluses disappear including tax rate cuts, give-backs from tax revenue, crea.ng new tax breaks, and just spending it on other things, etc. The bill does not specify what or how much it would improve beneﬁts including whether or not they would be funded going forward. I cannot even tell from the bill where the funding would be in the priority list for distribu.on of surplus revenue. Also even if this bill is passed it could easily be repealed by a future legislature. I believe we need more than one-.me, intermiKent, incremental, temporary addi.ons to our pension payments which appear to be all that this bill would provide. 
Thank-you Rob Peale Readﬁeld
