MAINE i=i€iii§tk3“R“sF@ 
Your Real Estate Experts 
19 Community Drive 0 Augusta, Maine 04330 0 (207) 622-7501 0 Fax: (207) 623-3590 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 1101 (“An Act to Support Lower Home Energy 
Costs by Establishing a Home Energy Scoring System”) 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS® 
March 30, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, my name is Andy Cashman. l am the Founder of 
Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a 
professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. 
REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members 
represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate 
transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing 
agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association 
is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade 
association in the country. 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® opposes LD 1101 in its current form. The bill would 
create a home energy scoring system for residential buildings. 
We support and encourage the development and voluntary use of alternative energy sources 
to reduce dependence on non-renewable forms of energy and understand its importance to 
sustainability and energy conservation. We support voluntary energy audits, financial 
incentives, and tax policies to assist in decisions to purchase property, upgrade efficiency, 
or encourage conservation. That being said, we oppose mandatory energy audits, mandatory 
energy ratings, or mandatory efforts to assign scoring metrics to homes or commercial 
properties. 
This bill would allow a county or municipality to require a home energy score beforea 
property can be advertised for sale. We strongly oppose this requirement because it creates 
an unnecessary obstacle that could delay the transfer of property. Additional point of sale 
mandates can create unknown and substantial delays before someone can list their 
property for sale. In real estate, timely delays often result in increased seller expense or 
could jeopardize the entire transaction. Sellers have many reasons that they may want (or 
need) to move a transaction along quickly and their ability to do so should not be impeded 
by this bill. 
Maine has some of the oldest housing stock in the country. We are concerned that 
mandatory energy audits, energy ratings, or scoring metrics will stigmatize our state’s older 
REA!-TORQ - is a registered mark which identiﬁes a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member ol‘ the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS® E’<:\:'%':"°'m"$ 
12781773 I
ﬁﬁ ASSOCIATION OF. 
1| REALTORS Yourkealfsrare Experts 
Page2g 
homes and potentially lead to an unnecessary decrease in home values. Sellers with lower 
rated homes may not have the financial resources to make improvements and those homes 
may not sell. 
People are aware of the importance of energy efficiency. As their financial means and 
budgets allow, they are improving their home’s efficiency for example through heating and 
hot water systems, appliances, and even light bulbs. Potential buyers will perform the 
voluntary due diligence that is most important to them, which may or may not include an 
energy audit. Property owners may perform a voluntary energy audit to market their 
property when it's their time to sell. Maine property owners and potential buyers do not 
need mandates and additional regulation from government for these changes to occur. 
Market demand will make it happen. 
For these reasons, we respectfully urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1101 in its 
current form. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
12781773 1
