 
 
Basalt, CO   /  Boulder, CO   /  New York, NY  /  Oakland, CA  /  Washington, D.C.   /  Beijing, China 
 Rocky Mountain Institute | 2490 Junction Place, Suite 200, Boulder CO 80301  | 303.567.8716  
 
March 30 , 2023    
To: Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Honorable Members of the Joint  
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology,  
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1101, An Act to Reduce energy costs by enacting a Home Energy Scoring System  
 
My name is Aurimas Bukauskas. I grew up on Peaks Island, Maine. I am writing in my current capacity as 
a Senior Associate at Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI) , a non- profit focused on decarbonizing the global 
energy sector , where I am part of our REALIZE residential energy retrofits program.  RMI has deep 
expertise and a decades- long  track record of leadership  in building energy efficiency improvement 
measures , including work on home energy audit s through the Residential Energy+ program .  
With the nation’s oldest population, some of its oldest building stock, and the country’s  high est 
proportion of buildings relian t on #2 heating oil, Maine has an exceptional need for home energy audits 
and retrofits . Greater access to efficiency  retrofits and electrification measures in Maine can reduce 
energy burden, improve occupant comfort, and reduce Maine’s contributions to climate change.  
LD 1101, by introducing a voluntary Home Energy Score for Maine residential buildings, addresses a 
current market failure in Maine’s real estate sector: the lack of standardized, transparent, and 
actionable data concerning the energy efficiency of existing homes. Making this data available to 
homeowners will unlock market mechanisms for the energy efficiency and electrification  retrofits that 
Maine’s homes critically  need, supporting green jobs in the process. RMI recommends that LD 1101 
prescribe a flexible audit procedure allowing for remote or in -person audits to collect this data .   
Having grown up in an early 1900’s Maine home heated using delivered heating oil and a wood stove, I 
can speak to the challenges  of maintaining thermal comfort through the win ter in a typical home in our 
state . My experience  researching and managing deep energy retrofits at RMI has made the benefits of 
efficiency and electrification upgrades for such homes clear. LD 1101’s home energy scoring system is a 
key step to achieve this change  for Mainers.  
 We urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 1101.   
 
Respectfully submitted,   
 
 
Aurimas Bukauskas, PhD  
On Behalf of the Rocky Mountain Institute  

