Testimony in Support of LD 1101 by Julia Bassett Schwerin, Agents for the Built Environment 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, distinguished members of the Energy, Utilities and 
Technology Committee of the 131“ Maine Congress. Thank you for your service to the people of 
Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you again to advocate for a bill that we 
believe is needed in our state, LD 1101, An Act to Support Lower Home Energy Costs by Establishing a 
Home Energy Scoring System. 
My name is Julie Bassett Schwerin, and I am a Green Broker designated by the National Association of 
Realtors for over ten years, a licensed real estate Broker for over 17 years, a member of the Greater 
Portland Board of Realtors Board of Directors, and co-chair of the Sustainability Advisory Group,a 
member of the Maine Association of Realtors Board of Directors, a residential and commercial Broker 
affiliated with Advisors Living Real Estate, a member of Passive House Maine, the Maine Energy Code 
Coalition, the Maine Green Bank Coalition, and an advisor to the NorthEast Energy Efficiency 
Partnerships Home Energy Label Information Exchange. 
I created and teach a three ceu course for real estate agents on how to represent buyers and sellers of 
homes with green features in Maine over the last seven years and have also taught real estate agents 
in Vermont how to use the fields in the MLS to market and find homes with green features. I have co- 
produced 17 CEUs of sustainability courses for Realtors to date, and will co-produce at least another 
nine in 2023 on our core topics: reducing greenhouse gasses in the building sector in accordance with 
the Maine Won't Wait goals, making buildings use less energy through weatherization, electrification 
and renewable energy, and making buildings healthier and more valuable due to these investments. I 
come before you representing Agents for the Built Environment, an advocacy group, with the Realtors 
signed below, and not the National, Maine or Greater Portland Associations of Realtors nor our real 
estate companies. 
Weatherization and electrification are an essential part of making buildings more affordable, more 
comfortable to occupy, with reduced housing expenses, while also lowering carbon emissions to stop 
climate change from destroying our coastal heritage, our fisheries, our farms, and our ecosystems. 
Weatherization is also a very significant way of increasing a building's value through asset 
appreciation. Investing in air sealing and insulation has a proven ROI. Unfortunately, weatherization 
has no curb appeal. You have nothing to show for it except a folder of utility bills. Many of us in the 
real estate community want a residential energy score that is uniform across the state and is 
voluntary with an easy to understand comparison building to building. 
Like MPG for automobiles, a residential energy score would allow a landlord/owner/seller to show 
tenants, appraisers, and buyers how a given building can be a better financial deal. Unlike a car's 
MPG, however, a building's energy efficiency score can be improved with attention to air leakage and 
insulation. 
In preparing a home to be sold, the real estate broker and the home owner prepare a disclosure form 
with important information for the buyer, such as: Does this home have a wet basement, is it prone to 
flooding, does it need a new roof, how old is the furnace? These are important questions which 
tenants/ buyers currently get answered. However, the critical question of how efficient is this home (a 
common buyer/tenant question and concern) cannot be honestly and objectively answered without 
an energy score. In addition, energy scores assist greatly in understanding which remedial measures 
are priorities to address for each unique building to make it more efficient. 
Maine has the eighth oldest housing stock in the nation with over half built prior to 1980. These older 
homes built prior to the existence of energy codes will benefit dramatically from weatherization,
insulation, and electrification. Efficiency Maine is working tirelessly to reach the goal of 100,000 heat 
pump rebates (new installations) by 2025 and they are ahead of schedule. With respect to 
weatherization, Efficiency Maine's goal is 17,500 weatherization rebates by 2025 and 30,000 by 
2030. That is fantastic, but it is only 7% of our older housing stock. Roughly another 30,000 homes are 
receiving fuel oil assistance with LIHEAP funds and these are often the older homes that need 
weatherization the most. 
Fortunately, most of the 6,500 homes that will be built this year in Maine will conform to the 2015 
building energy code and will be sufficiently efficient to be heated solely with air source heat pumps 
and have no fossil fuel combustion gas indoors. However, there hundreds of thousands of single 
family homes built before there were any building energy codes. We have to encourage and motivate 
more people than 30,000 to weatherize their homes by 2030. Way more! We have to incentivize 
homeowners to prioritize the invisible benefits of energy efficiency and energy labels are proven to do 
that. 
In many cities and states, energy scores have proven to raise awareness that the cost/benefit ratio of 
weatherization is positive. Energy scores are a way building owners can reign in their operating 
expenses and increase their cash flow. 
Air sealing and insulation have no curb appeal. Building energy scores also unlock "invisible" 
investments in weatherization on resale, refinance, and rental, generating more money in 
transactions. This bill provides for a uniform, voluntary scoring system for the state to use to provide 
transparency to buyers and renters. 
Who benefits? Studies have shown aging housing stock is concentrated among people of color and 
LMl residents. By design, a home energy score incentivizes the path to home weatherization by 
providing consumers a uniform, simple to understand guide. A home energy score report points to 
improvements, their cost, and their utility savings; a new score is created once the work is completed 
so consumers can quickly and readily see the benefits. Once the work is completed the homeowner 
then enjoys a more comfortable and healthy home environment, lower utility bills, and moves 
residential housing in Maine closer to the Maine Won't Wait reduced emission goals. A home energy 
score report would also highlight any State and/or local rebates, tax credits, grants and funding that 
are available. 
As demonstrated and proven in some dozen states and cities across the country, home energy scoring 
is a low-cost program delivering a win-win for all involved. 
Heating, cooling, and lighting of buildings are responsible for almost 1/3 of Maine's total greenhouse 
gas emissions. By actively encouraging homeowners to weatherize, electrify, and solarize, home 
energy scoring will help reduce the outsized contribution building energy makes to climate-changing 
carbon emissions. These are the reasons we ask you to support LD 1101. Thank you for your 
consideration. 
Julia Bassett Schwerin 
Marc Chadbourne 
David Gulick 
Russell DiConti
