Kenneth A. Capron, ret. CPA, Systems Engineer 
1375 Forest Avenue D-11 
Portland, ME 04103 
207-797-7891 
kcapron1@maine.rr.com 
maglev@maine.rr.com 
Southern Maine Research Institute 
SkyWay by MicroRail 
 
Dear EUT Committee, 
Wouldn’t this be a good time to convert Efficiency Maine into the Maine Department of Energy? 
I have been a real estate broker, a homeowner and a serious home renovator. To the average 
homeowner/wage earner these Scoring Mechanisms seem ominous. I can see how different organizations 
might use these scores against an individual. The scores do seem to be of the nature of just one more grab out 
of the pockets of taxpayers already struggling with every day life. When is enough “Enough”? It is highly 
probable that lower income people will be even less well off if scores are implemented. So Cut It Out! 
LD 1101, HP0696  
An Act to Support Lower Home Energy Costs by Establishing a Home Energy Scoring System 
1. LD 1101, as written, and the subsequent testimonies, failed to address a few big concerns: 
a. What will our tax ASSESSORS do with an “energy score”? I would expect that higher energy 
scores would raise the taxable value of a home/business. What do you think? 
b. What will BANKS do with an “energy score”? Would lower scores result in higher interest 
rates? Or could they be used to decline a loan? What about INSURERS? 
c. Shouldn’t such scores take into account the remaining life and ultimate replacement costs of 
energy improvements. Mankind has yet to develop products that never deteriorate over time.  
d. Don’t we expect that deficiencies will often just be passed on to subsequent owners to fix? 
That is the case today – with septic systems, wells, old wiring, lead plumbing and paint. 
 
2. How long will this waiting list for energy audits become? If we are short on home inspectors and 
energy auditors already, how bad will things be when hundreds of energy audits become mandatory 
(or ‘coerced’) onto the market? 
 
3. Will Efficiency Maine pay for these ‘audits’? In lieu of rebates? 
 
4. Isn’t the cost of the audits greater than the energy/carbon savings which will derive therefrom? It is.  
 
5. Regardless of the current benefit of a scoring mechanism, isn’t this just one more intrusion by 
government, big brother, into the independence and freedom of choice of the individual.  
 
6. Do we need one more way to frighten people with threats of penalties into making unaffordable  
choices in an already complex society? Remember the Beatles and just “Let It Be”! 
 
7. Wouldn’t “Safety audits” be a higher priority and equally as preventive and yet no one is mandating 
those? Imagine mandatory lead inspections and fire-safety inspections and health inspections and 
radon inspections? Where do we stop judging individuals and steering them to make decisions that 
are already their choice to make nor not? Why should I open my front door for government for any 
reason? 
 
8. Every house I have ever been involved with has had little defects that are discovered after the sale 
(see 1(d) above). We don’t need more worries.  
 
9. Maine is, to put it simply, going to fail to achieve its climate goals if we continue to focus resources on 
the little stuff. With workforce shortages, we need to put people where they are needed most. These 
scores are a mere distraction. Their energy/carbon impact is low, low on the totem pole of 
significance. We need to reserve funding to focus on solar, transportation and large MW producers. 
Then we can rehab our ancient abodes 
I am available to answer questions and provide facts to enlighten your decisions.  
It would help if all this climate stuff didn’t come with a price. Who can afford to buy/sell a house today? 
 
Ken Capron 
