Testimony of the Efficiency Maine Trust 
Michael D. Stoddard, Executive Director 
IN OPPOSITION TO 
LD 1101 - An Act to Support Lower Home Energy Costs by Establishing a Home Energy Scoring System 
Presented to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
March 30, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology, the Efficiency Maine Trust (the Trust) appreciates the opportunity to testify today on LD 
1101 - An Act to An Act to Support Lower Home Energy Costs by Establishing a Home Energy Scoring 
System. 
l appreciate that the supporters of this bill have the best intentions, and that they seek to help Maine 
homeowners lower their energy use and reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to improve the housing 
stock of Maine homes. The Trust shares these goals. 
However, the Trust cannot support this bill as drafted. 
First, the bill would effectively turn the Trust into the "energy police." The bill would have the Trust 
develop a system of penalties to be assessed against contractors for violating energy audit standards. 
This would be an unprecedented role for the Trust, which is not a regulatory agency and has no 
apparatus or experience in a policing role. The Trust's strength is in providing impartial information and 
financial incentives to entice Maine consumers to make energy improvements at their homes and 
businesses, and to encourage more contractors and vendors to work in this space. Slapping them with 
penalties seems an unlikely way to encourage them. Moreover, we already have ample leverage to 
dissuade or hold accountable poor performers by de-listing them from eligibility to perform rebatable 
work and removing their name from the online directory of eligible contractors. We don't need to add 
violations and penalties to our repertoire. 
Second, the bill appears to mandate that the Trust establish a single, uniform standard for energy 
audits that is overly complex and costly. The COVID pandemic hit the industry of home Weatherization 
168 Capitol Street, Suite 1, Augusta, ME 04330 I (866) 376-2463 I efficiencymaine.com
2 
contractors very hard. In the summer of 2020, Weatherization projects were at a standstill for obvious 
reasons. By the following summer, it Was barely any better. Contractors couldn't offer competitive 
Wages with other employers and laid off workers. ln the first months of 2022, the number of 
businesses offering Weatherization services was down 19% from pre-pandemic levels, and the number 
of completed projects was down 22% from the prior year. Meanwhile, the Climate Action Plan of the 
Maine Climate Council had set a goal of doubling the pre-pandemic rate of Weatherization projects. 
The Trust jumped in to help by allocating more RGGI budgets for home Weatherization, raising rebates, 
and signiﬁcantly increasing marketing. Through the spring and summer of 2022, Efficiency Maine saw 
the industry rebound, and by the fall of 2022 and into this past Winter, contractors Were so busy they 
had hired staff back, added more crews, and significantly increased Wages. The most active 
Weatherization contractors report to us they are now booked out about 100 days in advance. We are 
forecasting a 60% increase in completed Weatherization projects this fiscal year compared to last. 
In addition to the extremely hard Work and dedication of Maine's Weatherization contractors, l think 
there are a few notable elements of the Trust's program that have helped this industry recover from 
the pandemic and put Weatherization back on track to meet the goals of the Climate Action Plan. Most 
importantly, We "keep it simple." We've tried complex and detailed requirements for undertaking 
energy projects and found that it creates confusion and frustration for customers and contractors. 
Also, We've respected the desire of independent contractors to have the freedom to develop their 
oWn, individual business strategies rather than require a ”one-size-fits-al|" mandate. Some contractors 
prefer to offer a very simplified initial assessment of the home and charge only a few hundred dollars, 
conserving their time, and the customer's budget, for the big-ticket items that Will actually save them 
money and increase their comfort. Other contractors like to do an extensive energy audit, complete 
With analysis of the home's energy use, modeling or calculations of cost savings that could be achieved 
through various recommended actions, and additional explanation of the home's energy systems. 
These more extensive audits cost closer to $600 to $1,000, before any Weatherization Work has 
started. As drafted, LD 1101 appears to require that all energy audits in Maine Will be of the more 
extensive variety. Moreover, by requiring that the audit produce an energy score, the costs Will be 
even higher. The Trust's research indicates energy scores that Would comply With this bill Would likely 
cost between $800 and $1,500 or more. Our concern is that the complexity of this process, and the 
additional cost, will have a chilling effect on consumers considering Weatherization and other home 
energy improvements. 
While the recently enacted federal IRA legislation also offers a tax credit of up to $150 for an energy 
audit, we are concerned this will not be enough help most customers overcome the cost barrier of the 
type of audit required by LD 1101. 
Notwithstanding our misgivings about this bill's provisions on energy audits, We see real merit in the 
idea of developing a voluntary home energy score that could be used in Maine. And We agree that the 
US DOE Home Energy Score, using an asset-based approach, is a reasonable option. (We do not agree 
that "measuring the performance of the building, ” as suggested in the bill, is What the Home Energy 
Score does). We Would be interested in Working on developing such a score, and would be happy to 
Work With the bill's supporters and other stakeholders toward that objective. This bill is not needed to 
168 Capitol Street, Suite 1, Augusta, ME 04330 j (866) 376-2463 1 efficiencymaine.com
3 
achieve that outcome. Nor is the bill necessary for the purpose of giving authorization to the trust and 
municipalities to implement an energy score standard or process. (We are aware of nothing prohibiting 
a municipality from adopting an energy score standard or requirement within its own jurisdiction.) 
Finally, I should note that we have not found any funding in the emerging federal grant opportunities 
that would cover the costs for Efficiency Maine to perform the tasks of this bill. Even if such funding 
were available, we would want to think about whether dedicating it to the purposes of LD 1011 would 
be a higher priority than funding more weatherization projects and heat pumps. 
Respectfully submitted, 
[s[lVlDS 
Michael D. Stoddard 
Executive Director 
168 Capitol Street, Suite 1, Augusta, ME 04330 I (866) 376-2463 I efficiencymaine.com
