GrovvSmart Maine 
2023 
Board of Directors 
R1-zhecrita i7;1.1=*c:},' 
[Thu fr 
I-Itl"mn l3'n>:er-Macumhur 
Vice-r_Tlmi'r 
lean Claiveau 
Trei2sz1:'er' 
Maggie Fleming 
Sem;'£oiy 
Kirsten Brewer 
Ion Boyton 
Elizabeth Frazier 
Philip Iiussey 
[eff Levine 
Zoe Miiler 
Carol Morrir 
Lynne Seeiey 
Ben Smith 
Sally Storkwell 
Galen \~‘\"eibley 
[Mark C. Wiesemianger 
|'viai|iel'lousing 
Ex-ojjicrio 
Riiinmmn Hnmpson 
USDA: Rural [le\-elopment 
!:’ .\'-oﬂitriu 
Daniel I-liliirmli 
Fnierlruta ‘ 
livnn Richurl 
E1 Hr-1!‘! rm 
Alina =.\im"-h: ‘1‘hz- /on 
Errrerirus 227 Water Street, Suite 208 
Augusta, ME 04330 
5 Z2 207-2 0-00 
www.growsmartmaine.org 
Testimony of Nancy Smith, Executive Director of GrowSmart Maine 
in support of Public Transportation Components in LD 1101, 
An Act to Support Lower Home Energy Costs hr Establishing a Home 
Energ:LS.cnring.S¥s1;em 
March 3o, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, 
My name is Nancy Smith and I am the CEO of GrowSmart Maine. We are a statewide 
non-partisan non-proﬁt organization helping communities navigate change in 
alignment with smart growth. We advocate for comprehensive policies and funding for 
smart growth practices and outcomes. 
We have partnered with Build Maine to guide a transparent crowd-sourcing of policy 
proposals that began a year ago, and has drawn together over a hundred people from 
across Maine and beyond. Policy Action 2023 has resulted in sixteen proposals from 
eight working groups, all addressing this goal, “to address barriers to and create 
incentives for equitable, sustainable growth and development that strengthens 
downtovvns and villages of all sizes while pulling development pressure away from 
productive and open natural areas. We do so acknowledging that Maine has urban, 
rural, and suburban settings for which any solution may/ not be a ﬁt and a variety of 
people who deserve to be welcomed to their communities. ” 
LD 1101 is the bill that came out of Working Group #8, Decarbonization of Buildings, 
thanks to the signiﬁcant work done by passivhausMAlNE. I’ve attached the fact sheet 
for this bill, which outlines the merits of the proposal and provides context within Policy 
Action 2023. 
I also appreciate this bill personally, having sold and then purchased a home last year.I 
invested over $10,000 in energy efﬁciency in the house I sold, yet there was no way to 
highlight that value in the real estate listing. And when I was seeking a new home,I 
found only minimal reference to what it might cost to heat and cool each house asI 
compared options. I’m proud of the energy efﬁciency investments I made in my 
Monmouth home, and have accepted that I now have to make similar improvements to 
my new home in Ellsworth, having spent my ﬁrst winter here. 
This bill is a critical component of Policy Action 2023. GrowSmart Maine and Build 
Maine will assist the committee in any way that is helpful as you consider LD 1101. 
.P~'\ /~ ’ 
/7?-1/11? ((3
I 
. .-'
2:5 £3 iii i I 1' 
Til =;>f¥§?” 1’ r» 
' 
~-I 1 <-:1 = 1-'/>1f;i €_%:=€,l5' ,./§}§..»£< raise- 
~¥ 
OVERVIEW: What does the bill do? 
The legislative Committee on Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology (EUT) is currently considering LD 1101 which 
increases the probability that efficiency measures take 
place by providing a voluntary low-barrier audit which 
prioritizes potential projects to increase a building's 
efﬁciency score and also directs consumers to funding 
opportunities. This bill directs the Efﬁciency Maine Trust to 
establish a voluntary home energy scoring system for 
residential buildings for the purpose of evaluating a 
building's energy efficiency and relative greenhouse gas 
emissions. The bill also provides requirements relating to 
home energy audits. 
LD 1101 was born from passivhausMAlNE's retroﬁtMAlNE 
groiect. Naomi Beal's work on the Energy TAG of MUBEC is 
meant to tilt the existing codes to increased efﬁciency and 
resilience of new buildings. For existing buildings, we have 
found retroﬁts to be costly, inconvenient, and complex. 
Adoption of LD 1101 increases the probability that 
efficiency measures actually take place with a low barrier, 
voluntary audit which prioritizes potential projects to 
increase a building's score and also points consumers to 
funding opportunities. We have a once-in-a-generation 
opportunity for wide scale updating of the building stock 
both for mitigation of and adaptation to climate change. 
PROS: 
0 Equity centered: transparency at sale, lowering 
operations costs, increasing building resilience, 
healthy interiors, durability in extreme weather events. 
0 Voluntary 
0 Consumer protections at points of sale 
0 leveraging improvements for sellers’ beneﬁt 
0 increased participation in rebates, incentives and tax 
credits 
0 decreased carbon emissions and costs for 
operations in the Single Family Home market. 
0 Anonymous collection of carbon and building stock 
data to inform future building policy 
0 Remote Audit is less costly, less workforce intensive- 
reserving workers for the actual retroﬁt work 
I Bolsters Clean Energy Workforce either as auditors or 
retroﬁt construction. ‘:1: Ti"I ‘! ’<:._$7§))\;, —5lT~;€.?%?_7' ¢§{§~§.§g4ii§2_.; ‘:i -. ~-iv-»->4- .;-. 5.» =. {"’--- 
"-"T: 5‘ 5 at}; if F> 
( .51-Q. J";%:‘;‘1.f;:;L: ‘;:J:/'§i:;lL*_ /E .%»,s;;»..» 
0 Embracing this once in a generation opportunity to 
decrease carbon emissions and increase durability of 
Maine's aged building stock 
0 Building Stock improvement: Maine has some of the 
oldest building stock in the country, the highest 
proportion of buildings heated with #2 heating oil 
($$volatile prices) and the oldest population in the 
country. Improvement to existing buildings is a top 
priority is a single bullet which improves multiple 
challenges. 
POTENTIAL CHALLENGES: 
There is some concern around requiring in-person audits 
with a preference for remote audits. LD 1101 will increase 
the probability that efﬁciency measures actually take place, 
especially if energy audits are easy to access. Required 
in-person audits have the potential to be a barrier to 
program uptake with few auditors currently in place. 
Programs can be developed to encourage this ﬁeld. We 
prefer to see a remote audit option and focus workforce 
development on the retroﬁt ﬁeld. 
IMPACTS: Why does it matter? 
Equity: Equity centered: transparency at sale, activating 
cost saving incentives, lowering operations costs, 
increasing building resilience, healthy interiors, durability in 
extreme weather events. 
Transportation Safety and Choice: N/A 
Climate Action: Decreased carbon emissions and costs 
for operations in the Single Family Home market. Sistering 
with current rebate and incentive programs to encourage 
participation. LD 1101 represents both climate mitigation 
and adaptation. 
Fiscal health: The audit will point to local, state and 
federal incentives. This program also provides 
anonymous data collection for future housing and 
building policy. 
Economic Development: Bolsters Clean Energy 
Workforce- either as auditors or retroﬁt construction. 
Quality of Life: improved personal wellness with healthy 
interiors, predictable costs, comfort of an energy efﬁcient 
home and resilience in extreme weather events. 
/_\%_»\,~¢\( §§:?,_;.e xx . _ . _ _ _ , . ,. . . _ V V 
. .- H ,._._..g. . ;..:a-g~,@_§<_ _>a:;¢~éf,i~»<f-»».\e§;~<..;» 
. V 
.~ 
" V \$\£>“
K 
Build Maine + GrowSmart Maine a cotlaboration between 
PUL|CY ACTION Z023 
Overview oi Proposed Legislation G e 
PROBLEM STATEMENT Maine's current uncoordinated approach THE GOAL of Policy Action 2023 is to address barriers to and create 
to building places is causing real, unintended, and signiﬁcant social, incentives for equitable, sustainable growth and development that 
environmental, ﬁnancial, economic, and cultural challenges and strengthens downtowns and villages of all sizes while pulling development 
requires the creation of a cohesive approach to land development, pressure away from productive and open natural areas. We do so 
redevelopment, and placemaking. acknowledging that Maine has urban, rural, and suburban settings for which 
any solution may/not be a ﬁt and a variety of people who deserve to be 
FOR TALKING POINTS AND MORE: Public Folder for PA23 welcomed to their communities- 
Polioy Action 2023 
Working Group Bill Number Bill Title Sponsor Committee 
Printed Bills (LDs): 
1: Coordination of Government LD 602 An Act to Provide Regional Support to Deliver State and Federal Representative Traci Gere 
Programs to Cities and Towns in the State Select on Housing 
1: Coordination of Government H1259 Resolve, to Prepare Preapproved Building Types Ser1.am.iiéia£LBo.riiio.t Select on Housing 
3: Complete Streets Action LD 1076 ‘An Act to Expand the Use of Traffic Cameras for School and 
Work Zones" ®M Transportation Public 
Hearing April 4th 
6: Subdivision Regulations LD 1 25'} An Act to increase Housing and Protect the Regional Road 
Network, Municipal Tax Base, and Working Lands Representative Lydia Crafts Select on Housing 
7: Downtown Revitalization / 
Open Space protection .LD_§3B NOTE: Sponsor has decided to withdraw the bill and createa 
stakeholder group to meet between sessions. Goal is property 
tax policies to incentivize redevelopment of derelict buildings. mmmm Select on Housing 
8: Decarbonization of Buildings LD 1101 An Act to Support Lower Home Energy Costs by Establishing a 
Home Energy Scoring System Begresentative Rebecca Miliett Energy, Utilities and 
Technology Public 
Hearing March 30th 
Pending Bills (Lite):K
1 
1: Coordination of Government .LRlU.1 An Act to Establish an Affordable Housing Permitting Process E .I.: 
2: Rework Transportation Funding LKJZZZ An Act to Strategically Advance the State's Public Transit 
Infrastructure by Reinvigorating the Public Transit Advisory 
Council and increasing Funding E . 
H .Q.H.‘ 
Transportation 
3: Complete Streets Action 1.81132 An Act to Establish a Thriving Corridors Program by 
Encouraging Affordable Housing and Mixed-use Development E .I.: 
Transportation 
3: Complete Streets Action Q [256 Resolve to Establish a Vision Zero Task Force to Recommend 
Strategies to Achieve the Goal of Eliminating Traffic Fatalities 
and Serious injuries Beggesegtgtive Dag Agkeies 
Transportation 
3: Complete Streets Action LB.Z22é An Act to Grant Municipalities the Authority to Set Lower Motor ggngtggﬂiggﬁggggﬁ 
Vehicle Speed Limits Transportation 
3: Complete Streets Action LR 996 An Act to increase Street Safety Representative Marc Malon Transportation 
4: Growth Management Law LB.1.3IZ An Act to Update the Growth Management Law E .|H.5| 
5: State Historic Rehab Tax Credit LB_i§§5 An Act to Expand the Maine Historic Rehabilitation Credit Taxation 
6: Subdivision Regulations LR 275 Resolve Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation Bggrgggggggigg gggk Dgghgrmg 
and Forestry to convene a stakeholder group tasked witha 
Comprehensive overhaul and modernization of the State 
Subdivision Statutes 
7: Downtown Revitalization / 
Open Space protection LR 1 399 An Act To increase Maine's Housing Supply, Combat Climate 
Change, and Preserve Rural Open Spaces by Prohibiting 
Communities from Large Lot Zoning Practices in Areas Where 
Public Sewer and Water infrastructure are Available Representative Jim Boyle 
For an overview of Policy Action 2023, visit GrowSmart Maine website > Public Policy or click this link 
Version 03.29.2023 udito
