Dear committee members,  I am asking you to consider the positive impacts of LD1101 An Act to Support Lower Home Energy Costs by Establishing a Home Energy Scoring System. LD1101 will create a statewide building efficiency rating system to help homeowners and home buyers understand the level of efficiency and the scope of any needed improvements to a structure to allow it to be economical and resilient for decades to come. Most homeowners do not have the time and interest to learn/understand the nuances of air sealing, insulation, and air quality within a home. A standard numbered system, modeled possibly after the Department of Energy’s Home energy score (https://betterbuildingssolutioncenter.energy.gov/home-energy-score) would simplify and standardize home efficiency. Instead of having to communicate to a homeowner the amount of air exchanges per hour or the thermal bridging of their wall assembly, this information could be presented in a simple numbered scale.  With energy prices continuing to rise and ambitious goals to move toward renewable energy, a home energy rating system will be a welcome standard to compare homes and track the progress of any efficiency upgrades both for a homeowner and across the state’s housing stock. Currently calling a home efficient is subjective and is misleading in my instances. Having a number based standard that a homeowner can rely on will help them keep track of their progress towards efficiency and will set clear goals for any contractors or workers hired for efficiency upgrades.  In todays real estate market many new homes are constructed without enforcement of energy codes in smaller municipalities that are not required to enforce the states energy codes. Because of this lack of enforcement there are constant claims by realtors that a home is energy efficient simply because it is new. This is misleading because there are different levels and definitions of energy efficiency. Currently, the most commonly used comparison of energy efficiency would be through utility bills. As the cost of utilities continues to rise they become a larger part of the yearly expenses of a homeowner. Having a standard rating system for home efficiency may actually allow a prospective home buyer to get a larger loan because the bank knows that the cost to operate that home in the future is less.  Thank you for your consideration.    
