.J:""=5'»' ~é 
Sustainability Office City of 2%‘ 
5 us tainc/biiity Director 
To: Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
From: Troy Moon, City of Portland Director of Sustainability 
Date: March 30, 2023 
Regarding: LD 1101 
Testimony in Support of LD 1101, 
"An Act to Reduce energy costs by enacting a Home Energy Scoring System" 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology: 
I write to you in support of LD 1101, "An Act to Reduce Energy Costs by Enacting a Home 
Energy Scoring System." This would be an important tool to help the City of Portland achieve 
the goals described in our climate action plan, One Climate Future, for several important 
reasons. 
First, a Home Energy Scoring System may help reduce emissions from residential buildings by 
providing residents with a convenient opportunity to learn how they use energy in their 
homes, as well as information and resources to make improvements that reduce emissions. 
Second, a Home Energy Scoring System may be particularly helpful to low—income Maine 
residents, who spent an estimated 20% of their incomes on energy (according to a 2019 report 
by Synapse Energy Economics). The first step in reducing this energy burden is to empower 
residents with information so that they can make informed decisions to lower costs, as well as 
potentially access resources to help fund improvements. 
Third, a Home Energy Scoring System is a useful consumer protection tool. As residents are 
confronted with rising housing costs, full transparency related to the costs of buying and 
maintaining a home is essential. Home energy scores provide prospective home buyers with 
important information about how much it costs to heat and cool a home they are looking at. 
389 Congress Street, Portland, Maine 04101 | p: 207.756.8362 I thm@portlandmaine.gov
Having access to this information helps the buyer understand the true cost of ownership, and 
motivates the seller to make improvements. 
The City of Portland currently has an energy benchmarking ordinance, which requires the 
owners of buildings greater than 20,000 square feet to analyze and report on their energy use 
annually. We plan to use this data to help commercial properties find ways to reduce their 
energy consumption, benefitting both property owners and the general public. A statewide 
home energy scoring program would provide a similar tool for residential properties. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
389 Congress Street, Portland, Maine 04101 | p: 207.874.8689 l citymanager@portlandmaine.gov
