To:  Members of the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology,  
From:   William Weber  
Date:   March 30, 2023  
Re:   Testimony in  Support of L.D. 1101: An Act to Support Lower Home Energy Costs by 
Establishing a Home Energy Scoring System  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and the members of the Joint Committee on Energy, 
Utilities, and Technology,  
I am submitting the following testimony on behalf of the Portland Climate Action Team (PCAT), 
a volunteer group of greater Portl and residents committed to addressing the current climate 
crisis. We advocate for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in Portland and promote the 
equitable transition from fossil fuels to clean renewable energy. To that end, we urge an “ought 
to pass” report  on L.D. 1101: An Act to Support Lower Home Energy Costs by Establishing a 
Home Energy Scoring System.  
We have all become very familiar with the Energy Star labels when we go shopping for a new 
appliance. We are also keenly aware of the EPA mileage estimate on that new automobile we 
hope we can afford. These important measures protect the consumer and make them fully 
informed  of the costs  to operate the vehicle or the appliance. Those figures often can play a 
large role in deciding whether that car or refrigerator is really the one  for you or maybe a more 
expensive model may be less costly in the long run.  
Then isn’t it odd that one of th e most expensive investments that an individual can make, the 
purchase of a home, has the buyer in the dark relative to energy requirements? Energy costs in 
the United States can consume as much as 8% to  22% of a families’ total after -tax income, with 
the poores t Americans, or 25 million households , paying the highest of that range. According to 
a study by Wallet Hub  Maine has one of the highest costs for natural  gas in the country and is 
13th of the fifty states in the highest total energy cost for  a household.  It’s important to  
consider energy consumption when choosing a place to live, as around  27% of American 
households have difficulty meeting their energy needs.  A study done by  Synapse Energy 
Economics  determined that the average home energy burden in Maine for low income 
house holds is 19%.  
There are numerous examples across the United States where states and local governments 
have developed home energy scoring systems  to assist the consumer in making an informed 
decision on what they are buying. Efficiency Maine can easily ado pt one of the many existing 
and successful programs. Home energy scores can help potential home buyers better  
understand a home's energy efficiency and how even simple improvements can mean big  
savings over the life of the home . An example of a simple but very informative Home Energy  

 
Score is depicted below. The program which has been adopted by many states and 
municipalities was developed by the US Department of Energy Better Buildings Initiative .  
 
 
 
In addition to avoiding buyers’  remorse the Home Energy Scoring System will make a sig nificant 
contribution to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Due to the large percentage of fuel oil that 
heats our homes  in Maine residential greenhouse gas emissions are significant . Informing 
potential buyers of a property’s  energy costs will incentivize seller s to make investments to  
lower the carbon footprint of the building. That will also increase the participation in rebates 
and incentives . 
I respectfully urge an “ought to pass” report on L .D. 1101: An Act to Support Lower Home 
Energy Cost s by Establishing a Home Energy Scoring System.  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
William Weber  
Member Portland Climate Action Team  
 

