Testimony in Opposition of An Act to Ensure Safer Communities by Increasing 
the Punishment for Crimes Involving Fentanyl” 
 
Jamie Corbett, LCSW-CC, LADC, CCS, Mother in Recovery 
 
 Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Jamie Corbett. I am a resident of Marshfield, 
Maine. I am Master Clinical Social Worker – Clinical Conditional, a Licensed Alcohol and Drug 
Counselor, a Certified Clinical Supervisor, and a mother in long term recovery. In my work as a 
co-occurring therapist and program manager for eleven behavioral health programs across 
Washington and Hancock Counties, I have extensive experience working with individuals with 
substance use disorder. I am testifying today in opposition of L.D. 986, An Act to Ensue Safer 
Communities by increasing the Punishment for Crimes Involving Fentanyl.  
 There is no dismissing the enormous need in the state of Maine to help those suffering 
from substance use disorders. While addiction, for many, started as a choice the subtle gradual 
chemical changes that occur in the brain lead to automatic compulsive use that controls an 
individuals’ life. I have never evaluated a person with substance use disorder who reported they 
began using due to wanting to be an addict or a criminal but rather that substance use was 
normalized, often prescribed, and available within their communities. Individuals with substance 
use disorder suffer from a chronic disease not unlike hypertension and diabetes. We didn’t know 
scientifically when the Nixon Administration waged the War on Drugs, that drug use isn’t a 
moral defect but a chronic relapsing disease. Addiction like many other chronic health conditions 
can be managed and remission obtained with access to treatment and support services. 
More than a decade into the War on Drugs in 1999 Rolling Stone Magazine identified 
Washington County Maine as the Hillbilly Heroin Capital of the Nation. I stand before you 
twenty-four years later with sixteen years of sobriety and thirteen years of working on the front 
lines of the substance use epidemic as a substance use treatment provider to say that 
criminalizing individuals who use substances hasn’t worked and will not work. Incarceration 
creates significant obstacles to recovery and contributes to the problem. When we incarcerate 
individuals with substance use disorder, we create barriers to recovery success by removing 
individuals from essential services that support their recovery including positive interpersonal 
connections. When individuals can meet their basic needs such as housing, food security, 
warmth, safety, and connection, they are more successful in their recovery efforts. 
I have been trained in evidence-based practices of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, The 
Matrix Model, Moral Reconation Therapy, and Prime for Life among others. All these various 
treatment models are evidence-based and have a common thread of forming healthy relationships 
and connections. Criminalization is not assisting individuals impacted by substance use disorders 
to build healthy connections, it is disrupting existing healthy connections and placing barriers to 
positive connections that are possible when access to social supports and treatment are available. 
In my own recovery, positive relationships with treatment providers, community 
members, and employers helped me find stable housing, employment and to become someone 
my children are proud to have parenting them. Now, I work as a treatment provider. My 
professional evaluations are respected by child protective service workers, district attorneys, and 
judges. There is nothing miraculous about my journey: I had positive connections and 
opportunities that allowed me a life beyond my wildest dreams.  
Individuals whom I serve as a treatment provider and who have significant barriers due to 
criminalization to these basic needs often do not make it to the six-month mark of outpatient 
treatment. Often those who have experienced lengthy incarcerations not only face these barriers 
to recovery support services, but many have also had compounding trauma from these 
experiences to work through to meet the basic need of safety to build healthy connections that 
support their treatment and recovery. This legislation will continue to further criminalize and 
isolate Maine residents experiencing substance use disorder, a tactic that has only exacerbated 
the prevalence of substance use disorder among our residents. Increasing penalties for cocaine 
base possession or trafficking didn’t increase the safety of our communities during the 
implementation of the War on Drugs and neither will this legislation. In fact, what it will 
accomplish is further marginalization of our marginalized residents and further fueling our 
current substance use epidemic by increasing stigma, isolation, felony convictions, and 
increasing barriers to necessary recovery supports.  
Those in favor to this legislation will likely tell you that we need to decrease availability 
of these dangerous substances from our communities and hold individuals accountable. They 
will likely speak to the burden on taxpayers for the costs associated with substance use disorder 
on our communities. However, they are not looking at the entire picture. As the December 2020 
Maine Adult Drug Treatment Court Evaluation Report states probation and incarceration are 
more than twice the cost of case management and treatment. Taxpayers already support 
incarcerated individuals with their tax dollars, with the largest portion of state expenses related to 
substance use belonging to legal costs and incarceration costs. Taxpayers' hard-earned dollars 
deserve to be spent on increasing recovery capacity rather than contributing to the substance use 
epidemic our nation and our state are still facing fifty years into the War on Drugs. The twenty-
four percent increase in drug related deaths in 2020 during the coronavirus pandemic reinforce 
what we in recovery and the treatment field already knew, individuals need to be able to meet 
their basic needs of safety and connection to build their recovery capacity to sustain recovery. I 
am living evidence that treatment and social support services not only work but save lives. I have 
listed my years of experience and familiarity with multiple evidence-based treatment models all 
of which contain a common thread of building positive interpersonal relationships. The six-
month mark of treatment is a common indicator in treatment evaluations and as I stated many 
individuals with substance use disorder who face additional barriers due to criminal records 
don’t make it to this treatment milestone. So again, I state that the evidence doesn’t bear out that 
we cannot afford to support treatment and recovery, if fact as I see it the evidence states that we 
cannot afford to not invest in our Maine residents by supporting access to recovery. 
 
 
