 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 986 (Opposed)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 986, An Act to Ensure Safer Communities by Increasing the P unishment for Crimes 
Involving Fentanyl  
 
DA: April 18, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 986.   
 
 CLAC members recognize the s eriousness of the crime of trafficking fentanyl,  a 
particularly potent and addic tive drug.   After review of the  existing drug statutes and consultation 
with a  prosecutor with significant experience prosecuting drug crimes, however, CLAC members 
concluded that the change s proposed by LD 986 would not have a sign ificant impact on drug 
prosecut ions or public safety.     
 
 Current sentences for C lass B trafficking cases typically do not  approach  the ten -year 
maximum available for Class B crimes.    Trafficking in 6 grams or more, or more than 270 
individual packages of fentanyl , is already a Class A crime , subject to a 30 -year maximum sentence.    
The bill, as drafted, does not trigger imposition of any mandatory minimum  sentence.   
 
 Section 2 of the bill, which would create a new crime of “unlawful use of electronic 
communication device  in furtherance of fentanyl trafficking, ” likewise does not enhance public 
safety.  In order to pr ove this new crime, in addition to the use of the electronic  commu nications 
device, the State would have  to prove the elements of trafficking, or the intent to traffick and  what 
is in essence a substanti al step and/or agreement in furtherance of the cri me, which also could form 
the basis under current law of  charges of attempted trafficki ng or conspiracy to traffick.  17-A 
M.R.S. §§ 151, 152.   Thus the conduct sought to be cap tured by the proposed new crime is already 
actionable within existing statutes.     
 
 Section 2 would also intro duce an element of inconsistency into the criminal drug statutes,  
in that it would criminalize use of an electronic communication device to facilitate  fentanyl  
trafficking, but not other drug crime s.    
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body est ablished by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
 
 retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Crimina l Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the B ail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
