PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444
www.aclumaine.org
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought Not to Pass – LD 986  
 An Act to Ensure Safer Commu nities by Increasing the 
Punishment for Crimes Involving Fentanyl 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE O N CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
April 18, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, greetings. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am policy counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and 
U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I am here to testify today in opposition to 
this bill, which would worsen Maine’s overdose death crisis and swell our prisons.  
Although the public  rhetoric  around  Maine’s  drug laws  might  lead you to believe 
otherwise, Maine’s trafficking laws are already harsh compared to most other states.  More than 
three-quarters  of states  require  proof  beyond  a reasonable  doubt that a  person  intends  to sell  or 
distribute drugs before they can be convicted of drug trafficking. In Maine, however, possession 
of “any  compound,  mixture  or preparation”1 that weighs  four grams  or more  and “contain[s] 
fentanyl or any derivative of fentanyl…in any quantity” gives rise to a permissible inference that 
a person is trafficking in drugs.2 This bill would make that law even harsher, by allowing someone 
who possesses  four grams  of a mixture  containing  fentanyl  to be  sentenced  to prison for  more 
years  than the minimum  murder  sentence. And, because  a very high percentage  of street  drugs 
contain fentanyl these days, this bill would condemn the majority of people who are using street 
drugs in Maine to 30-year sentences for either possessing small amounts of drugs or subsistence 
selling (selling small amounts of drugs to afford to buy for one’s own use).  
The more the sta te criminalizes substances, the more it incentivizes a poiso nous drug 
supply. Criminalizing drugs makes them more profitable and more potent. The current rise in 
1 17-A MRS §1101(24) . 
2 17-A MRS §1103(3)(C -2). 
  
 
fentanyl -related  deaths can be directly tied to punishing possession and sale of heroin more  
harshly  than other drugs.  The rise in the use of heroin was directly tied to tamping down on 
prescriptions of oxycontin.  In recent years, policymakers  have focused on  increasing penalties 
for fentanyl, and as a result , sellers have begun inc reasing sales of  xylazine. The coming focus 
on xylazine will only lead to  a more unknown and more dangerous drug supply. This is a game 
of whack -a-mole: increase the penalties for one  drug, and another , worse drug pops up in its 
place.  
 The number of death s in Maine because of drug overdoses  is staggeringly  high: we lost 
716 people last year alone . These people included our  dear friends and neighbors.  The losses are 
personal, painful, and preventable. But prevention requires a path that is different than th is bill 
takes. To save lives, we need a public health response  to drug use . We must create ways for 
people to test drugs safely and legally, so that they do not unwittingly poison themselves. We 
must invest in harm reduction organizations that keep people who use drugs safe and provide 
proven pathways to recovery. We must expand  the availability of  detox  beds, residential 
treatment, and other recovery supports  for everyone including the uninsured . We must expand 
access to methadone and buprenorphine and other medications that can help people stabilize. We 
must ensure low -barrier housing and remove obstacles to getting and keeping jobs. None of this  
would result  from sending people to prison for 30 years.  
 More than fifty years of the war on drugs, and of incarcerating people for selling small 
amounts of drugs, has not saved our friends and family from overdoses.  Instead, it has saddled 
people with criminal records, making it harder to keep and maintain employment, housing and 
stability.  We urge you to turn away from failed methods of the past and vote ought not to pass.  
   
 
 
 
