Maine 
PRISON DVOCACY CoahtlonT
J 
feferﬂl. Zeﬂmam, .7’./Z2? 
20 Lawrence Ave. 
Thomaston, Maine 04861 ' 
(207) 542- 1 496 
Peter@GrowlnME.com 
Testimony in opposition to LD 986 
to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Apnl18,2023 
Senator Beebe—Center, Representative Salisbury, and 
distinguished members of the Committee: 
My name is Peter Lehman and I live in Thomaston. I am a formerly 
incarcerated citizen and a person in long—term recovery.* I am 
testifying in opposition to LD 986 on behalf of the Maine Prisoner 
Advocacy Coalition whose goal is to promote restorative practices 
in order to increase public safety and the health of our community. 
In the addiction recovery community, we often say that “insanity 
is doing the same thing over and over and hoping for a different 
result." We say this because in addiction we often deny our 
addictions and convince ourselves that “this time will be different." 
It's a habit. When in doubt or confusion or anxiety we try the 
same thing over and over again hoping that THIS TIME will be 
different. Insanity. Denial. 
This bill is exactly the same thing. We KNOW that increasing 
penalties does NOT reduce drug use. It does not reduce demand. 
It does not reduce supply. It does NOT make people safer. It’s 
simply insanity. 
The chart on the next page only goes to 2010 but I assure you 
that the trend continues. Despite our massive spending on 
enforcement and our massive spending on incarcerating people for 
trafficking, the extent of illegal drug use has not changed much. 
* 
In the interest of honesty and disclosure, a personal background statement is available on request.
April 18, Z023 Lehman, LD 986 Page2 
Forty Years of Drug War Failure in a Single Chart 
was 152 r@a§.@.@..§.e.m.i2 ‘ ;i195iL1if1.">.zty;y% ?l§:i?§:Qi%.LQif ‘£é€:f§i§ 155.. ~a sin/‘ Q1. ﬁé Y1 
What increasing penalties and enforcement DOES do, however, is 
make people LESS safe by diverting attention and resources from 
policies that work and reduce HARM. 
The title of this bill says that it will “ensure safer communities. ” It 
will not. Quite the opposite. 
We urge you to defeat it LD 986. 
Thank you for your generous attention. 
I'd be happy to try to answer questions.
