  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F. McKee 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph M ekonis 
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXEC UTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
April 14, 2023  
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
RE: LD 986 --  An Act to Ensure Safer Communities by Increasing the  
 Punishment for Crimes Involving Fentanyl  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Represe ntative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice and Pu blic Safety Committee:  
 
MACDL opposes  LD 986.  
 
Make no mistake:  fentanyl  is a very dangero us substance , and trafficking in it is a 
serious  crime.  But, as it stands now, trafficking in f entanyl is already a Class B 
felony crime, punishable  by up  to 10 years in prison.  Elevating the Cl ass B crime to a  
Class A crime would be without any evidence that judge s at this time are sentencing  
defendants to anywhere near the maximum sentence available.  It is o nly in that 
situation , and tha t situation alone, where this Committee should even consider 
elevating the class o f crime to a Class A crime.  
 
Section 2 of the bill would establish a brand new crime of basically using a phone in 
furtherance of fentanyl trafficking.  Under this new law, a person who sent a single 
text message to buy or sell a minute amount of fentanyl would be subject to a term of 
imprisonment of up to 10 ye ars.  There is no reason to  create this new law that would 
elevate the use of an electronic communication device that is connected to an y 
fentan yl trafficking to felony level consequ ences.  There are simply too many 
potential situations to which this new law would apply  and would likely ensnare 
countless people who were not true “traffickers” in fentanyl into a Class B felony.  
Additionall y, there is already the  felony crime of conspiracy , as well as accomplice 
liability, that is available  to prosecutors to ensure that those w ho eng age in activity  in 
furtherance of fentanyl trafficking can be prosecuted.   
 
Thank you for the opport unity  to address this bill.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F. McKee  
Chair, Legi slative Committee  

