Testi mony of Austin Vaughan  
In Reference to:  
LD 60: An Act to Require a 72 Hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm  
Public Hearing: April 3,  2023, at 1:00 PM in State House, R oom 436  
 
Dear Represen tatives Craven , Arford, Cr afts, Dodge, Gramlich, White,  and distinguished 
members  of the Committee of Criminal Justice and Public Safety,  
 
My name is Austin Vaugh an, a second -year osteopathic medical student  studying at the 
University of  New England College of Osteopathic  Medicine . I am currently located in 
Biddeford  but wi ll be moving to Lewiston next year for my rotations . I will hopefully be able to 
do my pediatric residency right here in Maine , a place my partner and I are no w proud to call 
home. I’m submitting this testimony on beh alf of myself.  
 
For most of h uman history , disease was the number  one cause of child mortality in the United 
States – it still holds that in famous title in many countries  around  the world.  Starting in the 
1960 s, that  unfortunate top spot  in the U.S. was overtaken by motor vehicle accid ents, which  
continu ed to be  by far the leading cause of death of children and adolescent s for the last 60 years , 
until recently .  
 
Last year, the CDC released data showing that as of  2020, the number one cause of death  in 
children in the U nited States is guns1. More th an 1 in e very 20,000 children died  in 2020 from a 
firearm2. For reference , in only one other comparable country  is gun-related deaths in the top 
five cause of child  mortality – Cana da, where it is ranked number 5.  Canada had 48 deaths. The 
United States had 4,357.2 
 
This data is undeniabl y upsetting, especially to those who have been affected by it firsthand. I 
was living in Tampa in 20 16 when the Pulse Ni ghtclub shooting occurred . I remember every 
tribute  posted , every protest  attended , and every letter wrote that year, and the frustr ation when it 
didn’t move the needle.  Less than 2 years later , one of my friends was a teacher at Marjory 
Stoneman Dougla s School in Miami in 2018, when 1 4 children and 3 adults were killed, with 
another 17 wounded. I count myself incredibly luc ky to have not yet been  affected firsthand by 
gun violence, and yet I still palpably feel it s effect s around me . 
 
But there’s data that shows common sense gun laws, including mandatory waiting periods, can 
help!  Even with the difficulty in wel l-funded research due to successful  gun-lobbying, there are 
studies  that show  well-written, purposeful legislation can make a difference. One Harvard study 
demonst rated a 17% drop in gun-related homic ides and a  7-11% drop in gun -related suicides by  
imposing a mandatory waiting period.3 Separate  data clearly sho ws that states  with more 
permissive gun  laws (or lack thereof) have a s ignificantly higher rate of mass shootings.4 
 
My goal  for my entire li fe has been to become a pediatrician , with the sole p assion  of wanting to 
see children g row up to be healthy and live extraordinary l ives. I’ve spent the last two years  
studying disease s in school , am spend ing the next two learning  treatments  in hospitals, and th en 
will spend  the rest of my life  helping children in the real world.  Nothing can deter me from that 
goal.  But I would be lying if I didn ’t say it’s hard to swallow that the number one cau se of death 
in children  here in the U .S. is something that no stethoscope or scalp el can fix. It ’s up to all of us  
to create a world safe enough for o ur children to l ive full, confident lives  – unburdene d by the 
fear that their school may be the next one in danger. So please, let ’s take a step toward that world 
together  by passing LD 60. Thank you for your time.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Austin Vaug han 
OMS -2 
University of New En gland College of Osteopathic Medicine  
 
1. https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/nejmc2201761   
2. https://www.kff.org/global -health -policy/issue -brief/child -and-teen-firearm -mortality -in-
the-u-s-and-peer-countries/   
3. https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1619896114   
4. https://www.bmj.c om/content/364/bmj.l542   
 

