To Senator Beebe - Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee: 
Good afternoon. My name is Barbara Arsenault and l am from Mexico, 
Maine. l appreciate the opportunity to testify on LD 60. 
l live in a gun owning home and l respect the second amendment and 
responsible gun ownership. 
My focus today is to look at the 72 hour wait period and how it can relate to 
firearm suicide. When South Dakota repealed its two day waiting period law 
in 2009, the next year it had a 7. 6 percent increase in gun suicides. Asa 
long time advocate for veterans l do want to address veteran suicide. The 
VA publishes statistics on veteran suicide for each state with a 2 year lag 
time and usually comes out each fall. ln Maine thirty five veterans died in 
2019 and 38 in 2020. Firearms were the lethal means 71.1% of the time. 
As the state of Maine is number 5 with the highest percentage of veterans 
this is notjust a veterans issue , it is a community issue. A recent Defense 
Department Committee recommended a 7 day waiting period to help 
protect military personnel and veterans. A committee member noted that 
the idea is to “slow down that access to firearms so that people can survive 
periods of high risk” 
A member of our extended family fatally shot herself in the parking lot ofa 
gun shop in Virginia several years ago. She first attempted suicide in 
Chicago. She told a relative she would have bought a gun there but there 
was a waiting period. The relative continued to tell me that her family 
brought her home to Virginia. She had been institutionalized. Had there 
been a simple waiting period or an Extreme Risk Protection Order she 
would not have been able to buy a gun that day. ln Virginia they have 
neither. This young lady was 25 and had a Masters from Northwestern ’s 
Medill School of Journalism. She loved people and loved to tell their 
stories. To honor her memory l am telling her story and asking you to 
support the 72 hour wait to purchase a firearm.
Barbara C. Arsenault 
187 Swift River Road 
Mexico, Maine 
507-1234 
barb7478@gmail.com
