LD 60 “An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm” 
 
 Good afternoon, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and the Committee of Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony 
opposing LD 60 “An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm.” 
 
As a Veteran with over two decades of service, I am appalled to come home and find more and 
more of our unalienable rights being slowly stripped away through smear campaigns, the use of children 
as propaganda tools and outright lies. Throughout my career, I have seen bureaucrats go above and 
beyond fighting for the industrial military complex, the corporate media, and those who donate towards 
their own PAC. Yet very few are courageous enough to stand up for the average American. 
 
This bill might have good intentions, but instead would hinder law-abiding citizens, merchants, 
and law enforcement. The mental health of our youth is critical nationwide. As a former security guard 
for the local hospital and seeing firsthand the youth depression and suicidal tendencies, I am appalled 
more attention is not being directed at the actual cause, but scape goading the real issues. Focus on the 
mental health crisis of youth depression, anxiety and suicide and stop wasting time with these types of 
bills. 
  
I request this committee to vote “ought not to pass” LD 60 “An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting 
Period After the Sale of a Firearm” and start going after criminals and stop harassing law-abiding citizens 
with needless bills. 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.) 
 
 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 60
LD 60 “An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm”
Good afternoon, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and the 
Committee of Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is Craig Caffrey of 
Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony opposing LD 60 “An Act to Require
a 72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm.”
As a Veteran with over two decades of service, I am appalled to come home and find 
more and more of our unalienable rights being slowly stripped away through smear 
campaigns, the use of children as propaganda tools and outright lies. Throughout my 
career, I have seen bureaucrats go above and beyond fighting for the industrial 
military complex, the corporate media, and those who donate towards their own PAC.
Yet very few are courageous enough to stand up for the average American.
This bill might have good intentions, but instead would hinder law-abiding citizens, 
merchants, and law enforcement. The mental health of our youth is critical 
nationwide. As a former security guard for the local hospital and seeing firsthand the 
youth depression and suicidal tendencies, I am appalled more attention is not being 
directed at the actual cause, but scape goading the real issues. Focus on the mental 
health crisis of youth depression, anxiety and suicide and stop wasting time with these
types of bills.
 
I request this committee to vote “ought not to pass” LD 60 “An Act to Require a 
72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm” and start going after criminals 
and stop harassing law-abiding citizens with needless bills.
Thank you for your time,
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.)
