 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health of all Maine 
people 
 
TO:   Joint Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
 
FROM: Dan Morin – Director of Communications and Government Affairs  
 
DATE:  April 3, 2023 
 
SUPPORT  LD 60  - An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm  
 
The Maine Medical Association is a volunteer statewide professional organization of more than 
4,300 current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties and practice settings. Maine’s 
physicians are providing comment in support of:  
 
• LD 60, An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm 
• LD 22, An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to Prohibited Persons 
• LD 168, An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or 
Exchange of Firearms 
• LD 582, An Act to Enhance Certain Penalties for Possession of Firearms by Prohibited 
Persons 
 
LD 60  requires a 72-hour waiting period between an agreement for the purchase and sale of a 
firearm and its delivery to the purchaser. 
 
Institution of a 72-hour waiting period for all firearm transfers in Maine is a smart, practical idea. 
The does not eliminate the Second Amendment rights as Americans. This is not preventing 
somebody from purchasing a gun. This instead provides a crucial “cooling off” period, while also 
potentially allowing law enforcement additional time to perform accurate background checks. 
 
Suicides 
 
Research has consistently identified firearm availability as a risk factor for suicide. 
 
In Maine in 2021 , there were 178 deaths by firearms. Of these deaths, 2 were unintentional, 17 
were homicides, 158 were suicides. Suicide rates increased 30% between 2000–2018 and 
declined in 2019 and 2020. Suicide is a leading cause of death in the United States, with 45,979 
deaths in 2020. This is about one death every 11 minutes. Americans with higher-than-average 
rates of suicide are veterans, people who live in rural areas. 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties and practice settings.  
  
Suicide attempts are often impulsive acts, driven by transient life crises, with minimal, if any, 
planning. Studies suggest most suicide survivors only briefly contemplated their actions before 
an attempt. Addressing that impulsivity, which a 72-hour waiting period for firearm transfers 
would help do, would literally save lives. 
 
A New England Journal of Medicine  study of firearm ownership and mortality in a cohort of 26.3 
million adult residents of California, we found an elevated risk of suicide among a large sample 
of first-time handgun owners. This risk was driven by a much higher rate of suicide by firearm — 
not by higher rates of suicide by other methods. 
 
Waiting Periods Work 
 
In 2015, Wisconsin repealed its 48-hour handgun purchase waiting period. As a result, handgun 
purchases from licensed firearm dealers could proceed without delay following a cleared background 
check. The waiting period repeal in Wisconsin was associated with increases in both handgun and firearm 
suicides. The findings suggest that waiting periods may be effective means restriction policies to reduce 
suicide. Post repeal suicides were more likely to involve handguns  than those in the 5 years immediately 
preceding the repeal. 
 
The Brady Handgun Violence Protection Act was passed by Congress in 1994. It imposed a five-day 
waiting period for handguns purchased from licensed dealers. In the four years between the time the 
law was passed and when it was eliminated in 1998, there was a 17% drop-off in gun homicides and a 
6% reduction in gun suicides across the country. 
 
LD 22  prohibits the sale or transfer of a firearm to a person who is prohibited from owning a firearm, 
possessing a firearm or having a firearm under that person's control. 
 
Particularly compelling to our physician members were data from the Deadly Force Review Panel which 
outlined various demographic and social characteristics contributing to use of deadly force in Maine, 
including: 
 
• 80 % had criminal histories, 
• 100 % had weapons in hand, 
• 84 % were known by family, friends, or neighbors to be violent, 
• 50 % were living in isolated rural areas of Maine, 
• 47 % involved domestic violence, with domestic partners present for at least part of the incidents, 
• 32 % expressed suicidal intent, and 
• 26 % were legally prohibited from possessing firearms. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide the committee with our comments and suggestions.  
 
Resources:  
American College of Emergency Physicians: Firearm Safety and Injury Prevention  
American College of Surgeons: Statement on Firearm Injuries  
American Academy of Family Physicians: Gun Violence, Prevention of (Position Paper)  
American Academy of Pediatrics: Firearm-Related Injuries and Deaths in Children and Youth: 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties and practice settings.  
 Injury Prevention and Harm Reduction  
