 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury and Members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety , my name is Deborah Hagler and I reside in 
Harpswell. I have been a practicing pediatrician in Maine for almost 26 years and am  
the immediate past President of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of 
Pediatrics. I am speaking today in support of LD 60.  
 
In 2020 , firearm deaths eclipsed motor vehicle related injuries as the leading cause of 
death in children and adolescents. This numbe r includes homicides, suicides, and 
unintentional injuries. Almost half of suicides are from firearms.  
 Suicide in adolescent patients  is heart wrenching and deeply affects their families and 
the entire community. They are generally associated with depression and known to be 
highly impulsive.  Studies of interviewed survivors of 
a suicide  attempt revealed 40 
percent contemplated suicide for less than 20 minutes and shockingly , about  a quarter  
for less than 5 minutes. This is why keeping lethal means away from youth is  especially 
important.   If access to lethal means is denied  or delayed , there is a chance  the deep 
pain can pass,  and tragedy can be averte d. 
 
Most who attempt suicide will not die from suicide .  9 out of 10 who attempt to take 
their life  will go forward and lead productive lives  unless, of course , the initial suicide 
attempt is  with a firearm. Those suicide  attempts are lethal 85 -90% of the time.  
 
Not all firearm  suicides are associated with mental illness .  Many are associated with a 
great life stress and  carried out in  a moment of crisis.  This  is why a n intentional  pause 
is helpful  and could be lifesaving . 
 
States with waiting period laws  that delay the receipt of a firearm after the purchase 
have  51% fewer firearm  suicides versus states without .  They also have about a third 
less total suicides than states that do not have waiting periods.   Waiting clearly saves 
lives …... nothing is worth the rush and potential for impulsive action .  Please support 
this legislation  and help save lives . 
 
 
References  
 
Goldstick,J., Cunningham, R., Carter, P. 2022. Current Causes of Death In Children and 
Adolescents. NEJM, 386;20: 1955- 1956.  
 
Simon, T. R., Swann, A. C., Powe ll, K. E., Potter, L. B., Kresnow, M. and O'Carroll, P. W. (2002), 
Characteristics of Impulsive Suicide Attempts and Attempters. Suicide and Life -Threatening 
Behavior, 32: 49 -59.  
 
Namkee G. Choi, Diana M. DiNitto, C. Nathan Marti, Youth firearm suicide: P recipitating/risk 
factors and gun access, Children and Youth Services Review, Volume 83, 2017,  Pages 9 -16, 
 
Dodson, N. 2016. Adolescent gun violence prevention: what we know, and what we can do to 
keep young people safe.  Current Op In Ped. 28(4) 441- 446.  
 
Suicide in Maine - 2018 Update ( A Data Brief Youth 10 -24). Available at: 
https://www.maine.gov/suicide/docs/Youth -Data -Brief -2018.pdf  
  
