 
 
 
April 3, 2023 
 
 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee, my name is John Hennessy. I am the 
Advocacy Director for the Episcopal Diocese of Maine offering testimony in 
support of LD 22, 60, and 168.  
 
Most religious Americans believe gun reform is necessary to save lives. (1) 
Religious Americans overwhelmingly support commonsense policies aimed at 
gun violence prevention. One study found that most Americans affiliated with a 
religious community – 84 percent of Buddhist, Catholic, evangelical, and 
mainline Protestant, Hindu, Jewish, Mormon, and Muslims – support background 
checks for all gun sales. (2) 
 
The Episcopal Diocese of Maine supports: 
 
LD 22 – An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to Prohibited Persons 
 
This bill creates a Class D crime for anyone who knowingly or intentionally sells 
or transfers a firearm to a person whom the seller/transferor either knows or 
has reason to believe is prohibited from having a firearm under 15 MSRA Section 
393. This proposed legislation increases gun safety in the state by trying to 
ensure that prohibited persons do not possess firearms. The Bill results from a 
specific recommendation of the 2nd Annual Report of the Deadly Force Review 
Panel 2021 Report submitted to the Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary in 
January 2022. That Report noted the use of firearms by prohibited persons in 
cases where deadly force was used and recommended the passage of a statute 
like L.D. 22 to safeguard not only the individuals against whom deadly force was 
used but also law enforcement responding to these situations.  
 
The Maine CDC issued a report in June 2022 that confirmed the danger of both 
suicides and homicides committed with firearms. We believe imposing criminal 
penalties on persons selling/transferring firearms to prohibited people should 
positively impact the number of suicides in Maine. We hope you will support this 
bill.  
 
LD 60 – An Act to Require a 72 House Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm 
 
In Maine, where no pre-purchase license is required to buy a gun, this bill’s post 
purchase waiting period provides a critical “time buffer” to give an impulsive, angry, or 
suicidal buyer 72 hours to settle down. Gun purchase waiting periods reduce the 
number of firearm deaths. States that have licensing or post-purchase waiting period 
laws have substantially lower firearm suicide percentages and total lower suicide rates 
than states without such laws. 
 
EDOM LD 22, 60, 168 
April 3, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 
Although a similar waiting period bill failed to pass in an earlier Maine legislative 
session, the need to address the recent alarming increase in firearm suicides by Maine 
youth and Maine veterans, and changing attitudes among gun owners about the 
importance of keeping guns from those who are dangerous to themselves or others, 
may cause this bill, this year, to succeed. Its passage would save dozens of Maine lives 
every year. We hope you will support this bill.  
 
LD 168 – An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer, or 
Exchange of Firearms 
 
Under current law, people who sell guns privately, through advertising, including 
online, and at gun shows or anywhere else without a federal dealer’s license can 
transfer firearms without having to run any background check on the buyer. This 
means that unless state law requires a background check for these sales, people 
convicted of felonies, domestic abuse and other prohibited persons who cannot legally 
buy guns can easily buy them.  
 
This bill will require background checks for private sales, subject to certain 
exceptions. It provides that the first offense for knowingly selling, transferring, or 
exchanging a firearm in violation of the criminal background check required is a 
civil violation for which the penalty is a fine of up to $1,000 and subsequent 
offenses is a Class D crime. 
 
This bill will help stop out-of-staters from buying guns in Maine. We believe 
private sale background checks can prevent suicides and shootings and do not 
violate the second amendment. As stated above, nationwide and in Maine, 
voters want background checks with private gun sales.  
 
The bottom line is expanding background checks to private sellers will save lives. 
Please support this bill.  
 
 
(1) Morning Consult and Politico, “National Tracking Poll #210449” (2021), p. 228, 
available at https://assets.morningconsult.com/wp-
uploads/2021/04/14112602/210449_crosstabs_POLITICO_RVs_v1_AUTO-1.pdf . 
(2) Jana Riess, “Which religions support gun control in the US?”, Religion News Service, 
August 29, 2019, available at https://religionnews.com/2019/08/29/which-religions-
support-gun-control-in-the-us/ . 
 
 
 
 
 
