 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 *Resident Board Representatives  
**
Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and distinguished members of 
the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety , my name is Joe Anderson.  I 
am a resident of Portland, a hospital -based pediatrician, and I sit on the Board of 
the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  I a m writing today to 
express our  support for  LD 60, An Act to Require a 72- hour Waiting Period After 
the Sale of a Firearm. We urge you to vote Ought to Pass on this bill.  
As individuals in positions of leadership or influence in our communities, I’m sure 
you’ve been asked the question “What keeps you up at night?”  As a pediatrician, 
that issue is gun violence.  I have cared for children and teenagers who have suffered life -altering injuries or death as a result of firearms far more often than I 
care to admit.  Their injuries are seared into my memory and serve as a constant reminder of how unbelievably easy it is in this country for children and teenagers to have their lives interrupted by firearms, made possible by weak policies regarding gun safety.  
Gun violence is a public h ealth crisis in the US, where deaths by firearms have 
outpaced motor vehicle accidents as the leading cause of death for children and teens aged 1 to 19 in the United States.
1  There are significant opportunities to 
improve these statistics with gun safety  policies that are supported by a majority 
of Americans, and in many cases by most  gun owners  as well.    
LD 60  requires a 72 -hour waiting period for the sale of a firearm.  Most of us are 
familiar with purchasing products online and  would not consider a 3 -day shipping 
window to be particularly burdensome  as a consumer.  Waiting periods are an 
under -utilized, evide nce-based strategy for reducing death and injuries  by 
firearms . Waiting periods give law enforcement sufficient  time to perform an 
accurate background check and  create a “cooling off” period to prevent acts of 
violence or suicide attempts.  States with such laws had 51% fewer firearm suicides than those without.  Over 70% of Americans without a firearm in the home support longer waiting periods for gun purchases.
2 
The American Academy of Pediatrics is committed to protecting children from firearm -related injury and violence.  We support specific measures to reduce the 
destructive effects of guns in the lives of c hildren and adolescents.  We urge each 
of you to consider the potential lives you could save as a result of enacting these pieces of legislation and  urge you to support LD 60 . 
 Respectfully,  
 
Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP , Co-Chair, Advocacy C ommitte e 
 
1 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Wonder.  2021  (https://wonder.cdc.gov/ ). 
2 American Academy of Pediatrics. Waiting Periods for Firearms Purchases. 2023 
(https://www.aap.org/en/adv ocacy/state-advocacy/waiting -periods -for-firearms -purchases ). 
  

