Testimony - Josh W. in Support of 
(LD 60, HP 0035 - An Act to Require a 72-hour waiting period after the sale of a ﬁrearm) 
Dear members of the Maine State Legislature, it is my honor to offer testimony in support of LD 
60 - An Act to Require a 72-hour waiting period after the sale of a ﬁrearm. I have asked my good 
friend Kathleen McGin1ey McFadden to share my testimony. My name is Josh and I currently reside in 
Framingham, Massachusetts. Throughout the course of my life, I have experienced signiﬁcant hardship 
which has impacted me physically, mentally, and emotionally. I struggle with Post-Traumatic Stress 
Disorder as a result of several horriﬁc incidents which occurred in my youth. Years ago, I gave 
considerable thought to the notion of ending my own life. After much contemplation and research, I 
came to the conclusion that death via ﬁrearm would be the quickest and hopefully the least painful way 
to depart from this world. 
I began to investigate the process of acquiring a ﬁrearm in Massachusetts, I was overwhelmed by 
the number of steps, extensive requirements, time and commitment needed to obtain a freann permit 
and license. As time went by, and I looked deeper within myself, I realized all the effort I could spend in 
pursuing my own death, I could also invest in self-care, psychiatric treatment, and family and friends, all 
of which would be much easier to obtain. Since then, my health has improved signiﬁcantly and I’m ina 
much better place than I was all those years ago. I may not be completely healed, as anyone who suffers 
from PTSD carries the impact throughout their life. I look back on those dark years with caution and 
reverence, knowing how that time allowed me to grow and mature in so many ways. 
When most people hear of gun violence in America, they assume the scenario of one individual 
killing another when in reality, the most common form of gun violence in the country is suicide and its 
attempts. "I am thankful for the gun safety laws in Massachusetts. They absolutely saved my life. IfI 
was able to obtain a ﬁrearm easier, I probably would not be here today. "In sharing my story I’m 
reminded of an excerpt from the Jewish Talmud I saw at the Holocaust Memorial Museum in 
Washington DC, “T0 save one life is to save the world entire. For whoever saves one lzfe, saves an entire 
generation of people and descendants. ” 
We have reached a precipice in our nation and too many people are dying with family, friends, 
and communities being devastated by something which is entirely preventable. I’ve traveled the world 
and have seen firsthand how gun ownership is managed in other nations. If they are able to fmd the
balance between citizens acquiring and owning ﬁrearms and preventing mass gun violence, there is no reason Why America can’t do the same. 
I understand the will and experience of one man may not be able to make a huge difference, but 
if firearm legislation was able to save my life, I’m certain it can save another. Maine is an absolutely 
WOI1d€1‘fll1 state with beautiful geography, a rich history, and amazing people. In fact I hope to move there one day, I thank you again for allowing me the opportunity to share my story as well as for your time and consideration. 
Warm regards, Josh.
