ti >»}-Av; ;<1§s 1% \‘§‘e-"iv-E -‘>2, ~ 
lusrrrurs non LEGISLATIVE ACTION 
1 1250 WAPLES MILL Rom) 
FAIRFAX, VIRGINIA 22030 
April 3, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Honorable Members of the Committee: 
I am writing to you, on behalf of the National Rifle Association, regarding Legislative Document 60 
(LD 60); an act to require a 72-hour waiting period after the sale of a ﬁrearm. On behalf of the NRA, 
I would like to express our strong opposition to this legislation. LD 60 delays Second Amendment 
rights by imposing a three-day waiting period before an individual may receive a ﬁrearm that they 
lawfully purchased, with very few exceptions. Waiting periods are arbitrary impositions with no 
effect on crime or suicide, they introduce no additional investigative avenues, and they only burden 
law-abiding gun owners without changing how or when criminals obtain ﬁrearms. 
Waiting periods were once part of federal law but only until the National Instant Criminal Check 
(N ICS) came online in 1998, which replaced the ﬁve-day waiting period with an instant background 
check. While most checks are instant, the FBI has three days to complete the background check 
before the transfer can proceed. 
Waiting periods do not provide additional tools for investigations. The background check does not 
change in the presence of a waiting period. The FBI would still run the background check through 
the same databases. Most buyers will continue to be approved instantly, and those who are not 
approved instantly will still be ﬂagged for additional investigation. No additional information will be 
uncovered with the addition of a waiting period on top of the existing three-day delay. 
Lastly, there is no logical basis in the argument that waiting periods result in a “cooling off’ of the 
purchaser. Two-thirds of gun owners own more than one gun. A cooling-off period for these 
individuals could not possibly have an effect because they already own other ﬁrearms. There is no 
scientiﬁc evidence that waiting periods have any effect on suicide, homicide, or mass shootings. 
On behalf of our thousands of members across Maine, I urge the committee to oppose Legislative 
Document 60. Please do not hesitate to call me if you have any additional questions. 
Sincerely, 
Justin E. Davis 
State Director, NRA-ILA 
www.nraila.org
