MOMSE;% DEMAND ACTION FOR GUN SENSHN AMERICA 
Testimony before the Joint Standing Gommittee on Criminal Justice and Safety =- 
LD 60, HPOQB5 - An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale ofa 
Firearm 
Thank you Jﬁenator Beebe Center and Representative Salisbury and Esteemecl l\/iembers of the 
Committee for allowing me to testify in support of LD 60 An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting 
Period Aﬁer the Sale of a Firearm. 
My name is Kathleen l\/icFadden and i am Resident oi Goulclsboro, Maine and a volunteer with 
i\/loms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, the largest grassroots organization dedicated to 
protecting our communities, families. and chiidren from gun violence in all its various forms including 
mass shootings, homicide, unintentional deaths, and suicide by firearms. lvioms Demand Actioris 
has over ‘l O million supporters Nationwide and since the most recent school shooting we have 
welcomed over 100 new supporters in l\/laine and nearly 20,600 Nationvl/ide. This clearly 
demonstrates that Americans are ted up with lawrnakers who how to the gun lobby and put the 2nd 
amendment above the iives of 2nd graders. Gur rounding fathers promised lite, liberty and the 
pursuit of happiness to all Americans, and they would be appalled and ashamed oi the gun lohby’s 
hijacking of the 2nd Amendment tor profit and political power on the backs and lives of our children. 
i am one of the 2 in 10, not 2 in 'lO0 or 2 in one thousand, but 2 in 10 Amercans who have been 
impacted by gun vioience. l bear witness to the lifelong aftermath, repercussions, and trauma that 
dun violence wreaks on families and communities. it is a horror, l wish on no--one V \._ 
Gun violence is a public heaith crisis and is now the leading cause of death among children in this 
country. 
e in lviaine the rate of gun suicide has increased 45% from 2012 to 2021 compare to a 19% 
change nationwide. 
in Maine, the ovenivhelming majority oi gun deaths (89%) are suicides. An average of 145 
people die by gun suicide each year across the state - one person every 60 hours. 
e From 2016 to 2020, more than 140 veterans dies by gun suicide in Maine, an average oi 
nearly 30 per year. Veteran Suicide is on the rise in Maine and we owe it to them and every 
resident of our great state to do all that we can to support and help them in times of crisis. 
This bill would provide a 72 hour waiting period to give a person experiencing a suicidal crisisa 
grace period to reconsider. When someone is in crisis, days matter ~ creating a butter between the 
purchase and possession oi‘ a ﬁrearm can be the difference between lite and death. Policies that 
create this putter are associated with lower tirearrn suicide rates. When we talk about suicide we 
know that means matter. lviost people who attempt suicide do not die—uniess they use a gun.
Across all suicide attempts without a gun, only 4% result in death. But when a gun is involved, that 
ﬁgure skyrockets to 90%. The vast majority of people who survive a suicide attempt do not go on to 
die from a later attempt. The research shows that the difference behzveen living to see a better day or 
dying by suicide is often determined by the presence of a gun and suicidal impulse. Given the 
unique lethality of firearms as a means of suicide, addressing gun suicide is an essential element of 
any strategy to reduce gun violence in this country. LD 60 would create a buffer to help prevent 
impulsive acts of suicide and homicide by requiring a waiting and “cooling off” period of 72 hours 
before the sale of any firearm may be completed. Veteran Suicide is on the rise in Maine and we 
owe it to them and every resident of our great state to do all that we canto support and help them in 
times of crisis. 
We know it takes courage, leadership and political will to change the trajectony of gun violence in 
every form in this country. l respectfully ask the committee to vote “ought to pass" Thank you for 
your time.
