April 23, 2023  Dis-nguished members of the Criminal Jus-ce and Public Safety Commi@ee of the 131st Maine State Legislature, thank you for taking the -me to read this tes-mony.  My name is Lauren Jacobs, and I am a resident of Old Town. I am wri-ng in support of LD 60: And Act to Require a 72-hour Wai-ng Period AQer the Sale of a Firearm.  I am wri-ng in support of LD 60 because legisla-on such as this could have saved the life of my beloved sister-in-law, Emily. Instead, our family has suﬀered immense heartache and grief aQer Emily legally purchased a gun and used it within hours of purchase to commit suicide. She had never before used a gun, or even held a gun, but she walked out of a store - aQer just a few minutes of walking in - with the gun that would end her life. This was not a planned ac-on; it was a deadly impulse.  This didn’t happen in Maine, but it could have, because just like the state where Emily took her life, Maine currently has no wai-ng period laws. A law like this follows the research, which states that anything that puts “speed bumps” in the way of someone suﬀering from a suicidal impulse can dras-cally lower the likelihood that they will a@empt suicide.   A 72-hour wai-ng period doesn’t stop someone from purchasing a gun, but it could slow someone down who is purchasing one out of suicidal or violent impulse. That gives family and loved ones more -me to intervene, or allows -me for the person to seek help or change their mind.  I understand the recrea-onal reasons people enjoy ﬁrearms; I was a compe--ve biathlete and I enjoy target shoo-ng. I understand our second amendment rights. But in our country, we have always a@empted to balance individual freedom and rights with the rights of others and the greater good of our communi-es. I believe this common-sense legisla-on helps strike that balance.  People opposed to gun safety laws oQen say that nothing will make a diﬀerence. There are already too many guns. Criminals don’t follow the laws anyways. But, in what other situa-ons have we collec-vely looked at a massive problem and just said, “It’s too big. There’s no way to ﬁx it, so we won’t even try”?   When automobile deaths were out of control, we didn’t just shrug our shoulders; we developed (and legislated) seatbelts and airbags. When faced with far too many childhood deaths from communicable diseases we developed an-bio-cs and vaccines. I urge you, our elected oﬃcials, to not just shrug your shoulders.  Will LD 60 stop all gun deaths? Of course not. But is it one step towards reducing gun deaths? I believe so.   Thank you for your -me. Sincerely,    Lauren Jacobs 

