 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 60 (Opposed ) 
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 60, An Act to Require a 72 -hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm  
 
DA: April 3 , 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony opposed to LD 60 because it is largely unenforceable as drafted , and offers the following 
drafting observations .   CLAC  is not taking a position with respect t o the policy of requiring a 
waiting  period.  
 
  Use of the term “firearm dealer” in the definitions, “person” in proposed subsections 2 and 
3, and “seller” in proposed subsection 4 creates confusion rega rding what persons are  subject to the 
requirement —any person who sells a firearm, or only federally licensed firearms dealers?    
 
 The last sentence of the proposal appears to create an independent state requirement for 
federally licensed firearms dealers  to conduct background checks.    If this is intended, there should 
be an enforcement provision.   This is currently a federal law requirement.  
 
 The application provision in proposed sub -paragraph 2015(4)(A)(2) —“promoting the public 
interest incidentally to the person’s employment as a bank guard or armed truck guard or as a 
similar type of employee” is vague; it would be difficult to identify the parameters of this 
description, or for the seller to make this determination based on the purchaser’s state or  mind or 
future use.    
 
 A similar bill was proposed in the 129th Legislature in 2019 (LD 1099).  
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
