is 
5, Q HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Margaret Craven TTY: Maine Relay 711 
41 Russell Street 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
(207) 783-1897 
Margaret.Craven@le2islature.maine.aov 
April 3, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Margaret Craven introducing 
LD 60, An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm 
Before the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and honorable members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Margaret Craven, and I represent House 
District 93, which includes part of Lewiston. I am here today to present LD 60, An Act to 
Require a 72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm. 
Last session, we passed a bill that requires the Maine CDC to keep track of the incidences of 
injury and deaths from ﬁrearms in the state. 
In 2020, there were 154 deaths in Maine from ﬁrearms, 132 of which were suicides and the 
majority of those deaths were young men. These numbers come from the 2020 CDC report, 
which is included with my testimony, and I anticipate data for 2022 to be available soon. 
In 2007, I sponsored a bill for a young mother who was heartbroken after her 18-year-old son 
committed suicide. He had walked into Wal-Mart, bought a gun and ammunition, went straight 
home and then shot himself. She told me that all she could think about was that if she or other 
members of the family had any indication of his despair, then they would have been able to 
intervene. Suicides by ﬁrearm will continue as long as people in crisis have easy access to 
ﬁrearms. 
The following excerpt comes from “The Case for Handgun Waiting Periods, ” which was 
coauthored by three social scientists. 
More than 33,000 people in the United States die from gun-related injuries each year, 
making ﬁreanns the second leading cause of injury-related death... Our recent empirical 
research shows that handgun waiting periods that delay gun purchases (typically by a few 
days) lead to large reductions in gun violence. ‘ 
Gun violence is an epidemic. According to the American Psychiatric Association, an 
overwhelming 87% of Americans think gun violence is a public health threatz . In 2016, the 
American Medical Association, our country’s largest physicians ’ group, adopted a formal policy 
calling gun violence a public health crisis.3
We all know that the human brain does not mature until well into a person’s 20s. Young people, 
especially when experiencing despair or hopelessness, are impetuous and don’t have the maturity 
to make good decisions. 
Behaviorally-informed gun policy has the potential to reduce violence without imposing new 
restrictions on anyone’s right to own a gun. Waiting periods are effective, and they are also 
supported by a majority of Americans and roughly 50% of gun owners. Waiting periods do not 
restrict gun ownership, but they do create a window of time in which someone in crisis could get 
the help they need. 
Thank you for your time. I am happy to answer any questions you have for me. 
1 . https://behavioralscientistorg/the-case-for-handgun-waiting-periods/ 
2. https://Www.ps\/chiauy.org/newsroom/news-releases/americans-overwhelmingly-see-gun-violence-as-av 
public-health-issue-they-want-congress-to-act-and-cdc-to-conduct-research 
3. https://WWW. ama-assn. org/press-center/press-releases/ama-cal Is- gun -violen ce-public-heal th-cri sis
