 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
 
Testimony in support of LD 60: ‘An Act to R equire a 72 -hour Waiting Period After 
the Sale of a F irearm’.  
 
Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury, distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety; I am Mary 
Tedesco -Schneck and I am a Pediatric Nurse Practitioner and an Associate 
Professor at the University of Maine in the School of Nursing.  I al so serve as a 
member of the board for the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  
 Today I am testifynig  on my behalf and on the behalf of the Maine Chapter of the 
American Academy of Pediatrics.  
 This testimony is in support of LD 60 An Act to re quire a 72 -hour waiting period 
after the sale of firearm.  
 Gun violence is a public safety issue. The role of government in our civilized society is to protect public safety particularly for those who are most vulnerable in our society. This proposed legisl ation will positively impact the safety of all Maine 
citizens which includes children and adolescents, two vulnerable populations.   Children and adolescents are affected directly by loss of their own life and equally as important by collateral damage when  gun violence strikes. In 2021, the Maine 
CDC reported a total of 178 firearm fatalities (an increase of 14% from 2020). Of these fatalities almost 89% were from suicide and 9.6% were from homicide. 
Analysis of firearm fatalities by age reveals that 9% of individuals less than 25 years of age died from suicide by firearm and 68% of individuals between the ages of 25 (35%) and 64 (33%) died from suicide by firearm.  Individuals within this age group may be mothers, fathers, and grandparents. Loss of a parent  or 
significant adult in a child’s life is collateral damage.  
 
Additionally, school shootings are on the rise. Our children and adolescents should 
be able to enjoy the same level of safety and comfort in attending school that most of us did when we were the ir age. They should not fear the possibility of being 
gunned down in their schools or witnessing the death by gun violence of a friend, teacher, janitor, or others on school property.  
 It makes senses to have a 72 -hour w aiting period to allow  law enforcemen t 
adequate time to perform background checks  and provides a  “cooling off” period to 
prevent violence or suicide attempts.   Thank you for considering this legislation.  
Respectfully,  
 Mary Tedesco -Schneck PhD, RN, CPNP  
 
  
