April 3, 2023 
To: Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
From: Mary Owen, 22 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330 
Re: Public Hearing: LD 60 An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a 
Firearm 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee, I am Mary Owen, and I live in Augusta. I am writing in 
support of LD 60, a bill that would require a waiting period between purchase and 
possession of a gun.  
Anger, impulsiveness, and feeling isolated are normal human emotions. In all of us, these 
emotions have the potential to increase the risk of careless, regrettable, deadly behavior.  
In 2021, 277 Mainers died by suicide. Of these deaths, 56% (158) of the victims used a 
firearm. Most of these deaths involved men between the ages of 25 and 64. What these 
men needed most was time and distance between themselves and a gun.  
Laws mandating waiting periods for gun acquisitions save lives. We have a responsibility to 
the husbands, fathers, grandfathers, brothers, and uncles in our state to put time on their 
side when they consider buying a gun.  
 
Thank you for listening. 
 
 
Mary Owen
Augusta
LD 60
 April 3, 2023
To: Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety
From: Mary Owen, 22 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330
Re: Public Hearing: LD 60 An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting Period After the 
Sale of a Firearm
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, I am Mary Owen, and I live in 
Augusta. I am writing in support of LD 60, a bill that would require a waiting period 
between purchase and possession of a gun. 
Anger, impulsiveness, and feeling isolated are normal human emotions. In all of us, 
these emotions have the potential to increase the risk of careless, regrettable, deadly 
behavior. 
In 2021, 277 Mainers died by suicide. Of these deaths, 56% (158) of the victims used 
a firearm. Most of these deaths involved men between the ages of 25 and 64. What 
these men needed most was time and distance between themselves and a gun. 
Laws mandating waiting periods for gun acquisitions save lives. We have a 
responsibility to the husbands, fathers, grandfathers, brothers, and uncles in our state 
to put time on their side when they consider buying a gun. 
Thank you for listening

