 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
 
Testimony in support of LD 60: ‘An Act to R equire a 72 -hour Waiting Period After 
the Sale of a F irearm’.  
 
Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of 
the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Melissa Burch, 
MD and I am a resident of Orono, Maine , a practicing pediatrician,  and a board 
member of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics. I am submitting t estimony in support of LD 60.  
 As a pediatrician, I am very aware of the  escalating  mental health crisis for our 
young  Americans. Every week I see  multiple teens struggling with depression. In 
some, that leads to suicidal thoughts  and for others, an intent to act on this , often 
impulsively. Access to a firearm greatly increases the risk of death when children 
or adults at tempt suicide.  
 Attempts with drug overdose, the most common method, are fatal in only 3% of cases. Attempts with a firearm/ gun increases the risk of death in that depressed 
teen  as 90%  or more  attempts using guns end in death.  
 Anyone who is a parent  or works with youth directly  is aware of the impulsivity 
characteristic of adolescence  resulting in poorly thought- out actions . In some  
cases,  there is little or no warning, no sign of increased depression before  a teen  
or young adult make s an abrupt  decision or  take s a potentially fatal  action. It can 
stem from  a break -up in a relationship or problems at school. We know from 
interviews of those who survive a suicide attempt , that typically there is less than 
an hour of contemplation before  taking potentia lly fatal action. As our current 
laws are written, a Maine teen can drive to their nearest Walmart, legally  
purchase a firearm, leave the store and take their own life within that one hour.  
 LD 60 would give that individual three days to get help. LD 60 helps to protect the 
lives of individuals in  a mental health crisis  and intentionally create a buffer which 
could allow for a different decision to be made.  Suicide is not just a youth issue,  
and this law would protect people in crisis of all ages . In our  state, every year , 
more  than 200 people die of suicide. Most of those suicide fatalities involve 
firearms. Let’s do what  we can to help save the lives of those Mainers  and give 
them a chance to get help before it is too late . 
 I urge you to v ote YES on LD  60 to proactively save lives in Maine.
 
 
  
