Nicholas Sevos
Searsport
LD 60
My name is Nicholas Sevos, and I am a resident of Searsport, Maine. I am a 
somewhat recent transplant to Maine, having moved up from Rhode Island in 2021 to 
escape the draconian laws imposed upon the people of that state by their so-called 
representatives; I was drawn to Maine by the spirit of independence, common sense, 
and appreciation of liberty that I had experienced on every visit and seen in Maine 
natives that I served alongside as an active duty US Army Infantryman for six years 
with two tours in Iraq. I have only recently become aware of several gun control 
proposals making their way through committee, and I would like to speak on these 
proposals; additionally for the sake of simplicity you will notice this preamble in each
piece of written testimony I submit so apologize for the partially duplicitous nature of 
my comments. 
There is a famous saying amongst those of us that love liberty (and have actually bled
for it), "A right delayed is a right denied". To delay any right is to infringe upon it, 
period. This concept is understood in many other states, and was previously here, so 
the desire to create these delays now, presumably as knee jerk reactions to recent 
tragedies, is somewhat surprising. There is no evidence that delaying access to a 
legally purchased firearm prevents tragedy; in fact the states with the most stringent 
waiting periods have at the least just as much if not more crime overall then those that
don't. The concept simply does not work. So between the impracticality and the 
absolute infringement upon the liberties of the people that this bill proposes, I cannot 
condemn it strongly enough; there is no place for ideas like this in the lives of a truly 
free people and pushing this agenda is unconscionable and un-American, and more to 
the point against the spirit of the concept of being a "Mainer", a people who love their
peace, their freedom, their neighbors, and their way of life. Stop trying to change it to 
fit your agenda. If you cannot understand that, you have no business here as a 
representative or even a citizen. Dislike what things you may, that is your right, but 
you do not get to foist your beliefs on the rest of us.
