April 3, 2023 
LD 60 - An Act to Require a 72 Hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. 
My name is Polly l-laight F rawley and I live in Cumberland. This testimony is submitted in 
favor of the above referenced bill. Based upon the facts, WE KNOW that the imposition ofa 
72 hour- waiting period after the purchase of a ﬁrearm will lessen the number of suicides by 
ﬁrearm and save the lives of Maine residents. First, WE KNOW that suicide is an impulsive 
act. l refer you to a set of studies pulled together by Means Matter at the T.l-l. Chan School of 
Public Health at Harvard that focuses on reducing the number suicides. One study examined 
the duration of suicidal deliberation by interviewing survivors. When asked “How much time 
passed between the time you decided to complete suicide and when you actually attempted 
suicide? ” 
- 24% said less than 5 minutes - 24% said 5-19 minutes 
- 23% said 20 minutes to 1 hour - 16% said 2-8 hours 
13% said 1 or more days 
A tool that lessens the risk associated with the impulsive act to commit suicide by firearm 
simply by delaying access to the ﬁrearm ought to be utilized. By creating a larger, longer 
window between the time an individual set his or her mind to committing suicide and the actual 
attempt, the more likely the ideation will pass. In addition, WE KNOW that the creation of 
waiting periods lessen the rates of suicide by ﬁrearm. The American Academy of Pediatrics 
reported: 
“Waiting period laws have proven to lower the rates of suicide. States with such laws had 
51% fewer ﬁrearm suicides than states without. Another study showed that these states 
also experienced a 17% decrease in gun homicides. ” 
Finally, WE KNOW that suicide by ﬁrearm is a signiﬁcant problem in Maine. And the 
problem is growing. The Maine CDC reported that in 2021, as compared to 2020, suicides by 
ﬁrearms went up almost 20%, froml32 deaths to 158. Thanks to your leadership, in 2022 
Maine invested $230 million in efforts to prevent suicides by ﬁrearm. I urge you to embrace 
that effort and not work in opposition to it. I urge you to support LD 60 to impose a 72 hour 
waiting period upon purchasing a ﬁrearm. For those who are experiencing a mental health 
crisis or love someone who is, this measure could literally be life-line. 
Thank you for listening and for your work. These are very tough times. 
Polly Haight Frawley 
Cumberland, Maine 
l_1_t_tps://w_yvw.hsph.harvard.edu/means-matter/means-matter/duration/ 
https://www.aap.org/en/advocacy/state-advocacy/waiting;periods-for- ﬁrearms-purchases
