A good day to the fine members of the Criminal Justice Committee, 
My name is Rose Brough and I live in Bangor. 
I am writing to oppose LD60 for reasons that seem to be ignored by those in support of it-including sadly a few 
misguided law enforcement officers.' 
I grew up in the town of Surry on a tiny farm with my parents, my sister and brother. 
My Dad had firearms around for hunting and defense of the family farm from predators mostly but he also taught us 
all to use them in case of emergency, for self-defense in our rural town where law enforcement could take 20 minutes 
to arrive. 
When I saw the wording of this bill I was appalled as I could see the potential for abuse and a very real and viable flaw 
in the legislation from an up close and personal experience. 
My sister has been through 2 ugly divorces now, one in particular from a verbally and physically abusive ex-husband 
that is a very cruel, condescending and conniving man not unlike an aggressive car salesman. So much so that before 
the divorce was officially final she took the children and went into hiding in fear of him during one of his sudden 
mood swings. 
I have zero doubt in my mind that he, knowing she is unarmed, would be fully capable of using this opportunity to 
take advantage of her being defenseless becuase this proposed law would be leaving her without her most practical 
means of defense. 
She is smaller than I am at barely 5'4" and not 90 lbs. She is no match for 6' , 200 lbs of burly roughneck. He does not 
need a firearm but she does. 
My sister is certainly not the only one that will fall victim to this situation, either. For committee members 
considering a yes vote on this, I must ask you to stop and think. You will put a law on the books depriving women, 
POC and the LGBTQA community of the right to defend themselves in the best manner possible. Again, you will 
REMOVE a right to self-defense that those same minorities currently have. This will surely lead to more injuries and 
possible death. How will you be able to sleep at night when this happens? I say "WHEN" because it isn't a matter of 
"IF" , it is indeed a matter of “WHEN”. 
Do you want to be the deciding factor on whether any of the above mentioned people are denied their right of self- 
defense by these ridiculous laws? What repercussions will you face for passage of your proposed law? None. You will 
sit behind qualified immunity, wring your hands and offer thoughts and prayers. Those are no more worthy for 
defense than the piece of paper a restraining order is printed on. Nothing. NADA darn thing. 
What Law Enforcement Official has NOT gone on a call where the larger person overpowered the smaller victim and 
inflicted serious injury or death? A firearm is simply the best means for the smaller person to have a chance in an 
outmatched situation. 
Vote for keeping safety for women and marginalized minorities. 
Vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS. 
Thank you for your time, 
Rose V. Brough (Leach)
