Good afternoon members of the Judiciary Committee:V 
My name is Stephen Brough from Bangor and I rise in opposition to LD 60. 
A 72 hour waiting period on the purchase of a firearm merely puts those most at 
risk from domestic violence or hate crimes at greater risk by denying them the 
right to self-defense. Females, POC and the LGBT community are at a higher risk 
than ever for violence yet this bill restricts their natural, God given right of self- 
defense at a time when their potential abuser is the most angry or unstable. 
HOW DARE YOU place them under risk of violence while denying them a way to 
protect themselves?!! FACT!! Whether you like it or not; A RIGHT DELAYED ISA 
RIGHT DENIED! 
When danger is at your door and the police are minutes away - anyone in their 
right mind would want the most effective means of protection for themselves 
and their loved ones. Waiting periods only burden the law abiding. No evidence 
suggests that waiting periods will reduce crimes or suicides. One study in 
Connecticut showed that suicides went up in total only using different methods. 
It didn't reduce deaths. 
Article 1 sec. 16 of the Maine Constitution clearly states: "Every citizen shall have 
a right to keep and bear arms and that right shall never be questioned." On that 
basis I find this law Unconstitutional. I've spoken with a Maine Constitutional 
law attorney on this and he agrees. 
So strongly do I feel on this that should it pass, day 1 I will attempt to purchase a 
firearm and when denied file suit against the state for violating the very 
Constitution it is sworn to uphold. I WILL make myself the test case that strikes 
down the law. 
Would you put a 3 day hold on the press reporting on news unfavorable to you? 
ls that fine? 
How about The People on social media? Regulate that right away and see where 
it gets you.
How about voting? No more same day voter registration. You registered the day 
of the election, wait 3 days to vote. You can't possibly do something rash like 
vote for a Republican- you'd be a danger to the State and others. (sarcasm) 
What about abortion? ls a 3 day waiting period to rethink before having one OK? 
What about Bail? Should we extend the period one is in jail before allowed bail- 
just because you are scared? 
What about quartering troops? Would it be OK to mandate that this right is 
denied for 3 days and armed men MUST enter your home? 
How about a 72 hour waiting period on buying Alcohol? That kills many more 
people than firearms yearly. 
ALL of the above situations would be Unconstitutional due to a denial of rights, 
including the right to keep and bear arms. 
What about fatty foods? Those also kill more people yearly than firearms. 
How about a 72 hour delay to purchase Marijuana? Would you vote in favor of 
that? 
None of those are actual rights. 
When considering this in Committee work session, think about the precedent 
you will set with a temporary denials of rights. What can be denied for one right 
can be applied to others. Do you want to start down that road? Do you want to 
be known for sliding us further toward a government that oppresses it people? 
I urge you to vote ”OUGHT NOT T0 PASS" ON LD 60.
