 
 
Testimony by Ellen Parent  
In Opposition to LD 752  
An Act to Expand Access to Banking Services for Minors  
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
March 9, 2022  
Good Afternoon,  Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services , my name is Ellen Parent 
and I am the Director of Compliance  at the  Maine Credit Union Leag ue and I submit the 
following testimony on be half of the League in opposition to LD 752 . The Maine Credit Union 
League is the trade association for Maine’s 5 0 credit unions and over 7 25,000 members 
statewide.  
Credit unions are financial cooperatives and have a vested interest in providing financial 
services to all, including youths in Maine. We believe that establishing good financial habits 
early in life is essential to long -term financial health ; our commitment to this can be seen 
through our Financial Fitness Fairs  that have had over 70, 000 students participate since the 
program began in  2004. Therefore, we are extremely reluctant to oppose this bill, but as it is 
written, we find we must do so.  
Minors are traditionally considered to not have the capacity to enter into contracts and may 
void a contract upon reaching majority. Despite this, there is a carve out in Maine law that 
specifically allows financial institutions to contract with minors for the purposes of opening 
accounts. Financial institutions are not currently required to have an adult named as a joint 
owner on the account, however many do so in order to ensure that there is an individual with 
capacity on the account to prevent losses to the institution. As written, this bill would  remove 
the discretion that a credit union has t o require an adult on the account .  
We fully recognize that some minors may not have a trusted adult in their life who can act as a 
joint owner on an account, however, we believe that as written the bill has the unintended 
effect of requiring that a credit  union open accounts for minors regardless of circumstance 
 
without an adult on the account. Credit unions, as cooperative institutions, tend to be risk 
adverse to protect their members and should be allowed the opportunity to set their own 
policies and pro cedures as appropriate.  
In preparation for this hearing, we reached out to our credit unions in an effort to determine 
the scope of the issue. We received information from a number of our credit unions that said 
that they would be willing to open an account for minors who did not  have trusted adults who 
could sign on their accounts. Many of our  credit unions who responded said that they would 
be willing to work with minors to place safeguards so that they could open accounts.  
When one CEO was asked about the circumstance we outlin ed said , “Yes, we would probably 
open this account.  We would first see if there was another adult over 18 that they trusted to 
be on the account with them.  If they did not, then we would most likely proceed as we want 
to ensure we are meeting people wher e they are.” Another CEO stated “ We would open a 
base savings account for the minor if they had a valid government ID.  [We] would suggest 
they sign up for electronic statements so that statements would not be mailed to their home 
and/or choose a mailing a ddress of a trusted family member for mail to go to.  Would 
recommend adding out -of-wallet verification questions or a password only they know so a 
parent couldn't call in pretending to be them.”  
We spoke with the bill sponsor regarding his intent with the  bill. We drafted some language 
that we think may better capture the intent while preserving the discretion of financial 
institutions. Should the language of the bill be amended to address our concerns, we would 
happily support the bill. We would be open t o working with any group of stakeholders on this 
issue.   
Thank you for considering our industry’s views and allowing the League to provide testimony 
to the Committee today. We are happy to provide any additional background information the 
committee may need on this matter .  
