STATE OF MAINE 
:1‘ DEPARTMENT O? PROFESSIONAL 
AND FENANCIAL REGULATION 
BUREAU G? NNANCIAL WSTITUTIONS 
36 $"§A'rl=; muss STA'I‘t0N 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
04333-0036 
Janet T. Mills Ltovo P. LAFOUNTAIN lll 
GOVERNOR SUPERINTENDENT 
131st Maine Legislature, First Regular Session 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and 
Financial Services 
Testimony of Gordon Laurendeau, Attorney, 
Bureau of Financial Institutions 
Department of Professional and Financial Regulation 
Neither for Nor Against L.D. 752 
An Act to Expand Access to Banking Sen/ices for Minors 
Thursday, March 9, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the 
Committee: 
My name is Gordon Laurendeau and I am the Attorney for the Maine 
Bureau of Financial Institutions. On behalf of the Bureau and the 
Administration, I am here to testify neither for nor against on LD 752, An 
Act to Expand Access to Banking Sen/ices for Minors. 
Minors may benefit in a number of ways when they have an account 
with a bank or credit union. Savings accounts are a gateway to financial 
education, money management skills, and instill an understanding of the 
value of saving for the future. Accounts can also provide a valuable sen/ice 
to minors living independently, whether due to difficult family 
circumstances, or due to attendance at school or college away from home. 
Maine law currently permits banks and credit unions to open 
accounts for minors, and the minor need not have a guardian or parent 
TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711 
QFFICE PHONE? (207)624-8570 CQNSUMERTGLLFREE: (8OO)%5_523S FAX: (207)624~8S90 
OFFICES LOCATED AT: 76 NORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE 
WEBSITE: http://www.maine.gov/pfrffinancialinstittitions
listed on the account. The current law allows financial institutions to pay 
funds from the minor’s account to the minor, pay to the minor’s order, or 
pay to the guardian of the minor. 
Though it is legal to open an account for a minor, some financial 
institutions nonetheless request that a guardian or parent be named on the 
account. Accounts established by, or on the behalf of minors, remain 
subject to federal customer due diligence and identification laws. Financial 
institutions may have some trepidation doing business with a minor 
because minors do not have the capacity to enter into binding contracts. 
For this reason, and others, financial institutions proceed cautiously. 
In those circumstances where a financial institution opens an account 
for a minor, current law provides the financial institution the discretion to 
pay funds from the account to the minor’s guardian if the financial institution 
deems it appropriate to do so. The financial institution might use this 
discretion if the minor is very young, or if the financial institution perceives 
something may be amiss, such as a scam. 
The Bureau would like to point out that the proposed bill eliminates 
this discretion. lf passed, the bill would require the financial institution to 
pay funds on demand to the minor. This provision may protect a minor from 
an abusive guardian, but it will eliminate the financial institution's flexibility. 
The Bureau finds that the bill adds clarity to the existing law in the 
following ways: 
o It explicitly states that a minor may endorse and deposit 
checks, such as a paycheck, into their own account; 
o It explicitly deems a minor to be the owner of their own account; 
and 
o It explicitly deems a minor of legal age in all transactions 
related to the account. 
These statements in the bill appear to be an effort to encourage financial 
institutions to more readily work directly with minors. 
The bill does not require a financial institution to open accounts, and
some financial institutions may decline minor accounts altogether ifa 
parent or guardian is not named a co-owner on the account. Thougha 
financial institution may treat a minor of any age like an adult, it is very 
likely they will follow their own policies as to what age group they are willing 
to serve. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I would be 
happy to answer any questions from the Committee.
