March 30, 2023  
Chairwoman Bailey, Chairwoman Perry, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee  on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:  
My name is Alan Cobo -Lewis. I live in Orono. I am the parent of two 22 -year -olds, one of whom 
has autism and significant functional limitations. I am testifying FOR LD 1041 , “An Act to Ensure 
Dental Insurance Coverage for Certain Adults with Disabilities ” 
MaineCare has recent ly been expanded to cover routine dental care. That is wonderful. But the 
unfortunate reality is that dentists who  accept new MaineCare patients are limited.  
My family  experienced this issue with my own son with a disability. Several years ago, h e was 
cove red by MaineCare through the Katie Beckett program, thanks to efforts by President 
Reagan to make sure that children with significant disabilities could have access to Medicaid 
without having to live in institutional settings. We had great difficulty in fi nding a dentist who 
would accept MaineCare patients because the MaineCare reimbursement rate was so low. We 
were flat -out refused enrollment in a dental practice that had openings for non -MaineCare 
patients because our son wore the scarlet M of MaineCare.  
It was humiliating.  
As an adult, my son with a disability is still covered by MaineCare. He is also covered by my 
federally regulated employer -sponsored health and dental insurance —and we expect he will 
continue to be eligible for such coverage even past t he ObamaCare age of 26, because the 
ability for adults with significant disabilities to stay on parents’ health and dental insurance past 
age 26 is fairly common among such large employers  (see, for example, the State of Maine 
Employee Dental Plan1). The ability of adults with significant disabilities to stay on parents’ 
health insurance past age 26 is also newly available to state -regulated plans in Maine, thanks to 
this Committee’s actions last year toward passing LD 1798 (Public Law 2021 chapter 520)  to join 
40 other states in requiring such health insurance coverage in state -regulated plans.  
LD 1041 is the logical next step: to require all state -regulated dental insurance to extend 
coverage on parents’ policies to adults with significant disabilities. This will open up better 
dental coverage for this marginalized population and ease the burden on dental practices that 
are poorly compensated  by MaineCare.   
 
1 “Children incapable of self -support because of physical or mental disability are eligible regardless of age;  
supporting documentation from a health -care provider may be requested. ” See page 3 at 
https://www.maine.gov/bhr/oeh/sites/maine.gov.bhr.oeh/files/inline -
files/SOM%20Dental%20Plan%20Document%207.2022%20.in dd_.pdf   
