      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
March 30, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1041 , An Act to Ensure Dental Insurance Coverage for Certain Adults with Disabilities  
 
Senator Ba iley, Representative Perry , and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services  Committee , my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of 
Community Housing of Maine or CHOM .  I am also the parent of a 2 6-year-old son with 
Intellectual/Developmental Disabilities (ID/DD).  I ser ve as Chair of the Maine Coalition for 
Housing and Quality Services, a coalition of some 4000 people, consisting primarily of parents, 
that focuses on housing and quality services for people with ID/DD.  I also serve as chair the Maine 
Developmental Servic es Oversight and Advisory Board (MDSOAB).   
 
I am testifying in support of LD 1 041, An Act to Ensure Dental Insurance Coverage for Certain 
Adults with Disabilities .  This bill requires individual and group dental insurance policies, contracts 
and certifica tes that offer coverage for a dependent child to offer coverage for dependent children 
with disabilities who are unable to sustain themselves through employment in the same manner as 
for a dependent child on a parent’s health insurance coverage. The bill r equires that an insurer is 
required to offer coverage for a dependent child with a disability, at the option of the policyholder, 
contract holder or certificate holder, regardless of age.  
 
Access to dental services for MaineCare members is extremely limite d in Maine, especially for 
people with intellectual/developmental disabilities (ID/DD), and these access issues are multifaceted.  Maine has an access issue in terms of dentistry in general.  Most Maine dentists will 
not accept patients who have MaineCare because of the low reimbursement rate and inflexibility in 
Medicaid regulations.  Further compounding this issue is the fact that individuals, specifically 
individuals with ID/DD, are not able to gain access to sedation dentistry – a vital service for peop le 
with more difficult behaviors, and there are very few providers who are willing to provide that 
service in the state.  Allowing dependent children with disabilities , including ID/DD, who are 
unable to sustain themselves through employment in the same ma nner as for a dependent child on a 
parent’s health insurance coverage  to remain on their parents dental insurance regardless of age 
would solve for this.  Lower barrier access to dental care will prevent far more acute, costly dental 
issues in the future . 
 
Without access to comprehensive, medically necessary preventive, diagnostic, and restorative 
dental services, people with ID/DD end up with much more complex and major dental issue s, 
causing distress, immense pain, and ultimately more costly interventions.  Major dental issues and 
behaviors associated with dental pain have led people with ID/DD to emergency rooms, crisis 
services, and even out -of-state treatment because their needs could not be met in Maine, and their 
dental issues became exponentially worse.   
 
Over the years I’ve watched oral health become an issue and a major identified unmet need for 
folks.  Most people think dentistry just has to do with teeth, but it has to do with much more, 
especially for people with ID/DD.  The notion of getting someone who has a serious disability, 
including challenges in understanding why or what’s going on, and difficulty enduring pain to 
undertake a dental experience can be a significant challenge.  I am aware of people within this 
population who have died as a result of having too many teeth extracted at one time, without a 
good plan in place to address aftercare, bleeding, and the serious potential for infection.  This is a 
failing of our system and something that can easily be prevented with expanded access to dental 
care.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
