Joshua Hobbs
Lee
LD 1041
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 I appreciate your interests with digital Asset adoption.  We need to be extremely 
cautious who we adopt this technology from.  Bitcoin is archaic at this point in time.  
Its better than what we are using, but the lack of clarity is what is preventing this 
industry from thriving.  Technology has already surpassed Bitcoins potential and too 
many people are purchasing it.  There is a narrative that no one knows who Satoshi 
Nakamoto is.  Then why did homeland security say that they knew Satoshi was a 
group of 4 people?  Maine is my home state. I am an Eagle Scout, Combat Veteran, in
Iraq. I have a picture of myself with a bag of Iraqi cash, AK 47's and a Humvee 
stacked with Bags of chemical PPE, that we confiscated from a town.  This was in 
May of 2003, when we were "on search" for WMD's.  I personally Searched a major 
Iraqi air field.  Absolutely no signs of anything of the sort.   The current financial 
system is based off the same security, TRUST.  When I was an Eagle Scout we 
abided  by the "Scouts Law" 12 words.  We swore to be: Trustworthy, Helpful, 
friendly, courteous, kind, obedient cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean, and reverent.  If we, 
as a nation, held half these values, we might be on a correct path.  The Fed, The 
Banks, The Politicians, have no interest in financial sovereignty.   That's what crypto 
is about to change!  With blockchain technology and the ability to custody it yourself,
makes the value exponential, so there's no party using our money for nefarious things.
We can store our wealth on the blockchain with the security of 12-24 word 
passwords.   That eliminates confiscation.  I have had the State take my truck title and
drivers license, for not being able to pay child support. I was arrested on the side of 
the road for a light that was out, no license (which we do not need one to travel), and 
harassed.   My last name is Hobbs.  The Hobbs act 18USC 1951 is a federal law 
prohibiting extortion or robbery by wrongful use of force or fear, or the attempt of 
these crimes, affecting interstate or foreign commerce.  Which means if someone isn't
putting someone at risk, then cops are not in the right to use their "emergency lights" 
for non emergent policies.   These fines, in hard times, make it difficult to TRUST 
law enforcement, when they are hindering a persons right to travel.  These methods of
theft are unacceptable! The war machine steals as well as the court systems. I know of
people in prison, right now learning and purchasing blockchain tech. While the people
who still believe their free, are in complete denial of how fragile and corrupt our 
systems have become. The government is creating the crisis and will only fix it when 
it benefits them, and not their constituents. Its not Bitcoin, Never was.  We are about 
to get smashed Financially.  DYOR and understand Bitcoin is Slow, costly, unknown 
creator that holds 800,000 BTC, and could create another financial collapse.  Be 
careful.  All the power to the people of Maine. Let's rebuild big with financial 
sovereignty.
