 
 Advocating the right to quality, affordable health 
care for every person in Maine . 
Consumer Assistance HelpLine  
1-800-965-7476
  
 
LD 1041, An Act to Ensure Dental Insurance Coverage  
for Certain Adults with Disabilities  
April 4, 2023  
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and esteemed  members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services,  thank you for th e opportunity to provide 
testimony  in support of LD  1041 , An Act to Ensure Dental Insurance Coverage for Certain Adults 
with Disabiliti es. My name is Kate Ende and I am the policy director at Consumers for 
Affordable Health Care (CAHC), a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates for Maine 
people to be heard, respected, and well -served in a health system that provides coverage, 
access and qualit y, affordable care to  all. 
As designated by Maine’s Attorney General, CAHC serves as Maine’s Consumer Assistance 
Program for health insurance and as such, we operate a toll -free confidential HelpLine staffed 
by trained experts in eligibility and enrollment in private and public heal th insurance. We 
answer questions about eligibility, help people apply for and enroll in health coverage, including 
private Marketplace health plans, and assist with other issues regarding insurance and 
accessing care, including helping people file complai nts and appeal coverage denials. We also 
serve as the Ombudsman program for MaineCare and help people apply for and navigat e 
MaineCare  coverage . It is our experience assisting people in Maine with navigating health care 
and coverage programs that drives ou r support for this bill today.  
Our mouths are part of our bodies, so it is no surprise that numerous studies have found that 
oral health is closely tied to the overall health of the rest of the body and that poor oral health 
is associated with diabetes, heart disease, and stroke. As a result, i nvesting in oral health can 
lead to lower medical costs associated with conditions such as diabetes and cardiovascular 
disease.1 
Often, when people call our HelpLine with dental care needs, they have reached the point of 
crisis and desperation. Many Mainers lack  access to preventive dental services , and as a result, 
are sometimes forced to endure painful, even debilitating conditions that result in expensive 
emergency interventions for conditions that could have easily been stopped in their tracks had 
routin e dental care been available when they needed it. The Maine Legislature and Governor 
Mills took a significant step in improving access to dental care last se ssion, by establishing a 
comprehensive adult dental benefit in MaineCare. However, we know many people continue to 
experience barriers to accessing care.  
Legislation enacted last year, which was supported by this committee,  requires  health 
insurance policies that offer dependent coverage  to offer coverage to adult dependents with a 
disability. This ensures that children with a disability can stay on their parent s’ health plan s past 
 
1 https://mainepcoh.org/publications/ADA_HPI_Estimating_the_Cost_of_MADB_in_Maine_FINAL.pdf   
P.O. Box 2490 Augusta, ME  04338 -2490  • 207-622-7083 • www.MaineCAHC.org  the age of 26.2 Dental care is health care . For the same reasons adult children with disabilities 
should have  access to  coverage under their parent s’ health plans, they should also have the 
same opportunity to access coverage under a parent’s  dental plan that offers dependent 
coverage.  For these reasons , I urge you to  support  LD 1041 to help more Maine people access 
the dental care they need.  
Thank you.    
 
 
 
 
2 http://www.mainelegislature. org/legis/bills/display_ps.asp?ld=1798&PID=1456&snum=130   
