MAINE 
DENTAL 
_(‘ ASSGCIATION 
Testimony of the Maine Dental Association 
Before Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services Committee 
In Support of 
LD 1041 An Act to Ensure Dental Insurance Coverage for Certain Adults with 
Disabilities 
Public Hearing: Thursday, March 30, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Distinguished Members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee: 
My name is Therese Cahill and I serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Dental 
Association. The MDA is a statewide association dedicated to advancing excellence in 
dentistry. 
The MDA represents 85% of the dentists in Maine; there are 774 practicing and retired 
dentists who are active members of the association. 
On behalf of the Maine Dental Association, I am happy to provide testimony in full support to 
LD 1041 An Act to Ensure Dental Insurance Coverage for Certain Adults with 
Disabilities. 
The MDA appreciates the sponsor putting foiward this bill, which is essentially a companion 
to last year’s LD 1798 An Act to Ensure Health Coverage for Certain Adults with Disabilities, 
which was signed into law last session. This current bill recognizes this same population ’s 
oral health care desen/es equal coverage as is in the spirit of the now law for medical care. 
It is well-known many of our most vulnerable citizens, adults with disabilities, wait an 
extremely long time for dental care. Given the special type of attention and care needed by 
these individuals, it takes a particular type of provider and setting to ensure the care required 
can be provided. Dental insurance should not be a barrier to this care. 
By passing this bill, Maine has the chance to once again be a leader in the nation. After 
speaking with other dental association Executive Directors across the country and the 
American Dental Association, it appears this law would be the first of its kind nationally. 
Additionally, there was a resounding “what a great idea, we want that coverage here too” 
from my counterparts. 
Again, thank you to the sponsor for putting this bill fon/vard. Thank you to the Committee for 
your time and attention. 
29 Association Drive, PO B02513, Manchester, ME 04351 r2o7.e22.79oo - F 207.622.6210 - medental.org
