 
 
 
 advamed.org   :: medicaldevices.org  :: medicalimaging.org  1 :: 
 
 
 
 
April 17, 2023  
 
Chair Chip Curry   
Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business  
Committee  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0003 
 Chair Tiffany Ro berts 
Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business 
Committee  
Maine  State House  
2 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 14 87, An Act to Ensure That Residents of the State Have the Right 
to Repair Their Own Electronic Devices  - Oppose   
   
 
 
Dear Chair Curry, Chair Roberts , and Members of the Committee ,  
   
 
On behalf of the Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed), Medical 
Device Manufacturers Association (MDMA), and Medical Imaging & Technology 
Alliance (MITA), we write today to express concerns with the right -to-repair 
legislation LD 1487  in Maine . Our membership comprises the full spectrum of health 
technology innovators and manufacturers, who work every day to deliver high -
quality healthcare for patients worldwide.    
   
Patient safety is our membership’s top priority, and this legislation unnecess arily 
exposes patients to an increased risk of harm or death . As introduced, LD 1457  
requires medical technology providers to share proprietary design and repair 
information with third -party servicers. Often, these providers lack the necessary 
training to re pair complex medical systems. Patients and consumers rely on a 
technology's accuracy to provide proper diagnosis and maintain safety standards.   
  
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) are subject to strict regulations by the 
Food and Drug Administration  (FDA) to ensure patient safety.  These regulations 
protect the safety and efficacy of medical devices and include registration with the 
FDA, implementation of quality and safety controls, proper training, and 
qualification of replacement parts.  Independent  third-party service providers are 
not held to the same standards. A 2018 report by the FDA found more than 4,300 
 
April 17, 2023  
Page 2 of 2  
 
  2 :: 
 
 advamed.org   :: medicaldevices.org  :: medicalimaging.org  
 adverse events – including 294 serious injuries and 40 deaths – from devices 
repaired by unauthorized third -party providers.   
   
These complex  issues are accounted for in federal legislation known as the Fair 
Repair Act – a right -to-repair bill that provides a full exemption for medical device 
manufacturers. Similar exemptions are provided in bills introduced in Minnesota, 
Washington, and recent ly signed legislation in New York.   
   
Safety and security are paramount to our members and the patients they serve. We 
appreciate your consideration of our concerns and are committed to working with 
the legislature on this critical issue. Feel free to contact any of our organizations 
with additional questions. Thank you again, and we look forward to working with 
you.  
   
Sincerely,   
 
  
Roxy Kozyckyj   
Director, State Government and Regional Affairs   
AdvaMed   
 
 
 
 
Clayton Hall  
EVP, Government Affairs  
MDMA  
 
 
 
Patrick Hope  
Executive Director  
MITA  
 
 

