The Entertainment Software Association   
601 Massachusetts Avenue, NW • Suite 300  West  • Washington, D.C. 20001  • Tel: (202) 223 -2400 • Fax: (202) 223 -2401  
  
DATE:  April 18, 2023  
TO:  Chair Curry, Chair Roberts, and members of the Joint Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business  
FROM:  Amanda Martin  
RE:  LD 1487  Relating  to Right to Repair – Oppose   
 
The Entertainment Software Association (ESA) respectfully opposes LD 1487 . The ESA is the U.S. trade association 
representing the publishers of computer and video games for play on consoles, personal computers, mobile 
devices, and the Internet.  
 
The video game industry is a key economic sector that creates jobs, develops innovative technology, and keeps the 
United States competitive in the global marketplace. Not only do 75 percent of United States households have at 
least one gamer in their home, our industry has a footprint that creates jobs in every state.  
 
ESA respectfully opposes LD 1487  based on concerns that permitting console access to independent repair 
providers , over whom we have no oversight , could result in the modif ication of hardware and firmware that could 
compromise the vital security features that provid e a secure media environment for the playback of copyrighted 
games of various game publishers. We recognize that the vast majority of rep air shops would not use the provided 
tools and documentation for any illegal purposes (e.g., removal of security features). However, at the rate at which 
knowledge is spread via social media and other online communication channels, it would only take a few  bad 
actors to have a rapid and severely detrimental impact on the industry.  
 
Importantly, our video game console makers employ digital locks designed to protect their game consoles and 
provide a secure media environment for players and other video game pu blishers and developers. These 
protections, known as technological protection measures (TPMs), are so important to copyright industries that 
international treaties concluded in 1996 ensured these digital locks were protected, and since then over 100 
countr ies have implemented this protection in their own laws.  
 
All three major video game console makers —Microsoft, Nintendo, and Sony —are committed to providing 
consumers with repairs that are quick, reliable, and secure. And, they offer a variety of repair options for consoles 
that include repair services beyond the warranty period to ensure that their consoles remain in good working 
order because their respective success depends on consumers having reliable, versatile, and engaging platforms on 
which to play video games and enjoy digital c ontent.  
 
We appreciate the o pportunity to provide testimony and would be happy to follow -up with any additional 
information as needed.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Amanda Martin  
Associate Director , State Government Affairs  
Entertainment Software Association   

