 
 
 
April 16, 2023  
 
Sen. Chip Curry, Senate Chair  
Rep. Tiffany Roberts, House Chair  
Maine Joint St anding Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
Maine State House  
August, Maine  04330  
 
Re: CTA Opposition to L.D. 1487  
 
Chair Curry  and Ch air Roberts, and Joint Committee Members : 
 
On behalf of the Consumer Technology Association (CTA) , we are writing in  opposition to L.D. 1487 .  
 
CTA is the trade association representing the U.S. consumer technology industry. Our members 
are the world’s lead ing innovators – from startups to global brands – helping to support more than 
18 million American jobs. Our membership is mostly small businesses  and startups, but also 
includes some of the  world’s  best -known  manufacturer  and retail  brands.   
 
CTA stands r eady to work with repair advocates to establish a national Memorandum of 
Understanding (MO U) to facilitate repair nationally consistent with the recently enacted New York 
repair law.  Enactment of varying state repair laws with dif ferent requirements  and definitions  
subject to differing  interpretations  by state courts and regulators is a major concern for our 
industry.   
 
Beyon d that over all concern, the specific provisions of L.D. 1487 raise num erous issues for  our 
industry , including those  summarized below.   
 
1. The definit ion of “Authorized Repair Provider ” encroaches into manufacturing operations .  
CTA’s national  MOU offer  includes (as does the NY law) parity between the provision of spare 
parts, too ls, and documentation for indep endent repair providers  and product owners  (both 
external entities)  equiv alent to external authorized repair providers .  Unfortun ately, the 
definition in L.D. 1487 equates internal manufacturer repair  with  these external activities which 
goes well beyond opening up the repair market .    
• Many manufacturers integrate internal repair operations with new product development, 
R&D , and management of the manufacturing supply chain .  Parts used internally are 
typically not designed with do cumentation or packaging or other distribution requirements  
outside these internal manufacturer operations .   
• If OEM -internal repairs are eq uated with external authorized  repair s, many manufacturers 
doing post -warranty repairs will just stop doing  such  work  because of risks and extra c osts 
associated with turning internal activities into external -facing operations .  This would be an  
unfortunate  outcome and would inadvertently reduce repair a ctivities and increase the 
generation of e-waste . 
2. Implications of jail-break provisions .  Forcing manufacturers to create back -door keys to 
consumer devices and to make those keys available to anyone claiming to be a device owner or 
indep endent repair p rovider is a bad idea. This undermines state and federal fencing laws, 
among other problems.  Security lock openings need to be in the hands of the product users to 
access their device . 
3. Retroactive laws are rarely cons titutional.  As currently written manufacturers would have to 
compl y with these provisions for any product they have already produced in the past – 
specifically the provisions would apply to any digital electronic equipment “sold or used ” in the 
state, which is effectively a retroactive  law.  New York addressed this by specifying a date in the 
future for which products first entering the marke t would be subject to the se new 
requirements.  
4. Breadth of prod ucts covered.   CTA represents techn ology produc ers and retailers in the 
consumer market,  and as noted we continue to offer a national MOU for consumer digital 
electronic products , but these pr ovisions would cover every product with di gital components 
regardless of the market – business to business, business to government, and industrial users .  
L.D. 1487 should be limited to the consumer market.    
 
CTA has additional issues where language is not clear  or is incomplete to avoid undermining key 
securit y and safety  provisions  associated with digital electronic devices.  CTA recommends the 
joint committee  not pass  this leg islation . 
 
Thank you again for the opportunity for us to testify.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Walter Alcorn  
Consumer Technology Association  
VP, Environmental Affairs  

