 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF CHRISTOPHER BRESEE  
MANAGER OF GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS  
 
ON BEHALF OF  
THE AIR -CONDITIONING, HEATING, AND REFRIGERATION INSTITUTE  
 
BEFORE THE MAINE LEGISLATURE  
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT,  ECONOMIC ADVA NCEMENT 
AND BUSINESS  
 
 
HEARING ON LEGISLATIVE DOCUMENT 1487  
 
APRIL 18, 2023  
 
  

Good afternoon, Chairs Curry and Roberts . My name is Chris Bresee, Manager of Government 
Affairs for the Air -Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute (AHRI). Thank you for 
allowing me to speak with you today in opposition to LD 1487 unless amended. AHRI supports 
amending the scope of t he legislation to exclude equipment that requires quality installation to 
ensure safety and environmental stewardship.  
AHRI represents more than 3 30 manufacturers of air conditioning, heating, water heating, and 
commercial refrigeration (HVACR) equipment. It is an internationally recognized advocate for 
the HVACR industry and certifies the performance of many of the product s manufactured by its 
members. In North America, the annual economic activity resulting from the HVACR industry is 
approximately $256 bi llion. In the United States alone, AHRI member companies, along with 
distributors, contractors, and technicians employ more than 1.3 million people.  
 
AHRI respectfully opposes LD 1487  as currently drafted without amendment to the scope of the 
legislation.  The legislation would mandate that original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) make 
available to owners of digital electronic equipment or independent repair providers any part, 
tool, service manual, or other device, implement, or information for the purposes of 
diagnosing, maintaining, or repairing digital electronic equipment made by the OEM.  
 
AHRI represents companies dedicated to manufacturing and installing highly effective and 
efficient heating, cooling, water heating, and commercial refrige ration systems for the health, 
safety, comfort, and product ivity of the residents of Maine . However, the equipment our 
companies manufacture and install is complex and requires highly skilled professionals to 
service and install it. Our industry places a h igh value on the use of skilled, trained, and certified 
contractors to handle the sophisticated equipment our manufacturers produce.  
 
One of the primary reasons AHRI believes it is critical that HVACR equipment only be repaired 
or maintained by licensed p rofessionals is to protect the environment. If not properly installed, 
maintained, and repaired, HVACR equipment, including cutting -edge energy efficient 
technologies, will not provide important energy saving benefits and will undermine energy 
efficiency i nitiatives.   
 
In addition to the se concerns , equipment warranties could potentially be nullified if service 
were conducted by an unqualified contractor. A manufacturer’s warranty is critical for 
consumer protection and confidence in the equipment they are  purchasing. Should a 
homeowner’s equipment malfunction, a warranty can be crucial for saving costs and having the 
equipment properly serviced. Manufacturers rely on qualified contractors to perform 
maintenance and repairs, ensuring that any future warrant y issues or product  recalls can be 
honored.  
 
AHRI respects the intent of this legislation, but to avoid these unintended consequences, we 
believe it is necessary to narrow the definition of “digital electronic equipment ” and amend the 
bill’s language to i nclude an exemption for HVACR equipment .  
 
AHRI has seen similar legislation introduced in other states. We recommend that the definition 
of “digital electronic equip ment ” used in Section 1.B be stricken and replaced with a definition 
that more clearly descr ibes the product s in the intended scope of the draft.  
 
An additional provision may also be added, clarifying that a  digital electronic  equipment  will not 
include any home appliance that has a digital electronic equipment  embedded within it. AHRI 
believes that clarifying the definition of digital electronic equipment does not include HVACR 
equipment would allow the legislation to serve its intended purpos e without creating any 
unintended consequences for product s manufactured, distributed, or installed by our 
members.  
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to present testimony at this hearing. AHRI looks forward to 
continuing to work with the Maine  Legislatu re to address concerns regarding LD 1487.  
 
 
