 
 
 
 
 
 
TechNet North east | Telephone 774.230.6685  
One Beacon Street, Suite 16300, Boston, MA 02108  
www.technet.org | @TechNet NE 
 
Austin  • Boston  • Chicago • Denver • Harrisburg • Olympia • Sacramento  • Silicon  Valley  • Washington,  D.C.  
  
 
 
April 18, 2023  
 
The Honorable  Chip Curry, Senate Chair  
The Honorable Tiffany Roberts, House Chair  
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business  
Cross Building, Room 206  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: LD 1487 – An Act to Ensure Residents Have the Right to Repair Their Own 
Electronic Devices  
 
Dear Chair Curry, Chair Roberts, and Members of the Committee : 
 
I write on behalf of TechNet to ask that you protect Mainers’ digital safety and privacy 
and not advance LD 1487 – problematic legislation that would mandate that 
manufacturers of digital electronic equipment provide unvetted third parties with 
sensitive d iagnostic information, software, tools, and parts – without the critical 
consumer protections afforded by authorized repair networks.  
 
TechNet is the national, bipartisan network of technology CEOs and senior executives 
that promotes the growth of the inn ovation economy by advocating a targeted policy 
agenda at the federal and 50 -state level.  TechNet's diverse membership includes 
dynamic American businesses ranging from startups to the most iconic companies on the 
planet and represents over five million e mployees and countless customers in the fields 
of information technology, e -commerce, the sharing and gig economies, advanced 
energy, cybersecurity, venture capital, and finance.  TechNet has offices in Austin, 
Boston, Chicago, Denver, Harrisburg, Olympia,  Sacramento, Silicon Valley, and 
Washington, D.C.  
 
Consumers currently have a variety of professional repair options, including independent 
repair providers or a manufacturer’s authorized repair network. By establishing 
relationships with authorized repair  providers, which include local small businesses, 
manufacturers can ensure the technicians receive the appropriate training and have the 
relevant qualifications so that repairs are done properly and safely. Contractual 
relationships that original equipment  manufacturers (OEMs) enter into with their 
authorized repair networks contain quality and safety assurances for customers and 
technicians, thereby guaranteeing that repairs meet OEM performance and safety 
standards. Consumers deserve nothing less.  
 
Unfortunately, LD 1487 severs this accountability link that protects consumers. If a 
consumer drops off their electronic device at a repair shop, they ought to be granted 
some level of security in the unfortunate circumstance that their data is compromised . It 
  
 
 
   
 
is not only essential that each repair person be properly trained in how to repair the 
device, but also that an accountability link exist between the manufacturer and the repair 
facility so that the consumer knows that the repair shop has been vetted and that they 
have recourse if something goes wrong.  
 
Further, if LD 1487 is allowed to become law, consumers might reasonably expect that 
all independent repair shops will use genuine OEM parts, since they are available to them 
by law. However, there are no consumer protections in the bill that would require 
independent shops to use genuine parts, nor even inform consumers when they choose 
to use cheap knockoff or counterfeit parts – which will be far easier to fabricate if OEMs 
are forced to hand over det ailed schematics.  
 
Advocates for this legislation claim it will reduce electronic waste. The truth is, e -waste 
is in significant decline and has been since 2015, according to a study  conducted by 
researchers at Yale and the Rochester Institute of Technology, while data from the US 
Environmental Protection Agency shows consumer electronics are the fastest declining 
portion of the solid waste stream. Manufacturers make significant efforts to return devices 
and parts  to useful service and out of the waste stream because it makes financial sense 
to do so. Authorized repair shops are held to sustainability and reuse standards by their 
affiliated OEMs. Independent shops are not.    
 
Finally, we also have concerns about t he bills’ impact on manufacturers’ intellectual 
property. Manufacturers make significant investments in the development of products 
and services, and the protection of intellectual property is a legitimate and important 
aspect of sustaining the health of a ll industries. Many diagnostic programs are developed 
by the manufacturer at significant cost and are confidential or licensed under a 
contractual arrangement. But LD 1487 would require manufacturers to turn over those 
tools without the contractual protect ions afforded by an authorized repair relationship.  
 
In closing, if a consumer wishes to bring their device to an unaffiliated third -party repair 
shop, there is nothing preventing them from doing so under current law. They own the 
device and can choose wh ere to have it serviced.  But SB LD 1487 forces the hand of 
manufacturers to give unvetted companies unfettered access to devices we all rely on, 
many of which contain our most sensitive data, without any consumer protections to 
speak of. We ask that this C ommittee not advance this bill.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Christopher Gilrein  
Executive Director, Northeast  
TechNet  
cgilrein@technet.org  
 
 

