 
 
 
 
 
April 18, 2023 
 
Senator Chip Curry, Chair 
Representative Tiffany Roberts, Chair 
Members of the Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business Committee 
 
RE: Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD 1487, An Act to Ensure That Residents of the State Have 
the Right to Repair Their Own Electronic Devices 
Dear Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the IDEA Committee: 
My name is Curtis Picard and I am the President and CEO of the Retail Association of Maine. I 
am a resident of Topsham. We have more than 350 members statewide and represent retailers 
of all sizes. Maine’s retailers employ more than 85,000 Mainers. I am here today to testify in 
opposition to LD 1487. 
 
You have likely heard from a number of electronics products manufactures about their 
concerns with LD 1487. We agree with their concerns about the bill, but I wanted to highlight a 
few additional points for your consideration. 
 
First, the Maine Legislature has done a tremendous amount of work to try to protect the 
privacy of consumer’s personal information. Just last week, the first proposals related to 
consumer privacy were released, and we expect those issues to receive quite a bit of 
consideration. Passage of LD 1487 would undo much of that work as it would expose personal 
information to unauthorized users. Retailers use a variety of point of sale machines, credit card 
processing systems, and other proprietary technology. As drafted, LD 1487 would allow 
unauthorized retail shops to attempt to fix those machines. Many of those systems store 
personal information, intellectual property and copyright protected goods. 
 
Second, the definition of digital electronic products is so broad that it impacts way more 
products than you realize. You may be thinking cell phones, but it includes farm equipment like 
John Deere tractors. It includes household ‘smart’ devices that could be used to tap a 
consumers personal information. It includes video game consoles whose manufacturers have 

done a tremendous amount of work to develop a game console that does a really good job of 
prevented pirated games of being played. Ten years ago, you could probably buy a pirated 
video game off the street in New York City. These days, you do not see that happening and that 
is because of the proprietary technology embedded in the hardware and software that runs 
those consoles.  
 
Additionally, a number of retailers go through quite a bit of training to become authorized 
repair centers. They work closely with the manufacturers to make sure their technicians are 
properly trained to repair their products, and to make sure certain safety requirements are not 
disabled. 
 
We would urge the committee to reject this proposal and vote LD 1487 Ought Not to Pass.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our concerns with you. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Curtis Picard, CAE, President and CEO 
Curtis Picard
Retail Association of Maine
LD 1487
Submitting my typo corrected testimony.
