 
April 17 , 2023 
The Honorable (Representative ) Tiffany Roberts  
Chair, Committee on Innovation , Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
The Honorable ( Senator ) Chip Curry  
Chair, Committee on Innovation , Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
re: Opposition to M E No. 1487  – An Act to Ensure That Residents of the State Have the Right to Repair 
Their Own Electronic Devices  
Dear Chairs Roberts and Curry : 
I write on behalf of our member companies to express our opposition to bill no. 1487  as it is the wrong 
approach for outdoor power equipment and creates the potential for harm to Maine’s consumers  and 
businesses alike.  OPEI is also a member of the "Coalition Opposed to Illegal Tampering", which has 
expressed its opposition to you separately.  
If this legislation was to move forward, in the alternative, OPEI reco mmends that it be amended to include 
the off-road  exemption amendment language [attached] proposed by the collective industries of the 
Coalition Opposed to Illegal Tampering.  
OPEI is an international trade association representing the manufacturers and their supplie rs of non -road 
gasoline powered engines, personal transport & utility vehicles, golf cars and consumer and commercial 
outdoor power equipment (“OPE”). OPE includes lawnmowers, garden tractors, trimmers, edgers, chain 
saws, snow throwers, tillers, leaf blow ers and other related products. OPEI member companies and their 
suppliers contribute approximately $16 billion to US GDP each year. OPEI members currently distribute 
their products across all 50 states, through a diversity of retail outlets including indep endent dealers who 
are authorized to sell and service their equipment through a contractual arrangement.  
Our concern with ME No. 1487 is the potential it would create for the improper modification of and/or 
tampering with safety and emission controls of outdoor power equipment, rather than addressing 
legitimate repair needs. I have attached further details about the OPE industry, includi ng its effective 
approach to  product repair & service, and details about the undue risks created by this legislation.  
Thank you for the consideration of these comments, and I would be happy to address any questions you 
might have.  
Best regards,  
 
Daniel J. Mustico  
Senior Vice President, Government & Market Affairs  
dmustico@opei.org  
attachments : 1) off r oad exemption amendment , 2) detail information on concerns with ME No. 1487 
 
Off Road Amendment  
Manufacturers, distributors, importers or dealers of all off- road (non -road) equipment, including 
without limitation, farm and utility tractors, farm implements, farm machinery, forestry equipment, 
industrial equipment, utility equipment, construction equipment, compact construction equipment, 
road -building equipment, mining equipment, turf, yard and garden equipment, outdoor power 
equipment, portable generators, marine, all- terrain sports and recreational vehicles (including racing 
vehicles), stand -alone or integrated st ationary or mobile internal combustion engines, other power 
sources, (including without limitation, generator sets, electric/battery and fuel cell power), power tools, 
and any tools, technology, attachments, accessories, components and repair parts for any  of the 
foregoing.  
 
WHY Outdoor Power Equipment (OPE) Manufacturers OPPOSE “Right to Repair” Legislation  
Current legislation is overly broad with unintended consequences for consumers of outdoor power equipment (“OPE”) . The 
OPE industry is instead committed to the consumer’s right to repair where it does not risk modifications to products which 
compromise consumer safety , product performance, and environmental protection.  
• Modification is not repair. Modifications are ou tside the scope of recommendations for repair made by the 
manufacturer.   
• Providing access to embedded software may result in modifications, not repair.  
WHO WE ARE , AND IMPORTANT UNIQUE ASPECTS OF THE OPE INDUSTRY  
• $16 billion U.S. industry  
• 110 U.S. manufacturer members  
• U.S. OPE industry employs 150,000 workers  
• OPE include s:  lawn mowers, snow throwers, chain saws, generators and more.  
• OPE p roduct use is ubiquitous in American households and businesses of all sizes, totaling approximately 250 million 
legacy products in use and new shipments of nearly 40 million products annually.  
• OPE industry has a long history of consumer safety and environmental protection through the development of safety 
standards and engagement with gover nment, including compliance with all regulations . 
ABOUT OPE PRODUCTS  
• Most OPE manufactured today relies on electronics and software code for various functions –  including safety and 
environmental compliance . 
• OPE product offerings are increasingly electrify ing with lithium -ion battery technology –  this results in the necessary use 
of software to control safety and operation of the machines . 
• Depending on the type of power source of the OPE (e.g., gas, diesel, battery, AC), the proposed legislation can create 
very unique risks of product modification to products , whether intentional or not . 
• Different from many of the other product s impacted by this broad scope legislation , many types of OPE have significant 
service lives and markets for re- use, re -manufacture, and recycling . 
• For OPE with shorter service lives , serviceability options  are diverse  and based  on manufacturer consideration of price, 
service life , potential for c onsumer repair,  and the complexity of the anticipated repairs . 
• To effectively provide for these diverse repair needs, OPE is serviced (when applicable) through a diversity of channels 
including independent  authorized dealers, independent service providers, and retailers . 
• OPE manufacturers already provide tools necessary for the proper diagnosis, maintenance and repair of products, where safe and applicable . 
• In cases where additional maintenance, diagnostic, and repair tools are  still required or preferred for applicable products, 
effective 2023 manufacturers of residential and commercial lawn & garden equipment will offer such additional resources for purchase [for information see www.opei.org/right -repair -solutions/
]. 
WHY “RIGHT TO REPAIR” LEGISLATION IS THE WRONG APPROACH, AND FAILS TO SERVE CONSUMERS AND 
HARMS  MANUFACTURERS  
• The legislation creates risks of improper rep air and modification , whether intentional or not, which poses risks to 
consumer safety , product performance, and environmental protection.  
• OPE maintenance, diagnostic, and repair needs cannot be equated with other equipment and products such as consumer electronics . 
• Broad scope legislation is impractical for the OPE industry as products are significantly diverse according to price, service 
life, retail channel, potential for consumer repair and the complexity of anticipated repairs . 
 
• For products with significant servi ce life, improper/faulty repair and/or modification can shorten the service life and/or 
negatively impact the re -sale value of the product . 
• Improper/faulty repair and/or modification can void the product’s warranty . 
• In some cases, legislation may infringe upon OEM intellectual property protections  provided for under U.S. Federal law. 
Examples of areas where preemptive federal law may apply are copyright1, trade secrets2, fraud and abuse3, and air 
emission regulations4. 
WHY “RIGHT TO REPAIR” LEGISLATION RISKS IMPAIRMENT OF PRODUCT SAFETY CONTROLS  AND CREATES 
POTENTIAL FOR UNSAFE PRODUCTS 
• Improper modification of software or hardware  risks making products non -compliant with applicable safety standards , 
and as such unsafe . For example : 
o Modification creates the potential to impair Operator Presence Controls (OPC) which protect against injury by 
disabling powered components when an operator is not actively controlling equipment . 
o The integrity of the OPC of consumer pedestrian -controlled lawnmowers is required under law by a federal 
standard ( U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission)5. 
o Modifications to other controls of OPE may impair control mechanisms for speed, direction, steering, and braking . 
• These safety risks apply not only to the OPE user, but commercial workplace employees and bystanders  including 
vulnerable pedestrians  where products are used in public settings for both residential and commercial purposes . 
• Modifications may also result in the potential to expose OPE users to unsafe engine emission levels of carbon monoxide 
due to improper emission control modification . 
• Where applicable to OPE, lithium -ion batteries are not amenable to any form of repair . For more information on batteries 
and their chargers see www.opei.org/battery -basics/
. 
WHY  “RIGHT TO REPAIR” LEGISLATION RISKS IMPAIRMENT OF PRODUCT EMISSION CONTROLS , 
ENVIRONMENTAL HARM  AND VIOLATION O F FEDERAL LAWS  
• Where applicable, OPE is subject and compliant to product air emission regulations, which is governed by the machine’s electronic / software controls. “Right to Repair” legislation risks potential product modifications which compromise air 
emissions and compliance with the law . 
• “Right to Repair” legislation potentially inhibits federal (and state where applicable) jurisdiction over the regulation of engine emissions . 
• The legislation further inhibits federal (and state where ap plicable) statutory anti -tampering provisions  and may infringe 
upon protections of OEM intellectual property rights.   
• Also where applicable (for battery -powered OPE), the legislation may inhibit federal (and state where applicable) 
jurisdiction over the re gulation of battery and battery charger efficiency. For more information on batteries and their 
chargers see www.opei.org/battery -basics/
. 
Learn more at www.opei.org/right -repair -solutions/  
#     #     # 
 
1 The Copyright Act and Digital Millennium Copyright Act  (DMCA)  
2 Defend Trade Secrets Act (DTSA) 
3 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA)  
4 Clean Air Act (CAA)  
5 U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1205, Safety Standard for Walk -Behind Power Lawn Mowers  
