 
 
Written  Testimony  of Daniel  B. Fisher,  Senior  Vice President  
of Associated Equipment Distributors  
 
Before  the Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and  
Business Committee  on LD 1487  
 
Chair  Robert s, Chair Curry , and other  committee members,  Associated Equipment  Distributors  (AED) 
appreciates the opportunity to offer this testimony in conjunction with the Development , Economic 
Advancement and Business  Committee’s heari ng on LD 1487.  
 AED is the trade association representing companies  that sell, rent, and service  construction,  farm,  mining, 
energy, forestry, and industrial equipment. Our members, which are predominantly small -medium- sized, 
independent, family -owned businesses, employ  many workers across Maine , providing well -paying jobs and  
serving as a positive force within  communities throughout  the state.  Below please  find a list of AED member 
companies and locations in Maine.  
 
Right  to repair” is a simple  slogan;  however,  the policy  proposals  surrounding the issue  are complex  with 
significant consequences.  
 
LD 1487 ’s application to the off -road equipment industry is based on the false narrative that customers are 
unable to fix their own tractors and machinery. To the contrary, equipment manufacturers and distributors make available  diagnostic  tools,  repair  information,  parts,  and remote customer  support.  Idle, non-functioning 
equipment  equals  lost time and money.  Whether  it’s on a road building project  or a farm during  harvest  there is 
absolutely zero incentive to not do everything we can as equipment dealers an d manufacturers to keep a 
machine running. That can mean repairs completed by a dealership service technician, the customer, or a 
third-party provider. The equipment industry is highly competitive, and if a company isn’t providing proper and 
timely servi ce, nothing is stopping the customer from moving to a competitor and their products.  
 In fact, a substantial majority of our members ’ parts sales are sold directly to customers so they can repair their 
own equipment. However, the tractors AED members are selling today are not the same as those sold 
decades ago. While customers can complete most repairs to their machinery, government environmental and 
safety regulations,  as well as technological  developments  that have made equipment  more efficient  and 
productive, necessitate restrictions in access to source code and software that ensure key operational 
functions aren’t modified or disabled. Equipment dealers invest countless resources to train certified technicians to work on complex  machinery.  LD 1487 invites unqualified  individuals  to attempt  to repair  the 
world’s most  advanced and sophisticated equipment, at significant risk to themselves, operators, and the 
public.  
 LD 1487 would also completely alter the equipment industry’s distribution model, putting countless small 
businesses at risk. Equipment manufacturers rely on a network of independent, mostly family -owned small -to-
medium- sized companies to sell, rent and service the equipment. These dealers make significant investments  
in their employees,  including  training service  technicians  to repair  and maintain  the latest  high technology 
machinery. Many AED member facilities in Maine  are in rural and underserved areas, c reating well -paying 
careers and economic opportunity.  
 Equipment  dealers  invest  extensive  capital  in parts  inventories  to ensure repairs  and maintenance can occur  
as soon as possible. Anyone can walk into an AED member  facility  (or go online)  and buy OEM  parts for their 
tractor. There’s no restriction on who can purchase parts,  whether  it’s an equipment owner, a third- party  
service  provider,  an equipment  operator,  or a member  of the general  public.  However,  there  will be no 
incentive for equipment  dealers to carry parts inventory if the manufacturer (or the dealer) is forced to sell  
parts  for a fixed  price  without  profit,  such  as is mandated by LD 1487.  
 
Suggested  Amendment  
 
Given  the substantial  concerns  with LD 1487 outlined above,  AED and our Maine- based members  urge you to 
adopt  exemption language that protects  public  safety  and the economic  viability  of the equipment  distribution 
industry.  The language is identical to an amendment  adopted by New York before  passage of right to repair 

legislation last year and has been utilized in numerous states with similar proposals:  
 
Manufacturers, distributors, importers or dealers of all off -road (non- road) equipment, including without 
limitation, farm and utility tractors, farm implements, farm machinery, forestry equipment, industrial equipment, 
utility equipment, construction equipment, compact construction equipment, road- building equipment, mining 
equipment, turf, yard and garden equipment, outdoor power equipment, portable generators, marine, all -terrain 
sports and recreational vehicles (including racing vehicles),  stand- alone or integrated stationary or mobile 
internal  combustion engines, other power sources, (including without l imitation, generator sets, electric/battery 
and fuel cell power), power  tools,  and any tools,  technology,  attachments,  accessories,  components  and repair  
parts  for any of the foregoing.  
 
Conclusion  
 For the off-road equipment  industry,  LD 1487 is a solution  in search  of a problem.  AED members  provide 
customers  and third-party  repair  providers  with parts,  tools,  and other  resources  to complete nearly  all repairs.  
 
Enacting LD 1487 will stifle entrepreneurship and result  in an unprecedented intrusion by government  into the 
free enterprise system. The viability of the equipment distribution industry will be severely hampered, causing 
lost economic activity, job creation, and technological advancement.  
 
Thank  you for the committee’s  consideration  of my testimony.  
 
Daniel  B. Fisher  
Senior  Vice President  
Associated Equipment Distributors  
dfisher@aednet.org  
202-897-8799  
 
AED’s  Maine  Dealer  Locations  
 
Alta Equipment  Lewiston  
Anderson Equipment Company  Gorham  
Anderson Equipment Compa ny Bangor  
C. N. Wood Co., Inc.  Westbrook  
Central Equipment Company  Stillwater  
Chadwick -BaRoss Inc.  Westbrook  
Chadwick -BaRoss Inc.  Caribou  
Chadwick -BaRoss Inc.  Bangor  
Frank Martin Sons, Inc.  Madison  
Frank Martin Sons, Inc.  Fort Kent  
Heavy Machines, Inc.  Skowhegan  
Milton CAT  Brewer  
Milton CAT  Scarborough  
TB Equipment & Rental, Inc.  Bangor  
Thompson Rolec Enterprises  Lewiston  
United Construction & Forestry  Hermon  
United Construction & Forestry  New Canada             
Whited Equipment Company  Presque Isle  
Whited Equipment Company  Auburn  
Whited Equipment Company  Saco  
Whited Equipment Company  Bangor  
 
 
