TESTIMONY 
JOHN KEANE 
MANAGER OF GOVERNMENT RELATIONS 
ON BEHALF OF 
THE ASSOCIATION OF HOME APPLIANCE MANUFACTURERS 
BEFORE THE MAINE LEGISLATURE 
COMMITTEE ON INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT AND 
BUSINESS 
HEARING 
LD 1487 
AN ACT TO ENSURE THAT RESIDENTS OF THE STATE HAVE THE RIGHT TO REPAIR 
THEIR OWN ELECTRONIC DEVICES 
APRIL 18, 2023
Chair Chip Curry 
Chair Tiffany Roberts 
Members, l\/laine Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement, and Business 
Chairs Curry, Chair Roberts, and members of the Committee: 
The Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers (AHAI\/I) appreciates the opportunity to 
provide our views on LD 1487, an act to ensure that residents of the state have the right to 
repair their own electronic devices. We would like to express our opposition to LD 1487. 
Al—lAl\/I represents manufacturers of major, portable and floor care home appliances, and suppliers 
to the industry. AHAl\/l’s membership includes over 150 companies throughout the world. AHAl\/I 
members employ tens of thousands of people and produce more than 95% of the household 
appliances that are shipped for sale within the United States. In l\/laine, the home appliance 
industry is a signiﬁcant and critical segment of the economy. The total economic impact of the 
home appliance industry to |\/laine is $437 million, $66.5 million in state tax revenue and more 
than $138 million in wages. The home appliance industry, through its products and innovation, is 
essential to consumer lifestyle, health, safety and convenience. Home appliances also area 
success story in terms of energy efficiency and environmental protection. The purchase of new 
appliances often represents the most effective choice a consumer can make to reduce home 
energy use and costs. 
AHA|\/I believes that so-called ”Right to Repair" concepts that are part of LD 1487 are overly broad. 
A basic reading of "digital electronic equipment" can be interpreted to include the home appliance 
industry and, therefore, raises serious questions that Al—lAl\/I strongly urges the Committee to 
carefully consider. 
Home appliance manufacturers know how much consumers rely on their products to make their 
lives easier and more comfortable. Thus, manufacturers work hard to make appliances that last 
longer and perform better and to ensure their customers are satisfied not only at the time of 
purchase, but throughout a product's useful lifetime. Accordingly, manufacturers have a vested 
interest in ensuring repairs are accessible, reliable, and safe. This includes ensuring that consumers 
have access to highly educated, trained and certified repair technicians. 
Home appliance manufacturers not only ensure that authorized repair providers are properly 
trained and certified, manufacturers also take necessary precautions so that when a repair 
provider enters a private home that the home owner as well as the property are safe and secure. 
The fact that repair providers enter consumers ’ homes to conduct appliance repairs presents a 
different set of circumstances regarding the repair of digital electronic equipment. 
LD 1487 comes into conflict with important industry doctrines: 
0 Safety: LD 1487 poses serious product, property and consumer safety concerns.
0 Cyber Security; LD 1487 requires manufacturers to make certain technologies available to 
independent third parties who may not have the proper certification and training thus 
exposing the home to cyber threats. 
Safety 
Safety is a top priority for AHAIVI members. The industry designs appliances that are as safe as 
they are useful and consumers recognize this commitment. Today there are more than 860 million 
appliances in use largely without incident and 93 percent of consumers believe home appliance 
manufacturers do a good job in providing safe and quality appliances. Moreover, another 85 
percent understand that safety policy is a top priority for the industry. For that reason, repairs that 
present safety risks are the exception to the general rule that materials needed for home appliance 
repair can easily be obtained by contacting the manufacturer or visiting the manufacturer's 
website, depending on the complexity ofthe repair. The primary reason that LD 1487 is of concern 
to the home appliance industry is the broad safety concerns presented by the legislation. There 
are three principal safety concerns that these bills present: product safety, consumer safety and 
property safety. 
Product Safety 
LD 1487 requires that manufacturers make all diagnostic and repair documentation available to 
independent third parties or equipment owners. Today, home appliances contain highly advanced 
operating systems that use high currents of electricity, gas, flammable substances, high speed 
motors, and have hermetically sealed systems that can come into contact with water and 
moisture. Product and consumer safety are top of mind for home appliance manufacturers. 
Available service and repair options are, therefore, dependent not only on the type of product but 
also on the qualifications necessary to perform the particular repair. 
|\/Ianufacturers develop diagnostic tools for certified engineers who have the educational and 
technical background and training necessary to troubleshoot, diagnose and conduct repairs to the 
appliance. A right to repair concept would broadly expand the universe of technicians that could 
access diagnostic tools and information. Also, manufacturer authorized servicers are typically 
required to perform repairs with manufacturer authorized parts that have been tested and 
qualified to meet the reliability and safety requirements of the home appliance product. Opening 
up the repair process to any third party services will loosen the control in this area significantly 
and could have a considerable impact on the safety and reliability of the product. In addition, 
manufacturers control the software used for service technicians. Without proper training, 
significant damage to the appliance and the home can occur if these tools are improperly used. 
Because appliances operate using electricity, gas, water, filtered air, flammable substances, and 
high-speed motors, they undergo vigorous safety testing to ensure they meet applicable safety 
standards. Furthermore, appliances are designed to be in compliance with electrical, building, 
and plumbing codes as well as clean air and radiation emitting device regulations. It is critical 
that repairs do notjeopardize compliance with applicable safety and other standards, codes, and 
regulations.
l\/lost appliance products are required by National Electric Code as well as other applicable 
building/mechanical codes to be listed or certified under applicable North American Safety 
Standards (such as Underwriter Laboratories or UL standard). These safety standards ensurea 
product and all of its components will operate in a safe and reliable manner. Right to Repair 
evades many of the safety provisions that Underwriters Laboratory (UL) and others test against. 
For example: 
Underwriters Laboratory North American Dryer Safety Standard (UL2158/CSA 22.2 no. 1581 
This UL safety standard has safety requirements such as motor overload protection, door/lid 
opening or temperature limiting. These requirements were put in place to mitigate risks of 
electrical shock, injury or fire. Manufacturers often design the electronic controls which are 
embedded into either hardware or software and often both work together systematically to 
ensure the system operates safely and meets the UL requirements. To ensure the safety critical 
functionalities are reliable, both the hardware and software of these controls are certified to 
applicable safety standards (i.e. UL6073O or UL60335 or specific requirements of the product 
safety standard). These standards have rigorous requirements to test and validate the required 
safeguards. The standards are stringent to the point that any design or manufacturing changes to 
these components by a manufacturer often requires recertification by a Nationally Recognized 
Testing Laboratory (NRTL) to the applicable standard in order to ensure that the required safety 
functionality has not been compromised. 
Underwriters LaboratorUUL) North American Washer Safety Standard (UL2157/CSA 22.2 no 169) 
High efficiency (HE) washers employ electronic lid switches to ensure that no one can access the 
rotating basket while it is spinning very fast. These switches are often controlled by the Electronic 
control, which monitors the lid switch signal and employs a braking mechanism to stop the basket 
from spinning if a user opens the lid. The same components are also utilized for other functional 
and safety requirements. Diagnosing and repairing a similar HE washing machine requires an in- 
depth understanding of the full system which authorized servicers are given as part of their 
training. An untrained servicer may employ a repair using a non-OEIVI part or incorrect connections 
can compromise the whole system that may result in a potential safety issue and/or performance 
degradation. 
Notably, many certifications are required by state / province regulations, as well as applicable 
Federal laws. Accordingly, any professional servicer must meet these requirements. Thus, they 
do not present a barrier to becoming authorized. l\/lanufacturers simply ensure their affiliated 
servicers meet the applicable requirements, giving consumers further peace of mind that their 
repairs will be conducted safely and correctly. Below is a summary of typical required 
certifications: 
Certification Description 
Section 608 ofthe Clean Air Act requires 
EPA Section 608 Technician Certification certification for technicians who maintain, 
service, repair, or dispose of equipment that
could release ozonedepleting refrigerants 
into the atmosphere 
Certification for handling heating, ventilation, 
air conditioning and refrigeration (HVACR) 
technicians North American Technician Excellence 
Certification (NATE) 
National Appliance Service Technician 
Certification (NASTec) NASTeC is a voluntary national certification 
program for technicians who service major 
(International Society of Certified Electronics home appliances. 
Technicians (lSTEC)) 
The Red Seal, when affixed to a provincial or 
territorial trade certificate, indicates thata 
Red Seal Program (Canada) tradesperson has demonstrated the 
knowledge required for the national standard 
in that trade 
Today, modern appliances contain sophisticated and technologically advanced electronics and 
internal controls that are uniquely designed and programmed for specific products. These 
electronics and internal controls contain safety features (both software and hardware) that are 
relied upon for the safe operation of the appliance. Manufacturers often invest substantial 
resources to ensure diagnostic tools are impervious to failure and tampering by the manufacturers 
own agents, the manufacturer will employ software and Information Technology tools specific to 
its agents to guarantee the service. The same cannot be ensured once these tools are opened up 
to unaffiliated third party servicers. It could be detrimental to the inherent safety of the appliance 
if access were to be granted in the public domain where defeating any of these features (either 
intentionally or inadvertently) could happen during diagnostics and repair, which could then 
create potential safety hazards to the consumer. The repercussions not only jeopardize the life of 
the product but may also leave the consumer worse offthan before either with a new malfunction 
or a product rendered unsafe due to a repair conducted improperly or with the wrong parts. 
For example, the home appliances industry is constantly innovating and advancing our products 
in order to deliver optimum solutions to consumers, which are energy efficient and continually 
better for the environment. Newer refrigerant gases that are non-ozone depleting and have very 
low global warming potential are an example. Comprehensive training is required in order fora 
technician to handle and conduct repairs on systems that contain different types of 
refrigerant. l\/lixing refrigerant types can be problematic and dangerous. An older product 
designed to operate with R134a gas refrigerant does not have the appropriately designed relays 
and electrical mechanical components for the newer R600a refrigerant. R600a gas is a flammable 
refrigerant gas that has positive attributes to reduce climate change and has started to be added 
to new refrigeration products in the U.S. market. It is critical that technicians are properly trained 
to identify which product utilizes which gas and how the gas is properly handled to ensure the 
utmost safety.
Authorized servicers can be directly trained and tools provided to 1) allow technicians to 
understand the systems included on every model and 2) repair those products appropriately. The 
same concerns hold true for the manipulation of LPG and natural gas in cooking products, dryers 
and water lines and the appropriate manipulation of 11O\/ and 220V electrical connections. If not 
properly installed, leaks and overheating can occur. 
Property Safety 
Appliance repairs when not performed correctly can be the cause of property damage, e.g., 
flooding and fires. Insurance claims as well as increases in homeowner ’s insurance premiums 
could result if independent third parties improperly perform in-home repairs. Additionally, in the 
event of significant property damage and/or personal injury, the manufacturer could face legal 
claims. 
|\/lanufacturers, in general, have process and procedures in place that track repairs completed 
through their servicer network. This allows the manufacturer to create traceability of repairs for 
their customers/consumers and is one of the critical factors if fire or another sort of property 
damage were to occur. Opening up this domain to third-party servicers, inhibits the ability for 
manufacturers to track any repairs made to home appliance products and has the potential to 
create issues in determining liability if the source of the repairs cannot be readily identified. 
Traceability is also important because improper repair or servicing can be a cause of appliance 
fires. Finally, this assists insurance companies and other entities if the incident requires 
investigation. 
Consumer Safety 
The nature of appliance repairs requires repair technicians to enter the homes of consumers. ln- 
home safety and security is of paramount importance to appliance manufacturers and we assume 
the same holds true for independent service technicians. Manufacturers who certify technicians 
may require extensive background checks as well as drug screening, and as previously mentioned 
technical and safety training. AHAl\/l members identified two areas in which a repair business must 
be in good standing to earn affiliation, both equally critical. These include (1) business 
requirements, and (2) business capacity to support the affiliated brands. These requirements are 
detailed further in the below tables. 
Business Requirements 
Manufacturerl brand Proof of insurance Business License 
certification course (liability, workers Annual user / service Tax ID 
State / provinciall compensation), agreement for Personnel background 
federal certiﬁcations for Better Business Bureau certification checks 
all technicians accredited Business credit check 
Cyber Security 
In an increasingly connected world, the threat of cyber—attacks has extended into the home 
through connected technology. ln fact, connected devices are in nearly every home, and the total 
number of those devices is expected to reach 26 billion. Home appliances touting ”smart features"
are already in the market. AH/\l\/l ’ s member companies are leading the way in bringing connected 
appliances to customers around the world and are committed to addressing those concerns so 
that consumers are able to access the full, life-enhancing potential of connected appliances while 
minimizing potential cyber threats. Without the proper training, independent third party service 
providers could unknowingly expose consumers to cyber threats while conducting un-secured 
repairs to these products. 
LD 1487 disregards security implications brought to light by requiring the release of firmware 
and other software systems within home appliances. A servicer or consumer without proper 
training and instruction to access technical protection measures and attempting to access 
appliances ’ firmware can lead to unknowingly or knowingly rendering the appliance 
unresponsive to certain operations, including most importantly, critical operations that prevent 
damage to the appliance or the area in the home where that appliance is located as well as 
leaving consumer data profiles and data transfers unsecured, making personal information and 
appliance operation commands vulnerable to outside sources, specifically malware and/or 
hackers. 
Right to Repair concepts have ignored these very real threats and will likely make home appliances 
more vulnerable to cyber-threats and corruption. For example, security key pairings have to be 
embedded in the firmware. If a manufacturer is required to provide the firmware to third parties, 
the manufacturer is providing the keys to the operating system, once the keys become public it 
completely breaks the firmware security chain and the home appliance is not fully secure. This 
also applies to remote and wireless interaction. Connected appliances in some circumstances 
require Wi-Fi connectivity to the consumer's personal in-home network. |\/lanufacturer authorized 
technicians when performing repairs or instructing consumers on the use of such products could 
gain access to those private networks. l\/lanufacturer authorized technicians are under contract, 
for whom the authorized service providers may have traceability. Opening that access up to 
independent third parties may give unauthorized personnel access to consumer's private Wi-Fi 
network and create opportunity for further risk exposure. 
Conclusion 
Thank you for the opportunity to present this written statement to the hearing record. Right to 
Repair concepts raise serious safety, cyber-security and contractual concerns for the home 
appliance manufacturing industry. AHAl\/l strongly urges that this Committee reconsider whether 
or not legislation is in the best interests of l\/laine consumers.
