   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P.O. Box 419264  Kansas City, MO 64141 -6264  816-561-5323  www. naeda .com 
 
In OPPOSITION to LD 1487  
 
The North America  Equipment Dealers Association is an international trade association 
representing  approximately 4,500 farm, industrial and outdoor power equipment dealers in 
North America.  
Through the sale of equipment, parts, and service, our dealer members work in partnership 
with farmers and ranchers across Maine  to make them the most productive and competitive 
producers in the world.  
The proposed legislation is unnecessary and divisive with far -reaching unintended 
consequences. Major farm equipment manufacturers  and dealers are committed to provid ing 
greater access to  parts, tools, documentati on, and diagnostic capabilities for farm equipment . A 
survey of  dealers  conducted by a third party  confirm ed that we are a leading industry in  
support ing customer self -repair . The results of that survey are included with this position 
statement.   
Three  of the primary stakeholders involved in this matter  have  formalized th eir commitment to 
support customer repair . Memorandum s of Understanding h ave been signed by those  parties  in 
which they  state  that legislation is unnecessary on this issue.  
Additionally, f ixing the price of parts at  the most favorable costs offered to authorized repair 
providers  would have drastic consequences for equipment dealers, their customers and 
indepe ndent repair shops. The average dealership stocks over $1 million in parts inventory per 
location . Fixing the cost of that parts inventory will result in  dealers  being forced to 
significantly reduce their parts inventory . They will also be put in direct competition with the 
manufacturers they represent for the sale of parts. Either option will put dealerships out of 
business  and paradox ically  reduce the availability of on-hand parts available to c ustomers and 
independent repair shops  
Finally, if passed, this bill would likely be held  unconstitutional . First, it violat es the state and 
federal  contracts clause  by interfering with dealer/manufacturer agreements. Second, the bill 
would likely be pre -empted by federal copyright law  and the Clear Air Act . 
For these reasons, we stand in oppo sition to LD 1487 . 
Kipp McGuire  
Director  of Government Affairs  
North American  Equipment Dealers Association  

SUPPORTING  YOUR  REPAIR  
© 2022  North America n Equipmen t Deale rs Association, All Rights Reserved  
The average deale rship need s to hire 5 additional 
service technician s to mee t custome r demand . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The average deale r has 2 independen t 
repair shops as a top 10 parts custome r. 
 
 
 
On a verage a deale rship sells parts and 
tools to 9 independen t repair shops. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 - 40 hours  
Deale rship technician s receive 20 to 40 
hours of training  each year to keep up with 
model and technolog y change s. 76% 
Seventy-six percent of equipmen t deale rs 
agree that expanded b roadband 
availabili ty would improve the deale rships 
use of remo te eq uipmen t diagno stics. 
 
 
56% 
Fifty-six percent of deale r parts are sold out the door and are 
not installed by the deale rship. 
1,000,000  
On a verage an eq uipmen t deale rship stocks 
over $1Million dolla rs in pa rts inventory. S100K+ 
The average deale rship will spend over 
$100,000 on technician  training  per year. 

