 
1400 16th Street, NW  ·   Suite 600  ·   Washington, DC 20036  ·   www.ctia.org  
April 18, 2023  
 
The Honorable Chip Curry  
Senate Chair, Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
Cross Building, Room 206  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME  04333  
 
The Honorable Tiffany Roberts  
House Chair, Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
Cross Building, Room 206  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME  04333  
 
RE:  Opposition to LD 1487, An Act to Ensure That Residents o f the State Have the Right to 
Repair Their Own Electronic Devices  
 
Dear Chair s Curry and Roberts : 
 
On behalf of CTIA®, the trade association for the wireless communications industry, I write in opposition 
to LD 1487 , which places mandates on original equipment manufacturers regarding diagnostic and 
repair information for digital electronic equipment. CTIA’s members include wireless service providers, 
infrastructure providers, suppliers and manufacturers. The marketplace already provides a wide range 
of consumer choice for repair with varying levels of quality, price and convenience without the 
mandates imposed by this legislation.  
 
The marketplace continues to evolve, and manufacturers continue to make changes to address 
consumer demand while offering c onsumers safe and reliable repair options. For example, 
manufacturers have relationships with authorized repair providers. These providers – which include 
local small businesses – have received the appropriate training from manufacturers and have the 
quali fications to help ensure that repairs are done properly and safely.  
 
In addition to authorized repair providers, manufacturers may offer walk -in repair options at retail as 
well as mail -in services. Insurance providers may also offer repair options, includ ing authorized third -
 
 
 
 
 
 
party remote technicians that will travel to the consumer to perform repairs. Consumers can also avail 
themselves of numerous other repair alternatives , although manufacturers cannot guarantee the 
quality assurance of unauthorized repa ir providers.  
 
Additionally, many manufacturers have expanded  other  repair options for consumers, from growing 
the number of authorized repair providers to increasing access to tools, parts, and manuals directly to 
consumers. It is vital  that with more rep air options available to consumers, consumers continue to have 
access to professional repair providers with demonstrable competence to provide safe and reliable 
repairs.  
 
To further address the repair marketplace, CTIA launched two programs related to repa ir – the Wireless 
Industry Service Excellence (WISE) Technician Certification Program and the WISE Authorized Service 
Provider (ASP) Certification Program. The WISE technician program educates and tests wireless device 
repair technicians on industry -recogn ized standards, certifying those that meet the highest standards 
for service quality and technical skill. The first certification of its kind, WISE -certified device repair 
technicians provide consumers with a predictable, high -quality repair experience.1 
 
The WISE Authorized Service Provider (ASP) Certification Program creates a network of certified retail 
locations, helping consumers identify qualified providers that meet the highest standards for service 
quality and wireless device repair.2 Both programs were created by CTIA’s Reverse Logistics and Service 
Quality Working Groups, which convene members representing the entire reverse logistics community 
to address the wireless industry’s challenges and develop requirements for industry -recognized 
standards in repair and refurbishment of wireless devices.  
 
While proponents of this legislation may cite to the release of a Federal Trade Commission policy 
statement regarding repair restrictions, it is important to note that the policy statement was based on 
information that is over three years old and does not reflect recent changes in the marketplace. Wireless 
companies – individually and through industry associations – have taken proactive steps to provide 
consumers with more device repair options, while accounting for the need to maintain device integrity 
and  security and to protect intellectual property rights. These include the expansion of CTIA’s WISE 
                                                      
1 https://www.ctia.org/news/ctia -launches -technician -certification -program   
2 https://www.ctia.org/news/ctia -launches -retail -certification -program -for-wireless -device -repair   
 
 
 
 
 
 
program to include ove r 16,000 certified technicians nationally, continued growth of manufacture rs’ 
authorized repair networks and ac cess to tools, parts  and manuals directly to consumers.  
 
CTIA is also concerned this bill would negatively impact  consumers by eliminating the need for 
repairers to demonstrate to consumers that they have the technical comp etence to perform safe, 
secure and reliable repairs. Manuf acturers want to ensure repair providers they work with understand 
the numerous components of the ir electronic products. Their authorization to perform repairs ensures 
that the changes made to the devices are compatible with current technology and the netw orks on 
which they operate.  
 
Finally, CTIA is concerned that this legislation has the potential to weaken the privacy and security 
features of electronic products. The security of user information is of the utmost importance to 
consumers. The potential wea kening of privacy and security protections will increase risks to 
consumers. With broad and unchecked access to technical information, security protections could be 
easily circumvented. In an era of sophisticated cyberattacks, we should not make it easier to hack 
devices and networks.  
 
This bill is an unnecessary intervention in the marketplace, and its mandates could cause safety, 
privacy, and security risks that compromise consumer safety and protection. For these reasons, CTIA 
respectfully asks that you not move this legislation.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Jeremy Crandall  
Assistant Vice President  
State Legislative Affairs  
 
 
 
 

