 
Public  Testimony of fered on behalf of: 
United Ag and Turf and United Construction and Forestry    
 
 
IN OPPOSITION TO:  
L.D. 1487  
 
Committee On  Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business  
 
Hearing:  April 18, 2023, at 1:00 PM  
 
UNITED AG AND TURF AND UNITED CONSTRUCTION AND FORESTRY 
OPPOSES L.D. 1487  
 
  
My name is Scott Miller, and I am writing on behalf of United Ag and Turf (UAT).   As 
President of UAT, which is an independently owned and operated John Deere 
dealerships with six Maine locations. UAT employs around 900 employees in the region.  
Our industry fully supports our customers and third parties having the abili ty to 
repair their equipment, but we DO NOT support L.D. 1487 as this legislation fails to address safety concerns or federally mandated emissions systems. Furthermore, the legislation would hurt small, agricultural businesses and customers in the state of  Maine.  
 Unlike many other industries, the agricultural equipment industry supports the customer’s “right to repair” making this legislation unnecessary for our industry.   You 
may have heard that the State of New York recently passed a right to repair law (attached). That law exempts the off -road industry. The exemption included in New 
York’s right to repair bill is included below for reference.  Customers in our industry can 
already repair their own machine, have an independent repair shop work on it, or bring it to a local John Deere dealership for repairs.   John Deere and United Ag & Turf offer 
100% parts lookup to consumers and independent repairs shop, the same resources for parts lookup that the dealers have. The diagnostic service tool, Customer Servi ce 
ADVISOR, is available from John Deere directly to customers and independent repair shops through JohnDeereStore.com.  This commitment to customer access to 
diagnostic and repair information was recently formalized in a memorandum of understanding with the American Farm Bureau Federation. I have included a link for reference: AFBF Signs Right to Repair Memorandum of Understanding with John 
Deere. Let me be very clear, any independent repair provider can access the tools, 
diagnostics, and repair information available to them today. Operating such a business, 
however, requires investment in not only these items but also in training on the complex systems.   As you can see, L.D . 1487 would undermine Maine businesses and is  
unnecessary to ensure repair and diagnostic information is available to customers and third- party repair providers.  
 
Public   
It is important to note that Customer Service Advisor, and the full array of DIY offerings available to customers today, do not provide the technical training required to perform sophisticated diagnostic tests and troubleshooting procedures which comes with significant formal education and years of experience in the field.  Modern diesel engines 
and power trains utilize a vast array of sophisticated electronic components and sensors to deliver appropriate horsepower and productivity, conserve fuel and comply with EPA emissions standards, which are required to remain in- tact during the entire useful life of 
the equipment we sell. Despite these federally mandated emissions requirements under 
the U.S. Clean Air Act , L.D. 1487 fails to provide any safeguards to prevent illegal 
tampering of emissions systems or even safety systems.  
  In conclusion, our industry fully supports our customers and third parties having the ab ility to repair their equipment, but we DO NOT support L.D. 1487 as it would 
hurt rather than help small, agricultural businesses and customers in the state of Maine. We encourage you to adopt the amendment below which would exclude our industry from this legislation.  
 Sincerely,  
   Scott Miller  
United Ag and Turf  
United Construction and Forestry  
 
Off Road Amendment  
Manufacturers, distributors, importers or dealers of all off -road (non- road) equipment, 
including without limitation, farm and utility tractors, farm implements, farm machinery, forestry equipment, industrial equipment, utility equipment, construction equipment, compact construction equipment, road- building equipment, mining equipment, turf, yard 
and garden equipment, outdoor power equipment, portable generators, marine, all -
terrain sports and recreational vehicles (including racing vehicles), stand- alone or 
integrated stationary or mobile internal combustion engines, other power sources, (including without limitation, generator sets, electric/battery and fuel cell power), power tools, and any tools, technology, attachments, accessories, components and repair parts for any of the foregoing.  
 
 
 

