 
      
 
A Non Governmental  Organization in Special Consultative Status with the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations  
 333 West Wacker Drive, Suite 810  
Chicago, Illinois, 60606  
Phone/Fax: (312) 929 -1970  
www.truckandenginemanufacturers.org  
 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Truck and Engine Manufacturers Association  
By 
Patricia Hanz  
 
Senate Paper  608, Right to Repair Electronic Devices  
 
Public Hearing of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
and Business  
Maine  State  Legislature  
 
April 18, 2023  
 
Members of the C ommittee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business : 
 
I write to you today on behalf of the Truck and Engine Manufacturers Association (EMA), 
regarding our concerns with Maine S P 608, “Right to Repair Electronic Devices .”  EMA represents 
the world’s leading manufacturers of commercial vehicles and on - and off -road engines used in 
several applications, including: trucks; buses; construction and farm equipment; locomotives; 
marine vessels;  lawn and garden equipment; and stationary generators.  
 
The bill  has a very  broad scope  requiring  “original equipment manufacturers of digital 
electronic equipment ” to provide  access for th e purpose of diagnosis, maintenance and repair of 
products that use  digital electronics to operate, which include s many of the products manufactured 
by EMA members, such as medium and heavy -duty commercial vehicles and off-road construction 
and agricultural equipment.  Including those types of large, complex vehicles and equipment  will 
create unnecessary confusion, complications, burdens, and risks for Maine  users and 
manufacturers alike. As such, EMA respectfully reques ts that any right to repair  digital 
electronic equipmen t legislation be amended to expressly exclude  all on - and off -highway 
commercial vehicles and equipment  and the e ngines or motors that power them .  Those 
products are not typical  consumer goods, and they are already covered by existing state and federal 
laws and manufacturer commitments.  Further, their inclusion will lead to significant adverse 
safety, environmental, and security impacts.  
 
As currently written, the bill would all ow independent service providers and owners  to 
access and change the microprocessors on engines, vehicles and equipment that control critical 
safety, emissions, and performance systems.  Such digital right to repair legislation simply is not 
needed for commercial vehicles or agricultural or construction  equipment, and creates a solution 
in search of a problem.  
 
Allowing open, unfettered access to service and diagnostic information will undermine the 
integrity of the equipment and allow for safety features o n heavy equipment – such as braking 
systems and electronic stability (anti -rollover) controls – to be altered and compromised.  
Unfettered access also will increase the likelihood that federally mandated emission control 
systems could intentionally, or uni ntentionally, (and illegally) be altered or disabled.  Such illegal 
 
2 
 tampering is increasingly occurring today, especially on off -highway equipment and commercial 
vehicles , and the U.S. EPA has undertaken a National Compliance Initiative  to respond to the 
numerous instances of tampering  across the country, some of which include the use of software to 
alter or disable digitally controlled emission technologies. Tampering contributes substantial 
excess pollution that harms public health and air quality.  
 
The bill also fails to contain any meaningful safeguards or restrictions that would prevent 
or mitigate the risk of cybersecurity incidents.  Widespread and unfettered access to service 
information increases the opportunity for hackers to improperly obtain or tampe r with such 
information – creating enormous cybersecurity risks.  This legislation will simply make those 
efforts easier.  
 
EMA is actively monitoring  digital repair legislation , and notes that other states have  
recognized the significant adverse unintended  consequences that would be created in including 
commercial vehicles and heavy machinery in such  legislation  and have amended it  to exclude 
motor vehicles and offroad equipment.  
 
Lastly, we note that at least some provisions of the legislation appear to  apply to vehicles 
and products manufactured as early as 2018 .  EMA members believe that these provisions may be 
not just impractical to implement but may be simply infeasible  and is why i t is rare for legislation 
to apply  retroactively .  
 
For all these re asons, EMA requests that any digital product  repair legislation released by 
the Committee clarify that all on - and off-highway commercial  vehicles, and agricultural and 
construction equipment and the engines and motors that power them are expressly  excluded.  
Maine S P 608 will otherwise create enormous safety, environmental, and security risks and 
liability exposure for owners and the general public.  Finally, the bill will limit the availabili ty – 
and/or increase the costs – of products sold in Maine , as those products will be forced to have 
unique characteristics.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide our comments.  I would be happy to answer any 
questions following the hearing at: phanz@emamail.org , (312) 929 -1979.  
  
