STATE or MAINE ~-é?%:¢ 
I G0vERNOR ’s OFFICE OF POLICY lNNOVATlON AND THE FUTURE 
\-~é_ v_.,, A I81 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
‘Wan " 04333-0181 
LD 1126 Resolve, to Increase Community Action Grants 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against 
April 5, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Committee on the 
Environment and Natural Resources. My name is Brian.Ambrette. l am the Senior Climate Resilience 
Coordinator in the Governor's Office of Policy Innovation and the Future (GOPIF), and I manage the 
Community Action Grants as part of the Community Resilience Partnership. 
I am here to testify Neither for Nor Against LD 1126 Resolve, to Increase Community Action Grants. 
LD 1126 directs the Office of Policy innovation and the Future to increase to $100,000 the maximum 
Community Action Grant award amount that a project of a single community may receive. A Community 
Action Grant is a grant to support projects that reduce energy use and costs or make the community 
more resilient to climate change effects. 
Our office appreciates the sponsor's attention to the Community Resilience Partnership program, andl 
welcome the opportunity to share a few details about the early success of this new state funding 
program for Maine's cities, towns, and tribes. 
The Community Resilience Partnership provides grants and technical assistance to municipal and tribal 
governments as well as unorganized territories in support of projects that reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and energy costs, and make communities more resilient to the impacts of climate change. All 
funds allocated to this program are awarded to communities in Maine via the Community Action Grants, 
and to service provider organizations that support communities to prioritize projects and develop grant 
applications. 
The Community Resilience Partnership is structured to offer a low barrier to entry and to encourage 
community alignment with the Maine Won't Wait state climate action plan. The program offers 
communities a menu of more than 70 actions that are eligible for no-match grants, ranging from 
installing public electric vehicle chargers and heat pumps in municipal buildings to comprehensive 
climate action plans, infrastructure assessments, and community engagement. Communities are in the 
driver's seat, identifying local needs through public workshops and tailoring their grant applications to 
their own local priorities. 
Under the Partnership's Community Action Grants, communities may request up to $50,000 for 
applications from a single community, or up to $125,000 for collaborative applications of two or more 
communities. 
ln 2022, the Partnership awarded 74 Community Action Grants totaling $3.71 million over two grant 
rounds. Of these grants, 67 were awarded to individual communities and 7 were awarded to 
collaborative, multi-community projects. The average award amount for grants to single communities 
PHONE 207-624-7458 WW\V.MAlNE.GOV/FUTURE
was $43,920. importantly, 57% of the Community Action Grant funds awarded in 2022 went to 
communities with populations below 4,000 or communities with high social vulnerability (according to 
the Maine Social Vulnerability Index). The Partnership's low barrier to entry and simplified application 
process make it accessible to many of Maine's smallest and disadvantaged communities. 
Under LD1126, doubling the maximum possible award for single community applications to $100,000 
would cut in half the number of communities that could benefit from the grant program, unless 
additional funds are added to the program's budget. 
In 2023, at least 130 communities are expected to be eligible for a Community Action Grant, over 50 of 
which will be applying for the first time. Under the current services budget passed last month, the 
program's allocation of $1.5 million wouldsupport only 15 communities per year at $100,000 each as 
proscribed by this bill, falling far short of demand. Even with the Governor's proposal for an additional 
$1.5 million per year in the upcoming Part 2 budget (which we encourage you to support), fewer than 30 
awards per year would be possible under this bill, compared to the 74 awards we made in 2022. In 
either scenario, keeping the award cap at the current $50,000 and allowing more communities to 
participate in the program is a better outcome for communities and for Maine's climate goals. 
Our office understands that many important community resilience projects carry large price tags. We 
encourage communities to utilize their Community Action Grant to leverage much larger federal funding 
opportunities — either by deploying their grant award as the local cost share for larger federal grant 
awards, or by funding the completion of preliminary planning, design, or permitting work required to be 
eligible for some federal funds. 
Additionally, GOPIF and the Governor's Energy Office are exploring opportunities to deploy federal 
funding from the Bipartisan infrastructure Law, Inflation Reduction Act, and Congressionally Directed 
Spending via the Partnership to make larger awards to communities when possible. 
In summary, without a commensurate increase in funding for the program, doubling the maximum 
award to $100,000 will reduce by half the number of communities that can beneﬁt from the program. 
This would leave most communities in Maine, especially the smallest communities, with longshot odds 
at one of the few grant programs they can feasibly access, which in turn hampers Maine's ability to 
achieve our critical climate targets. 
For the committee's information, I have brought copies of our first annual report for the Community 
Resilience Partnership to share more about the program and our past grants. You can find the full list of 
communities that were awarded grants in 2022 on pages 5 to 10. l am happy to answer any questions 
now or in the work session. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and for your service on this 
committee.
