April 5, 2023 
Th6NatuI_ € 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director COI1S€TV8I1Cy 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine Maine 
kaitlyn.nuzz0@tnc.org 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
RE: LD 1126 - Resolve, to Increase Community Action Grants 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramllch, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and lam 
the Government Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate 
this opportunity to testify neither for nor against LD 1126 - Resolve, to Increase 
Community Action Grants. 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on-the-ground solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature 
Conservancy has been leading conservation in l\/laine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate. 
TNC fully supports the Community Resilience Partnership (CRP) and has advocated for 
increasing the overall funding for this program in the biennial budget. This grant 
program invests in municipalities by supporting efforts to plan for and implement 
climate resilience work in their communities. The recently released annual report for 
the CRP program demonstrates an outstanding record of success —with 131 cities, 
towns, and Tribal governments having participated in the program so far through 
individual or regional coalition efforts. 
This Resolve would increase the amount of grant funding available for each applicant 
from $50,000 to $100,000. We are concerned this would result in fewer communities 
being able to access the program, even if the program funding does increase. When the 
amount applicants can apply for increases, fewer applicants overall receive support. 
We believe the program is successful under its current structure because of the 
number of communities it is able to reach. Those $50,000 grants are being leveraged 
and paired with local funding, private funding, or other efforts to capitalize on much 
bigger projects. They are helping communities add climate considerations to their 
comprehensive plans, engage in specific studies that are relevant to their town or 
region, and build capacity from within. The biggest asset to this program is that it relies 
on the individual communities coming together to decide their priorities. 
TNC fully supports the Community Resilience Partnership - and we want to make sure 
it is available to as many l\/laine communities as possible. Thank you for the 
opportunity to comment. 
14 Maine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, Maine 04011 natureorggmaine
