Testimony of The Maine Real Estate Managers 
Association 
 
In opposition of LD 1193 An Act to Allow 
Residents of Low-Income Housing to Keep Pets 
 
April 5, 2023 
 
Senator Chipman, and all members of the 
Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Alyssa Dean-Littlefield, and I 
am writing to you as Co-Chair of the Maine Real Estate Managers 
Association (MREMA) Legislative Committee.   
 
Our organization is a nonprofit which represents over 80 professional 
property management companies providing 16,000 units of affordable and 
subsidized housing throughout the state.  It is our mission to promote the 
availability of safe, decent affordable housing in Maine.  Our management 
members are both for-profit and nonprofit landlords that believe in this 
mission. 
 
We have some very serious concerns about LD 1193 and the impact it would 
have on the communities we serve in Maine. 
 
First, many of our insurance companies require us to comply with breed and 
size restrictions. The way this bill is currently written, we would not be able 
to comply with those requirements to keep the insurance on the buildings.  
 
A second major concern we have is that pets can cause more expensive 
damage to units than general unit wear and tear. In some geographies in 
Maine and under certain state and federal programs, we are not allowed to 
charge a security deposit greater than the first month of rent, which is only 
enough to do regular unit maintenance when a household moves out; but 
not enough to cover extra damage by the animals in a unit. In this scenario, 
the onus for unit repairs would fall solely on the landlord or owner to pay. 
 
Another concern we have is the health and wellness of all community 
members. Not being able to limit size or type of animal can create safety 
risks to others in the buildings. The ferociousness of an animal might not be 
known until there is an incident in a property which can sometimes be 
catastrophic. Animals also pose fall risks to older adults, kids, or people with 
disabilities as not every community member will comply with leashing rules. 
Loud animals also disrupt community members’ right to ‘peaceful 
enjoyment’ in their units.  Alpha Management Corp
Auburn Housing Authority
Avesta Housing
Bangor Housing Authority
Barkan Management Co.
Bath Housing
Brewer Housing Authority
C & C Realty Management
C. M. Cimino Realty Inc.
C. S. Management, Inc
C.B. Mattson, Inc.
Caleb Foundation, The
CMHI Property Management Inc
Community Housing of Maine
DBH Management
DC Management
Deanna Morse Property 
Management Inc
Deering Pavilion
Dover-Foxcroft Housing Dev Corp
Downeast Community Partners
Eagle Point Management, LLC
Ellen M Leach Memorial Home
Evernorth
Federal Management Co., Inc
Foothills Management
Foreside Real Estate Mgt
Gary Buck Property Management
Guilford Development Corp
Hallkeen Management, Inc
Harbor Management
Harborview Management LLC
Hillside Apts
Housing Authority City of Old 
Town
Housing Foundation, The
Kathryn Hughes Associates, Inc.
L & L Management
LaBrecque Property Management
Laplante Apartments
Lewiston Housing Authority
Madison Avenue Associates
Maine Development
Mary Young
Matthew Sherman Mem AptsMEMBERS

We are also worried about this leading to resident disputes around clean-up and maintaining common 
outside and inside areas of the buildings. As a property manager, it is incredibly hard to prove which unit 
is not cleaning up after their pets unless the staff manager is there 24-hours a day and witnesses the 
offense. This will likely lead to arguments and complaints among neighbors and when there are many 
more animals in the buildings, this will be incredibly detrimental.  
 
If this bill were to go through there would be major financial and operational implications. Many 
affordable housing properties in Maine run on limited budgets and cannot afford the extra money in 
damages, clean-up, or general operating. These expenses could put a property into a deficit and 
potentially not be able to pay its bills. Properties that are not financially stable are a risk to affordable 
housing that is desperately needed in Maine.  
 
Due to the reasons above, MREMA opposes LD 1193. If you have any further questions, please do not 
hesitate to contact me. 
 
Legislative Co-Chairs, 
 
Alyssa Dean-Littlefield     Sherrin Vail 
adeanlittlefield@wishcamper.com    svail@evernorthus.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
