Testimony of the Maine Association of Public Housing Authority Directors 
In Opposition to LD 1193, “An Act to Allow Residents of Low-Income Housing to Keep Pets” 
Joint-Standing Committee on Labor & Housing 
April 6, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the 
Joint-Standing Committee on Labor & Housing. My name is Chace Jackson and I am a Partner 
at The Resurgam Group, a public affairs firm. Today I am here on behalf of our client, the Maine 
Association of Public Housing Authority Directors. Our membership consists of twenty local 
Public Housing Authorities (PHAs) across the state of Maine, with Public Housing Authority 
Executive Directors from Sanford to Fort Fairfield. 
We are here today asking you to oppose LD 1193, “An Act to Allow Residents of Low-Income 
Housing to Keep Pets” , which would require public housing authorities to accommodate pet 
ownership in a very unrestricted way and irrespective of a property ’s speciﬁc needs. This bill 
overlooks the significant management issues that public housing authorities already face when 
it comes to pet ownership, and it does not consider the numerous federal regulations that 
already govern pet ownership in public housing. 
Existing federal law regulates pet ownership in public housing. Specifically, the Fair Housing 
Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) provide protections for individuals with 
disabilities who require service animals or emotional support animals. These laws require public 
housing authorities to make reasonable accommodations for individuals with disabilities, which 
may include allowing them to have a sen/ice animal or emotional support animal. The ADA also 
prohibits housing providers from charging additional fees or deposits for service animals or 
emotional support animals. 
The Department of Housing and Urban Development's 2020 Public Housing Occupancy 
Guidebook further specifies that “[Public Housing Authorities] PHAs must permit tenants of 
elderly/disabled developments to own common household pets and may establish rules 
governing pet ownership. Further, PHAs must not discriminate with respect to admissions or 
continued occupancy in such elderly/disabled housing based on an applicant or tenant owninga 
pet or having a pet in their unit.” So even in contexts where federal guidance admits and 
protects pet ownership, recognizing its inherent importance to many occupants, rule making is 
preserved for public housing authorities. 
MAPHD worries LD 1193 overlooks these federal laws and the protections they offer for pet 
owners, instead placing an undue burden on public housing authorities already striving to 
provide safe and affordable housing to low-income families and individuals. The presence of 
pets in public housing units is a complex issue that requires thoughtful consideration of the 
needs and safety of all residents, as well as compliance with federal law. The vast majority of 
PHAs generally accept pet ownership on their properties. However, we feel that those policies 
are most fair to all tenants when they can be tailored to an individual property or location without 
a blanket approach like LD 1193.
Public housing authorities are tasked with providing safe and affordable housing for low-income 
families and individuals. The presence of pets in public housing units can pose signiﬁcant 
challenges to the safety, cleanliness, and overall quality of life of residents - which is precisely 
why it must be approached with deference to the situation, rather than a one-size-fits all For 
example, pets can cause damage to property, create noise disturbances, and pose health and 
safety risks, especially for those with allergies or compromised immune systems. Public housing 
authorities must balance the needs of all residents, including those with and without pets, to 
ensure a safe, healthy, and comfortable living environment for everyone. 
lt should also be pointed out that the bill as written takes “public housing” to mean “a residential 
building funded wholly or partly by the Maine State Housing Authority or by the housing 
authority of a municipality ” . This language is inconsistent with the federal definition of that term, 
which regards “public housing” as a very specific type of subsidized housing funded by HUD. LD 
1193 appears to apply the term to public housing authorities via colloquialism rather than extant 
federal definitions. 
In conclusion, the Maine Association of Public Housing Authority Directors strongly opposes LD 
1193, and we urge the Maine Legislature to reject this bill. Public housing authorities must be 
able to balance the needs of all residents and comply with federal law to ensure safe and 
affordable housing for low-income families and individuals. We would be happy to answer any 
questions. Thank you for your time and consideration.
