      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 6, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1193, An Act to Allow Residents of Low -income Housing to Keep Pets  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder , and members of the Labor and Housing Committee , my 
name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine ( CHOM ).  
CHOM’s small staff works collaboratively to create affordable housing enriched with services to 
help people overcome challenges.  
 
I am testifying in opposition to LD 1193, An Act to Allow Residents of Low -income Housing to 
Keep Pets .  This bill directs the Maine State Housing Authority, a housing authority of a 
municipality or other entity in control of public housing to allow a resi dent of public housing to 
own and maintain one or more common household pets .  
 
The way Public Housing is defined in this bill does not match the U.S. Department of Housing and 
Urban Development definition of “Public Housing”, nor does it coincide with the  general public’s 
understanding of what Public Housing is.   
“WHAT IS PUBLIC HOUSING?  Public housing was established to provide decent and 
safe rental housing for eligible low -income families, the elderly, and persons with 
disabilities. Public housing com es in all sizes and types, from scattered single -family 
houses to high rise apartments for elderly families. There are approximately 
970,000* households living in public housing units, managed by some 3,300 HAs. The 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Dev elopment (HUD) administers Federal aid to 
local housing agencies (HAs) that manage the housing for low -income residents at rents 
they can afford. HUD furnishes technical and professional assistance in planning, developing, and managing these developments.”   
Source: https://www.hud.gov/topics/rental_assistance/phprog
  
 
The way “Public Housing” is defined in LD 1193, any entity that receives any  funding from 
MaineHousing or from a housing authority of a municipality to develop housing would be considered “Public Housing.”  Though I hope the Committee recommends this pass Ought Not to 
Pass, I would implore the Committee to adopt HUD’s definition of “Public Housing”, meaning 
housing owned by a Public Housing Authority, should this bill move forward out of Committee.  
 
Owners/landlords already consider and approve reasonable accommodation requests related to 
service, emotional support, and therapy animals.  The process to request reasonable accommodations for this is straightforward, and the documentation required is minimal.  
 
I appreciate that this allows owners/landlords to impose pet deposits and reasonable conditions on the ownership of household pets, including policies on nuisance behaviors, leashing requirements, 
limitations on the number of common household pets allowed in a unit based on the unit's size and 
prohibitions on dangerous or vicious animals.  However, there are a broad array of reasons why 
owners/landlords prohibit pets beyond the scope of the reasonable conditions included within the 
bill, including health, medial, and liability issues.   
 
This legislation, though well -intended, will have dire unintended consequences.  This bill does not 
account for the additional costs borne by owners/landlords associated allowing residents to have 
pets, including but not limited to increases in insurance premiums, increased  costs for pest 
remediation, additional costs not covered by pet deposits and additional time to complete unit 
turnovers, etc.  
 
I hope that you please oppose LD 1193.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.    
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
