MaineHousing MAINE STATE HOUSING AUTHORITY 
Te.rz‘z' m0/g/ of 
Erik C. jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
bejbre 
The ]oint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Neither For Nor Against: 
LD 1193: “An Act to Allow Residents of Low-income Housing to Keep Pets”
\ 
April 6, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the joint Committee on Labor and Housing, I 
am Erikjorgensen Senior Director of Government Relations and Communications at the Maine State 
Housing Authority (MaineHousing) and I am submitting this testimony neither for nor against LD 1193. 
Mainel-Iousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 1969. 
We are an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to address the problems of 
unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing. We are authorized to issue bonds to 
ﬁnance single family mortgages for ﬁrst time homebuyers and for affordable multi—family housing. 
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, including rental 
subsidies, Weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-income housing tax 
credit program, and homeless grant programs. We receive state general fund revenue for homeless 
programs and receive a dedicated portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing 
Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Fund. 
MaineHousing does not own or control any rental housing in Maine. We do have in our portfolio 
around 20,000 units that we have financed, and in that capacity our asset management department 
does provide periodic oversight around assurance of affordability and property management 
standards. We do however, have reservations about adding a blanket requirement like this to 
properties, many of which already do allow pets, and which have existing pet policies in place. 
Most affordable housing in Maine is, in fact, provided in privately-owned properties. While some 
apartments, as noted, are owned by public housing authorities, the majority of affordable housing 
projects in our state and ﬁnanced by MSHA are owned by developers or nonproﬁt housing 
26 Edison Drive l Augusta, Maine04330-6046 I 207-826-4600 1 800-452-4668 l Maine Relay 711 1 Fax 207-626-4678 I mainehousing.0rg
providers. We should add that this bill as drafted only covers those properties fnanced by MSHA or 
the public housing authorities, and not the thousands of subsidized units, mostly in rural areas, that 
were constructed and are operated with federal rental subsidy through the USDA’s rural 
development program. 
Adding a requirement like this would add a new category of oversight — this subject is not about 
safety, it’s not about affordability, and it’s not about property maintenance, which are the things that 
we do monitor. 
Furthermore, many housing projects fnanced using federal resources are already subject to detailed 
federal regulations around pet ownership. The Fair Housing Act and the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA) both provide protections for individuals with disabilities who require service animals or 
emotional support animals. These laws require public housing authorities to make reasonable 
accommodations for individuals with disabilities, which may include allowing them to have a pet. 
The ADA also prohibits housing providers from charging additional fees or deposits for service 
animals or emotional support animals. 
HUD publishes a detailed guide to pet ownership in public 
housing: l1ttps:/ / \v\v\v.l1ud.gov / sites/ dfrles/ PIH / docu1nents/ PHOGPetO\vnershijlpdf. It states 
that “Public Housing Authorities must permit tenants of elderly/ disabled developments to own 
common household pets and may establish rules governing pet ownership. Further, they must not 
discriminate with respect to admissions or continued occupancy in such elderly/ disabled housing 
based on an applicant or tenant owning a pet or having a pet in their unit.” 
Another iinportant point from these HUD guidelines is that in projects where pet policies are being 
considered, those policies must be developed in consultation with the residents. Not all residents in 
projects want to live in a building that has animals in it, and issues like noise, property damage and 
allergens are real concerns for many apartment residents. 
Again, there is nothing stopping a property owner from allowing pets in their property, and many, if 
not most, of them already do. We would urge you, however, to consult with entities, such as those 
public housing authorities that actually own housing (unlike MaineHousing), to better understand 
the on-the-ground speciﬁcs of how this proposed bill would work and interact with other 
regulations that those landlords must follow. 
We recognize the value in pets as contributors to quality of life, and we understand that this bill 
seeks to go further than service and emotional support animals. That said, operating publicly- 
financed affordable housing is complex and difficult work, and not enough landlords are willing to 
provide this service to begin with. We caution against any mandates that could make the 
management of these properties harder for Maine’s property owners and managers.
