Robin D. Watts  
102 Wolcott Street    •   Portland, Maine 04102    •   (207) 650 -3193  
 
April 6, 2023  
 
Committee on Labor and Housing  
C/O Legislative Information  Office  
100 State House Station  
Augu sta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Testimony on LD 1193 – An Act to Allow Residents of Low -income Housing to Keep Pets  
 
Chairs  Roeder  and Tipping , and Distingu ished  Mem bers of the Committee on Labor and Housing :  
 
I am a residen t of Maine, currently resid ing in Portland. I am also a real estate attorney  and have  practic ed 
law for almost 30 years.  In addition, during my years in Maine, I have had an opportunity to volunteer  
with animal shelters in Centra l and Southern  Maine and  to adop t and foster animals through Maine’s 
anim al shelters.  I am writing in support of LD 1193 – An Act to Allow Residents of Low -income Housing 
to Keep Pets. LD 1193 directs the Maine State Housing Authority  and other housing authorities in control 
of public housing  to allow a resident of public housing to own and maintain on e or more common 
house hold p ets. 
 
Through my personal experiences as a re al estate attorney , shelter volunteer,  and pet owner,  I have 
come to appreciate t he need  for th e type of practical rental polic ies anticipated by LD 1193 . As a foster 
parent and adopti ve parent th rough the shelter system, I have seen  cats and dogs come into the shelter 
system, either temporarily or permanently, simply because  their families were  displaced from their 
residence s and were  unable to find appropriate or affordable housing that would accept pets. In  those 
situations where pets are allowed, the re are sometimes unworkable  limitations on the types or size of 
pets allowed . Rather than severely  restricting the type s or size of pets allowed, it would be more beneficial 
for landlo rds to impose practical policies that are reasonably relat ed to the  safety of other tena nts, such 
as leash and cleanu p rules. In addition, the deposits and fees that must be paid in order to maintain  the 
pets are not always reasonable . Tenants who must seek low -income housing already  have limited  
financial  means , so it is difficult to pay significant additional  deposits and fees  just to be able to keep  their 
family pets. I was involved in one  situation, that was particularly  personal for me, where my former foster 
daughter, who is now an adult, was forced to surrender her famil y’s two  cats back to the shelter  just 
because  she had to move out of her rental apartment,  and she was not a ble to locate a n affordable 
replacement that would allow cats.   
 
The Maine Legislature has illustrated  a commitment to provi ding affordable  housing for its residents and 
it has also had a tradition of supporting and protecting its companion animals. The policies set for th in 
LD 1193 will further stren gthen Maine ’s commitment t o affordable housing  and companion an imals , 
ensuring  that all Mainers , including those who have made pets a part of the ir families  will be able to find 
appropriate housing  for their entire family . I encourage  this Committee  to vote in support of the enactment 
of LD 1193 . Thank you for you r time and consideration and for the opportunity to provide testimony in 
supp ort of LD 1193 .   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Robin D. Watts  

Robin Watts
Portland, Maine
LD 1193
April 6, 2023
Committee on Labor and Housing 
C/O Legislative Information Office
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: Testimony on LD 1193 – An Act to Allow Residents of Low-income Housing to 
Keep Pets
Chairs Roeder and Tipping, and Distinguished Members of the Committee on Labor 
and Housing: 
I am a resident of Maine, currently residing in Portland. I am also a real estate 
attorney and have practiced law for almost 30 years. In addition, during my years in 
Maine, I have had an opportunity to volunteer with animal shelters in Central and 
Southern Maine and to adopt and foster animals through Maine’s animal shelters. I 
am writing in support of LD 1193 – An Act to Allow Residents of Low-income 
Housing to Keep Pets. LD 1193 directs the Maine State Housing Authority and other 
housing authorities in control of public housing to allow a resident of public housing 
to own and maintain one or more common household pets.
Through my personal experiences as a real estate attorney, shelter volunteer, and pet 
owner, I have come to appreciate the need for the type of practical rental policies 
anticipated by LD 1193. As a foster parent and adoptive parent through the shelter 
system, I have seen cats and dogs come into the shelter system, either temporarily or 
permanently, simply because their families were displaced from their residences and 
were unable to find appropriate or affordable housing that would accept pets. In those 
situations where pets are allowed, there are sometimes unworkable limitations on the 
types or size of pets allowed. Rather than severely restricting the types or size of pets 
allowed, it would be more beneficial for landlords to impose practical policies that are
reasonably related to the safety of other tenants, such as leash and cleanup rules. In 
addition, the deposits and fees that must be paid in order to maintain the pets are not 
always reasonable. Tenants who must seek low-income housing already have limited 
financial means, so it is difficult to pay significant additional deposits and fees just to 
be able to keep their family pets. I was involved in one situation, that was particularly 
personal for me, where my former foster daughter, who is now an adult, was forced to
surrender her family’s two cats back to the shelter just because she had to move out of
her rental apartment, and she was not able to locate an affordable replacement that 
would allow cats.  
The Maine Legislature has illustrated a commitment to providing affordable housing 
for its residents and it has also had a tradition of supporting and protecting its 
companion animals. The policies set forth in LD 1193 will further strengthen Maine’s
commitment to affordable housing and companion animals, ensuring that all Mainers, 
including those who have made pets a part of their families will be able to find 
appropriate housing for their entire family. I encourage this Committee to vote in 
support of the enactment of LD 1193. Thank you for your time and consideration and 
for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 1193.  
Sincerely,
 
Robin D. Watts

