Testimony of Sharon Secovich  
For LD 1193  
4.6.2023  
 Testimony for LD 1193  – An Act to Allow Residents of Low -income Housing to Keep Pets  
Committee on Labor and Housing  
Submitted by Sharon Secovich  
 
 
Good afternoon,  Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Labor and Housing .  My name is Sharon Secovich I am from  Alfred, and I am here to testify for LD 1193.  
 
I have been  on board of directors of the York County Shelter Program s (YCSP) for six years.   I also 
volunteer in its food pantry, and I founded and run its pet fo od pantry.  Although I am not testifying on 
behalf of YCSP, my testimony is informed by my work with th at organization.  
 
YCSP owns and manages 110 low-income housing units in southern Maine housing approximately 400 
people.  While we do allow pets in our apartments in some circumstances , we do not allow pets in our 
family or adult homeless shelters.  As a result, we have had many potential clients refuse to enter our 
shelter as they  prefer t o live in their car or on the streets with their pets.   We currently have grant 
money that allows us to partner with a local animal shelter and provide foster care for the pet while we 
seek to move our client from our shelter to permanent housing  and we are exploring building kennels at 
our adult shelter so that no one is separated from their pet just because they are poor.   
 
Before starting our pet food pantry, I took a survey of our food pantry clients , most of whom are seniors,  
to see how many  owned pets and what kind of pets they owned.    Of the households  that had pets, 38% 
indicated that the y themselves would go without food before they would allow their pet s to go hungry.   
Just this past Tuesday, our pet food pantry provided pet food for 71  families who owned 128 cats and 76  
dogs.   Our clients  start lining up at our food pantry a 9:00 in the morning for an 11:00 opening.  Many 
have their dogs in the car with them.    Most are elderly, and alone, except for their pets.  Our volunteers 
go from car to car delivering their pet food to them.  Our clients ’ face s light up when they receive their 
pet food and often it is hard to break away from a car because the owner wants to tell us  all about their 
pet(s).   This is especially true for our e lderly clients.  They don ’t want to tell us about their 
grandchil dren, they want to tell us about their pets!  
 
Mainers are compas sionate people,  and the ir animals  are clearly beloved members of their family.  
Being poor and being poor and elderly should not have to mean that you can’t have housing if you don’t 
give up a beloved family member .    Thank you for your time  and your wo rk. 
 
Respectfully Submitted , 
 
Sharon Secovich  
Alfred, ME  
