 
 
April 5, 2023 
Sen. Michael Tipping, Senate Chair 
Rep. Amy Roeder, House Chair 
Maine Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
 
RE: Support for LD 1193 
 
Dear Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing: 
 
On behalf of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA), I am writing to express our 
support for LD 1193. Founded in 1866, the ASPCA was the first humane society to be established in North America 
and is today one of the largest in the world. The ASPCA believes that pets and people belong together; that 
financial circumstances alone are not reliable indicators of the capacity to love and care for a companion animal, 
and that strong bonds between people and pets make for stronger communities. To this end, the ASPCA supports 
and works to promote policies creating more pet-friendly housing opportunities, especially for lower income 
households. LD 1193 is entirely consistent with these efforts by ensuring that residents of public housing are not 
faced with the devastating choice of accessing housing or relinquishing their pet to a shelter. 
 
LD 1193 would build on the successful experience of numerous government entities that decided to include pets as 
part of their communities. One such entity is the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) 
which has required all of its public housing and all HUD-insured or financed housing for senior or disabled 
households to be pet-friendly since 2000 and 2008 respectively. Unfortunately, local restrictions by the Public 
Housing Authorities have significantly restricted the types of pets that are permitted in these communities.  
 
In permitting pets, HUD has emphasized that allowing pets is a significant way to contribute to the overall well-
being of families living in affordable housing. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, pets 
have positive impacts at nearly every stage of life.  Pets influence social, emotional, and cognitive development in 
children, promote an active lifestyle, and have been able to detect oncoming epileptic seizures or the presence of 
certain cancers. Research has shown that cats provide emotional support, improve moods, and contribute to the 
overall morale of their owners. Cats are also credited with promoting socialization among the elderly and 
physically or mentally disabled people. These benefits are consistent with goals to holistically address the social, 
economic, and health outcomes for residents of affordable housing. 
 
We ask for your support for LD 1193 so that fewer households are faced with the difficult decision of giving up 
their pet. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Bill Ketzer 
Sr. Director of State Legislation 
Bill.ketzer@aspca.org  
 
Susan Lea Riggs 
Sr. Director of Housing Policy 
Susan.riggs@aspca.org 
 

William Ketzer
ASPCA
LD 1193
Sen. Michael Tipping, Senate Chair
Rep. Amy Roeder, House Chair
Maine Legislature
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0100
RE: Support for LD 1193
Dear Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing:
On behalf of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
(ASPCA), I am writing to express our support for LD 1193. Founded in 1866, the 
ASPCA was the first humane society to be established in North America and is today 
one of the largest in the world. The ASPCA believes that pets and people belong 
together; that financial circumstances alone are not reliable indicators of the capacity 
to love and care for a companion animal, and that strong bonds between people and 
pets make for stronger communities. To this end, the ASPCA supports and works to 
promote policies creating more pet-friendly housing opportunities, especially for 
lower income households. LD 1193 is entirely consistent with these efforts by 
ensuring that residents of public housing are not faced with the devastating choice of 
accessing housing or relinquishing their pet to a shelter.
LD 1193 would build on the successful experience of numerous government entities 
that decided to include pets as part of their communities. One such entity is the 
federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) which has required 
all of its public housing and all HUD-insured or financed housing for senior or 
disabled households to be pet-friendly since 2000 and 2008 respectively. 
Unfortunately, local restrictions by the Public Housing Authorities have significantly 
restricted the types of pets that are permitted in these communities. 
In permitting pets, HUD has emphasized that allowing pets is a significant way to 
contribute to the overall well-being of families living in affordable housing. 
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, pets have positive 
impacts at nearly every stage of life.  Pets influence social, emotional, and cognitive 
development in children, promote an active lifestyle, and have been able to detect 
oncoming epileptic seizures or the presence of certain cancers. Research has shown 
that cats provide emotional support, improve moods, and contribute to the overall 
morale of their owners. Cats are also credited with promoting socialization among the
elderly and physically or mentally disabled people. These benefits are consistent with 
goals to holistically address the social, economic, and health outcomes for residents of
affordable housing.
We ask for your support for LD 1193 so that fewer households are faced with the 
difficult decision of giving up their pet.
Sincerely,
 
Bill Ketzer
Sr. Director of State Legislation
Bill.ketzer@aspca.org
 
Susan Lea Riggs
Sr. Director of Housing Policy
Susan.riggs@aspca.org
