 
Committee  on Taxation  
State House, Room 127  
Augusta, Maine  04333  
c/o Benjamin Berry , Committee Clerk  
 
Re: LD 1355: An Act to Establish a Behavioral Health Employment Income Tax Credit for Student Loan 
Payment s 
 
Dear Senator  Nicole Grohoski , Representative Joe Perry  and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Taxation , 
 
    As President of the Board  and Executive Director  of the National Association of Social Workers  - Maine 
Chapter (NASW ME), we are submitting  this testimony in support of LD 1355: An Act to Establish a 
Behavioral Health Employment Tax Credit for Student Loan Payments. The present behavioral health 
workforce shortage  has reached a critical point during COVID .  Behavioral health loan debt coupled with 
reimbursement rates n ot ke eping  up with inflation and low wages are major contributors  to this 
shortage.  Waitlists are untenable (7 -9 months for outpatient counseling), services are closing, and 
youth of all ages  are spending prolonged periods in emergency rooms , only to be  eventually  sent out -of-
state for treatment given lack of services in Maine.   
   Student loan debt has been hampering recruitment and retention of Maine’s behavioral health 
network and schools of social work.  The behavioral health  workforce in Maine is shrinking, whereas 
projected growth in social work employment is expected to grow by 9% in the next decade (BLS, 2023).  
   Results from a  2022 survey of social workers in Maine reflects  that 91%  of responders  (n=423) report  
having and b eing stressed about their student loan debt , with t he average debt  levels to be:  
  ▪ Bachelor’s level social worker: $50,624  
▪ Master’s level social worker: $74,557  
▪ Doctoral level social worker: $117,500  
Well trained social workers are leaving or never entering the profession, going to higher paying jobs  to 
help pay of their educational loans . 
   Lack of proper treatment of behavioral health disorders is not only bad for our health, but bad for our 
economy (Carne val, 2021).  The effects of inadequate or no treatment for mental health and substance 
use disorders include productivity losses, heavier use of all health care resources, and greater 
dependence on employer and government disability programs.  
   NASW Maine urges  you to vote “yes” on LD 1355  to support and help keep behavioral health providers 
in the workforce, improve access to behavioral health care , and improve Maine ’s economy .   
   
Sincerely,  
Julie M. Schirmer, LCSW, ACSW     Chris McLaughlin, LCSW  
President , Board of Directors    Executive Director  
NASW Maine Chapter     NASW Maine Chapter  
Resident, Falmouth, ME     Resident, Hermon, ME  
 
 
 
References:  
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor,  Occupational Outlook Handbook , Social Workers,  
at https://www.bls.gov/ooh/community -and-social -service/social -workers.htm  (visited  February 14, 
2023 ). 
Carnevale, AP, Gulish, A. Campbell, KP. (2021) If Not Now, When? The Urgent Need for an All -One-
System Approach to Youth Policy. Center on Education and the Workforce. Georgetown University.  
Washington, DC.  Accessed on October 9, 2022. https://1gyhoq479ufd3yna29x7ubjn -wpengine.netdna -
ssl.com/wp -content/uploads/cew -all_one_system -fr.pdf  
 
