Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Kb Testimony in Support of LD 1355 
"' 
Oﬁicers" 
Dave McCluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1“ Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2'" Vice- 
President 
laineGeneral Behavioral Healt 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP Inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
roostook Mental Health Centt 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"' 
Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
idroscoggin Home & Healthca 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Sen/ing Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
ommunity Caring Collaborativ 
ommunity Health & Counselir 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
°ortland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
'lCounty Mental Health Servic< 
Wellspring, Inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services An Act to Establish a Behavioral Health Employment Income Tax 
Credit for Student Loan Payments" 
Sponsored by Representative Walter Riseman' 
April 11, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation. My name is Malory Shaughnessy and l am 
a resident of Westbrook, Maine. I am also the Executive Director of the Alliance for 
Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide association 
representing the majority of Maine's community based mental health and substance 
use treatment providers, providing services annually to over 80,000 Maine men, 
women, and children across the state. The Alliance advocates for the implementation 
of sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
The Alliance is strongly in support of LD 1355, ”An Act to Establish a Behavioral Health 
Employment income Tax Credit for Student Loan Payments." We thank the sponsor, 
Representative Riseman, and co-sponsors for bringing forward this legislation. 
According to the most recent Maine State Community Needs Health Assessment, 
"Common concerns identified by participants in 2021 include an ongoing mental 
health crisis; challenges in accessing health care - especially mental health providers ~ 
and increasing rates of substance use.1” This struggle to access mental health and 
substance use providers has only grown over the pandemic, and continues to lag 
behind the growing need we are seeing in our communities.I 
Table 4. Sial 
(emmun Canter' 
CBIIOTI 
County Forums 1,029 
Black or African American 
People who are Deaf anG 
Hard of Hearing Z0 ' 
People who live witha 
disability 3% 
People Experiencing 
Homelessness 
1,000 3% 
immigrant 
LGBTQ+ community 15% ~ - - 
People with low income 21 109$ 19% 5% 
People with a mental 
health diagnosis . 13% _ 
Older adults 9% 1% 
Youth ‘I — 
1 State of Maine community health needs assessment report 2022 I Maine Shared CHNA ' 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 " Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAIllanceMaine.org
| 
A recent article on News Center Maine, For Mainers in need, in-person therapists are hard to findl, 
highlights these issues with many examples of the struggle to find mental health providers, and the 
impacts on our communities due to this problem, especially in our more rural areas. 
This bill would amend the newly revamped student loan repayment tax credita to provide behavioral 
health clinicians double the maximum tax credit from $2,500 per year to $5,000 per year and to double 
the lifetime cap to $50,000. The intent of the bill was that to be eligible for the enhanced credit, the bill 
would require a behavioral health clinician to be licensed to practice and working in a community-based 
agency licensed by the State to provide mental health or substance use disorder treatment services. 
The language in the bill as it came from the revisor’s office did contain an error. We would ask that you 
strike out part of the final section, 2F. The initial intent of that section was to define eligibility for the 
credit and to provide a cap to the eligibility for the credit to 5 years of working within an agency, however 
it came out stating that a person must have been working for a licensed community agency for 5 years to 
be eligible. Section 2D places a total cap on the amount one can receive, and so with that and the error 
inherent in the last section, we ask that you please strike the clause ”and be engaged in that employment 
for at least 5 years" from the final section.
u 
The Alliance urges you to vote Ought to Pass on this important legislation. Thank you for your attention to 
this matter, and l would be happy to bring you any additional information you might need for the work 
session. 
1 https:[/wwwmewscentermaine.com/article/news/health/mentai-heaith/for-those-in~nee¢in-person-therapists~ 
are-hard-to-find-mental-health-care-maihe-monitor/9%1f1df3f2-7ae4-4ceO-871:5-c<:l4c1da2c379 
3 https:[/www.maine.g0v/revenue/taxes/ta»reiief-credits-programs/income-tax-credits/student-loanweggyment-tax-credit 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.521.8362 "' 
theAllianceMaine.0rg
