. TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: April 1], 2023 
LD 1355 — “An Act to Establish a Behavioral Health Employment Income Tax 
Credit for Student Loan Payments ” 
---- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1355,‘ _‘An Act to 
Establish a Behavioral Health Employment Income Tax Credit for Student Loan 
Payments. ” 
For tax years beginning on or after January l, 2023, the bill proposes to 
double the maximum student loan repayment tax credit from $2,500 to $5,000 and 
the lifetime cap from $25,000 to $50,000 for behavioral health clinicians. A 
behavioral health clinician must be licensed to practice in a clinical capacity for an 
agency licensed by Maine to provide mental health or substance use disorder 
treatment services and be engaged in that employment for at least 5 years. 
For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2022, the student loan 
repayment tax credit replaced the Educational Opportunity Tax Credit (“EOTC”). 
The student loan repayment tax credit is equal to the amount of eligible student 
loan payments made by the taxpayer directly to a relevant lender during the tax 
year, up to $2,500 a year and a $25,000 lifetime cap for each qualiﬁed individual. 
Certain temporary transitions adjustments are allowed.
1
After many years of discussion, the Educational Opportunity Tax Credit 
(“EOTC”) was repealed and the student loan repayment tax credit was created. 
The current credit was designed to be much simpler for taxpayers and MRS. This 
simplicity is aimed to drive credit uptake rates and to allow businesses to use the 
credit as a recruitment tool. Businesses struggled to understand the more 
complicated EOTC and so often hesitated to discuss it with potential applicants. 
Carving out one degree or profession for additional beneﬁts so soon after the 
enactment of the student loan repayment tax credit opens the door for additional 
degrees and professions and removes the simplicity that was recently achieved. 
Determining when a taxpayer is engaged in employment in a speciﬁc profession, in 
this case, the provision of mental health or substance use disorder treatment 
services, would require difficult line-drawing outside of MRS’ general expertise. 
In addition, the factual determination of when a taxpayer is engaged in a profession 
may not always be clear, potentially involving a review of the taxpayer ’s job 
description and employment responsibilities. 
The federal Department of Education has proposed a rule to increase the 
generosity of one of the primary federal student loan relief programs, income- 
driven repayment (IDR). In a hypothetical scenario for 2023, combining the 
proposed federal IDR plan with the student loan repayment tax credit would mean 
that a childless individual ’s income would need to exceed $82,805 (for 
undergraduate loans) or $57,805 (for graduate loans) before they would have any 
student loan payments that are not covered by the refundable credit. If their income 
is above those levels, they must spend 5% (for undergraduate) or 10% (for 
graduate loans) of their income above the threshold on student loan payments. The 
thresholds are higher for larger family sizes. While the proposed rule has not yet
2
gone into effect, any expansion of the SLTC should be considered with this rule in 
mind and avoid replacing federal beneﬁts with state beneﬁts. 
The Administration also notes the following technical concerns: 
Taxpayers would be required to provide additional documentation to 
conﬁrm that they meet the employment and licensing requirements.t 
For clariﬁcation, the bill should be amended to remove Section 2 and to add 
the application date in 36 M.R.S. § 5217-E, sub-§2, ﬁrst paragraph and 36 
M.R.S. § 5217-E, sub-§2, 1] D. 
The bill should be amended to deﬁne the terms “mental health treatment 
services, ” “substance use disorder treatment services ” and “behavioral health 
clinician, ” and clarify whether that includes a person licensed to practice ina 
clinical capacity at any level (e.g., technicians, aides, nurses, physician 
assistants, physicians, etc.). 
The bill should identify the agency(ies) recognized for issuing licenses to 
individuals authorized to practice as behavioral health clinicians and the 
Maine agency that issues licenses to mental health and substance abuse 
agencies. 
The bill should clarify Whether the qualiﬁed individual must be employed as 
a behavioral health clinician at the time the credit is claimed, whether the5 
years of employment must include consecutive employment with the same 
employer, and whether the taxpayer must complete the 5 years of 
employment prior to claiming the credit. 
The bill does not limit the increased credit to student loans obtained to earna 
degree in behavioral health. 
For tax years beginning in 2023, the bill does not double the maximum 
SLRTC for taxpayer ’s eligible to claim up to $1,000 additional credit in the
3
case the taxpayer received the refundable EOTC for a degree in science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics during any tax year beginning in 
2019, 2020, or 2021. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is a revenue loss of less than $1 
million per year. 
The estimated administrative costs continue to be under consideration. As 
written, the bill will require an additional tax examiner to process affected 
individual income tax returns and perform desk audits to review eligibility for the 
increased tax credit. Computer programming will be required to update the 
individual income tax program to accommodate the increased credit. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
