 
 
Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 1355, “An Act to Establish a Behavioral 
Health Employment Income Tax Credit for Student Loan 
Payments” 
Tuesday, April 11, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, I am Sarah Calder, Senior 
Government Affairs Director at MaineHealth, and I am here to testify in 
support of LD 1355, “An Act to Establish a Behavioral Health 
Employment Income Tax Credit for Student Loan Payments.” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to communities throughout Maine and 
New Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support 
our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest 
in America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty 
physician services to a continuum of behavioral health care services, 
community and tertiary hospital care, home health care and a lab.  
Like health care systems across the country, MaineHealth is facing 
significant workforce shortages despite making historic investments to 
recruit and retain our current care team members. In fact, MaineHealth has 
increased wages for nonexecutives and non-physicians five times since 
2021, totaling $223 million. Even with those investments and other 
creative and innovative efforts to recruit and “grow our own,” we are still 
challenged with over 2,900 open positions, not including physicians. 
We are facing an extreme shortage of behavioral health clinicians, but 
today, I’d like to focus on one area in particular that we are experiencing a 
significant shortage - social work. MaineHealth is currently recruiting for 
approximately 60 social workers. These positions are open, on average, 
for 191 days or over half a year before a candidate is hired. 
Social workers play a key role in helping individuals to cope and 
overcome many complex and unique challenges so they can live healthy 
and productive lives. Social workers assist individuals with a wide variety 
of challenges such as medical and psychiatric issues, addiction challenges, 
developmental disabilities, as well as complex psychosocial issues such as 
homelessness, unemployment, and financial challenges. Licensed clinical 
social workers play a critical role in the behavioral health continuum both 
in the outpatient (community setting) and at the most intensive levels of 
care, like Spring Harbor Hospital. Outpatient, Hospital, and Emergency 
  
Department Social Workers are a tremendous asset, providing individuals and our community 
with much needed care, therapeutic treatment, and intervention.   
As you may know, the pandemic exacerbated a pre-existing crisis in Maine’s behavioral health 
system. Without sufficient access to community behavioral health services, like social work and 
therapy, a greater demand is placed on more intensive levels of care. In fact, every day people 
with behavioral health needs, particularly children, languish in hospital Emergency Departments 
for days and weeks, and many community-based services maintain long waiting lists or are 
simply non-existent. Just in the past year at MaineHealth, 435 children and adolescents 
languished in MaineHealth Emergency Departments for an average of 5.5 days awaiting 
appropriate services. The state-wide number is even more sobering – 861 children languished on 
average for 7 to 10 days in Emergency Departments across the state, depending on the level of 
care they needed. 
The legislation before you today is one tool we can use to recruit and retain licensed clinical 
social workers to stay and practice in Maine. The individual cost of education coupled with 
relatively low salaries, results in many skilled clinicians leaving organizations that primarily 
serve Medicaid patients for private practice where there is immediate potential for higher 
incomes and more control over the service being delivered. For this reason, many licensed 
mental health and substance use organizations who primarily serve Medicaid clients, like 
MaineHealth, are experiencing high turnover and multiple vacancies. MaineHealth has attempted 
to address this workforce shortage with increased salaries, and support for better working 
conditions, but the exodus to private practice continues.  
The workforce shortage and behavioral health crisis are significant, and we look forward to 
working with you this Session to advance policy changes, like LD 1355, that attract and retain 
individuals to meet the increased workforce demands and also increase access to behavioral 
health services for our vulnerable community members who struggle with mental health needs. 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
 
