Testimony of Rep. Walter Riseman introducing 
LD 1355, An Act to Establish a Behavioral Health Employment lncome Tax Credit 
for Student Loan Payments 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Greetings Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of the Taxation 
Committee, my name is Walter Riseman, and I proudly represent House District 83, which 
consists ofthe towns of Harrison, Bridgton, and Denmark. I am here to seek your support on 
LD 1355, An Act to Establish a Behavioral Health Employment Income Tax Credit for Student 
Loan Payments. 
in the 2022 Community Health Needs Assessment, every county across the state of l\/laine 
(except two) ranked mental health as the top priority area identified for their communities, and 
in the other two counties, it was ranked as the second highest priority area. 
The availability of mental health providers was the most frequently mentioned indicator related 
to mental health. Community members noted the low availability of mental health providers in 
their area, both for inpatient and outpatient care. They also noted long waitlists to access 
mental health care services. Nearly two-thirds (60%) of community forum participants 
identified the use of the emergency department to address mental health needs as a concern. 
Mental health is an important part of overall health and well-being. Mental health includes our 
emotional, psychological, and social well—being. It affects how we think, feel, and act. It also 
helps determine how we handle stress, relate to others, and make healthy choicesl . 
Across l\/laine, the pandemic exacerbated the issues of access to care as many clinicians moved 
to telehealth or working in private practice from their own home, while at the same time 
increasing the number of Mainers seeking mental health services. This crisis in access is 
behavioral health services is especially striking in our rural areas. 
History has shown that the mental health impact of disasters outlasts the physical impact, 
suggesting today's elevated mental health needs will continue well beyond the coronavirus 
outbreak itselfz . As we emerge from the COVID-19 pandemic and the federal public health 
emergency draws to an end, it will be important to consider how the increased need for mental 
health and substance use services may persist long term. 
This bill is designed to provide incentives for newly graduating behavioral health clinicians, and 
those considering moving to our great state of Maine, to work in our community-based mental 
health and substance use treatment centers. I would also ask that the very last section, Section 
2F be stricken out as it was due to an error in the revisor’s office. Section 2D provides the cap 
on the total credit one could be eligible to receive. 
1 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available from: https:1/www.cdc.gov/mentalhealth/index.htm 
2 
https:[/www.bbc.c0m/worklife/article/2020102lacoronavirus-the-possibIe-Iong~term-mental —health-impacts
