 
Caring and serving since 1883®  
 
 
Community Health and Counseling Services             
            Home Health, Hospice and Mental Health Services  
 
March 13, 2023  
 
     Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer  and distinguished members of the Health and Human 
Services  Committee, my name is Dale Hamilton and I am the executive director of Community 
Health and Counseling Services (CHCS). I am writing in support of the Resolve, to Increase the 
Reimbursement Rate for Foster Parents by 20 Percent . 
 
     Community Health and Counseling Services has been a provider of Treatment Foster Care for 
more than 30 years. Treatment Foster Care serves children who are assessed at a treatment level 
of care including Level C, D and E.  Treatment Foster Care providers work in partnership with 
foster parents who hold a specialized license. I think your resolve succinctly states the 
“essential” role that foster parents serve in our soci ety. 
 
     Reimbursement for treatment level foster parents was last adjusted in 2018 . Treatment Foster 
Parents hold a specialized license because they are providing a professional service. The re are 
many reasons why in dividuals choose to become foster parents. Workforce challenges exist in all 
sectors . It is important to remember that compensation to our foster parents is a part of attracting 
and retaining this special group of people. It is reasonable to conclude that foster parent  
compensation has not kept pace with inflation. Foster parents are hit harder than other 
occupations due to the fact that most of the compensation supports the costs of caring for the 
child(ren) in their home.  
 
     It is important that you understand a nuance of the funding mechanism for specialized foster 
parents serving children at Levels C, D & E. Treatment foster parents’ contract with providers  
like Community Health and C ounseling Services. The provider  receives a flat daily rate and in 
turn the provider pays the foster parent at the standard rate for the Level of Care of the child. The 
flat rate is the same regardless of the level of care of the child.  
 
     It is essential for the committee to understand that t reatment foster care providers will bear the 
responsibility for funding the 20% increase to treatment level parents unless additional language 
is included in the resolve. I respectively request that you include a statement to the effect, “That 
the Departme nt of Health and Human Services shall increase the daily room and board 
rate, provided to treatment level providers , equal to the amount of increase provided to 
reimbursement for treatment foster parents who serve children at Levels of Care C, D & E.   
 
    The average treatment foster parent rate per day is $60. Treatment Foster Care providers 
receive room and board reimbursement at $64.81 per day. Under this resolve the average 
reimbursement for treatment level foster parents will increase by $12. If trea tment foster care 
providers do not receive an increase to the board and care rate, providers will assume an 
additional average cost per child of $4,380 per year. An organization serving 25 children will be 
required to absorb this new expense at a cost of n early $110,000.  
PO Box 425  
Bangor, Maine 04402 -0425  
Tel. 207 -947-0366  
TTY 207 -990-4730  
www.chcs -me.org  
     To be clear, increasing the room and board rate by the amount of the foster parent increase is 
not an additional expense. Since treatment foster parents are paid from the reimbursement 
received by the treatment foster care provider, i t simply ensures that this resolve doesn’t become 
an unfunded mandate for treatment foster care providers.  
 
     Foster parents are some of the most special people in our society. I appreciate the fact that 
you are considering foster parent compensation as  a way to attract, retain and fairly support this 
group of professionals. I am happy to provide you with additional information or answer any 
questions. I can be reached at dhamilton@chcs -me.org  or 922 -4600 x6488.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Dale Hamilton  
Executive Director  
   
     
 
  

