i 
S'FA"€E GP MAINE 
‘ i}Ei>?~llR"i ‘i»1iE?\é'i “ 9? PQGFZESSEQNAL ., 1.’:
I 
A€\ii‘1Fii\iAN(IiAi R¥;TGULA"E ‘l@i\Z 
BUREAU UP FiNAi\iClAL ENSTITUTIUNS 
36 s"m'rs uousg STA‘I‘i€>i\% 
Aucusm, §viAiNI5 
Q4333-GU36 
Janet T. Mills Laevo P. LAFOUNTAEN III 
GOVERNOR SUPERINTENDENT 
131st Maine Legislature, First Regular Session 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and 
Financial Services 
Testimony of Gordon Laurendeau, Bureau of Financial Institutions 
In support of LD 114, 
An Act To Make Technical Amendments to Banking Laws 
Tuesday, January 31, 2023 at 1:00 p.m. 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the 
Committee: 
My name is Gordon Laurendeau and I am the Attorney for the Maine 
Bureau of Financial Institutions. On behalf of the Bureau and the 
Administration, I am here to testify in support of LD 114, An Act To Make 
Technical Amendments to Banking Laws. This is an agency bill developed 
by the Bureau, and we thank Chair Bailey for agreeing to be its sponsor. 
The legislation makes technical changes to provisions in Title 9-B, the 
Maine Banking Code, in the following manner. 
In sections 1 & 2, the bill amends statutes assessing fees paid by 
financial institutions by authorizing the superintendent to lower the amount 
of fees paid. Currently, the law only allows the Bureau to raise fees for 
banks and credit unions, and it makes sense to us that the Bureau should 
be able to lower fees as well. This would align more closely with the 
O 207 624 8570 TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711 
207 624 8590 FHCE PHONE’ ( )_ 
CONSUMERTGLL FREE: (800) 965-5235 FAX' ( )I 
OFFICES LOCATED AT: 76 NORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE 
WEBSITE: http2//www.maine.gov/pfr, ’financlalinstitutions
treatment of trust companies. We believe this was an oversight in the 
original statutory language, and so we are proposing this technical 
amendment. At the present time, the Bureau does not anticipate changing 
fees, but the technical amendment would be useful in the future. 
Section 3 of the bill covers situations where the superintendent 
determines that, for “good cause,” the Bureau cannot adequately supervise 
an applicant seeking to charter a new financial institution and defines “good 
cause” to mean the Bureau lacks the present capacity to ensure the safety 
and soundness of a proposed institution or activity. This change would help 
ensure the Bureau can adequately protect Maine consumers. The 
clarification is important as some entities may, for example, have business 
models that raise money laundering issues that are difficult to supervise 
and require additional personnel. 
Sections 4 & 5 of the bill make technical changes tostatutes 
governing liquidations of financial institutions by clarifying that fiduciary 
accounts held at financial institutions are automatically transferred toa 
successor institution without assistance from a court. The ability ofa 
receiver of a failing institution to transfer trust accounts to a subsequent 
competent trustee, through merger or sale, helps ensure continuity of trust 
management and services for the beneficiaries of trusts. At any point, trust 
beneficiaries may still petition the probate court to assign a trustee of their 
choosing. The automatic transfer of fiduciary accounts is not a new 
concept, the process already exists when banks merge under the Banking 
Code. 
Section 6 of the bill clarifies that uninsured financial institutions are 
institutions that are engaged in the “business of banking." An institution is 
engaged in the business of banking if it accepts deposits and makes loans. 
The amendment clarifies that an uninsured bank predominantly takes non- 
retail deposits and makes loans. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I am happy 
to answer any questions from the Committee.
