LD 1495 Ought to Pass 
To: Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
From: Frederick Beck, Consulting geologist, Yarmouth, Maine 
Subject: Support for Legislative Document LD 1495; Resolve, Establishing the Commission to 
Study the Role of Critical Minerals as a Resource in the State. 
Maine has a long history of metal mining and legislative support and encouragement for 
responsible mining. Signiﬁcant past producing metal mines have included lead mines in Lubec, 
silver mines in Sullivan and Acton, copper and zinc mines in the Blue Hill peninsula area and 
importantly, iron mines in several towns including Clinton and Shapleigh and the largest by far, 
Katahdln iron Works northwest of Brownville Junction which produced iron for over 50 years 
during the 1800s. 
All of these mines operated without any signiﬁcant environmental oversight and the waste 
dumps still remain for all to see. It wasn't until 1969 that the ﬁrst mine-speci ﬁc law was 
adopted which required some form of reclamation. 
To my knowledge, these old mine waste piles have not adversely impacted tourist visitation to 
the Towns in which the wastes reside, nor have real estate values in those towns suffered. 
My ﬁrst job in Maine was with the Maine Geological Survey in 1966. At that time the Survey 
was part of the Department of Economic Development (DED) with the speciﬁc directive to 
create and publish maps and reports of potentially economic mineral deposits and to 
undertake, at State expense, basic geochemical and geophysical surveys which would encourage 
mining exploration groups to conduct additional more detailed exploration for the metals which 
were of interest at the time, the base metals copper, lead and zinc as well as precious metals 
silver and gold. That "seed money" resulted in about 40 different companies investing millions 
of exploration dollars in Maine during the 1970s and 19805 and resulted in discovery of several 
important metal deposits, including the Bald Mountain, Ledge Ridge, Alder Pond and Mt. Chase 
deposits. The recently "re-discovered" Pennington Mountain rare earth elements (REEs) 
deposit in northern Aroostook County was discovered during those years as well. The Mt. 
Chase deposit has been renamed the Pickett deposit and is currently being studied for 
production by Wolfden Resources. 
ln 1955 the 97th Maine Legislature created the Maine Mining Bureau with the speciﬁc directive
” . . . to encourage and administer the development of mineral resources on State Iand" . In 
1981 the 110"‘ Maine Legislature created the Mining Excise Tax (MRS Title 36, Chapter 371). 
The preamble of that Law states: "It is the Legislature's belief that mining for metallic minerals is 
an acceptable and necessary activity in the State . . . ”; the purpose of the law states: "lt is the 
policy of the State to encourage the sound and orderly development of Maineis mineral 
resources" .
As a follow-up of the above stated Policy and in view of the many bills which have been 
introduced to this session of the Legislature, as well as the changes which have taken place in 
our recognition ofthe importance of critical minerals to mitigate climate change and embrace 
the new “green economy” , it seems imperative that all parties concerned with mining in Maine 
be a part in developing the State's overall mining policy for critical minerals and LD 1495 would 
appear to accomplish that ambitious goal. 
It is important to note that according to the USGS, the United States is 100-percent dependent 
on imports for 21 critical mineral commodities and at least 50-percent dependent on imports 
for another 28 mineral commodities. Many of these come from countries not particularly 
friendly with the United States and in a few cases the metals (cobalt for example) are mined 
under appalling conditions by children and with little or no environmental regulation. Maine is 
unique in having occurrences of, and the potential for discovery of, a wide variety of the 
Federally listed critical minerals. Maine could play a role in changing these unsettling statistics 
Recommended Reading: 
1. 1991; Mining in Maine: Past, Present, and Future. By Carolyn LePage, Michael Foley, and 
Woodrow Thompson. Available from the Maine Geological Survey, Augusta. 
2. 2022; Potential for Critical Mineral deposits in Maine, USA. By John Slack et al, Atlantic 
Geoscience 58, 155-191. https//doi.org/10.4138/atigeo.2022.007. 
3. 2022; Volt Rush, the winners and losers in the race to go green. By Henry Sanderson. 
Available in local bookstores or online. 
4. 2023; Cobalt Red, how the blood of the Congo powers our lives. By Siddharth Kara. 
Available in local bookstores or online.
