Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Support of LD s 1363, 1433, 1476  
 
“An Act to Support Extraction of Common Minerals by Amending the Maine 
Metallic Mineral Min ing Act ” 
 
“An Act to Exclude Pegm atites from the Definition of ‘ Metallic Mineral Mining ’” 
 
“An Act to Amend the Definition of “Metallic Mineral ” in the Maine Metallic 
Minera l Mining Act ” 
 
Testimony Neither for nor Against LD 1495  
 
“Resolve, Establishing the Commis sion to Study the Role of Critical Minerals as a 
Resource in the State”  
 
April 13, 2023 
Patrick Strauch, Executive Director  
 
Hello  Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich  and members of the Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources . I am Patrick Strauch from Exeter, Maine, and the 
Executive Director of the Maine Forest Products Council (MFPC). I am submitting 
testimony  today in support of  the first  block of mining bills up for consideration, except 
for LD 1 495, which the Council  is neither for nor against . 
 Since 1961, the Maine Forest Products Council has represented our state’s diverse forest products community, including logging contractors, sawmills, paper mills, biomass energy facilities, pellet manufacturers, furniture manufacturers, and the owners of more than eight  million acres of commercial forestland in Maine.  
 Our landowner community has varied interests in the option to mine metallic minerals, but they are interested in creating a regulatory framework that can use the best science and environmental protections to proceed with a possible project. As we have testified before pre vious legislatures, MFPC is in favor of the eff ort to revive mining in Maine in 
a manner that is environmentally safe and will not jeopardize the stewardship principles we adhere to on our lands. If done the right way, mining in Maine will provide an additional diversification of landowner income that would strengthen forestland investments and support the working forest model in Maine.  As drafted, we feel that LDs 1363, 1433 and 1476 all create important opportunities to 
mine mater ials that don’ t carry the same risks as other materials. For instance, we 
understand that certain rock formations that cont ain lithium can be extracted through 
open pit mining similar to rock quarries that have lo ng been in use throughout the state. T his extraction process 
would not cause acid drainage from tailings, which are the major water quality concern for metallic mineral  
2 
 mining. We should allow crushing, sorting and grinding of rocks  containing lithium under the rock quarry 
regulations  while continuing to regulate the chemical processing of lithium under the mining law.  These two 
processes are vastly different with different risk profiles.  
 
The Council is neither for nor against LD 1495 because  we feel that the issue has been thorou ghly studied by 
the Department and by pre vious Legislat ures, so we don’ t see value in any further delays. We would suggest , 
however, that the Committee consider a n annual report back from the Department each year on mining projects 
and their impacts.  
 Maine is at an important crossroads. Global interest in advancing green technologies as a means to mitigate climate change have made certain materials, such as lithium, high value and in high demand. By 2025, demand for lithium is exp ected to be three times higher than it was in 2018, as it is utilized in everything from laptops  
and phones to electric cars and electricity grids . By all owing this material to be mined right here in Maine, we 
have the opportunity to ensure that the mining practices utilized for these materials  are environment ally and 
socially sound. T hey also present an important econ omic opportunity for rural Maine.  
 For these reasons, MFPC landowners are supportive of the revisions to the mining laws that will enable mining activities to be seriously evaluated and implemented in Maine.  
 
 
