I write in support of LD 1406, Section 4 based on my experience as my late 
husband’s caregiver.  My husband had Parkinson’s Disease for 19 years and 
required significant support and care in the last seven years of his life. 
One in seven Americans is serving as a caregiver at any given time.i 
Caregivers are usually untrained friends or family members with no 
experience in health care or social services.   They are learning about their 
loved one’s health, financial and social needs on the fly, often during a crisis.   
Those with serious or chronic health issues often have multiple conditions, 
posing additional challenges.  Health insurance regulations are complex and 
confusing, and trying to navigate and juggle all of these demands is 
overwhelming.  The demands of caregiving are often impossible to reconcile 
with the caregiver’s employment, leading many to lose income or their jobs 
altogether.ii 
Most of us would like to remain in our homes for as long as possible, even 
dying at home if we can be supported and kept comfortable there.   It is 
undeniable that, in addition to being our preferred living situation, 
remaining at home with adequate support is dramatically less expensive that 
alternative living in either an assisted living situation or nursing home.   The 
shortage of paid home healthcare workers (assuming a patient or family can 
afford it), adds to the burden on unpaid caregivers. 
Those without support at home have no choice but to seek out long-term 
care, which is also scarce due to workforce shortages.   Even those who are 
able to find such a placement often eventually exhaust their own resources, 
at which point the taxpayers bear the cost of supporting them through 
MaineCare. 
Engaging and supporting caregivers is dramatically less expensive than 
paying for nursing home care, is better for the patient, reduces stress and 
health costs for the caregiver, and is good public policy. 
There is evidence to indicate that supporting caregivers delays nursing home 
admission.iii  It makes sense, therefore, to adequately support caregivers – 
for their own sakes, as well as those for whom they are caring. 
Maine has taken a step forward by making available some funds by which 
caregivers who lost their employment during the COVID pandemic to 
provide for a loved one can be paid.  However, this funding is limited and 
only available to those who had to give up their jobs during the pandemic. 
Maine also has launched a pilot caregiver assessment program to identify the 
needs of caregivers and guide them to resources.  However, this program, 
too, is currently limited. 
To reduce long-term expenditures for care for the frail, chronically and 
seriously ill, and support and engage caregivers in a meaningful way,  Maine 
needs to invest in a systemic approach to identify those who are providing 
care support to a friend or family member and connect them with the 
resources they need.  The State’s caregiver education program should 
partner with health systems and social service agencies to reach all of those 
in need of this support. Financing such a program will save tax dollars, make 
it easier for healthcare and social service providers to deliver appropriate 
care, and increase the well being of patients and caregivers. 
In addition, providing funding to help replace the income caregivers have 
lost will make it less likely that individuals who might remain at home end 
up in long-term care facilities, and that caregivers will suffer from the loss of 
income they sustain as a result of their dedication to a loved one. 
I therefore urge the Legislature to adopt LD 1406, and to do everything in 
your power to engage and support caregivers.   Because sooner or later we 
are all likely to need such care, or be providing it to a loved one.    
      Respectfully submitted, 
      Jane Conrad 
      117 Barters Point Rd, 
      Tenants Harbor, ME 
      207-372-6621 
 
 
i RAISE Family Caregiver report to Congress, https://acl.gov/RAISE/report , p. 7.  
iiId. at p. 2 
iii https://www.caregiver.org/resource/caregiving/  ciiting AARP Public Policy Institute, Valuing the Invaluable: The 
Economic Value of Family Caregiving, 2008 Update. Washington, DC: AARP, November 2008; Mittelman, M. S., 
Haley, W., & Roth, D. 2006. “Improving Caregiver Well-being Delays Nursing Home Placement of Patients with 
Alzheimer’s Disease.” Neurology, 67, 1592-1599.   
