Q 61 Winthrop Street - 
Augusta, ME 04330 
i-800-499-O.22Q Fax 207~6Zi-0509 
l\/lLTCOP@i\/laineOmbudsman org
‘ 
.r..;i ‘i' 
olv1B'Ui§sMAN 11;. 
TESTIMONY 
In Support of 
LD 1406; An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Estate Recovery and Planning for Long- term Care 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 18, 2023 
Maine Long Term Care Ombudsman Program 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services. 
My name is Laura Harper. l am a Senior Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. l am here today to present 
testimony in support of this legislation on behalf of the Maine Long Term Care Ombudsman Program. 
The Ombudsman Program is a nonprofit agency that provides statewide advocacy for older and disabled 
residents of nursing homes, assisted housing, assisted living and for recipients of home care services. 
Additionally, the program serves patients in hospitals who experience barriers in accessing the long- 
term services and supports they need when they are ready for discharge. 
This legislation requires the department to develop educational materials to assist individuals with 
accessing programs that allow family members or legal guardians to be reimbursed for providing 
personal care services to a family member who is eligible to receive home and community- based 
services under the MaineCare program or a state funded program. Public education focused on assisting 
family caregivers in accessing these programs when needed is critical in building effective family support 
across the state. Additionally, developing educational materials that would provide information 
regarding MaineCare eligibility for long-term services and supports could assist older and disabled 
individuals and their family caregivers in planning and avoiding a transfer of assets that would impact 
eligibility. 
Repeatedly, the Maine Long Term Care Ombudsman Program staff have observed the enormous value 
and dedication of family caregivers. These individuals step in, often with little support to keep a loved 
one at home. Increasingly, they are called upon to carry out skilled care tasks they may have had little 
training to perform. The important contribution of family caregivers can lessen the need for home care 
services, hospitalizations, and may prevent or delay the need for care in a long-term care facility. Their 
role has become even more critical as Maine has experienced a significant direct care workforce 
shortage that has resulted in limiting access to services across the continuum of long-term services and 
supports. When staffing cannot be found to provide home care, a family caregiver may be the only 
support available to provide care to an older and disabled adult. For those individuals waiting in the
community for care in a nursing home or residential care, they may provide the only help available. 
There are approximately 166,000 family caregivers in Maine. Valuing the Invaluable 2023 Update 
Strengthening Supports for Family Caregivers, AARP Policy Institute. 61% work either full or part time. 
AARP and National Alliance for Caregiving 2020. Family caregivers often struggle to manage both 
employment and caregiving responsibilities. Sometimes it is necessary for a family caregiver to leave 
their employment in order to be available to provide care for a loved one. 
o This is just one example of the dedication and necessity of family caregiving. The Ombudsman 
Program staff have provided advocacy over a long period of time for a mother who is providing 
care to her daughter who has complex medical needs. Because R.N. staffing could not be found, 
the mother had to leave her employment. Though care in a long-term care facility was 
considered, admission could not be found. The complex needs of her daughter were a barrier to 
admission. Fortunately, the home care program allows payment for the care the mother 
provides. 
0 Sometimes family caregivers may not have all the information they need. Ombudsman Program 
staff were contacted by a woman who had left her job to provide care for her husband. She 
believed that she would receive payment for 36 hours a week approved under the care plan. 
However, payment was only allowed for 26 hours of personal care excluding other tasks 
included in the care plan. Had this been known, it may have impacted her decision. 
Unfortunately, this has financial implications for this family. 
Maine family caregivers should be able to easily access information about programs that allow payment 
for caregiving. Every effort should be made to expand public education to reach family caregivers early. 
Washington State has established a strong and effective family caregiver support program that includes 
an emphasis on public education along with other resources and strategies. This has resulted over time, 
in reduced reliance on nursing home care and substantial savings in the Medicaid program. 
Additionally, information should be easily accessible to inform care recipients about the importance of 
having a written personal care agreement when payment is provided out of pocket to family members 
providing care. lf the individual applies for MaineCare, the agreement can show that payment was made 
legitimately and not to "hide" assets by giving cash to family members. Both care recipients and family 
caregivers should have information about MaineCare eligibility and potential penalties if funds are 
transferred to family members. Many care recipients and family caregivers may not be aware of this. 
The use of Maine's Long Term Care Support Services Agreement can provide important consumer 
protection and calls attention to the need for the proper use of funds. Maine's caregiver agreement 
should be widely known and accessible. it is available on the Department's web site. However, it may be 
difficult to find. 
Thank you for your consideration.
LONG TERM CARE PERSONAL SUPPORT SERVICES AGREEMENT 
This Agreement is made by and between the following parties: 
and on 
ELDER/ADULT wrru DISABILITIES cmzmrvnn 
DATE 
Term of Agreement 
This Agreement shall commence on , and may be 
Date 
terminated by either party on reasonable notice to the other party. 
Purpose 
The purpose of this Agreement is to set forth the terms and conditions under 
which CAREGIVER will assist ELDER/ ADULT WITH DISABILITES with 
instrumental activities of daily living and / or activities of daily living in order for 
ELDER / ADULT WITH DISABILITIES to continue to live at home and prevent 
the ELDER / ADULT WITH DISABILITIES from moving to a residential or 
nursing care facility. 
Services to be Performed 
CAREGIVER will provide care to ELDER / ADULT WITH DISABILITIES in 
Specify location, i.e. Home of the ELDER/ ADULT WITH DISABILITIES / CAREGIV'ER ’S own home / OTHER 
Services to be provided by CAREGIVER will include, but shall not necessarily 
be limited to: 
Check all that apply and provide detailed information about the services to be 
performed to meet the specific needs of the Elder/ Adult with Disabilities. 
1. [:1 Transportation and errands: 
a. ___ Driving ELDER/ ADULT WITH DISABILITIES to medical, 
dental, adult day care and other appointments and activities;
1 
December I6, 2011 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Ofﬁce for Family Independence
b. _ Shopping for groceries and other items needed by 
ELDER / ADULT WITH DISABILITIES, and ﬁ1ling/ reﬁlling 
prescriptions; 
c. ___ Running other errands for ELDER / ADULT WITH 
DISABILITIES. 
[:1 Meals: Preparing meals per day and daily snacks for 
ELDER/ ADULT WITH DISABILITIES. 
E] Housework: 
a. _ Cleaning ELDER ’s / ADULT WITH DISABILITIES ’ living area. 
b. ___ Laundry and changing linens 
[1 Financial: Paying ELDER’s/ ADULT WITH DISABILITIES ’ bills, 
balancing Elder’s / Adult with Disabilities ’ checkbook, making 
deposits, dealing with health insurance, other paperwork. 
|:| Administration of medication.
2 
December 16, 2011 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Office for Family Independence
6. B Assistance with the following activities of daily living: transferring 
from bed, chair and toilet; ambulation; bathing, hygiene / grooming; 
toileting; eating. 
OR 
Cueing ELDER/ ADULT WITH DISABILITIES as to when to dress, eat, 
get up, go to bed and attend scheduled appointments. 
7. E] Monitoring the ELDER/ ADULT WITH DISABILITIES for safety, 
including responding to alarm system to control wandering/ fall risk. 
8. [II Monitoring the ELDER/ ADULT WITH DISABILITIES health, and 
bringing health problems to attention of health care providers. 
9. [:1 OTHER: 
Schedule 
CAREGIVER will provide services on the following schedule:
3 
December 16, 2011 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Oﬁice for Family Independence
Compensation 
1. ELDER shall pay CAREGIVER $ per HOUR/ DAY / MONTH. Circle One 
2. TO BE USED IF ELDER LIVES IN CAREGIVER ’S HOME: In addition, 
ELDER/ ADULT WITH DISABILITIES shall pay CAREGIVER $ per 
month for room and board (which consists of a proportional share of 
mortgage, taxes, insurance, heat, electricity, water, sewer and groceries). 
3. ELDER / ADULT WITH DISABILITIES shall reimburse CAREGIVER for all 
out of pocket expenses borne by CAREGIVER in connection with 
CAREGIVER ’S work. Such expenses shall include mileage at the rate of 
$ cents per mile. 
ON BEHALF OF ELDERI ADULT WITH 
DISABILITIES: 
Date [To be signed by Elder/ Adult with 
Disabilities or by a legal representative for 
E1der/ Adult with Disabilities such as 
agent under POA, guardian or 
conservator] 
CAREGIVER: 
Date
4 
December 16, 2011 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Ofﬁce for Family Independence
4/17/23, 10:53 AM Becoming a Paid Caregiver | DSHS 
MENU 
Aging and Long-Term Support Administration 
About ALTSA | Frequently Asked Questions | Find Local Services, Information and Resources 
Home > ALTSA > Long-Term Care Services&lnformation 1> Caregiver Resources > Becominga Paid Caregiver 
Becoming a Paid Caregiver 
There are several ways to become a paid caregiver. You 
b h": can e "ed by Caregiver Support is a Phone Call Away 
' A home care agency, adult family home, assisted Talk to caring people for practical caregiving 
living facility, or nursing home and be paid by information and help finding local 
the agency or facility to provide ca re. resources/services. 
' The PeF$°" needing Care and be Paid by him OF Contact your local Family Caregiver Support 
her directly. P|'Qgram_ 
~ The person needing care and be paid by the 
state to provide care services. 
Home Care Agencies and Facilities that Hire Caregivers 
Home care agencies hire, train, pay, supervise, and are responsible for the care you provide as a paid caregiver in 
someone’s home. Contact them directly to see ifthey have any openings. Use The National Association of Home 
Care and Hospice locator to get a listing of home care agencies in your area. 
Adult family homes, assisted living facilities, and nursing home hire, train, pay, and supervise their caregivers. 
Contact them directly to see if they have any openings. Use the links here to learn more about these types of 
facilities and get a listing of facilities where you live. 
In-Home Caregiver (Individual Provider) 
The state pays for a caregiver ifthe person needing care lives at home, is eligible for care services and needs 
Medicaid to help pay for them. In this situation, the person who needs care hires and supervises the caregiver, but 
the caregiver is paid by the Consumer Directed Employer vendor for these services. 
All lPs are employees of the Consumer Directed Employer (CDE), Consumer Direct Care Washington. lfyou have 
someone you would like to become your caregiver, you can send them to Consumer Direct Care Washington to 
begin the hiring process. 
All lPs are represented by the Service Employees International Union (SEIU) local 775. Learn more. 
The types of care tasks that an IP is authorized to do and the number of hours a client is eligible for is determined 
by a care plan. It is up to the client and CDE to determine how many hours an IP can work. The care plan is the 
result of a care assessment completed by the DSHS social worker/case manager working directly with the person 
who needs care. 
https://www.dshs.wa.gov/altsa/home-and-community-services/becoming-paid-caregiver
4/17/23, 10:53 AM Becoming a Paid Caregiver I DSHS 
An IP must meet a number of requirements to be hired, including 
' Be 18 or older. 
' Pass a criminal conviction background check. 
' Provider picture ID and be authorized to work in the U.S. 
~ Not be the spouse of the person getting care. 
' Successfully complete all the caregiver training requirements. 
Family or friends as unpaid caregivers 
The majority of people who provide care for an adult family member or friend are not paid. There is free or low 
cost help for unpaid caregivers through the Family Caregiver Support Program. Learn more about the services 
offered through the Family Caregiver Support Program. 
CarinaCare 
Carina helps individuals, families and home care professionals find qualified, verified caregivers and more hours 
Find out more about this free resource at www.carina.org/ ~ 
ALTSA 
Long-Term Care Services & I nformation 
Caregiver Resources 
' Client Information and Resources 
Long-Term Care Residential Options 
In-Home Care for Adults 
Kinship Care 
’ Roads to Community Living 
> Adult Protective Services 
Find Local Services, Information, and Resources 
State Hospital Discharge and Diversion 
Long-Term Care Professionals & Providers 
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing 
Stakeholders 
Tribal Affairs 
Long-Term Services and Supports Trust 
https://wvvw.dshs.wa.gov/altsa/home-and-community-services/becoming-paid-caregiver
