 
1 
 LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742    
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
   
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY) 
www.mainelse.org 
April 18, 2023 
 
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D.1406 An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Estate Recovery 
and Planning for Long-term before the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services   
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Health and Human Services 
 
On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer comments 
in support of L.D. 1406.  Legal Services for the Elderly is a non-profit legal 
services organization that was established in Maine following the passage of 
the Older American’s Act in 1974. Since then, we have provided free legal 
assistance to our disadvantaged older adults when their basic human needs 
are at stake. Our clients are all aged sixty or older and most have very low 
incomes.  
 
Each section of this bill addresses some but not all the elements of the 
MaineCare long term care programs that presently cause older adults much 
concern. The first section invites a policy discussion on the necessity for a 
feature of the program that is called “estate recovery”. The second section 
focuses on a legal barrier in the MaineCare eligibility process which 
prevents applicants from qualifying for assistance if they have made 
prohibited transfers of their assets. The last two sections suggest ways of 
educating the public on the topic of estate recovery and the care of eligible 
individuals by family members. We offer will comment on each section.     
 
Section One: estate recovery. 
Estate recovery is a concept that was added to Medicaid by Federal law in 
1993 (42 USC 1396p). It requires States that participate in the Medicaid 
program (and all States do), to recoup the total cost of any benefits paid for 
 
2 
 people aged 55 and older while they receive nursing facility level services in 
their homes or in a nursing facility. The repayment happens when the 
individual dies and the claim that the State makes on their estate is paid in 
full or in part. Since the only significant property that may be in the estate is 
the older adult’s home most claims are not fully satisfied. This “claw back” 
of benefit payments does not apply to any younger person receiving 
MaineCare benefits regardless of how much the program has paid for their 
care. Because both the State and Federal government share in the payment of 
an older MaineCare member’s long term care expenses, the recovered 
amounts are shared by each in the proportion that the payments were made. 
Approximately two-thirds of the money recouped by Maine is sent back to 
the  Federal government and the remainder is kept by Maine.  
 
There are many reasons to question the existence of the estate recovery 
program. Here are some (we apologize in advance if the following reads like 
a rant): estate recovery is patently unfair, discriminates on the basis of age, 
disproportionally affects lower income adults who cannot afford to hire 
attorneys to help them legally avoid its effects, fosters financial exploitation, 
discourages older adults from seeking medically necessary health related 
services, disproportionally deprives families of a physical home likely 
financed through mortgage payments made over a long period of time and 
prevents families from escaping generational poverty or even maintaining a 
middle-class way of life. It is also incompatible with the current efforts of 
this Legislature to expand affordable housing opportunities that help lower 
income older adults shoulder the burdens of their housing costs.   
 
Unfortunately, estate recovery is a mandatory part of the Federal Medicaid 
program and because Maine participates in Medicaid through the MaineCare 
program we are forced to accept it. Maine’s flexibility to change the estate 
recovery program is extremely limited. Section One offers a suggestion that 
may prove to be a way to both respect the Federal law and help Maine 
people blunt the effect of our estate recovery recoupments. In short, it 
proposes to return the State share of the amount collected from an estate 
back to the estate. While we are not certain that this is the most efficient way 
to give effect to this policy, we believe that it deserves serious consideration,       
  
We respectfully submit that given the number of bills and the time 
constraints currently occupying this Committee, you may not have the 
opportunity to engage in what could be a very long policy conversation. 
 
 
3 
  
We would like to see this discussion happen between sessions. We suggest 
that Section One should be amended as a Resolve creating a workgroup 
containing legislators from both parties to study the stated proposal and 
report its findings to this Committee for consideration in the Second regular 
session of this Legislature. We hope that you agree.  We now turn our 
attention to Section two.     
 
Section Two: change of an evidentiary standard in the asset transfer rules. 
 
When determining eligibility for MaineCare long term care services, Maine 
is required by federal law to review any assets that an individual age 55 and 
older transferred during the five years before they applied. This five-year 
review of an applicant’s finances is called the “look back period”. Any 
transfer allowed under the rules is considered “exempt”. Those non-exempt 
are examined further. If it is discovered that non-exempt property was sold 
for less than fair market value or given as a gift, that person will be found  
ineligible for the program. The period of ineligibility varies  depending on 
the value of the asset transferred. 
 
The purpose of this “asset transfer” rule is to discourage individuals from 
transferring assets in order to qualify for MaineCare or sheltering assets that 
could be used to pay for their long term care costs. The fact that every 
financial transaction involving a check or a deed or some other instrument 
will be scrutinized is just another example of how intrusive applying for 
these benefits can be.    
 
The rule also contains a legal “rebuttable presumption” which is a rule of 
evidence that makes a particular fact true unless it is proven otherwise. In  
reviewing the five year collection of financial records the State must 
presume that the applicant has transferred property to reduce their assets so 
that they would qualify for MaineCare benefits. The applicant may dispute 
that presumption and the MaineCare rules provide a process for doing so. 
Here is the Section of the rule that sets out the process (highlighted and 
underlined for emphasis): 
 
“Section 1.6: Disproving the Presumed Transfer 
Any transfer taking place will be presumed to have been made for the 
purpose of becoming or remaining eligible for Medicaid unless the 
individual furnishes clear and convincing evidence that the transaction was 
 
4 
 for some other purpose and that there was no intent at the time to apply for 
Medicaid within the foreseeable future.  It is the Department's responsibility 
to demonstrate that a transfer took place and to establish the date of the 
transfer. It is the individual's responsibility to prove that the transfer took 
place for reasons other than to gain eligibility for Medicaid. 
 
If the individual wants to disprove the presumption that the transfer was 
made to establish Medicaid eligibility, the burden of proof rests with the 
individual. The individual must demonstrate that the transfer was 
specifically and solely for some other purpose than to receive Medicaid. 
Statements and evidence to disprove the transfer must be contained in the 
individual's record…”  
(10-144 Chapter 332: MaineCare Eligibility Manual, Part 15 - Transfer of 
Assets , page 4) 
 
The process places the burden on the applicant to prove by “clear and 
convincing” evidence that “…the transaction was for some other purpose 
and that there was no intent at the time to apply for Medicaid within the 
foreseeable future”.   
 
A “clear and convincing” evidence standard is not normally applied in civil 
matters. It requires a showing almost as high as the “beyond a reasonable 
doubt standard” used to prove a person’s guilt in a criminal trial. We suggest 
that it’s one thing to shift the burden of proving that you acted properly but 
to require that you prove it by using a measure of evidence almost as high as 
the criminal standard seems, at the very least, excessive. 
 
Most civil matters require proof by a preponderance of the evidence which 
means that it is “more likely than not” that a fact is true. Given the strict 
parameters of what must be proven, we believe that this normal civil 
standard used in court cases involving all kinds of civil matters, including 
complicated business disputes, should replace the “current clear and 
convincing” standard. This is one change that the Federal law does not 
prohibit. So long as the State uses a standard that convinces it of the truth of 
the evidence presented, the Federal law does not mandate the choice.  
 
We will now offer some brief comments about the remaining two sections of 
this bill.      
 
 
5 
 Section Three requires the Department of Health and Human Services to 
work with interested parties to develop specific informational products 
explaining how the estate recovery program works. It also directs DHHS to 
make this information available to MaineCare members and the public both 
in print, on its website and through organizations serving older adults. We 
generally support the idea of making everyone more aware of the unique 
eligibility rules and practices of MaineCare long term care programs. 
Knowledge would help eliminate surprise and confusion as well as promote 
advance planning. Having the information come from an official source 
would also be welcome and ensure that it was accurate and helpful. But we 
are also mindful of the increased workload that the Department is 
experiencing and will continue to experience because of the demands 
created by the ending of the Federal Pandemic Health Emergency. In 
recognition of that reality, we suggest that if the Committee is interested in 
directing the Department to take on this additional work it should make the 
effective date of this directive as far into the next biennium as possible.  
 
The last section of this bill concerns a similar directive to the Department to 
produce and distribute information regarding home and community-based 
services provided by a family member or a guardian. We support the idea for 
similar reasons but repeat our comment that implementation may require an 
adjustment to the date that the deliverables will be available. The effective 
date should be advanced for that purpose.   
 
This concludes our comments. Thank you for giving us the opportunity to 
share our thoughts with you,   
