  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 18 , 202 3 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1406  – An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Estate Recovery and Planning for Long -
term Care  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information related to LD 1406 , An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding 
Estate Recovery and Planning for Long -term Care . 
 
This bill requires the Department to return the state portion of estate recovery under the MaineCare 
program to the estate. The bill requires the department to amend its rules in Chapter 332: MaineCare 
Eligibility Manual, Part 15, Transfer of Assets, to change the standard for transfer of assets from 
"clear and convincing evidence" to "a preponderance of evidence." The bill also re quires the 
Department to develop educational materials to assist individuals with long -term care planning, 
estate planning , and asset transferring and sheltering.  
 
This bill would create operational cha llenges within the Department as we do not presently n egotiate 
and settle estates on a claim -by-claim basis with federal funding rates tied to specific dates of service. 
Sending the state share of Estate Recovery back to the estate after we recoup from the estate will 
require additional staff to set up estate  representatives as vendors so we can issue checks to them 
and account for this money. New staff would also be needed to undertake the tasks in this bill 
including meeting with advocates and recording minutes and participation in the development of 
educati onal materials.  
 
The Department is also concerned about the requirement that staff “develop educational materials 
to assist individuals with long -term care planning, estate planning and asset transferring and 
sheltering.” These matters are best left with f inancial planners and attorneys, not Department staff.  
 
P.L. 2021, ch 398, the 130th Legislature’s biennial budget , required the Department to reduce estate 
recovery recoupments to the federal mandatory minimum  at a cost of approximately $416,000 
General Fund each fiscal year . The Department implemented this requirement via a new rule in 
November 2021 .  The new rule limits e state recovery recoupment to only nursing facility , certain 
home and community -based  services, and associated hospital and pharmacy costs.   
 
 
 Given the general fund impact of this bill, the Department does not support its passage. We wanted 
you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If you have any 
furthe r questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

