g STATE or MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION & FORESTRYA 
OFFICE or THE COMMISSIONER 
22 STATE HOUsE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
JANET T. IVHLLS AMANDA E. BEAL 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST LD 649 
An Act to Promote Water Conservation and Water Quality and Create Habitat for Wildlife, 
Including Pollinator Species, by Protecting Low-impact Landscaping 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Gary Fish, and I am the State Horticulturist. I am speaking on behalf of 
the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Neither For Nor Against LD 649, An 
Act to Promote Water Conservation and Water Quality and Create Habitat for Wildlife, 
Including Pollinator Species, by Protecting Low-impact Landscaping. 
LD 649 deﬁnes "low-impact landscaping" as landscaping techniques that conserve water, lower 
maintenance costs, provide pollution prevention and create habitat for wildlife." 
Currently, many homeowner association agreements and other covenants require regular 
mowing, constant leaf raking, and deep spring and fall cleanups. These landscaping practices 
may yield a neater-looking garden, but they also reduce the value of wildlife habitat, contribute 
to greenhouse gas emissions, and release other air pollutants. LD 649 may provide greater 
freedom for landowners to experiment with their landscape, contribute important ecosystem 
services, and improve wildlife habitat for beneﬁcial insects and other wildlife. 
Minimizing lawn areas, mowing less, and planting native plants all help improve habitats for 
birds, pollinators, and other wildlife. While thick, healthy lawns provide safe play areas, ﬁlter 
rainwater, and reduce ﬁre hazards around structures, these highly maintained surfaces may only 
contain one or two turfgrass species. The lack of plant diversity in high-input lawns makes them 
less suitable as wildlife habitats. Adding keystone plants like oaks, willows, goldenrods, and 
asters helps produce critical food components for raising baby birds and feeding pollinators. 
If lawns are mown too short or damaged by insects or diseases, they may become a source of soil 
erosion and runoff. Diversifying lawn areas with layers of perennials, shrubs, and trees to 
intercept rainfall and adding rain gardens and rain barrels to redirect runoff from rooftops, 
parking lots, or slopes reduces the potential for soil erosion and nutrient and pesticide runoff. 
18 ELKINS LANE conservation FAX: (207) 2812400 
AUGUSTA, MAINE ” I 
& Forestry WEB:wWw.1vIA1NE.o0v/DACF B 1, DEPARTMENTOF_ 
HARLOW UILDING Agricukure PHONE. (207)287-3200
In addition, reducing leaf raking and allowing the buildup of leaf litter or duff helps form a ﬁlter 
layer that traps nutrients and pesticides. Those potential pollutants can then inﬁltrate the soil and 
be utilized by plants or broken down by soil microbes. The duff area also serves as an 
overwintering site for many beneﬁcial insects. 
Leaving seed heads on perennial and annual plants provides signiﬁcant food resources for over- 
wintering birds and other wildlife. Plants with hollow stems provide nesting habitat for 
pollinators and other beneﬁcial insects. 
The Department would like to point out the potential for increased development of tick habitats 
and that low-impact landscaping practices may not always result in a reduction of long-term 
maintenance costs. In most instances, mowing a smaller lawn will reduce maintenance costs, but 
adding trees and shrubs will increase long-term pruning and mulching costs. 
Finally, the Department does not envision an enforcement role Within this section of the law and 
encourages the committee to carefully consider long-term enforcement goals at the municipal 
level. 
Thank you for your time. I am happy to answer any questions now or at the work session.
