/3/4; ,[’eg;;,(g{ ”;¢e Senator Mattie Daughtry 
Assistant iMajority Leader 
5 ¢ State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
7 _c 
‘jauhe Oﬁ’1ce(2O. ) 287 15].; 
Senate .?)12stu2:t Z5’ 
Testimony of Senator Mattie Daughtry introducing 
LD 649, An Act to Promote Water Conservation and Water Quality and 
Create Habitat for Wildlife, Including Pollinator Species, by Protecting Low- 
impact Landscaping 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Mattie Daughtry, and I proudly represent Senate District 
23, which includes Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, and part of 
Yarmouth. Today, I’m very excited to introduce LD 649, “An Act to Promote Water 
Conservation and Water Quality and Create Habitat for Wildlife, Including Pollinator Species, 
by Protecting Low-impact Landscaping. ” If you’ve heard any “buzz” around this bill, it’s 
deﬁnitely the bees offering their support. 
In December 2022, I came across the New York Times article “They Fought the Lawn, and the 
Lawn Lost.” The article tells the story of a Maryland couple, Janet and Jeff Crouch, who 
replaced their grass turf lawn with native plant beds. After planting bee balm, phlox, 
coneﬂowers, swamp milkweed, and sunﬂowers, the homeowner association ordered the 
Crouches to rip out these native plants and restore their grass turf lawn. The Crouches hireda 
lawyer and took the homeowner association to court. Shortly after, a Maryland state 
representative asked the Crouches if their case could form the basis of a new environmental law. 
The lawmaker drafted a bill that forbade homeowner associations from bamiing pollinator plants 
or rain gardens or from requiring property owners to plant turf grass. Maryland became the ﬁrst 
state to limit homeowner control over eco-friendly yards. The bill before you, LD 649, is 
modeled on that landmark legislation. 
Grass turf lawns are ecological dead zones or deserts that require excessive water, fertilizers, and 
pesticides. Last year, for the ﬁrst time since 2017, my hometown of Brunswick suffered a major 
clam die-off. One factor was the runoff of lawn fertilizers andpesticides, which contributed to 
the death of 4 acres of softshell clams in Maquoit Bay. Lawn fertilizers and pesticides that 
contain nitrogen and phosphorous run-off into the water and cause algae blooms. When the algae 
die and decompose, oxygen levels drop dramatically and choke out other marine life, including 
shellﬁsh seedlings. Across the district, Freeport and Harpswell experienced similar clam die-offs. 
In Brunswick alone, the shellﬁsh industry is worth $13 million — but not if the clams are dead.
1
In addition to the threat that grass turf lawns pose to Brunswick ’s — and Maine’s — shellﬁsh 
industry, grass turf lawns are causing bird, insect, and wildlife populations to plummet. 
Pollinator-friendly gardens and lawns can help counteract the negative impact that human 
activity, pollution, and habitat destruction have on these species. Some homeowners are already 
planting native plants and creating “conservation corridors ” that provide sustenance to local and 
migratory butterﬂies, birds, and bees. But what if homeowner associations — which govern nearly 
74 million people nationwide, including nearly a quarter of all Mainers — continue to try and 
restrict native plant landscapes? The bees will die. 
Pollinators play a key role in ecological health, the food system, and the national economy. 
Many plants depend on pollinating animals, which can include ants, honey bees, native bees, 
birds, bats, butterﬂies, and other insects. According to NCSL, Maine is one of the 19 states that 
do not have any laws addressing pollinator health, which puts us behind the rest of the nation. 
I’m including the below list of bills that prioritize native plants, encourage biodiversity, and re- 
establishing pollinator-friendly plant populations because I want to demonstrate that more and 
more states are taking this issue seriously: 
0 California (SB 170 — 2022): Allocates the funds for the existing Pollinator Protection 
Program aimed to beneﬁt native biodiversity and the use of locally appropriate native 
plant seed mixes. 
0 Illinois (HB 3092 — 2019): Creates the Native Prairie and Forage Preference Act and 
provides that state agencies should give preference to using native plants beneﬁting 
pollinators. 
0 Massachusetts (HB 5060 — 2022): Mandates pollinator friendly wind and solar farms. 
0 Minnesota (SB 20 — 2021): Makes appropriations for pollinator conservation through 
habitat improvement and restoration, research, grants for pollinator-friendly lawns, and 
education. 
0 Minnesota (H 3765 — 2022): Makes appropriations to establish new populations of 
ﬂowers that are essential for pollinator health. 
0 New Jersey (A 4554 -2021): Establishes standards for the use of pollinator friendly 
native plant species and seed mixes in grid supply solar. 
0 New Jersey (SB 3539 -2022): Directs the Department of Environmental Protection to 
establish a grant program to support the development and maintenance of pollinator 
friendly community gardens in the State that will help support ’populations of pollinating 
animals. 
¢ New York (SB 2044- 2019): Makes available information on minimum guidelines for 
vegetation management plans that are pollinator friendly. 
0 North Carolina (SB 606- 2019): Prioritizes the use of native plants on highway rights- 
of-way. 
0 Ohio (HB 26 — 2017): Directs contributions from transportation and public safety to the 
Beekeeper ’s Association for the protection and preservation of Ohio’s monarch butterﬂy 
and pollinator corridor.
2
0 Vermont (HB 205- 2019): Regulates the sale and application of neonicotinoid pesticides 
in order to protect pollinators, and requires the secretary of agriculture, food and markets 
to register neonicotinoids as restricted use pesticides. 
0 Washington (HB 2478 — 2016): Requires all agencies to give preference, when 
appropriate, to replacing pollen-rich or nectar-rich noxious weeds with native forage 
plants that are beneﬁcial for all pollinators, including honey bees. 
0 Washington (SB 5552- 2019): Provides for the development and maintenance of habitat 
beneﬁcial for the feeding, nesting, and reproduction of pollinators. 
In her latest book, poet Camille Dungy wrote about her years-long project to transform her weed- 
ﬁlled, water-hogging monochromatic lawn in suburban Fort Collins, Colorado. Dungy replaced 
grass turf with vibrant, drought-tolerant native plants. Her garden is full of native grasses like 
blue grama and little bluestem, as well as perennials like penstemon, baptista, and Lewis ﬂax. 
Similar to the Crouches in Maryland, Dungy and her husband had to deal with a homeowner 
association that had a strict maintenance code that forbade anything that upset the homogenous 
green grass turf look of the neighborhood. Dungy didn’t have to go to court because Fort Collins 
eliminated the strict code. 
I am passionate about this bill and this concept for a number of reasons. In college, my minor 
was Landscape Studies and Architecture. Even back then, scientists, biologists, plant enthusiasts, 
and many more were already sounding the alarm over the detrimental impact of non-native 
lawns. From seminars and lectures to in-ﬁeld experiments, I saw firsthand what everyone was 
talking about. I know that there are successful ways to maintain a green front yard without the 
environmental hazards of non-native monoculture. When I was lucky enough to get my own 
home in Brunswick, I immediately began planting native grasses and worked to createa 
wildﬂower median. 
It’s an ongoing experiment, but one result is that even in our hardest droughts, my garden has 
survived and often ﬂourished. This includes having enough pollinators present to “bee” the only 
one with a successful vegetable crop in my little town block. Beyond my block, although Maine 
is considered to be a “water-rich ” state, we still experience severe droughts. Just last year, Lt‘ 
l6 counties — half the state — experienced severe drought. Farmers lost their crops and 
homeowners watched their wells run dry. In Washington County, some wild blueberry farms lost 
60 percent of their yield, and the majority of dry wells were reported in Cumberland, York, 
Lincoln, and Kermebec counties. As the effects of climate change, including drought, become 
more severe, we need to start taking reasonable steps to conserve our most precious resource: 
water. If we have to choose between maintaining grass turf lawns or having enough water for 
Maine farmers to irrigate their ﬁelds and Mainers to have wells on their land, then I choose the 
farmers and the homeowners every time. 
Another reason for my commitment to this measure is because it impacts one of my good friends 
who lives in a home governed by a homeowners association. She just had her ﬁrst child and 
wants to create a front yard that is not only good for the bees but also full of kid-safe plants. 
Unfortunately, that’s not allowed in her neighborhood. She mentioned that it isn’t just the
3
mandate for grass turf that frustrates her but also the cost associated with maintaining it. If this 
bill were to pass, it would enable her and her neighbors to have the kid-safe lawns they want. 
In Maine, we have an opportunity to ensure that homeowner associations cannot require Mainers 
to maintain grass turf lawns that deplete biodiversity, reduce pollinator populations, and require 
fertilizers and pesticides. Let’s not wait for the Crouches of Maine to hire a lawyer and go to 
court. We can change state law to allow for pollinator-friendly gardens and lawns and help save 
the native bees, insects, and wildlife that call Maine “home.” 
I thank you for your time, and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
,5/40 
Mattie Daughtry 
Assistant Senate Majority Leader, Senate District 23 
Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, and part of Yarmouth
4
/- 1”l 
_ __ : ,» .' W;/?, 
5/ 
Extreme heat, heavy rain, lawn 
runoff blamed for Brunswick 
clam die-off 
Four acres of Brunswick clams died across several bays this 
summer, likely due to high temperatures, low tides and an algae 
bloom. 
BY JOHN TERHUNESTAFF WRITER 
Even before he touched the shells, Steve Vachon knew something was 
wrong. 
The stench of rot had led him to the little Maquoit Bay cove behind his home 
on Mere Point Road. He walked along the mudﬂats, noting the presence a 
strange white foam, until he reached clamshells. 
When he tumed the clams over to ﬁnd their bellies oozing out, his fears were 
conﬁrmed —~ the shellﬁsh were all dead. 
In late July and early August, a conﬂuence of factors, including extreme heat, 
heavy rainfall and the possible presence of lawn fertilizers and 
pesticides, contributed to the death of 4 acres of softshell clams in 
Brunswick, according to Dan Devereaux, the town’s coastal resource 
manager. 
Freeport and Harpswell saw similar clam deaths over the summer.
l
Devereaux, who presented the issue to the Brunswick Town Council Monday 
evening, said that samples from the affected areas in Maquoit, Middle, Mere 
Point and Tomas bays tested negative for diseases that could have led to 
further shellﬁsh deaths. Yet he warned that the factors that likely caused this 
summer’s mortality event will only worsen over time. 
“This is all part of the changing system in the changing climate and the 
warming oceans,” he said. “We suspect that will happen more and more, 
particularly with softshell clam species. ” 
A perfect storm 
The clam deaths, Brunswick ’s first signiﬁcant shellﬁsh mortality event since 
20l 7, were the result of several elements Working in concert, according to 
Devereaux. 
“There’s so many different metrics that could have contributed to this,” he 
said. “You’ve got a perfect storm in certain spots.” 
He said the ﬁrst factor behind the clam death was extreme heat, which can be 
particularly damaging to softshell clams. This summer, high temperatures 
coincided with extreme low tides that left mudﬂaps baking, unprotected from 
the sun. 
A report from Kennebec River Biosciences, a Richmond lab that analyzed 
tissue samples from the affected area, agreed high heat could be partly 
responsible for the mortality event.
2
The report also noted the presence of an unknown organism, likely an alga, 
and suggested the infection could have contributed to the clams’ death. 
Algae can be good for marine life, when large, established shellﬁsh 
populations operate as a ﬁltration system that keeps water clear. Yet wild 
softshell clam populations in Maine have been declining for decades, _a_s_ 
water temperature and acidity levels have risen, according to data from the 
Friends of Casco Bay. 
Without a properly functioning natural ﬁltration system, Brunswick ’s waters 
are more susceptible to algae blooms, which occur when excess nutrients, 
including nitrogen and phosphorus, result in an explosion of algae growth. 
When the algae die and decompose, oxygen levels can drop dramatically, 
choking out other marine life — including both ﬁsh and the shellﬁsh 
seedlings that could otherwise have helped to prevent future blooms. 
Brunswick can do little to prevent rising ocean temperatures. In order to limit 
future algae blooms, Devereaux said, the town will need to focus on the 
problem it can control: the use of nitrogen-rich fertilizers and pesticides, 
which rains can carry from lawns into the ocean. 
Something needs to be done 
Cody Gillis Jr., chairperson of the Brunswick Marine Resources Committee, 
has a personal stake in preserving the town’s shellﬁsh population: As a full- 
time clammer and ﬁsherman, his livelihood depends on it.
3
Gillis is one of the more than 200 Brunswick residents involved in the local 
shellﬁsh industry, which has an estimated value of $13 million, according to 
Devereaux. 
While the 4 acres affected by the casualty event make up only about half of 
1% of Brunswick ’s approximately 750 productive acres of mudﬂats, Gillis 
was concerned about what it might mean for rest of the shellﬁsh, ﬁsh and 
waterfowl that inhabit Brunswick ’s waters. 
“The clam ﬂats are really the lifeblood ﬁltration system of this bay,” he said 
“If We lose it, everything is going to take a hit. It all goes downhill from 
there.” 
Earlier this summer, Gillis Wrote a letter to Brunswick Environmental 
Planner Bina Skordas requesting the town consider zoning ordinances 
changes that would tighten restrictions on pesticides and fertilizers in the 
shoreline zone. 
While he’s happy with the commitment of Brunswick ’s leadership, he said 
he’s concerned that homeowners will prioritize their well-manicured yards 
over an industry that supports hundreds of residents. 
“It’s alarming, ” he said. “People should really pay attention to what’s 
downstream from their beautiful green lawns.”
                                                       
2 ,,/w 
They Fought the Lawn. And the 
Lawn ’s Done. 
After their homeowner association ordered them to replace their wildlife-friendly plants 
with turf grass, a Maryland couple sued. They ended up changing state law. 
By Cara Buckley 
Photographs by Jason Andrew 
Published Dec. 14, 2022Updated Dec. 20, 2022 
COLUMBIA, Md. — Janet and Jeff Crouch do not know which ﬂower or plant may have 
pushed their longtime next door neighbor over the edge, prompting him to pen 
complaint after complaint about the state of their yard. 
Perhaps it was the scarlet bee balm that drew hummingbirds in darting, whirring 
droves. Or the swamp milkweed that Monarch butterﬂies feasted upon before laying 
their eggs. Or maybe it was the native sunﬂowers that fed bumblebees and goldﬁnches. 
Whatever it was, their neighbor ’s mounting resentment burst to the fore in the fall of 
2017, in the form of a letter from a lawyer for their homeowner association that ordered 
the Crouches to rip out their native plant beds, and replace them with grass. 
The couple were stunned. They’d lived on their quiet cul-de-sac harmoniously with their 
neighbors for years, and chose native plants to help insects, birds and wildlife thrive. 
Now the association was telling them that their plantings not only violated the bylaws, 
but were eyesores that hurt property values. “Your yard is not the place for sucha 
habitat, ” the letter read. 
The Crouches were given 10 days to convert their front yard into a lawn that looked like 
everyone else’s. But instead of doing what they were told, the couple fought back, and 
ended up paving the way for a groundbreaking state law. 
Lawns continue to polarize Americans, with traditionalists prizing manicured emerald 
expanses and environmentalists seeing them as ecological deserts that suck up excessive 
amounts of water and pesticides. The locus of power in many of these disputes are 
community or homeowner associations, which, by one measure, govern some Z4, million 
people nationwide. 
Generally these associations are tasked with making sure that yards are maintained, but 
there are growing questions about what exactly that means. 
Insect, bird and wildlife populations are plummetingas a result of human activity, 
pollution and habitat destruction, prompting scientists to predict mounting mass 
extinctions in the coming years.
1       
As diplomats from nearly 200 nations meet in Montreal this week to try to hammer out 
an agreement to stop hundreds of species from disappearing, homeowners in the United 
States are increasingly planting native plants that provide sustenance to local and 
migratory butterﬂies, birds and bees. 
According to the National Wildlife Federation, in 2020 there was a 50 percent increase 
in people creating wildlife gardens certified by the organization. And a growing number 
of localities and states are enacting pollinator-friendly laws, and in 2020, Taylor 
Morrison, a major homebuilding company, partnered with the National Wildlife 
Federation in a plan to plant native species in its communities nationwide. 
The association told the Crouches that their plantings violated the bylaws and hurt 
property values. 
Still, native gardeners wanting to “naturescape ” often face pushback from homeowner 
associations, whose primary interest is to protect home values by ensuring a consistent 
appearance across property lines. Associations can dictate everything from house paint 
colors to the location of driveway basketball hoops. 
But in Maryland, homeowner associations can no longer force residents to have lawns, 
thanks to the Crouches. 
The couple moved to Beech Creek, a clutch of homes bordering Columbia ’s Cedar Lane 
Park, in 1999. Shortly afterward, they stopped using fertilizers and pesticides, a decision 
that they say deepened their connection with their modest plot of land, which backs 
onto some woods. 
“You’re thinking more about the soil, and its inhabitants, and how it ﬁts together in the 
ecosystem, ” said Mrs. Crouch, who works for the United States Department of Health 
and Human Services. At the urging of Mrs. Crouch’s sister, Nancy Lawson, a native 
plant proponent known as the Humane Gardener the couple began adding indigenous 
and pollinator-friendly plants: coneﬂowers, cardinal ﬂowers and phlox that drew little 
winged creatures. After work, Mr. Crouch, a clinical social worker, would wander the 
garden to see how the plants were doing, and offered ﬂowers to kids who stopped to 
admire it. 
But as their garden grew, their next door neighbor, Daniel O’Rourke, was seething. 
Around 2012, Mr. O’Rourke began emailing the homeowner association, complaining 
that the Crouches ’ yard was overgrown with weeds, figurines and barrels filled with 
rainwater, claims the couple would later contest. Mr. O’Rourke couldn’t enjoy his own 
property, he wrote, due to the “mess of a jungle” next door. 
Mr. O’Rourke, whose missives became public after the Crouches ﬁled a lawsuit, did not 
respond to emails, calls or a note left at his home. A representative for the homeowner 
association declined to comment.
2
At the time, the Crouches had no idea anything was amiss. They weren’t friends with 
Mr. O’Rourke, but they were cordial, waving from the driveway and on at least one 
occasion, they said, lending him their ladder. 
The Crouches ’ yard is decorated with hand-painted rocks and registered with the 
Howard County Bee City. 
Mr. O’Rourke continued to complain, saying that the Crouches ’ yard was attracting 
rodents, deer, snakes and bats, and that they were planting shrubs and bushes in no 
particular order. 
In September 2017, the homeowner association sent the Crouches a letter saying their 
yard was in need of seasonal maintenance, which the Crouches said they heeded. Two 
months later, a cease and desist letter from the homeowner association ’s lawyers 
arrived. If they didn’t change their yard back to a “neat, clean” lawn, the lawyer for the 
association wrote, the Crouches could face fines or worse. 
Lawns make up one-third of the country’s 135 million acres of residential landscaping, 
according to the ecologist Douglas W. Tallamy, who calls the velvety carpeting of 
bluegrass or ryegrass “ecological dead zones.” 
Dr. Tallamy, whose book, “Nature’s Best Hope,” urges homeowner to change their yards 
into conservation corridors, said that because so much property in the United States is 
privately owned — as much as 78 percent — owners had to be enlisted to grow native 
plants that support biodiversity. “This idea that humans and nature cannot coexist is 
destroying the entire planet, which in turn is destroying humans,” Dr. Tallamy said. 
“The only way forward is to coexist. ” 
For the Crouches, giving in was not an option. They hired a lawyer and contacted every 
wildlife and environmental group they could think of, along with local legislators. Aftera 
year and a half, still at an impasse with the homeowner association and fearful that one 
day they’d come home to find their garden mowed down, they filed a complaint in 
Howard County Circuit Court. A chief claim was that in 2011 they’d been told there was 
no issue with their gardens, and also that before 2017, they’d received no violations for 
their yard despite regular inspections. 
“The overall principles are bigger than us,” Mrs. Crouch said. “We had an opportunity 
and even an obligation to see it through as best we could.” 
Two months after the Crouches filed their complaint, a Maryland state representative 
asked if they would allow their case to form the basis of a new environmental law. 
A property marker along the line dividing the Crouches and their neighbor who 
complained to the homeowners ’ association. 
Maryland has contended with devastating ﬂoods —— among them the 2018 submersion of 
Ellicott City — and mounting concerns about pesticide runoff to Chesapeake Bay. A bill
3
was drafted that forbade homeowner associations from banning pollinator plants or rain 
gardens, or from requiring property owners to plant turf grass. 
Dozens of states have passed legislation to promote the health of pollinators, which 
include bees, wasps, bats and butterﬂies, while some have curbed the authority of 
homeowner association edicts during droughts. 
But the Maryland law was the first in the country to limit homeowner association 
control over eco-friendly yards, said Mary Catherine Cochran, former legislative director 
for Maryland State Delegate Terri L. Hill, a Democrat who co-sponsored the legislation. 
The measure gained bipartisan support, passed with near unanimity, and became law in 
October 2021. 
“It’s a really small effort in the face of the international work that needs to be done,” said 
Dr. Hill, a physician. “But it’s nice that individuals in the community are able to feel that 
they are empowered to make a difference. ” 
In December 2020, the Crouches and their homeowner association, which had 
countersued, reached a settlement. The Crouches were able to keep virtually all of their 
garden intact, but agreed to remove plantings within three feet of their neighbor ’s land 
and six feet of the sidewalk, and replace them with some sort of grass — they chose 
native Pennsylvania sedge. 
Their fight had a ripple effect. Their lawyer, Jeff Kahntroff, has since resolved not to use 
pesticides, and when part of a tree fell in his yard, he and his wife left it there for critters 
to use as habitat. Another Maryland couple, Jon Hussey and Emma Qin, were able to 
point to the law after their homeowner association objected to weeds in their lawn, 
which they kept mowed but pesticide free. “It’s crazy how ingrained turf grass has 
become,” Mr. Hussey said. “It doesn’t have to be that way.” 
In the end, the Crouches spent $60,000 on lawyers fees, but they say it was worth it. 
This fall, with the new law backing them up, the Crouches let their dead coneﬂowers, 
sunﬂowers and other perennials stand. Mr. Crouch awoke one frigid morning this 
November to ﬁnd six birds on the stalks, feasting on the seeds. 
“Maryland was a big deal,” Dr. Tallamy, the ecologist, said. “Now people know if they 
fight back, they can win.”
4
