LD 51, An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions
to Immunization Requirements
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs,
My name is Abigail Beal of Cherryfield, Maine.  As a citizen and as a Christian, I urge you to support 
LD 51's restoring of exemptions to immunization requirements.
In looking at this issue, it is important to consider the evidence of significant impacts that such 
requirements have on those affected by it.
As of March 17th, 2023, VAIRS reports for the COVID-19 vaccine  reveal a total of 34,819 deaths and 
64,366 permanently disabled victims of this injection.  This is more than any other vaccine in history.  
So why are we forcing this evidently dangerous injection upon the citizens of our state?  Why are we 
allowing their education, jobs, and livelihoods to be threatened simply because they refuse to be 
injected with an experimental substance?
And where will it stop? If the government can tell us what we will be injected with, then they will 
certainly tell us where we will or will not travel, how we may or may not use our money, what is good 
or bad for us to eat, and ultimately under what circumstances we may or may not live and function as 
American citizens. 
Americans are not supposed to be living under a dictatorship.  Benjamin Franklin said, “Those who 
give up essential Liberty to purchase a little temporary Safety, deserve neither Liberty nor Safety.”
As a beneficiary of the blood-bought freedoms of our Constitutional Republic, I am unwilling to 
sacrifice my liberty for a little supposed safety.  I am not content allowing the government to mandate 
the immunization decisions of citizens of the State of Maine.
So in the name of liberty and justice, I would remind you of your duty to protect the freedoms of your 
constituents and ask you not to only support religious and philosophical exemptions but also to fight for
the freedom we ought to have to make our own immunization decisions without having to go begging 
for it.
Thank you for your time.
