Amanda Krantz
Westbrook
LD 51
To: Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 2020-2024
From:  Amanda Krantz
Date: April 2, 2023
Re: Testimony in support of LD 51, LD 869, LD 1098, LD 1148, LD 1209 and LD 
1228
My name is Amanda Krantz and I am a 20 year resident of Westbrook and a lifelong 
Mainer.  I am submitting my testimony in support of LD LD 51, LD 869, LD 1098, 
LD 1148, LD 1209 and LD 1228 because these bills will directly impact the ability 
for my two children to graduate public school and attend college in the state of Maine
My oldest daughter is 15 and in grade 9.  She has an IEP due to a specific learning 
disability.  As a result of her IEP she is currently allowed to keep her non-medical 
exemption and remain in school as long as her IEP remains active.   Based on the 
current law once she graduates from needing the IEP and/or the IEP is removed she 
would no longer be able to attend public school.  As a result, there is little to no 
motivation for her to work hard in an effort to “graduate” from her IEP, as once she 
does, she will no longer be able to attend public school. 
My youngest daughter is almost 13 and in grade 7.  She is quite a good student and 
does not require any additional services from the school, such as an IEP.  She has 
excellent feedback from her teachers and we often receive feedback that she offers a 
very positive social impact on her peers.  She does not have the need for an IEP, 
requires no additional services and yet is at risk of being excluded from school, unlike
her sister.   Upon entering grade 7 she was required to obtain two vaccines.  And, 
upon receipt of these she promptly developed a significant, uncomfortable and painful
rash all over her body.   This has happened with previous vaccines, although her 
health care providers deny any association, and in fact deemed me “non-compliant” 
when I chose to delay additional vaccines after observing this same reaction in the 
past.  Reinstating the philosophical and religious exemptions will alleviate further 
suffering for my daughter in the future, and allow her to finish her education with her 
sister and her peer group.   
A vote of Ought to Pass on  LD 51 will allow children like mine to remain in school - 
preserve their regular interaction with their friends, allow them to remain in the sports
and music programs in which they are are so heavily invested.  
Thank you for your time and your consideration, 
Amanda Krantz

