Annalyse Sarvinas
Topsham
LD 51
Testimony of Annalyse Sarvinas
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee
Testimony in Support of LD 51:
April 3, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the distinguished members on the 
Committee of Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Annalyse Sarvinas and I 
am reaching out today in regard to the proposed LD 51, “An Act to Restore Religious 
and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements”.  Thank you for the 
opportunity to testify today. I request that the Committee deem that LD 51 ought to 
pass. My reasons are many, but out of respect for your time, I will give you two brief 
accounts of why this bill needs to pass. 
According to the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, many required vaccines contain
fetal cell tissues. This goes against my sincerely held religious beliefs, and having to 
justify my religious beliefs to members of our local government, in order to access 
publicly funded institutions, is a violation of my first amendment rights. The first 
reference for my belief can be found in Exodus 20:13 in the 10 commandments. 
Whether you believe the life inside the womb is worth protecting is irrelevant to the 
fact that it is a human life, and terminating that life is murder. My second reference 
for my belief is found in Exodus 21:22-25; which requires any person who harms or 
kills a fetus in the womb to receive the same infliction that they imposed upon the 
unborn. I have no interest in being chemically burned, or ripped limb from limb by 
my just and holy God, because I was complicit in the injuring and/or killing of unborn
human life by way of vaccines. 
My second reason addresses the false promise made, that medical exemptions would 
still be available. I have dear friends whose children are vaccine injured, with reports 
filed with VAERS. They were promised by this committee that medical exemptions 
would still stand, only later to be informed that the language of medical exemptions 
was changed after the bill was passed. They were also informed by their doctors, that 
they had been issued a cap on how many medical exemptions were allowed to be 
given out, causing undue stress and heartbreak as many felt forced to remove their 
children from their local public schools.  
The Education and Cultural Affairs Committee needs to vote yes on LD 51 to restore 
trust between the citizens of Maine and their elected officials, and to show respect for 
the Constitution of The United States which gives us our religious freedoms. Thank 
you for your time 🙂
