 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony in OPPOSITION of LD 51, “An Act to Restore Religious and 
Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements”  
 
Good day, Senator Rafferty  and Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Anne Coates, MD . I am a resi dent of  Cape Elizabeth, a 
hospital -based pediatrician in Portland, a mother of four, and a member of the Board of Directors for the Maine 
Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics .   
 From infants born at 5 months of age, to children with cystic fibrosis, a life threatening disease that  causes thick, 
sticky mucus to build up in the lungs, digestive tract and other areas in the body, to toddlers and adolescents with 
muscular dystrophy, a severe neuromuscular disorder that may require the connection of a machine through a 
tube in their throat to breathe, my patients are amongst the most vulnerable in the state. My 16 years of medical 
training has occurred in states that have nearly the lowest vaccination rates in the country.  
 I have witnessed the devastating effects that may have on children. I was a pediatric resident in 2009 during the 
HINI or swine flu epidemic. I took care of a previously healthy, 4 -year-old unvaccinated girl who presented to the 
hospital in respiratory failure. I  watched in horror as despite all our efforts which included placing her on a 
machine to help her breathe and transferring her to another hospital where she was placed on a different 
machine to help her heart  and lungs work, she died, 1 week later. One of the patients I took care of in fellowship 
tested positive to pertussis at 2 weeks of age (she herself was too young to receive the pertussis vaccine and her 
family  was not properly vaccinated). She was admitt ed to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit after she had stopped 
breathing at home. She required a tube to be placed in her throat that was connected to a machine to help her 
breathe. Ultimately, even that intervention was not enough,  and she died.  
 
On a  personal level, my aunt contracted the measles virus in 1957 before the first vaccine had been developed. 
She had been a previously healthy 2 -year-old when she was diagnosed with meningitis  caused by the measles. 
She ultimately died 10 years later secondary to neurological complications from  the recurrence of the virus. 
Measles, influenza and pertussis have a spectrum of symptom severity from  mild cough, fever and runny nose to 
devastating neurological effects such as meningitis, blindness and deafness.  
 The bottom  line is that measles, influenza,  and pertussis are vaccine preventable illnesses. All 3 of these deaths 
may have been prevented if the children and the close family and friends around them  had been vaccinated. With 
that said, vaccines may prevent deaths however they are not 100% effective, and their protection may lessen 
over time which is why certain vaccines require boosters or repeated vaccinations such as pertussis. Although 
there is variance for levels of immunization required to generate community immunity specific to each disease 
and vaccine, it is generally understood that  population immunization rates of at least 90% are required. Highly 
contagious diseases, such as  pertussis and measles, require a population immunization rate of 295% to achieve 
comm unity  immunity. In 2017-  2018, Maine had the 7th highest non- medical vaccine exemption rate in the 
country,  at 5.0%. Some Maine schools had vaccine exemption rates as high as 9%. I cannot stress enough that 
our community immunity rates are not high enough to protect the right for children like some of my  patients whom 
I’ve previously mentioned, who cannot be immunized to attend a safe school. These children deserve the right to 
a safe education.  
 
Smoking is not allowed in public. That is the law as we know t hat it is dangerous to be exposed to secondhand 
smoke. If people wish to smoke in their homes,  that is their choice. The same should be true regarding vaccines. 
If you choose not to vaccinate yourself,  stay out of the public and schools and don’t  risk exposing others to 
harmful diseases.  
 
On behalf of all children, our community and the legacy of prioritizing health and education in our state,  please 
support LD 51.  
  
