Anne Sarbanis
Phippsburg
LD 51
My name is Annie Sarbanis and I am testifying in support of LD 51.  
 
I am a mother with the lived experience of a child with a lifelong vaccine injury.  
Because of this injury, my child is medically exempt under the Maine Vaccine 
Exemption Law, LD 798, however, in September 2022, on this child’s 9th birthday, I 
received a letter from my school district that the medical exemption that we had on 
file for my child, written in March of 2021 was not going to be accepted. We had two 
weeks to get our child caught up on their vaccines or they would be excluded from 
school until they were.  I will repeat, our legally obtained medical exemption that was
written by a licensed, practicing medical provider that was licensed to practice in the 
State of Maine at the time that the exemption was written and met the licensing 
requirements under the law, was being arbitrarily rejected due to a recent “rule 
change” that put my child’s medical exemption into the gray area.  Technically legal 
but without the funds or resources to arbitrate with our school district, we were forced
to seek another medical exemption or have our child and his 4 siblings who are also 
medically exempt due to our family’s medical history removed from school.    
My children are the children that LD798 was supposed to protect, medically 
compromised children who can not receive vaccines safely and who are otherwise 
medically exempt.  However, instead, like many of us warned you, this terrible law 
and subsequent rule changes have harmed my children.  During the legislative session
in 2019 for LD 798, we were promised that medical exemptions would become more 
accessible, that no rule pertaining to the law would create any barriers to families and 
children in need of obtaining a medical exemption.  Lies.  We were told that medical 
exemptions would be readily accepted to allow children who are medically exempt to 
continue to attend school without interruptions.  More Lies. We warned you that 
children like mine would be harmed by the removal of the philosophical and religious
exemptions, exemptions that families like mine had relied on to protect our children 
from further harm and lifelong vaccine injuries for years due to the changing medical 
climate of our state.  
However, children were not the only one’s harmed by this law:
Inlaw- fired for declining for the Covid-19 vaccine after 42 years as a practicing 
cardio pulmonary bedside nurse
Inlaw- fired after 16 years as a Licensed Clinical Social Worker while pregnant for 
declining the covid vaccine due to lack of adequate data to support the safety
Friend- diagnosed with guillain-barre syndrome after receiving the flu vaccine in 
2016, fired after 15 years  as an ER nurse in Sept of 2021 for refusing the flu vaccine
But being fired is not the worst that has happened:
Family member-diagnosed with Myocarditis after their first dose of pfizer's covid 19 
vaccine, threatened to lose their job if they did not receive their second dose, died of a
massive heart attack 3 weeks after their second dose.
Please vote to right this wrong, restore religious and philosophical exemptions for 
vaccinations in the State of Maine.  

