 
TO:   Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan  and Members of the  
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs   
FROM:  Becky Smith, Director of Government and Community Relations  
RE: Statement on  Vaccines  
DATE:  April 3, 202 3  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs , please accept this statement as you consider the myriad of vaccine bills before you 
today.  
The Maine Community College System believes in the safety and efficacy of vaccines and requires 
students attending classes on campus to provide proof of immunizations currently required by state law. 
We believe  allowing medical exemptions  and prohibiting r eligious and philosophical exemptions  from 
state mandated vaccines continues to be  a solid public health strategy.   
We also feel very strongly that our Board of Trustee s’ ability and responsibility to protect the health of 
our students , faculty, adjunct faculty,  and staff needs to allow us to consider all public health measures , 
including vaccines approved under an Emergency Use Authorization.  We rely on advice from public 
health officials, medical advisors,  and our internal c ampus exper ts about how to maintain the health and 
welfare of our communities.  
Having said that, many of our students have low incomes and are struggling to make ends meet. The 
added cost of immunizations and required boosters, while a seemingly insignificant amount to some, may 
be an unaffordable expense and yet another barrier to education for some of our students. These concerns 
could be mitigated by free or at least very reduced -price vaccines available at convenient locations and 
times  and we are always willing to partner with the Maine Immunization Program to host clinics on our 
campuses . 
As you know, we closed our campuses in March of 2020 in response to the COVID pandemic.  As we 
worked to reopen our doors the next fall  and to expand our on -campus offerings through that academic 
year and the next , the ability to require vaccines was integral to our abili ty to teach in -person courses .  We 
removed this requirement when our medical advisors informed us that the requirement was no longer the 
recommended approach to combat COVID on our campuses .  However, if public health and medical 
advisors advise us to reinstate that requirement, or recommend a  vaccine for a different reason , the Board 
of Trustees needs to be able to set the appropriate policy without political constraints.  
We respectfully recommend that you vote Ought Not to Pass on any bill that will constrain the Maine 
Community College System’s ability to manage the health of our campuses.  

