Brady Mercier
Gorham
LD 51
Dear Committee Leaders and Representatives,  
My name is Brady Mercier, and I am a high school student at Gorham High School. I 
am in favor of LD51, a bill aimed to regain philosophical and religious exemptions 
for state residents.  
I have had 23 surgeries in my 17 years of life, including 4 open heart surgeries. 
Doctors across Maine have refused to let me gain a medical exemption.  
Per the Maine CDC stats they presented at the testimonies, claim that there were 
around 1% of medical exemptions in Maine, so it is not hard to get. That is a small 
number. And needs to be easier to get, especially for us who have heart conditions, 
but the doctors ARE refusing to sign a medical exemption at risk of losing their 
license from the board.  
Below, I am going to list my-own research which is the ingredients in each 
COVID-19 vaccine, which you can find on the CDC.gov webpage:
- 
In the Pfizer Covid-19 Vaccine, there is Sodium Phosphate Dibasic which can cause 
kidney problems if injected too much, such as with boosters. 
4 hydroxybutyl is harmful if absorbed in the skin, inhaled, or swallowed (injected).  
Sucrose is in our daily diets, but those who may have unhealthy habits and get the 
COVID-19 shot, are more at risk of liver damage.  
 
In the Moderna Covid-19 Vaccine, there is Tromethamine which can cause tissue 
damage.  
Sodium Acetate Trihydrate can cause toxic and oxidative damage to the liver.  
And the Moderna Vaccine also contains Sucrose.  
 
The Johnson & Johnson Vaccine, the vaccine contains Sodium Citrate which can 
cause the body to retain fluid.  
Ethanol can cause hemolysis.  
HBCD is commonly found in insulation boards (construction materials).  
Polysorbate 80 can cause cancer, skin allergies, developmental toxicity, and 
reproductive toxicity.  
 
 The terms for how the materials or substances affect the human body can be found on
a basic surface search.  
- 
I also want to share some facts after talking to a few Maine Emergency Medicine 
physicians:  
“We have seen countless strokes and heart attacks come through these doors 
concerning these new boosters.”  
This was said by an Emergency Room Physician in a Maine hospital. The doctor 
refused to share their identity and come out to report because of the risk of losing 
their medical license.  
This is a story next from someone's dad who is fit, and now, has issues due to the 
COVID-19 vaccine.  
“My father is the fittest guy you would know. Gradually, he could not breathe. He is 
not a doctor person, so when he called the doctor, the doctor knew something was 
wrong. When he went to the doctor, his lungs were clear, and the doctor said, ‘It’s 
your heart.’ My father was transported by ambulance to a Maine hospital and then 
seen that he was in atrial fibrillation from a clot that was blocking 90% of his heart. 
They cannot do a catheterization; they have him on a med to reduce the clot and have 
him walk. He's discharged too! I fear he will die every day. The doctors said that if he
had not gotten his booster shot, this would not have happened.”  
-  
Why are the doctors not allowed to act upon their oath, and when they do, they are 
suspended, or other countless actions by the board? 
The physicians taking care of every one of you and us took an oath called the 
“Hippocratic Oath.” They took the oath and pledged to one of four rules, one of them 
being called “autonomy.” They must guarantee autonomy to patient bodies.  
There are physicians in charge of the CDC... they are not letting patients have 
autonomy over their bodies. Even though we allow abortions here in Maine, WE 
cannot allow exemptions. (My body my choice?) 
It reminds me of the age of totalitarianism. 
As citizens of the United States, and as well in a state, we should be ALLOWED to 
experience exemptions because AMENDMENT 1 in the BILL OF RIGHTS is 
“freedom of speech, press, religion, assembly, and to gather.”  
 
We are trying to keep America and the state a democracy, but it is turning into 
communism, and people are starting to believe the wrong facts. I have researched this 
for 2 years, and trust me... I know the trusted sources compared to the false ones. 
 
Since the COVID-19 mandates, there have been astonishing amounts of job openings 
in the healthcare field because of the COVID-19 vaccine mandate. Who would want 
to take a vaccine, manufactured in just under 2 years, with barely any studies put 
behind it and FDA puts out an “emergency use order.”  
That sounds suspicious to the regular person, but some people do not think so.  
 
 
Here is a little background for why I am fighting SO hard for the philosophical and 
religious exemptions:  
 
I am currently a high school student at Gorham High School. I am dual enrolled in an 
online course at SMCC for Medical Terminology and as well Medical Law and 
Ethics. 
I am almost finished with my junior year and trying to think of what to do for the rest 
of my life. Since birth, I have been surrounded by medical teams, doctors, ICUs, 
vaccines, shots, and anything you can think of.  
I was born 2 months premature in 2006 and diagnosed with a genetic condition called 
Loey’s Dietz Syndrome, which is most associated with aneurysms in the aortic route 
of the heart. Since my birth, I have had 23 surgeries, including 4 open hearts, and 
plenty of procedures and imaging.  
In 2020, I tried to file for a medical exemption with my geneticist in Boston, but she 
said that I had to have my PCP do the exemption. After dialing the PCP and seeing if 
he would do the exemption, he said he would write a letter saying that we understood 
all ways of the vaccine but were not comfortable with me taking it due to the reported 
cases of myocarditis, heart attacks, strokes, and other cases in adolescent males.  
We got that letter sorted out, and earlier this year, I had this amazing opportunity to 
be a Nursing Unit Secretary at Maine Medical Center on an inpatient floor. Passed the
interview, received the job offer, and was hired. Until the health screening came 
around and said that the “philosophical’ letter was not enough and that my PCP would
have to write an actual medical exemption form.  
I sent the form to my PCP, and you can just guess how it went from there.  
I was crushed, people told me I was going to get the job even with the exemption I 
had, but I did not. And I wanted and needed that job to get into the healthcare field I 
want to get into.  
 
During my senior year, I am planning to apply to Southern Maine Community 
College, Saint Joseph’s College, and the University of Southern Maine for a major in 
Nursing. I want to be a nurse and share empathy with all the patients 
before/after/during a procedure or surgery. I want to help the patient be comfortable. 
Unlike some other nurses, I am not in it for the money, or the “easy” days, I want to 
be a nurse to repay what I experienced to those who are sick in the hospital and give 
them empathy, compassion, and love they deserve in the hospital.  
 
If this does not pass, I am unsure what I am going to do without healthcare, I was 
born to go into healthcare. It is my calling... do not mess it up for me or other people, 
and do not listen to the Maine CDC who could barely answer questions in their 
testimony. That honestly says something. 
 
So, in my closing note, I would please ask all of you to please say YES on LD51, to 
help patients in the future, help hospitals get their nurses and staff back, and... help 
me and others accomplish our dreams.  
