Bridget Burkhardt
LISBON FALLS
LD 51
I would like to express my STRONG support for this bill for the following reasons:
Bodily autonomy - While I do not support abortion in any way and would not 
personally have one, I believe that a woman should have control over medical 
decisions that affect her body. Similarly, every human being should have the right to 
decide if and which vaccinations they will inject into their body. Anything else is a 
double standard.
Corruption - Mandating vaccines opens the door for big pharma and other bad actors 
to buy out politicians in order to get new (and possibly unnecessary) vaccines added 
to the schedule. The COVID-19 vaccine is a perfect example of this. How does a 
mostly untested vaccine that seems to be causing serious heart issues in young people 
suddenly get added to the federal CDC‘s school vaccination schedule before further 
testing? 
Medical Necessity - Some members of my family have the MTHFR gene mutation. 
This mutation makes it difficult to detoxify many of the metals and toxins that are still
present in modern vaccines. My sister and her husband left the state and moved to 
South Carolina solely due to it being so difficult to get a medical exemption for her 5 
and 7 year-old children who likely also have the mutation. My other sister has decided
to homeschool her 7 year-old, and luckily they can swing it financially, but most 
people in Maine cannot afford to have a parent at home. Doctors are scared they will 
lose their licenses and are not giving medical exemptions. Do we want to lose our 
workforce and youth to other states?
What is the answer to the threat of reduced herd immunity? States should put some 
effort into better educating their populations on the efficacy and safety of vaccines 
without mandates. If done with honesty and transparency, most people will willingly 
choose to vaccinate. Integrity is a Maine value. Let’s do right by ALL Maine people 
and reintroduce religious and philosophical exemptions for vaccines in this state.
Thank you.
