Carolyne Falank
Farmingdale
LD 51
Dear members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, all State legislators 
and citizens of Maine,
My name is Dr. Carolyne Falank, PhD. I am a proud home educating parent, UMaine 
graduate and clinical scientist working in healthcare. I am in support of LD 51, LD 
869, LD 1098, LD 1148, LD 1209, and LD 1223. I have two subject areas that I 
would like to touch upon. The first one is that I watched as the State of Maine 
violated the First Amendment and forced frontline healthcare workers to choose 
between their careers and their religious or philosophical beliefs. Remote healthcare 
workers were fired because they were a threat to patients and fellow coworkers 
despite their job location (at home). And let’s not forget that we all watched as St. 
Mary’s allowed COVID positive employees to continue caring for patients, despite 
the lack of evidence-based studies showing that the vaccines stopped transmission of 
the SARS-CoV2 virus. We all witnessed Central Maine Healthcare close their NICU 
over staffing resignations due to the vaccine mandates which put an even harder strain
on their declining employee retention rate. News headlines of numerous long term 
care facilities (up to 85% of them), nursing homes and group homes facing staffing 
crisis closing left and right. Was this truly necessary? Was this to keep patients and 
members of our communities “safe”? Because according to the Maine CDC they 
reported between 2/6/23 and 2/13/23 on their COVID19 breakthrough data that 35 out
of the 40 COVID19 related deaths were in fully vaccinated individuals, which came 
at the same time of 54 consecutive data updates where the fully vaccinated made up 
the majority of hospitalizations (dating back to 3/4/2022). I think it is finally time to 
follow the science and build policy and laws upon evidence-based data. 
In addition, where has the state’s constitutional responsibility to protect religious 
exercise, private or public been? Why is the State of Maine allowing LD798 to 
continue as state law even though it is preempted by federal law….and where is the 
equity for people that uphold personal religious beliefs? The separation of church and 
state is all about equity- it is to ensure that all people, regardless if they practice a 
specific religion or not, be treated the same. 
This brings me to my second subject: Equity. In addition to healthcare workers…. 
What about our children? The Maine DOE defines equity as “providing each student a
legitimate opportunity to learn, grow, and thrive in school and beyond”. But what 
about those children who aren’t allowed to attend school because the State 
discriminates against them due to their religious or philosophical beliefs? What are 
we teaching our children, our future leaders, about inclusion and equity? What we are 
currently teaching them is that certain Maine children, based on their religious beliefs,
aren’t allowed to attend school. That they are different and that they are punished for 
upholding religious convictions and are not entitled to the same public education 
because of it. Please consider being in favor of LD51, allow all of Maine’s children 
equal opportunities to learn. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, 
Carolyne Falank, MS, PhD

