Charlene Crane
Ellsworth
LD 51
Charlene Crane
10 Maddocks Ave.
Ellsworth, ME 04605
April 2, 2023
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee,
My name is Charlene Crane and I’ve been a licensed massage therapist in Maine 
since 1992. In my massage therapy practice I see a wide variety of ages, sizes and 
types of people coming from all backgrounds and all walks of life. Because I 
specialize in applying orthopedic type massage therapy, and craniosacral therapy, 
neuromuscular and myofascial trigger point release techniques, I see quite a few 
people who have been dealing with chronic debilitating pain and who have witnessed 
and been victim to trauma and multiple cumulative traumas. These range from sports 
injuries, job related accidents, and car wrecks to injuries sustained on the battlefield, 
domestic violence and homelessness. I am very familiar with the difference between 
effortless vibrant health and being in the arduous process of rehabilitating from 
serious injury. 
Ever since the Covid mRNA gene therapy injections program got underway I have 
witnessed an alarming downward spiraling of health in many clients, especially 
obvious and devastating in already fragile, injured and immune compromised clients. 
Ever since the rollout of the mandatory for work and school attendance Covid 
frankenshots were introduced I’ve seen more bizarre symptoms and debilitating 
neurological events suddenly appear in clients than I have ever before seen in my 
thirty years of doing massage therapy in Maine. I have witnessed a correlative array 
of adverse events including muscle twitching, spasms, twitching and shaking, 
increased joint and muscle pain in clients, weakness and incapacitating fatigue, 
lethargy, numbness and paresthesia, headaches and vision problems, tinnitus and 
vertigo, gastrointestinal reflux, and blood pressure abnormalities.
For fear of losing their licenses or being sanctioned by the state medical boards 
doctors are not speaking up about the multitudes of injuries and adverse reactions 
they’re seeing.* This sad fact, along with blatant censorship from the big tech 
companies** and legacy media, is keeping a lot of people in the dark about the true 
nature of the untested understudied cocktails that they are putting into their bodies and
how horrific the outcomes are to the blind use of the pandemic’s chief 
countermeasure. 
But this isn’t about my clients and their symptoms. This is about preventing more 
unnecessary disease and dysfunction in the youth who are coming up today.
It’s also about nurturing an optimistic hope that these same up and coming young 
people may enjoy some similar level of medical autonomy and sovereignty to what I 
and my peers had while we were growing up. Unnecessary vaccination will put 
children at elevated risk of vaccine harm, especially as it appears that most are already
naturally immune and will obtain no advantageous benefit. 
There is no such thing as a one-size-fits-all medicine. We are all completely unique in
our needs and requirements when it comes to the substances, nutrients and 
supplements we take into our bodies. A drug that one person may experience zero 
side effects from another will have a veritable endless stream of egregious and life 
altering side effects from. Where there is risk there must be choice. Where there are 
experimental products involved (such as the drugs or vaccines that have not 
undergone adequate safety studies and for which the manufacturers carry no liability 
if someone is harmed from taking them) there must be, according to United States 
law, informed consent; meaning a full disclosure of all the risks and benefits of a 
product and an absence of coercion, as well as approval by an institutional review 
board.  I am in support of LD51 “An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical 
Exemptions to Immunization Requirements” and I urge you to give it an “ought to 
pass” vote.
Sincerely, 
Charlene Crane, LMT, Breathe Easy Massageworks, Ellsworth, Maine. U.S.A.
*Dr. Paul Marik on Why Doctors Aren’t Speaking Out
https://stevekirsch.substack.com/p/my-paul-marik-interview-on-why-doctors
**https://childrenshealthdefense.org/defender/lawsuit-rfk-jr-chd-biden-free-speech/

