Cherelle Weymouth
Topsham
LD 51
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the 
Committee of Education and Cultural Affairs,
I am a life long resident of Maine, mother to two children and former speech language
pathologist before quitting my job to homeschool as the result of LD 798;  A 
profession that as of today, has 70 school openings in need of a Speech Therapist 
across Maine. For those unfamiliar with the state of therapeutic services in Maine, 
there is a dire need of speech pathologists to meet the ever growing needs of our 
children and a shrinking pool of speech pathologists to fill those roles. Today, I am 
providing written testimony in support of LD 51, LD 869, LD 1098, LD 1148, LD 
1209, and LD 1228. 
When I turn on the tv, scroll social media or read the newspaper, I am continually told
to be inclusive; To accept and honor other’s wishes. We are told that the freedom to 
assert one’s truth and be accepted and uplifted for that, is the goal of our society. Over
and over we are told to choose kindness, to live our truth and to never, ever exclude a 
person based on a specific parameter. Schools and families are rallying behind the 
banners of inclusivity and equity except when it comes to one parameter. One small 
part of what a child is, their vaccination status. We will unite behind a child to ensure 
they have equal rights except if they are missing a single booster shot. We will tell 
children that everyone matters, that no one should be excluded, except if their 
family’s religion inhibits them from partaking in particular vaccinations due to their 
ingredients or development process (aborted fetal cells). 
Can you imagine for a moment, living in a society where inclusivity is the word of 
day and yet your children are excluded based on one, single parameter; In a world 
where children like mine long for the opportunities their neighbors have but are told 
they are unclean, a danger and will put others at risk. 
The hypocrisy of this law is glaring when one looks at it beyond the surface. Children 
are denied an education based on vaccination status yet teachers have no vaccination 
requirements. Our children are allowed to attend sports games, sitting in the bleachers
cheering on their friends but are too much of a danger to sit in a classroom. Our 
children may not be up to date on vaccines against diseases that are rarely seen 
anymore, but the majority of students are still unvaccinated against a very present 
virus that shut down the entire world in the past few years. The state of Maine 
allowed exemptions prior to 2019, and not once in our history, has an unvaccinated 
child actually given another vaccinated child a communicable disease.
LD 798 discriminated against a minority group of children. Regardless of how LD 
798 was packaged, it is a discriminatory law which shows how disingenuous the rally 
cry of inclusivity is. However, you now have the opportunity to truly be inclusive. To 
practice what you preach. To right a wrong that I am sure you will hear the impacts of
in others testimony.  I am asking you today to vote ought to pass on LD 51, LD 869, 
LD 1098, LD 1148, LD 1209, and LD 1228 and show our children that they too 
matter, are worthy and included. Thank you for your time. 
Sincerely, 
Cherelle Weymouth
Topsham, Maine
