Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs LD 51 - An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements   Christ Mpika M. Yarmouth, ME 04096     Thank you, dear Committee members, for taking the time to read this testimony in support of LD 51 - An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements.  My name is Christ Mpika M., and I am a licensed high school mathematics teacher with a deep commitment to supporting students in reaching their full potential.  Unfortunately, in the middle of the '21/ '22 school year, I was placed on unpaid leave which ultimately led to my resignation from Portland High School. The reason? Their Covid-19 policy - which required vaccination or weekly testing. I refused both and submitted a religious exemption that was denied due to current law.  The lack of truthful answers, research studies, or reasonable justifications for many questions related to the Covid-19 vaccine option made it impossible for me to take. For instance, questions concerning the origin of the Covid-19 virus, the drastic measures taken in schools, mRNA products’ ingredients for vaccines, damage liability exemptions for mRNA vaccine manufacturers, exemptions for Congress, the incentives for taking the shots, and increased incentives for additional shots and boosters lacked reasonable answers.    In conclusion, as a Christian, my beliefs forbid me from taking any vital action that goes against my conscience or lacks truth, including doing something out of fear or using any medical substance that deals with or could modify my healthy blood. Therefore, I could not take the Covid-19 vaccine or believe anything that lacks truth and has an ulterior motive.   I believe that this strict Covid-19 vaccine policy in public schools and what it advocated for could be described as inhumane, unlawful, and criminal.  Thank you, for helping restore lost human values! God bless. In Jesus Christ’s name. 
Christ Mpika M.
Yarmouth
LD 51
Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs
LD 51 - An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization 
Requirements
Christ Mpika M.
Yarmouth, ME 04096 
 
Thank you, dear Committee members, for taking the time to read this testimony in 
support of LD 51 - An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to 
Immunization Requirements.
 My name is Christ Mpika M., and I am a licensed high school mathematics teacher 
with a deep commitment to supporting students in reaching their full potential.
Unfortunately, in the middle of the '21/ '22 school year, I was placed on unpaid leave 
which ultimately led to my resignation from Portland High School. The reason? Their
Covid-19 policy - which required vaccination or weekly testing. I refused both and 
submitted a religious exemption that was denied due to current law.
The lack of truthful answers, research studies, or reasonable justifications for many 
questions related to the Covid-19 vaccine option made it impossible for me to take. 
For instance, questions concerning the origin of the Covid-19 virus, the drastic 
measures taken in schools, mRNA products’ ingredients for vaccines, damage 
liability exemptions for mRNA vaccine manufacturers, exemptions for Congress, the 
incentives for taking the shots, and increased incentives for additional shots and 
boosters lacked reasonable answers.  
In conclusion, as a Christian, my beliefs forbid me from taking any vital action that 
goes against my conscience or lacks truth, including doing something out of fear or 
using any medical substance that deals with or could modify my healthy blood. 
Therefore, I could not take the Covid-19 vaccine or believe anything that lacks truth 
and has an ulterior motive. 
I believe that this strict Covid-19 vaccine policy in public schools and what it 
advocated for could be described as inhumane, unlawful, and criminal. 
Thank you, for helping restore lost human values! God bless. In Jesus Christ’s name.

