Claire McCallion
Lisbon
LD 51
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of 
the Committee for Education and Cultural Affairs.
My name is Claire McCallion. I am a lifelong Mainer, a current homeowner in 
Lisbon, a mother, former public school educator, and current home school parent. I 
am writing to testify in support of LD 51, LD 869, LD 1098, LD 1148, LD 1209, and 
LD 1228.
I would like to begin by sharing with you two great loves in my life: My family, and 
my home state. The two are so deeply intertwined that I cannot imagine raising my 
children anywhere else. Nor would I want my children to have to leave the state 
should they want to pursue higher education here one day. Sadly, this is exactly the 
situation that we find ourselves in since the passing of LD 798.
I would like to share with you a little bit about our family and our story, to help you 
see the impact that LD 798 has had and will continue to have on our lives, should the 
above listed bills not pass.
I am a Mainer born and raised and love the beauty and uniqueness of our great state. 
My husband came to Maine for college and fell so deeply in love with the state that he
never considered moving back to his home state after graduation.
When we married and had children, we knew that we wanted to raise them here 
among family, surrounded by the ocean, forests, and mountains.
When our oldest two childern were school aged we enrolled them in a public charter 
school and were excited for the education that they would receive. After having taken 
a few years off from my teaching career to stay home with our children when they 
were young, I took a job teaching at my local high school technical program. I worked
running the preschool program in the Education Department, overseeing young 
people who wanted to become educators themselves one day. It was a job I found 
deeply rewarding, and one I hoped to grow in for many years. We were happy in our 
careers, our children's schooling, and the outlook for all of our futures.
Then LD 798 passed and suddenly, our family was being discriminated against for 
our religious beliefs. We were told that are children could no longer participate in the 
public school program that they were in, unless we were willing to violate our beliefs.
We were told that we had no alternatives, or recourse. We were coldly and cruelly 
kicked out of our school community.
I had no choice but to quit the job I loved, that I was passionate about and successful 
in (training future teachers) because the system that I worked for would no longer 
accept my children because their beliefs weren't convenient. 
We were coerced into an educational decision that we would not have otherwise 
made.
Thankfully, home education has turned out to be one of the best things that could 
have happened for our children and our family, and we are so grateful that the 
adventure is ours to take. However, we are still impacted by LD 798 on a regular 
basis. My bright and brilliant children cannot choose to participate in any programs 
offered by the public school system, including sports. They cannot attend day care 
should I need to take a job that would require me to work outside the home during the
hours that my husband is at work. They will not be able to attend any of the amazing 
programs offered by the technical schools during their high school years, they will not
be able to attend Maine's University System (of which I am a graduate). They will be 
forced to move out of state for college, or if they would like to pursue a career in the 
medical field.
All of these wonderful opportunities are no longer available to my children because of
the discriminatory nature of LD 798. 
At a time in history when diversity and inclusion are in the spotlight, and our state 
prides itself in moving forward, a whole population of people are being viciously and 
harmfully discriminated against because of their desire for medical freedom of choice.
In closing, I beg you to consider the impact of this discrimination on my children, and
the thousands of other Maine children and families affected by LD 798, and vote to 
support the passing of these important bills. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
