Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the committee, I am 
asking you today to vote " ought to pass " on LD 51.  
 
Due to the detrimental effects that  LD 798 has had on my family, I sincerely hope  that your 
committee will restore the rights of our students and healthcare workers to utilize the religious 
and philosophical exemptions that were in place prior to 2019.  The many consequences of LD 
798 have left a profound mental impact on me, as it has  been one of the greatest stressors and 
obstacles that I have had to navigate as both a parent, a patient.  My family still has a lot to lose 
without the assurances that our religious obligations to our bodies will be once again 
safeguarded and we might be  able to move forward without the constant threat to our ability to 
pursue goals, enjoy educational experiences, and make decisions that are based in context 
rather than forced by an inability to comply.  
If LD 51 doesn’t pass, my son may be unable to rema in a student at the University of Maine in 
Orono. Not only would this devastate him academically and hinder future opportunities, but his 
exceptionally promising career as a top division 1 track and field athlete would be shattered. It’s 
a bit nightmarish to think of him having to choose between his faith and fulfilling a dream that he 
has already worked so hard for the great achievements he has earned thus far. It would be 
equally devastating to see him lose the opportunity to finish pursuing the high -standard goals he 
is so committed to.  
Since 2019, I had to take my elementary age child out of public school, and homeschool her, 
despite having a chronic illness which has burdened us financially and exhausted myself 
physically these last several years. Alth ough homeschooling has turned out to be a lovely 
blessing, we are still impacted by the limitations set in 2019. If LD 51 does not pass, she will 
continue to be deprived of the opportunity to participate in the classes from her old school that 
she had prev iously enjoyed such as art and gym. She has missed out on many opportunities, as 
LD 798 had far -reaching consequences that infiltrated both public education and homeschooling 
communities alike.   
The last point I would like to make is in regard to how LD 5 1 needs to pass in order for patients 
such as myself to receive proper and effective medical care. Since 2019, I have not been able 
to secure a doctor who is allowed to be sympathetic to my environmental illness. With an 
immune system that could never tole rate vaccination, I have been forced to seek medical care 
in a system that no longer employees professionals who understand my illness deeply enough 
to empathize or set adequate treatment goals. The shortage has made doctors hard to come by, 
and the ones w ho are left are simply not allowed to advise a patient like me on how to overcome 
an illness that has made my system unable to process even the slightest of environmental 
toxins, let alone a vaccine.  
I urge you to hear the pleas of families and medical pr ofessionals today. I ask that you hear the 
vast reaching consequences of LD 798 that has plagued many of us since 2019. Passing LD 51 
will finally offer relief to the mental anguish sustained while my family has been forced to protect 
our religious faith w ith great consequences to our medical well -being and parenting options. The 
education of my children and their ability to pursue the future they deserve weighs heavily on 
our religious rights and our freedom to chouse what we put in our bodies.  
Thank you so much for your consideration and attention to this matter.  
 
