LD 51 "An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to 
Immunization Requirements" 
 
Good morning, Senator Raffety, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee of 
Educational and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my 
testimony in full support of LD 51 “An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to 
Immunization Requirements.” 
As a Veteran with over two decades of service, I am appalled to come home and find more and 
more of our unalienable rights being slowly stripped away through smear campaigns, the use of children 
as propaganda tools and outright lies. Throughout my career, I have seen bureaucrats go above and 
beyond fighting for the industrial military complex, the corporate media, and now the pharmaceutical 
industry. Yet very few are courageous enough to stand up for the average American. 
We are a Constitutional Republic, not a democracy and therefore every American has a right to be 
heard and choose their own paths in life. One of these paths is religious freedom, the 1st Amendment 
clearly states: Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or PROHIBITING the 
free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people 
peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances. 
Americans are afforded religious liberty and choosing their own paths without government 
interference through the many sacrifices made by the men and women in uniform with the willingness 
to go into harm’s way to defend our American values and way of life. Honor those sacrifices and restore 
our American values through choice, and religious liberty by supporting LD 51 "An Act to Restore 
Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements.” 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.)  
 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 51
LD 51 "An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization 
Requirements"
Good morning, Senator Raffety, Representative Brennan, and members of the 
Committee of Educational and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of 
Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony in full support of LD 51 “An Act to 
Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements.”
As a Veteran with over two decades of service, I am appalled to come home and find 
more and more of our unalienable rights being slowly stripped away through smear 
campaigns, the use of children as propaganda tools and outright lies. Throughout my 
career, I have seen bureaucrats go above and beyond fighting for the industrial 
military complex, the corporate media, and now the pharmaceutical industry. Yet very
few are courageous enough to stand up for the average American.
We are a Constitutional Republic, not a democracy and therefore every American has 
a right to be heard and choose their own paths in life. One of these paths is religious 
freedom, the 1st Amendment clearly states: Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion, or PROHIBITING the free exercise thereof; or abridging 
the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to 
assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
Americans are afforded religious liberty and choosing their own paths without 
government interference through the many sacrifices made by the men and women in 
uniform with the willingness to go into harm’s way to defend our American values 
and way of life. Honor those sacrifices and restore our American values through 
choice, and religious liberty by supporting LD 51 "An Act to Restore Religious and 
Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements.”
Thank you for your time,
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.) 
