Danielle Maguire
Lincolnville
LD 51
Thank you to the committee for considering my testimony in support of passing 
LD51.  I am the mother of 2 boys, both were previously protected by both religious 
and philosophical exemptions.  They are now homeschooled.  Our oldest is eligible 
for a medical exemption as well, however we have not sought out this exemption for a
number of reasons.  We lost our faith in the medical system years ago and seek 
alterative care.  Allopathic medicine is not the only way, or the right way.  Our family
chooses Homeopathy as it heals and gets to the root cause of the problem instead 
treating symptoms as Allopathy does.  We trust in our bodies natural healing ability, 
we trust natural healing, we trust our Chiropractor that has helped to heal my oldest 
child.  Everything that goes into our minds and our bodies matters to our overall 
health.  In the UK, companies are required to label foods and drinks with red dye with
the following warning “may  have an adverse effect on activity and attention in 
children.”*  Our government does not require this warning, yet we’re supposed to 
trust the FDA?  If we had chosen to seek the medical exemption for our oldest son, 
then how could we possibly put our second child at risk.  Vaccines are created by 
corporations.  Corporations create products, products that are not always safe.  Last 
summer, Banana Boat sunscreen was recalled for containing Benzene, a known 
carcinogen.**  In 2021, Merck recalled Cubicin injections for having particulate 
matter within, which could be life threatening.***  These are just two examples in a 
sea of many.  We trust in God before we trust in Corporations.  This has caused our 
faith in Government and Education to fail as it did with the medical system.  
Corporations do not have an influence on how we raise our children and what we put 
into their bodies while we assume the whole risk and they only profit.  The 
government exists to protect my rights, especially my right to protect my children.  
Our children will not return to public schools whether their God given rights are 
reinstated or not.  The entire system has failed us and our children, but we’ll continue 
to fight to save our freedoms and rights.  
*https://www.gov.uk/guidance/chemicals-in-food-safety-controls
**https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/edgewell-pers
onal-care-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-banana-boat-hair-scalp-sunscreen-due
***https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/merck-issues
-voluntary-nationwide-recall-cubicinr-daptomycin-injection-500-mg-lot-934778-due

