Darcy  Forrest 
Falmouth 
LD 51
I am speaking to support the ought to pass on LD 51. I am currently in Florida with 
my two boys, who are approaching the age of five. I am in Florida looking at schools 
and relocation. 
I was born and raised here in Maine, attended Portland schools, and went on to get my
masters degree in Chinese Medicine, and for the past decade have served the greater 
Portland area helping people reclaim their health. I have stayed in Maine, opened a 
business in Maine, and raised my family in Maine, because I am a Mainer at heart, 
and love this great state.
I have been able to help and facilitate healing of chronic conditions that have been 
debilitating for patients, I have pulled fellow community members out of despair, and 
I have given all I have to the people of my community. 
But my kids can’t even attend school here. 
I decided with the birth of my first son, due to my philosophical beliefs, and medical 
conditions of my child, that vaccinating them on schedule with the CDC guidelines 
would be going against all that I know about my sons personal health concerns, as 
well as my beliefs about health. 
Imagine being a mom, imagine feeling like all you know to be true, could be 
compromised by a mandate- or a law- so that your children could attend school like 
every other child. 
Imagine the fear that comes with that.
Imagine the tension in the family unit, to have to give up your much loved career to 
raise and homeschool your extremely healthy children, because someone decided they
needed to be injected with countless vaccines. 
It’s immoral to assume this shouldn’t be my choice.  It is my choice. It should be no 
one else’s. I know these children better than any doctor, or politician, or law maker. I 
know what is right for them, and by implementing this law, preventing my children 
from attending school, you have pushed me out of Maine. You have lost a community
member, a small business owner, a bad ass mother, and two future children who 
would also bring a wealth of contributions to this great state. 
You’ve lost a generation of Mainers.
This is the same story you have probably heard countless times, people 
homeschooling, giving up their careers and their financial stability, people leaving 
Maine. 
Please listen. 
Please do the right thing- gives us our choice back, our freedom. 

