Darci Lane
Bangor
LD 51
I am writing to testify that I am in favor of the legislation to restore religious and 
philosophical exemptions to the vaccine requirements. As a registered nurse of 26 
years I firmly believe that all people should be given informed consent, making a 
voluntary and educated decision,  when having any medical procedures or medication.
The same right given to patients should be provided to healthcare workers when they 
take their turn being the patient. Receiving an ultimatum is not informed consent.  I 
was denied that right and lost my ability to teach at the University where I was 
teaching junior level nursing students  and was unable to continue working  as a 
clinical nursing supervisor  in a local hospital. This mandate has affected the number 
of professionals currently working in healthcare in Maine  as well as the ability to 
attract qualified providers to our State . Working in hospitals for the past 26 years I 
can assure you that most are understaffed . The care our loved ones is receiving  is 
less than adequate at times. 
My decision to decline the Covid vaccine was based on being an essential worker in 
early 2020  and catching Covid -19..When I asked the Medical Director why natural 
immunity wasn't being approved ,the response I received  was " we haven't looked at 
that and are only taking the Covid vaccine as proof".  We now know natural immunity
is superior and should have been accepted all along . My declination of the flu 
vaccine was based on the fact that I had had severe reactions to it the last 5 times / 
years that I had taken it. My exemptions after that were always approved until this 
restriction went into place. I was told the only exemption would be a "documented" 
anaphylactic reaction . 
In closing, I am a highly skilled nurse as well as patient advocate and believe that if I 
have the training and responsibility to save lives than I deserve the right to practice 
that  skillset with myself.
Thank you 
Darci Lane 
