David Putnam
Brooklin
LD 51
Dear Committee Members,
I am a 79 year old father of four children, a carpenter, organic gardener, and college 
educated student of philosophy and literature.  I will try to make my comments 
regarding LD 51 brief, because I know you have a lot of people to listen to.
Vaccination is but one, relatively new, technique for the suppression of contagious 
sickness.  Our recent experience with the COVID MRNA vaccination has made clear,
among other things, that vaccinated individuals are quite able to transmit to others the 
very sickness for which they have been vaccinated, all the more easily because 
symptoms are masked by the vaccination. I also believe that an active and outgoing 
childhood, nurtured by healthy food, and occasional time-honored herbal cures, 
jostled into well-being by community interaction and predictable victory over various 
“common colds” and flus produces the strongest long-term health for our children. 
In addition, I believe that the medical data, if honestly collected and considered leaves
much room for concern about the relation between various vaccines and vaccination 
administration technologies, and long term mental and physical well-being, in the 
largest sense.
These considerations amongst others, coupled with a rigorous and extensive belief in 
individual freedom, especially in the care and treatment of OUR OWN BODIES and 
THOSE OF OUR CHILDREN, demonstrate principles which have distinguished this 
country from its inception.  
The moral expression of the individual must remain sovereign over the autonomy of 
the majority.  This is what differentiates a republic from a democracy, and as Ben 
Franklin so famously remarked, “we have a republic, if we can keep it.”
I urge you to support this bill in its entry onto the floor of our statehouse for debate.
We must be granted not only religious, but also philosophical and medical rights of 
exemption from the tyranny of mass fear and imagined expediency.    
Sincerely,
David Putnam
Brooklin

