David Dickson
Winslow
LD 51
We’ve heard some good testimony today.  We’ve heard some facts and figures and 
some good anecdotes.  Now, I would like to provide the philosophical reasons why 
mandating a vaccine with or without an exemption is ethically and morally wrong.
There are some who say that good public policy should be based on what’s best for 
the most people, - “The greatest good for the greatest number.”  However, this is a 
very dangerous proposition.  In fact, it is the philosophy used by Hitler, Stalin, Mao 
and all of the other despots of the Twentieth Century to justify their atrocities.  It is 
the philosophy of Fascism, Communism, Socialism and all of the other collectivist 
forms of governance and ultimately leads to gulags and death camps.  This is not the 
American way.  Our Founding Fathers knew better.  They knew that it is the 
individual who is endowed with unalienable rights, not groups of people.  This is 
significant because an individual right cannot be voted away even by a supermajority.
So, you see, even if you get a supermajority to vote in favor of a vaccine mandate, it 
would not be just because the individual has the right to choose what medical 
intervention should be done to his body.
The second philosophical principle pertaining to this issue is the fact that, and this is 
important, you cannot delegate authority to a government that you do not have to 
begin with.  For example, I can delegate to the government the protection of my life 
and property from assassins and thieves because I have the right to self defense.  On 
the other hand, there is no right to be free from disease or infection.  These are 
naturally occurring events.  So, even those who have weakened immune systems, for 
whom I have the greatest sympathy, do not have the authority to require you to be 
vaccinated based on the possibility that you could someday get too close to them and 
potentially spread a virus that might make them sick.  They may, like everyone else, 
take whatever steps they deem prudent to protect themselves.  
No, justice demands that people be allowed to choose for themselves how to care for 
their health.  And when it comes to our schools, we would be much better off if the 
government did not have a monopoly on education.  Indeed, School Choice would go 
a long way to solving many of the conflicts, including this one, we have involving the
education of our children.  So, that is why I am saying today; My body, my choice, 
My child, School Choice.  

