 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Educati on and Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Deborah Hagler, MD, MPH and 
I am a pediatrician  and past president of the  Maine AAP  and resident of Bruns wick . I 
am testifying against LD 51 , "An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical 
Exemptions to Immunization Requirements. " 
 Have you ever seen a 4- or 5-year- old with croup ? They wake  up in the middle of the 
night , feverish bug eyed  and frightened , making  a horrible harsh sound as they try to 
gasp for air.  T hey are panicky,  and their parents are panicky .  Thanks to  widespread 
uptake of vaccines against Diphtheria and Hemophilus  Influenzae , there are tricks of 
the trade to help  families manage  so they can make  a trip into the  provider  office in 
the morning, instead  of racing to  the emergency room.  
 
This was not  always  the c ase - 100 years ago in the United States , before  we had the 
Diphtheria vaccine , about 1 in 5 people died from diphtheria infections , and this 
included the adult caregivers. Diphtheria essentially has vanished in the United States  
due to vaccination , but globally  this illness has not gone away and there are still 
outbreaks of this deadly illness.  
 
Hemophilus Influenzae type B can present as a deadly illness that looks like croup , 
and can also cause meningitis  - a deadly infection of the brain in infants and young 
children.  
 
I began my career as the Hib vaccine , first licensed in 1985 , was increasing uptake in  
the population . I saw far fewer patients with this deadly illness , but still cared for a 
few with infections of their brains , and one that had a presentation like croup and 
was exceptionally ill requir ing a breathing tube and a prolonged stay in the pediatric 
intensive care uni t.    
 
I have seen children die from chicken pox and meningococcal meningitis during my 
career and have seen  children endure severe complicati ons from measles.  
 
We have vaccines to prevent these deadly illnesses. They are safe and effective. They prevent outbreaks of mumps, measles and chickenpox and allow  children to remain 
in school .  Following the COVI D outbreak,  I believe we understand just how critical it 
is for kids to sta y in school  as we ’ve seen such a n esc alation of mental health issues in 
youth being kept from typical interaction with peers and the learning env ironment. 
For those not able to receive vaccines  for medical reasons , there are exemptions 
available from physicians and nurse practitioners.  
 Vaccines not  only protect children,  but they protect the wider community,  and ou r 
immunocompromised children a  have a right to be in school  and be protected.  
  Our state has decided by referendum , and all major religions have also con cluded  
that we have a duty not only to protect our children , but to protect the community 
and the most vulnerable amongst us.  
 
Please do not pass  LD 51 and the fleet of similar legislation reinstating religious and 
philosophical exemptions to vaccines.   
 
  
