donalee dolan
Nobleboro
LD 51
I am Donalee Dolan, M.S. CCC-SLP, a medical Speech-language Pathologist 
working in the midcoast region since 1995 (1999 salaried at Miles Memorial 
hospital-now part of Lincolnhealth of MaineHealth). I can't stress enough how 
passionate I am about my work. I love my patients and they always know that they are
receiving authentic care. Everyone from Housekeeping to Doctors, know that my 
work ethic is fierce & that my concern for the needs of my patients is my only 
concern. For 20 yrs I signed a declination form and agreed to wear a mask during Flu 
season, when with my patients. I struggled with the Covid-19 mandate (w/Flu shot 
lumped in-aren't we all masked all the time now? I'm using N95 to treat patients), but 
in 2021 I took those shots so that the people who need my special care would 
continue to have access. I then had the most unhealthy year of my life. So this yr. I 
went through the motion of filing for a religious/philosophical exemption, and of 
course was denied. The deadline was Dec. 1, 2022 for the flu shot & I was in the ER 
on Nov. 30th with continued respiratory issues (this time pleurisy & bilateral 
pneumonia), so I asked for a medical deferral & was given 4 days. MaineHealth 
moved the deadline to the 16th & I decided not to get it. I braced for firing, but 
continued to work, until 3/24/23 when I was told that I could see my patients that day 
& then hand in my badged. This comes at a time when my domestic partner (also 
Mainehealth employee) is out on Short term disability. I am scheduled for an updated 
chest CT 4/3 but have no insurance as of Friday. More than the personal impact, I am 
saddened that I no longer have access to my community members who I have helped 
greatly over the years. At the same time another SLP gave her notice to move out of 
state. The decision to fire me (& I can't get them to use that word rather than 
"separation of employment" which is very ambiguous), makes no clinical sense & is 
far from Patient centered.
