Elena Gino
Island Falls
LD 51
Dear Committee
First, on behalf on my family and millions others, I thank you for respectfully 
adhering to our first amendment rights guaranteed as citizens of the United States of 
America by her great Constitution and reinforced on a state level by the fourteenth 
amendment without prejudice. 
When 16 years ago we purchased the land and had built a beautiful home in the 
wonderful state of Maine we thought it will be a great place to raise a family, work 
and study. Unfortunately, all our dreams were crushed by tyrannical removal of 
religious and philosophical exemptions. The tragedy of this really hit hard in the past 
3 years when thousands of people lost their jobs, thousands of kids were locked out of
schools even online ones! Why tax-payer funded institutions such as schools don’t 
provide equal access to education to all tax-payers and their children without 
discrimination? Why access to basic civil services, right to work denied trough 
discrimination? 
 It seems like we rolled back many decades to the times of segregation when horrific 
civil discriminations of African Americans and Native Americans took place or the 
time of WW2 when Jewish people were segregated on pretext of disease spreaders 
and later been subjected to horrendous experimentations in camps. Only now 
unvaccinated people are new Rosa Parks, African Americans, Native Americans and 
Jews! This should never happen in free democratic society with liberty and justice for 
all! 
In the light of events of the past 3 years we saw vividly how information got 
suppressed, manipulated, censored, law- abiding taxpaying citizens and residents got 
persecuted for simply sharing their experience, pointing out to valid scientific 
researches and raising questions. But, quote: “Asking questions is at the heart of 
science. Science is not an institution and not an authority. Science is never settled. It 
is forever evolving through conjecture and criticism. Questions form the basis of all 
scientific inquiry and scientific progress. Without challenging existing concepts – 
usually held by a majority – there is no new knowledge creation. Censoring dissenting
voices eliminates the mechanism of error correction and pushes humanity back into 
the dark ages.”- by Abir Ballan, MPH, https://www.pandata.org/question-everything/
Because of the tremendous suppression of information concerning vaccines, due to 
powerful lobbing outreach of profit gaining parties, many people, including medical 
professionals, don’t even know in how many ways the purity of their God given 
bodies, it’s intricate and wonderful design, their believes concerning sacredness of all 
human life even in a womb, are utterly violated in this quick procedure. 
The very basic commands, that are found in Exodus 20:1, Deuteronomy 5:15, which 
instructs us not to murder and 1 Corinthians 6:19-20 and 10:3, that instruct us to 
regard our bodies as temples of God's Holy Spirit and that we are to honor God, our 
Creator by not defiling them, are utterly violated by the use of foreign cells, cellular 
debris, protein, DNA from willfully aborted human children as well as the presence of
neurotoxins, hazardous substances, attenuated viruses, portions of HIV virus, animal 
cells, foreign DNA, albumin from human blood, carcinogens, chemical wastes found 
in Adenovirus, Polio, Dtap/Polio/HiB Combo, Hep A, Hep A/Hep B Combo, MMR, 
MMRV, Pro Quad, Rabies, Varicella, Influenza, Shingles, Covid-19 and all others 
vaccines. Even though we are recognized by God as life human beings from the point 
of conception human fetuses are been used in the past and present vaccine researches, 
also the following ingredients were derived from no fewer than 107 human fetuses: 
PER C6, HEK293, WI-38 (RA 27/3), WI-1, WI-2, WI-3, WI-4, WI-5, WI-6, WI-7, 
WI-8, WI-9, WI-10, WI-11, WI-12, WI-13, WI-14, WI-15, WI-16, WI-17, WI- m18, 
WI-19, WI-20, WI-21, WI-22, WI-23, WI-24, WI-25, WI-26, WI-27, WI-38, WI-44, 
and MCR-5. According to Exodus 20:13, Leviticus 18:21 & 20:2-5, Deuteronomy 
5:13, 12:30-32, 18:10, 2 Kings 16:3, and Psalm 106:38, all child sacrifice is 
condemned with no exception clauses allowing for the greater or public good.  
Also Genesis 9:4, Leviticus 17:10-11, 17:14, Deuteronomy 12:23, Acts 15:20 and 29 
informs us that blood represents the life force of human and animal species and that 
human blood and DNA was to be kept pure under all circumstances. Therefore, 
CRISP-technology DNA modifications or any other technology altering human DNA 
either permanently or temporarily in newly developed and promoted MRNA vaccines 
are in direct violation of these instructions.  
All life saving knowledge, like basic hygiene, sewer management, food safe 
management, separations of blood, keeping sick separately from healthy and many 
more, were already given to us in Holy Scriptures (Leviticus, Deuteronomy) by our 
Creator, nevertheless, only centuries later were discovered and confirmed of it 
benefits by human science. Only now scientists are getting a glimpse of how complex 
our DNA is, how sophisticated our immunity is, what functions and uses organs that 
thought to be unnecessary really have and list goes on. 
Time and time again, just in the last 100 years, many things/procedures were 
promoted as beneficial and useful but were proven to be very harmful later. For 
example: lead paint, asbestos, radioactive drinks, paints, tobacco, X-rays for shoe 
stores use, bloodletting, lobotomy, LSD-therapy, tape worm therapy for weight loss, 
cocaine included in medicine and drinks, mercury, EMF radiation, various opioids 
and many more chemicals/substances in agricultural/pharmaceutical/household use. 
The trust that people put in these products/procedures/therapies and those promoting 
it, had been broken again and again, many lives were irreversibly damaged or even 
lost. 
Nevertheless, if person chooses to trust the stated efficacy/benefits of that 
product/procedure, particularly vaccines, it is their choice and they don’t need to 
worry about those who didn’t extend such trust. 
We are seeing a drastic increase in many chronic illnesses, learning disabilities, 
mental, neurological, cardiovascular problems, cancers and many more issues in our 
children and adults. One major changing factor between generations is medical 
interference in form of vaccines. This became especially apparent within the past 3 
years when untested product was forces unto millions of people without any liability 
from manufactures, any recourse or responsibility by any party. Keep in mind, that 
pharmaceutical industry is not liable for any damage caused by any vaccine; new or 
old; they are immune to any litigation against them. So, a major factor, which must 
push manufacturer to ensure safety and benefits of their product, is not there! How 
many drugs/products get recalled and filed law suits against every year, because, 
eventually, they were found to cause greater harm than benefits and billions had been 
paid in damages. 
Can schools/work places/state governments afford to get sued over mandated by them
procedures (such as vaccines) that CAN cause death or severe suffering either 
physical or spiritual? Should anything that can potentially cause death or permanent 
debilitating damage or anguish of individual (physical or spiritual) be institutionally 
mandated rather than personally voluntarily chosen?  
Why we have debates about school restrooms used by this or that gender and 
“suffering” that it causing to individuals with gender dysphoria but completely 
ignoring suffering and real damage that been imposed by enforcement of medical 
interference into individuals bodies by the institutions that all citizens as tax payers 
must have open access to without any prejudice or discrimination? Why tax-payer 
funded institutions such as schools don’t provide equal access to education to all 
tax-payers and their children without discrimination? 
All that people need are to be able to continue to choose for themselves and not to be 
persecuted, singled out, cut out from services (that they are actually funding) for their 
choice. If it is true for a choice of sexual orientation, which is, by the way, by our 
Creator allowed but strongly warned against any relations aside a marriage between 
man and woman, why the freedom to choose what to accept into my own or my 
children God given bodies, is been under attack and question?  God had given to us 
free will and not taken it back in spite of any wrong choices, additionally, when it 
comes to vaccines, nobody else, but person accepting it and their immediate family , 
will be burdened 24/7 with any adverse consequences or spiritual anguish as a result, 
therefore, nobody should force this choice and retaliate for it. Stop discrimination and 
tyranny reinstate all exemptions! Make America land of Freedom again with Liberty 
and Justice for All!  
Please,  
SUPPORT: LD 1098/HP 693, LD 1209 (HP769), LD 869/SP366, LD51/HP26, 
LD1148(SP475), LD1228/HP776 
I  thank you for respectfully adhering to our first amendment rights guaranteed as 
citizens of the United States of America by her great Constitution and reinforced on a 
state level by the fourteenth amendment without prejudice.
Respectfully,
 El Gino

