April 2, 2023 
Dear Honorable Members of the Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, 
My name is Elizabeth Mann, and I live with my family in Portland. I am writing today to voice my 
STRONG OPPOSITION to LD 51 and its sister bills (specifically LD 1098, LD 1209, LD 1228, LD 1448, LD 
869).  It is incredibly disappointing that, despite the significant gains that have been made in vaccine 
coverage in the short time since Public Law 154 passed in 2020, legislators who do not speak for the 
majority of Mainers continue to seek ways to threaten children’s health, their right to safe education, 
and ultimately, public health.  I am a parent, a public health nurse, and a voter who supported Maine’s 
vaccine law in March 2020 amid the referendum effort, as did an overwhelming majority (72.5%) of my 
fellow Mainers.  I supported then – and I fervently support now – public health, child safety, and fair 
access to education, and this new round of tone-deaf and irresponsible legislation threatens to 
undermine public health and the right to a safe learning environment for Maine’s children. 
The science is clear & indisputable: immunizations are overwhelmingly safe and effective, and prevent 
deadly disease and the disruption that outbreaks bring to our schools and communities.  Herd immunity 
– achieved only through high vaccination rates – is the best prevention strategy to minimize morbidity 
and mortality related to vaccine-preventable infectious disease.  Passage of any one of these pieces of 
legislation would undermine Maine’s popular vaccine law and have disastrous consequences for 
children and families, especially those who are immunocompromised and most vulnerable to infection.  
With anti-vaccine legislative efforts like those being proposed, I have to wonder if our elected officials 
and policymakers have learned anything from the tragedies of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
I was incredibly proud of our legislature when the vaccine law was passed – and even prouder when my 
fellow Mainers made their voices heard at the polls in March 2020 to ensure the law was upheld.  In 
doing so, Maine set the standard for public health and safety, and served as a role model for other 
states to pursue the same common-sense vaccine legislation.  Please do not allow a vocal minority to 
undo what Maine has identified as the best solution to a very serious problem: dangerously high rates of 
unvaccinated children and outbreaks of infectious disease.  Please do not allow these pieces of 
legislation to advance any further in the Maine legislature by voting “ought not to pass”.  Mainers 
overwhelmingly support strong school vaccine laws, and have shown that we will not compromise when 
it comes to our children’s health and safety.  Please show us that you won’t compromise, either. 
Many thanks for your time & consideration, 
Elizabeth Mann RN MSN PHNA 
Mother, public health nurse, Portland resident         
    
