Emily Nixon
New Gloucester
LD 51
Dear Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, all State Legislators 
and fellow citizens of the State of Maine,
I want to thank you for your service and your sincere attention on this most important 
Bill.
I am speaking today in support of LD 51, an Act to Restore Religious and 
Philosophical Exemptions for Vaccinations, and the other bills that support 
vaccine-choice being heard today.
I am the founder of The Coalition for Healthcare Workers Against Medical Mandates 
formed in response to the Mills Administration COVID 19 Vaccine Mandate in 
August of 2021. I represent all healthcare workers that stood against the mandate 
numbering nearly 4,000 and the thousands of healthcare workers that left the field 
either due to the mandate, burnout, moving out of state, or making a career change 
due to the stress placed upon them as a direct result of the mandate.
I would be in my 15th year as a Registered Nurse and 20th year in healthcare had I 
not been fired in October of 2021 for not accepting the COVID19 or flu vaccine. I am
in vaccination compliance with positive titers for all other required vaccinations in 
order to be a nurse. I was unable to obtain informed consent for the COVID 19 
Vaccine since there were no long term studies to tell me about the risks. I refuse the 
yearly flu vaccine for philosophical reasons. Because of both of these private medical 
decisions I can no longer work in my area of expertise in a time of great need for 
skilled and seasoned nurses.
Since being fired I gave birth to our first son who will also have severe limitations 
placed upon his life, should we choose to continue living in this state. Our household 
income has gone from comfortable to struggling with the loss of my career. Our story 
echoes so many other Mainers.
When LD 798 was passed it put into motion a catastrophic impact on Maine’s 
healthcare infrastructure. Without philosophical or religious exemptions and with 
medical exemptions being incredibly difficult (nearly impossible, due to fear of 
repercussions,) to obtain it’s impact has rippled out affecting every single citizen of 
Maine. From children unable to attend day care and school, to college age young 
adults seeking higher education, to the elderly left homeless when nursing homes 
shuttered their doors due to lack of staff, the ramifications are heart shattering at best.
It is unconscionable NOT to pass LD 51 and restore these exemptions. Based on all of
the testimony given, what you can see with your own two eyes both in this state and 
across the nation, I implore you to do the right thing and restore our constitutionally 
protected freedom. 
I want to go back to work. I miss caring for my patients. Help me help the great state 
of Maine by voting “ought to pass” on this bill. Thank you and God Bless. 
The following is for your legal reference:
The First Amendment of the United States Constitution and Article 1: Declaration of 
Rights. Section 3 of the Maine State Constitution grant the right and protection of 
religious freedom. 
The passage of LD 798 and its prohibition of religious and philosophical exemptions 
for vaccinations clearly violates the civil liberties etched in our guiding documents.
Chief Justice John Marshall declared in the 1803 case of Marbury v. Madison that “A 
Law repugnant to the Constitution is void.” 
Article IV Part 3rd Section 1 of the Maine State Constitution corroborates the 
previous statement:
“ The Legislature, with the exceptions hereinafter stated, shall have full power to 
make and establish all reasonable laws and regulations for the defense and benefit of 
the people of this State, not repugnant to this Constitution, nor to that of the United 
States.”
LD 798 is certainly repugnant to our state and national constitutions.
Article X Section 3 of the Maine State Constitution says the following:
“All laws now in force in this State, and not repugnant to this Constitution, shall 
remain, and be in force, until altered or repealed by the Legislature, or shall expire by 
their own limitation.”
Having said all this, I want to draw attention to our elected officials. Given the 
evidence presented, it is abundantly clear that you have a constitutional duty to now 
repeal LD 798 and reinstate religious and philosophical exemptions with the passage 
of LD 51.
That constitutional duty was accepted by you when you were sworn in to your 
position. I give you Article IX Section 1 of the Maine State Constitution: The Oath of 
Office: An oath that closes with the sentence “SO. HELP. ME. GOD!”
I must say, I find it quite contradictory for any elected representative to favor denying
religious and philosophical exemptions, while at the same time swearing before Our 
Creator to protect them.
Per our National and State Constitutions, LD 798 should have never become law in 
the first place. It was unconstitutional from its inception, and should never have been 
presented to the public to vote upon; nor signed into law by our duly elected 
representatives. But this law isn’t entirely on the shoulders of our elected officials. 
The general public has a responsibility to understand how our government operates, 
and we need to fully understand the repercussions of our ignorance before we cast our
vote. The era of the “low information voter” needs to come to an end. We need to 
demand transparency and understanding with any bill that is presented to us, which I 
believe was a huge part in why LD 798 was passed in the first place.
To quote Thomas Jefferson “The best defense of democracy is an informed 
electorate.” This is the gold standard of how We The People preserve our rights, and 
how we hold our elected officials accountable for retaining said rights.
We ALL need to take and accept responsibility for the outcome of LD 798, and now 
we must all come together to pass LD 51 and restore our constitutional rights.
And should  our representatives not pass LD 51, let me address my peers, and those 
within this system of governance that are battling their consciences in executing LD 
798 with the following quotes.
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr: “One has a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws”.
And Benjamin Franklin: “Rebellion to Tyrants is Obedience to God”.
Thank you.

