Erica Dunn
Gray
LD 51
My name is Erica Dunn from Gray, Maine and I am testifying in favor of LD’s 51, 
869, 1098, 1148, 1209, and 1228.
As citizens of the United States, we should undoubtedly have a voice in regard to 
what is injected into our bodies. It is atrocious and horrifying that we have been 
forced into something that is highly controversial- with potentially life threatening 
side effects. After the law that stripped us of our medical freedom went into effect in 
2021, I had to make the difficult choice to fully vaccinate my children or face 
consequences. Since I am a single mother and couldn’t consider homeschooling at the
time, I made that difficult choice to vaccinate my children against my belief and 
against my intuition. 
After doing so, I was contacted by the school administration stating that my daughter 
(7) would have to be re-vaccinated for one of the vaccines. I told them that she had 
already been vaccinated for it. Because the vaccine was administered 2 days prior to 
the “recommended” date the CDC stated, she would be required to be re-vaccinated. 
She did also state that this was an issue with other students as well - one receiving the 
vaccine a day prior to the recommended vaccine schedule and had to be 
re-vaccinated. My daughter’s pediatrician admitted it could be unsafe to do this. This 
technicality is was not something I was going to allow to potentially harm my child.  
This is what it has come to. A technicality.
My son had an adverse reaction to the DTaP vaccine showing a baseball size raised 
red area at the site of injection. He had a fever. When we got home from receiving the
shot, he just about collapsed on the driveway. After getting him inside, he fell asleep 
for 3 hours. When I tried to report this as an adverse reaction, I was told that there 
was no way to prove that it was due to the vaccine. This is corruption at its finest. My 
son should have received a medical exemption, but instead was dismissed. And now 
there is no other solution or option for us since philosophical and religious 
exemptions were removed. As a mother, I feel helpless. 
If the Covid vaccine is mandated and part of the CDC recommended vaccine 
schedule, that is where I will draw the line. Such a law will force me, again, to choose
between public education for my children and standing for my rights as the United 
States citizen. I will choose medical freedom. 
Please consider protecting the rights of the people. Of our children. 
