Erica Blanchard
Brunswick
LD 51
Dear Members of the Committee, 
I am writing in favor of LD 51 as well as LD 869. After LD 798, my daughter was 
forced to be vaccinated against Measles, Mumps and Rubella in order to stay at her 
high school.  I had previously chosen to forego the MMR vaccine with a 
philosophical exemption based on a recommendation from our previous pediatrician 
(who has since retired). She believed my daughter’s body could not safely handle a 
live vaccine. 
       On September 24, 2021, my daughter received one dose of MMR and lost her 
vision twice in 24 hours - once while driving in downtown Portland. She proceeded to
become very, very sick and missed three weeks of school in the first month of the 
school year. Our Maine pediatrician promised to write a medical exemption to the 
second dose and referred my daughter to various specialists to figure out why her 
vision loss persists. I have taken her to three specialists so far. It has been 18 months, 
and to this day, no one knows why or how to fix her vision. Next up is an MRI of her 
brain and eyes. I am stuck covering all these costs. 
       Last fall, my daughter was forced to take the second dose because our 
pediatrician said the language for Medical Exemptions under LD 798 was altered and 
she could no longer offer a medical exemption. She said neurological and vision 
changes after the MMR are not covered by medical exemption guidelines under the 
new language of LD798. She said my daughter deserved an exemption, but her hands 
were tied and her license would be on the line. She told us this! My daughter got dose 
#2 of MMR and again fell very sick and missed days of school. We will never know 
if more damage was done to her eyes. My daughter now says she would drop out of 
school and/or college before she takes another vaccine ever again. She couldn’t even 
consider Bowdoin college because of their Covid vaccine requirements. She is 
traumatized. 
    It is completely unacceptable that a pediatrician cannot practice medicine safely 
under the language of LD 798. It is unacceptable that a child experienced vaccine 
harm that was completely preventable had we been able to exercise our rights to 
informed medical consent with a philosophical exemption. I can assure you we will 
leave the state of Maine if there is ever a mandate for experimental/EUA vaccines in 
my children’s school- not when our pediatrician cannot protect them from further 
harm should they react to the first dose. 
Please pass LD 51 and LD 869 and restore our God given rights to informed consent 
and a free and fair education in the state of Maine.
Thank you for your time, 
Erica Blanchard
Brunswick

