Erica Clark
Gardiner
LD 51
This madness has to stop. I am FOR all of these bills.
Thank you to the friendlies that never once gave up on our children and shame on 
those who did. 
LD 51 - An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization 
Requirements
LD 869 - An Act to Protect Education Access by Prohibiting a Mandate for 
Schoolchildren for a COVID-19 Vaccine or a Vaccine Under an Emergency Use 
Authorization
LD 1098 - An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions Regarding 
Immunization Requirements
LD 1148 - An Act to Prohibit COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates for Students Enrolled in 
Public Institutions of Learning
LD 1209 - An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine Exemptions 
for Private Schools and Virtual Public Charter Schools
LD 1228 - An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from Requiring 
Vaccines Approved Under Emergency Use Authorization for Admission or 
Attendance. 
Listening to the names of those bills, you wouldn’t think we would have to have this 
discussion but here we are.
These are OUR children, let’s get that out in the open off the bat. Not yours or anyone
else’s.
. People can’t get medical care, dental care, nurses had to leave & babies out of 
school. 
My ggrandfathers and gggf didn’t flee for freedom for this to happen. Explain how 
this lack of freedom and Liberty happens??!
A free education to all Maine’s children & No Child Left Behind…. Unless you’re 
“under vaccinated” & refuse to  “Medicate” your children the way the state wants you
to. Explain this to me. 
Children with Hep B + blood can go to school but a live free child can’t? Explain this 
to me.
Can I mandate people eat peanut butter? I hope this simplifies it for everyone, even 
Brandy who was sitting in the back row, smirking at injured children. All children 
have a right. If you’re that scared, then pull your kid from public. Don’t forget, there 
are Hep B + kids on class with your children, yet the state  only ostracize one group? 
Ours? Why? Hatred? Dislike to disabled children? A distaste for learning 
handicapped kids? They need help with resources too. Or are they just not worth 
enough? Hmmmm…. Janet, you need to rethink your choices. 10-10 Highly 
recommend it. Seems discriminatory to me and we will seek action. 
Our lawyers look forward to hearing from you. 

