 
Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
 
Staff 
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony against LD 51, ‘An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical 
Exemptions to Immunization Requirements’ 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Gabriela DeOliveira, MD 
and I am a resident physician living in South Portland, Maine and training in 
pediatrics. I am a member of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of 
Pediatrics.  I am submitting testimony against LD 51, ‘An Act to Restore Religious 
and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements’ and its sister bills, 
LD 1098 and LD 1209, because I believe that every child in Maine deserves to live 
in a community where they are safe – especially from preventable diseases that 
may have horrifying consequences, such as irreversible disability or even death. 
 
I am honored to be a member of a profession dedicated to the health and well-
being of children. All children are born with the potential for happy and fulfilling 
lives, and as pediatricians, we have the unique privilege of watching many 
children grow and thrive. It is unthinkable that a child should suffer or have their 
life cut short by a disease that we have the power to prevent. As we have 
unfortunately learned in the past several years, transmissible illnesses can have 
many effects beyond those directly caused by the illness itself – including cutting 
off access to education for many children. This may be because there are so many 
sick educators that classes cannot be held, or because a child has a medical 
condition that prevents them from receiving vaccines. Those families must then 
choose between their child’s education and the risk of their child catching a 
serious and potentially deadly illness. 
 
I recently cared for a child who was admitted to the hospital with a pneumococcal 
blood infection requiring several weeks of IV antibiotics – forcing him to be apart 
from his family and out of school while receiving treatment in the hospital. 
Pneumococcal infections are one of many serious illnesses that we have a vaccine 
to protect against, and this vaccine is part of the routine series of vaccines we give 
to children. While this child was in the hospital, we found that he had developed 
an immunodeficiency that prevents him from creating antibodies in response to 
vaccines, and this was likely the reason why he developed this serious infection. 
Because of his immunodeficiency, this child will never be able to create an 
immune defense against bacteria and viruses and is at risk of developing life-
threatening infections. He now relies on others in his community to be vaccinated 
so that he can attend school and participate in activities without the constant fear 
that he will become dangerously ill. 
 
You have the power to protect the health and access to education for this child 
and all the children in Maine. When these bills come before you, I ask that you 
vote for the children of Maine by voting against LD 51.  
 
Thank you for your time and care of our community. 
 
  
