Testimony in Support of LD 51 – 
 "An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to 
Immunization Requirements,"  intended to reinstate religious and 
philosophical exemptions, essentially a repeal of LD 798. 
 
I am a Nationally Board-Certified Primary Care Provider, Doctoral Prepared Nurse Practitioner 
with a Masters in Family and Community Health and with 30 combined years of experience in 
Family, Pediatric, and Veteran Primary Care.   
 
Today’s hearing provides a venue for rational and respectful exchange of information in the 
hopes that the members of our legislature will hear us when we share what we know and will 
understand why the acceptance of religious and philosophical exemptions is critical to the 
medical freedom of the citizens of Maine.  
 
Philosophical reasoning allows for independent thought and decision making based on the 
available information, and an admittance that all the information is not always available to 
everyone.  It requires open and safe venues for discussion, logical and critical thinking, and an 
open-minded ability to institute change without bias or impulsiveness.  In essence, it allows for 
personal choice regarding our individual healthcare decisions and is a right in our Democratic 
society.   
 
The Administrative and Mitigation mandates in response to the Initial Alpha Strain Coronavirus 
Pandemic of 2019 and the State’s refusal to allow religious or philosophical exemptions were 
necessarily reactive during the Initial and Acute phase of the outbreak as we knew very little 
about the virus, the treatment, and we lacked scientific data regarding both the effectiveness 
and the potential for Adverse Reactions to the Emergency Use Authorization vaccines. We are 
no longer in an Emergency Response, and we have learned a great deal.  A refusal to accept any 
exemption to the vaccine is no longer appropriate. We have seen that the outdated policy of LD 
798 has had a negative impact and has resulted in barriers to providing excellent healthcare to 
the people in Maine.  
 
Because of the denial of any exemption to vaccination, Critical Mission Staff were forced out of 
medical care facilities leading to shortages that not only made providing care virtually 
impossible but also overwhelmed those who remained behind to assume the additional 
workload leading to burnout and, in turn, even more staffing shortages. Frequently beds in the 
hospital cannot be used to admit patients in need of care because of a lack of nursing and other 
staff to provide that care.  Reports of hospitals ‘at capacity’ and patients being diverted away 
from hospitals occurs when a bed may be available, but the staff is not.   
 
Medical providers are trained to empirically review scientific data, to monitor the results of 
treatments we provide, and to weigh the risks and benefits of those treatments when making 
clinical decisions.  Treatment decisions change as we learn new information, most often reliant 
on the expertise of the medical provider and before the slow process of reporting that 
information and formal recommendations can be updated.  Our patients rely on us to use our 
extensive knowledge and training to make these decisions in their best interest and we are here 
now to respectfully ask that you, also, listen to our testimony and rely on our expertise.  
 
We have witnessed what could be interpreted as Severe Adverse Reactions to the vaccines in 
some people, but we are very cautious in reporting any direct implication as we continue to 
observe and to gather data.  This is how science works.  Underreporting means that the 
potential for injury from vaccination could be even greater than we currently know.  In practice 
clinicians discuss in small, safe groups what they worry could be increases in complications such 
as blood clots, including strokes and sudden cardiac death, neurological side effects such as 
paralysis and seizures, and cardiac changes related to endocarditis and myocarditis.   
 
Those who practice medically are trained to First Do No Harm and so we provide our patients 
with the information we do have and share with them that there is still information we do not 
have, so that they can make their own informed decisions in this and in all medical treatments.  
It is the duty of all in entrusted with power to do the same.  Supporting LD 51 allows Maine 
citizens to listen, to learn, to observe, and to exercise their own religious and philosophical 
beliefs and to exercise their right to medical freedom.  
 
We are, thankfully, no longer in the same situation of 2019, we are no longer in a situation 
where the pandemic of a deadly viral strain poses a threat greater to the common good of the 
general population that it warrants refusal to the rights of the individual. 
 
For all the reasons mentioned here today, I respectfully request that the Maine Legislature 
support Legislative Document 51 and return the decision-making ability to the individual and to 
their healthcare providers who are trained to treat them in their own individual best medical 
interest.  
 
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to speak to this very important issue.  
 
With the greatest of respect,  
 
 
2 April 2023 
Gayle Travers, DNP  
Arundel, ME 04046 
 
 
