Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs , 
Ginger Taylor, MS, Maine Informed Consent, former director of the Maine Coalition 
for Vaccine Choice, 2009 – 2019, in support of LD 51 
Maine has thrown thousands of Mainers out of work and education, driven 
families, young people and businesses out of Maine, rather than implementing 
much needed vaccine program reforms, accountability, and open discourse with 
the public, after 37 years of vaccine maker liability protection.  
• In 1986 Congress passed the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act, removing 
liability for injury from vaccine makers, even when a product is defectively 
designed and kills children. 
• Liability-free vaccines are classified as "Unavoidably Unsafe" by the US 
Government, which means they CANNOT be made safe for their intended use, 
and will harm some individuals. 
• The 1986 Act mandated that HHS conduct vaccine safety research and issue 
reports to Congress every two years. No such research has been done, and no 
reports have been filed. 
• Uncoerced medical choice is a fundamental human right, and LD 798 violated 
the international standard of informed consent in medicine. Coerced consent 
is NOT consent. 
• LD 798 required Mainers to purchase and inject products containing human 
and animal materials, including bovine, porcine and aborted fetal cell line 
remains, despite their religious and conscientious objections, in order to 
qualify for full participation in society. 
• The American Medical Association holds the position that physicians should 
have access to religious and philosophical exemptions, but that such should 
be removed from the public.  
• The Maine Medical Association (AMA) has claimed no pharmaceutical 
sponsorship in testimony supporting LD 798, while Merck and PhRMA are 
their corporate-affiliates. 
• There is no vaccine safety infrastructure in Maine. 
• Maine keeps no data on vaccine injury cases or rates, and assumes an 
adverse reaction rate of zero in making vaccine risk/benefit analysis, 
despite 36,631 VAERS reports, and several Mainers being compensated 
by the Vaccine Injury Compensation Program. 
• In Maine there are no physicians trained in, nor any standard of care 
assessment for, vaccine adverse reactions. 
• Maine DHHS, Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics, 
Maine Medical Association have ignored vaccine injured families 
requests for meetings, or even answers to their questions on vaccines, 
science, and policy since 2015. 
• The state of Maine has barred thousands of children out of school 
without ever meeting with their families to find out their reasons for 
opting out of full participation in vaccine recommendations. 
The State of Maine Has Barred Thousands of Maine Children from School While 
Refusing to Speak To Their Families 
 
It has been 2,870 days since I began requesting meetings with the Maine DHHS on 
behalf of more than a thousand vaccine hesitant and vaccine injured families, to 
discuss their safety concerns and unmet medical needs. The issues which are at the 
heart of vaccine hesitantly.  
Kenneth Albert, then director of the Maine CDC in 2015, patently refused the 
meeting, stating that we were not a priority.  
 
Five months later, Mr. Albert held a public meeting at Maine Law to discuss our 
families and what to do about the vaccine hesitant, without an attempt to involve 
the population at the heart of the discussion. During the event, Albert smeared 
parents with vaccine injured children and their concerns as "anti-vaccine," and 
advocated for barring their children from an education. Then, in an exchange with a 
pediatrician who expressed discomfort with the pressure being put on him and his 
colleagues to disallow families to make their own medical choices, Albert praised 
using "the stick" on doctors so that they would pressure vaccine hesitant families at 
doctors appointments, joking, "That's one way to get 'um." 
 
Isn't the first rule of public health that you must engage the target population of any 
given program? How exactly does the State of Maine defend removing the rights of 
children to attend school, while stonewalling those families for NINE years? 
Maine parents report gaslighting by primary care providers when their child has an 
adverse event such as seizures, high pitch screaming and loss of affect shortly after 
vaccination. When asked for a list of physicians who are trained to diagnose and 
treat adverse events, Maine CDC responded that, "The Maine Immunization 
Program does not gather or retain the information that you are requesting." 
In 2015 I authored the Maine Consumer Protection Act, a bill to create a program 
and process Maine for vaccinating families who experience an adverse event. The 
bill would have ensured training for health care providers which would include 
mechanisms for prompt diagnosis and treatment, and greater understanding of the 
federal programs in place to address adverse events. The the proposed plan should 
be considered standard practice for a liability free medical product considered 
"Unavoidably Unsafe" by the CDC, which is administered within 24 hours of birth as 
routine care.  
The bill was written because Maine parents had reported that pediatricians and 
other primary care providers do not know even vaccine safety basics from the US 
Department of Health and Human Services website, such as the difference between 
the Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP), and the Vaccine Adverse Events 
Reporting System (VAERS). 
During the course of the hearings, it was clear that parental reports were indeed 
accurate. Maine pediatricians, other health care providers, and the lobbyists 
representing them, were ignorant of the differences between federal programs 
meant to guide medical practices on vaccination.  
 
In testifying against The Maine Vaccine Consumer Protection Act, which would 
assure that all in the medical field would be educated on the information on vaccine 
package inserts, and on the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) 
which was designed to compensate vaccine injury victims, it became clear that 
almost no one in the medical industry in Maine knew much about either. 
 
Peter Michaud, representing the Maine Medical Association, (author of LD 798) 
while testifying against a measure to educate him on the HHS Vaccine Injury 
Compensation Program (VICP) was asked about the VICP rulings responded, “I don’t 
know. I’ve never been involved in that system.”  
Jeffrey Austin, representing the Maine Hospital Association submitted testimony 
opposing the bill that would require the health care providers to know and use the 
information on the FDA required vaccine package inserts wrote, “People don’t 
receive vaccines like they do other prescriptions… not sure there is a package here.”  
 
Not even the head of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics, Dr. 
Janice Pelletier, knew the name of the VICP or its function, testifying that, “The 
Federal Vaccine Injury Program provides appropriate venue for reporting and 
tracking vaccine related side effects.” There is no such thing as "The Federal Vaccine 
Injury Program." 
 
Instead, Dr. Pelletier was describing the Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System 
(VAERS), an early warning system to alert CDC if there are multiple problems with 
specific vaccines or batches of vaccines, but neither investigates cases nor offers any 
support to her vaccine injured patients. 
 
And neither pediatrician Amy Belisle of Maine Quality Counts nor Shawn Box, 
Former Asst. Dir Maine Immunization Program knew the difference between the 
VICP and VAERS, both writing in their identical testimony (one cutting and pasting 
from the other,) “Many of the components of this bill are redundant to the Vaccine 
Adverse Events Reporting System and Efforts already performed by the Maine 
Immunization Program in collaboration with providers and physicians state wide.” 
The Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System was not mentioned in the bill.  
21 Maine health entities, public, private and individuals, submitted testimony 
against the bill that would assure they are educated on federal vaccine safety 
information. Of those entities, it was clear that only one of them had even read or 
tried to understand the bill.  
The Maine Vaccine Consumer Protection Act was reintroduced in 2017, and again 
2019 as LD 1616  , along with LD 798 that has now removed Mainer's rights to attend 
daycare, preschool, k-12, college or even work in the health care field with out 
mandatory vaccination. The Maine Legislature chose NOT to pass the bill that would 
inform physicians on proper patient care and support according to HHS, while 
removing their right to decline a vaccine. Vaccine injured Mainers are STILL waiting 
just to have a public meeting with Maine DHHS on vaccine safety matters after NINE 
years. 
During the public hearings on LD 1616 on April 30 th, 2019, Maine CDC was asked, 
"Following the hearings on this same bill in 2015, The Maine Coalition for Vaccine 
Choice sent a list of questions to Maine DHHS that arose from those hearings. DHHS 
refused to answer the questions, and refused to meet with the group which 
represents thousands of Mainers. DHHS responded that these families were not a 
priority... How can Maine DHHS advocate for the removal of these families rights to 
childcare, education and work, while refusing to speak to them or address their very 
reasonable concerns?" 
Maine DHHS responded:  
“We cannot speak to responses of the previous administration [LePage], but since 
this administration [Mills] has taken office we have received one request and time 
has not allowed the meeting to occur. When time allows, the Commissioner's office 
is not averse to meeting with stakeholders to discuss their concerns.” 
 
But as of today, more than four years have passed, and the Mills Administration has 
yet to respond to the request for a meeting.  
Why doesn't Maine have an education plan for physicians to know how to 
recognize, diagnose and treat vaccine adverse reactions, especially since the Maine 
Immunization Program has made the stupefying goal of 100% vaccine uptake for 
school entry? (Assuring that those who are at risk for vaccine adverse reactions, will 
have them.) 
 
For a family to get federal compensation for a vaccine injury through the VICP, they 
have to have a doctor to diagnose it, and testify on behalf of the family to the 
federal program. If we don't have any physicians in Maine who know the VICP exists 
or are trained in VICP table injuries, then how can they know what vaccine adverse 
reactions are outlined by the US Department of Health and Human Services, and 
how can they evaluate and support families? 
 
The questions that parents have are myriad, and Maine DHHS has no intention of 
answering them, which simply adds to the questions asked... like why should any 
parent in Maine want to participate in the vaccine program when it abandons those 
who may be injured by their program, and ignore those who see vaccine risks being 
ignored? 
 
I submitted pages of questions to not only the Maine Immunization Program, but 
the Maine Medical Association, MaineHealth and the Maine Chapter of the 
American Academy of Pediatrics. None have answered the questions. But I am 
reasonably certain all of them will be showing up to again to advocate that our 
children be denied the right to an education. 
 
In the last 14 years I have watched, parent after parent testify to legislative 
committees in Augusta that their physicians did not believe them when they 
reported vaccine adverse reactions, would not take their reports seriously, and 
would not medically investigate their children's adverse events. 
To my knowledge not one legislator has ever contacted one of those families 
directly to try to assist them in accessing proper assessment, diagnosis, medical 
treatment, or compensation from the federal Vaccine Injury Compensation 
Program. 
The most telling response of the Medical establishment in Maine, in a callous and 
telling comment at the end of the 2015 hearings, Peter Michaud told the Health 
committee, "As you know I represent the Maine Medical Association. I have heard a 
lot of horrible things about doctors today. And you'll believe what you believe based 
on what you've heard. I refuse to believe that so many doctors in this state are 
unfeeling, are horribly rude, are bullies, don't have the best interests of their 
patients in mind.” 
When parents report vaccine injury to doctors, they are not believed.  
When they report not being believed by doctors, even then, they are not believed. 
Nothing has changed since the pharmaceutical industry began its assault on 
Mainer's rights in 2015. The Maine vaccine program has refused to meet with 
Mainers suffering due to vaccine injury, or even answer their questions, much less 
implement basic reforms like educating physicians on federal vaccine injury 
guidelines and programs. In fact rather than addressing the injustice and inequity 
that vaccine injury families face, Maine has opted to simply force them back into the 
program that harmed them in the first place and then abandoned them to struggle 
alone, or to suffer the penalty of exclusion from the basic rights of Mainers to fully 
participate in society. 
 
Ginger Taylor
Maine Informed Consent
LD 51
This is my corrected testimony. Previous version was GingerTaylorLD51.doc. Please 
delete that copy and replace it with this.
Thank you for your service to Maine.
