Heather Pellegren
tremont
LD 51
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
committee, I am asking you today to vote ought to pass on LD 51. I am the solo 
parent to a 7yr old child. I stood before the committee during the hearing for LD798 
begging that they did not pass a bill that would strip my daughter of her right to a 
public education, and a bill the would end my 10yr career as a well paid jeweler and 
esteemed gallery manager.   I feel like many in the state, my pleas were not heard 
and it has effected me negatively everyday ever since. Before 2019 I was able to 
provide a decent middle class life for myself and my child.  I had paid sick and 
vacation time, medical coverage and retirement through my full time employer. As a 
result of the passage of LD798 I was forced to quit my job so that I could homeschool
my daughter and jump into being self employed so I may bring her to work with me 
or work from home. In doing so I have had to juggle more than one person should 
have to, and we have faced both food and financial insecurity ever since. I once had 
so much joy for my life, and felt healthy and vibrant, my work Homelife balance felt 
sustainable, and my energy for my child endless. The last three years of being the sole
provider whilst homeschooling, and having no time away form my child, on top of 
extreme isolation has taken its toll on me physically, mentally and lastly financially. 
There are so many barriers already existing for single mother’s in this country and 
this adds just one more.   The reasons I chose not to vaccinate are many, I am sure
you have heard a litany of testimonies outlining why people make this same choice. 
Some will site the legal indemnity that vaccine manufacturers are privileged to profit 
off of without recourse if their product does any form of harm from minor to 
catastrophic. Some will site the flaws in the safety monitoring system as outlined in a 
recent Harvard Pilgrim study. Others can give detailed accounts of research bias, 
fraud, and corporate capture of almost all of our governmental and regulatory 
agencies. For me, all of those talking points are valid and worth exploring to get to the
matter of truth and justice; but far beyond that and reduced to simplest reason is this: 
Every human deserves the dignity and freedom to make their own medical decisions 
about their body. Simply put: Our bodies our choice.   Please vote ought to pass 
on LD 51 and restore our right to exercise our religious and/or philosophical 
objections to forced vaccination as a condition for our children to access a public 
education. 
Sincerely and hopefully, 
Heather B Pellegren

