 
Testimony Before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
April 3, 2023 
 
IN OPPOSITION TO:  
 
LD 51: An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements 
LD 1098: An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions Regarding Immunization Requirements 
LD 1209: An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine Exemptions for Private Schools and Virtual Public 
Charter Schools 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Committee, 
 
My name is Jane Field and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Council of Churches, an ecumenical coalition of 
seven mainline Protestant denominations: Episcopal, Lutheran (ELCA), Methodist (UMC), Presbyterian (PCUSA), 
Quaker, Unitarian Universalist and the United Church of Christ, and two associate member churches, who combined have 
437 congregations across the state with 55,000 parishioners in their care. 
 
As you consider LD 51, 1098 and 1209, it is important for you to know that none of our seven denominations opposes a 
requirement that children be vaccinated in order to attend school. Furthermore, all of our denominations support 
protecting children and adults from diseases that can spread throughout a community and have the potential to cause 
extreme illness or even death.   
 
Our member denominations uphold the fundamental religious value of loving neighbor as self. Although we are firm 
proponents of an individual’s right to practice their religion, we do not believe the exercise of religious freedom should be 
allowed to promote a risk to public health.  We are also concerned that parents may use the religious exemption to evade 
vaccination laws. This is precisely what a law professor at the University of California’s Hastings Law School found 
when she was researching religious exemptions.  Dorit Rubinstein Reiss reported in a law journal article in 2014 that 
parents in numerous posts on anti-vaccination websites openly admitted lying, saying they took the exemption just to get 
around the law. Here is one example she found: “I filed a religious exemption in Virginia and no one batted an eye or 
questioned my beliefs. I’m actually an atheist but it’s the only exemption option, aside from medical.” Prof. Reiss noted 
that the cases she found reflected only ones that had been publicly posted. “Consider that these are only those who are 
willing to admit their lies in an open forum on the Internet.” 
 
In Vermont, the religious exemption historically hadn’t been exercised often, but something interesting happened in 2015 
when the philosophic exemption was eliminated.   The percentage of students whose parents opted out of having them 
vaccinated by using the religious exemption jumped from .9 percent to 3.7 percent in one school year. 
 
We are concerned that the health of our state’s children, at-risk adults, and indeed all Mainers would be severely 
jeopardized if the Legislature reverses its decision to eliminate the religious exemption and ignores the overwhelming 
majority of Mainers who voted to uphold that decision in the people’s veto referendum three years ago. 
 
For these reasons, we at the Maine Council of Churches have consistently offered strong public support for removing the 
religious exemption from Maine’s vaccine rules and regulations—both during legislative deliberations and during the 
public referendum to veto the legislature’s decision to remove the religious exemption—and why we now urge you to 
vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD 51, 1098 and 1209. 

Jane Field
Maine Council of Churches
LD 51
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Committee,
My name is Jane Field and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Council of 
Churches, an ecumenical coalition of seven mainline Protestant denominations: 
Episcopal, Lutheran (ELCA), Methodist (UMC), Presbyterian (PCUSA), Quaker, 
Unitarian Universalist and the United Church of Christ, and two associate member 
churches, who combined have 437 congregations across the state with 55,000 
parishioners in their care.
As you consider LD 51, 1098 and 1209, it is important for you to know that none of 
our seven denominations opposes a requirement that children be vaccinated in order 
to attend school. Furthermore, all of our denominations support protecting children 
and adults from diseases that can spread throughout a community and have the 
potential to cause extreme illness or even death.  
Our member denominations uphold the fundamental religious value of loving 
neighbor as self. Although we are firm proponents of an individual’s right to practice 
their religion, we do not believe the exercise of religious freedom should be allowed 
to promote a risk to public health.  We are also concerned that parents may use the 
religious exemption to evade vaccination laws. This is precisely what a law professor 
at the University of California’s Hastings Law School found when she was 
researching religious exemptions.  Dorit Rubinstein Reiss reported in a law journal 
article in 2014 that parents in numerous posts on anti-vaccination websites openly 
admitted lying, saying they took the exemption just to get around the law. Here is one 
example she found: “I filed a religious exemption in Virginia and no one batted an 
eye or questioned my beliefs. I’m actually an atheist but it’s the only exemption 
option, aside from medical.” Prof. Reiss noted that the cases she found reflected only 
ones that had been publicly posted. “Consider that these are only those who are 
willing to admit their lies in an open forum on the Internet.”
In Vermont, the religious exemption historically hadn’t been exercised often, but 
something interesting happened in 2015 when the philosophic exemption was 
eliminated.   The percentage of students whose parents opted out of having them 
vaccinated by using the religious exemption jumped from .9 percent to 3.7 percent in 
one school year.
We are concerned that the health of our state’s children, at-risk adults, and indeed all 
Mainers would be severely jeopardized if the Legislature reverses its decision to 
eliminate the religious exemption and ignores the overwhelming majority of Mainers 
who voted to uphold that decision in the people’s veto referendum three years ago.
For these reasons, we at the Maine Council of Churches have consistently offered 
strong public support for removing the religious exemption from Maine’s vaccine 
rules and regulations—both during legislative deliberations and during the public 
referendum to veto the legislature’s decision to remove the religious exemption—and 
why we now urge you to vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD 51, 1098 and 1209.

