Easter Sunday, April 9, 2023  
Dear  Education and Culture Affairs Committee Member,  
I am writi ng in support of LD 51 on this beautiful Sunday of the resurrection of the Christ, the 
day my faith considers to be the most important day of the year.  If that sentence turned you off, 
or struck you in some  way th at would make you less likely to listen to me, because it is not based 
in science, I would simply ask if you can know what is happening within another soul?  If you 
can experience for me, how I experience the spiritual world.  
In modern times,  churches, state institutions, health  practitioners, and educators must  not assume 
the role of authoritarian law makers to force individual souls into compliance that could harm, 
and non -compliance which could harm even more.   
The removal  Religiou s and Philosophical  exemptions  from vaccination  for school age children  
with immediate implementation put many good, people with good reasons in the position of 
either harming their child,  or harming their child.   
It is difficult to  understand  how an intuiti on leading to  an informed non -consent of a vaccination 
for a particular child or family comes abou t. Sometimes, it is because one child got a vaccine 
injury.  Sometimes, it is because it just seems that experiencing an illness would build the 
immune system in betters ways than a vaccine.   
I have seen good families forced into the social alienation of home scho oling when they had 
done no  to harm anyone.  There are promoters of immunization who believe that without forced 
immunization of E VERYONE certain diseases will make a comeback.  Yet, we have had the 
religious and philosophical exemption in Maine since vaccines became mandatory.   
Why was this?  Did former legislators add this just because they felt generous.  My belief is that 
they provided this exemption because the founding fathers wrot e freedom of religion into the 
Constitution.  We have a fundamental right to fo llow God.  It is a little known fact that those 
who came to North America did not just come to practice freedom of religion.  No.  They had to 
come, because while they were allowed to practice their religion, it cost them jobs, forced them 
into poverty  and social isolation.  
Why would we do this to our child ren, our own children, who had been going to school for many 
years with a religious or philosophical exemption, and then we forced them out of school, forced 
their families into economic hardship of homeschooling, forced them into social isolation, all 
within the idea of being good, and vilifying  them and their families as people who wanted to 
make others sick.  
Vaccination does not stop the spread.  Indeed, I have read where a school age vaccinated child 
unknowingly brings whooping cough home to a not yet vaccinated younger brother or a 
grandparent.   There were protocols in place for the unvaccinated child with whooping cough.  
These worked, I witnessed it in a family in my home town.  He was more  the canary in the coal  
mine, than the one who was spreading  it unknowingly.   
Our children and their parents , our intuitively aware, dare I call it, spiritually aware parent and 
families do not want to harm  their children or others.  They do not take health lightly, nor do 
they wish to impose their view on others.  Yet, scientism, in the name of science, is more than 
willing to harm children who for some reason, get themselves born into families, where they 
believe in God, and they believe in their ability to listen to spirit ual, intuitive, impulses, coupled 
with scientific investigation and understanding of immunity to make decisions over themselves 
and their children.   
I know it is hard for Scientistic -religious ity to think it has anything  to learn from those who  
believe in a spiritual world, protective beings, angels, ancestors, Christ, Mary, God, etc.  but, I do 
believe that if they put as much time into studying the ways of the spirit as they did to narrowly 
investigated science, that they would indeed see that every human bein g has the right to bo dily 
sovereignty , and that parents have a duty to protect this in their children.  
The thing is that science  thinks we act out of ignorance. We believe that they are acting out of a 
narrow field of vision.  By ex cluding children from school for a bodily sovereignty choice 
because of a theoretical threat  to life of other children is implementing a superstitious  science, 
one based in ultimate  fear. 
The job of the legislator is to protect the few from the opinion of the many, especially in areas of 
constitutional rights.  It is my assertion that we have an individual right to refuse any medical 
treatment, and if we have something that could hurt anothe r, we would simply isolate when there 
is active cases in the community.  With Zoom options staying safe in “whooping cough ” or 
measles outbreaks should be easier than ever.  
Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical  exemptio n for school access .  Our parents are tax -
payers, and their children ha ve a right to a ttend school on a regular basis and develop into strong, 
healthy tax paying adults.  
God Bless.    
Sincerely,  
Jennifer Mitchell  
Brooklin, ME   
 
Jennifer Mitchell
Brooklin
LD 51
Easter Sunday, April 9, 2023
Dear  Education and Culture Affairs Committee Member,
I am writing in support of LD 51 on this beautiful Sunday of the resurrection of the 
Christ, the day my faith considers to be the most important day of the year.  If that 
sentence turned you off, or struck you in some way that would make you less likely to
listen to me, because it is not based in science, I would simply ask if you can know 
what is happening within another soul?  If you can experience for me, how I 
experience the spiritual world.
In modern times, churches, state institutions, health practitioners, and educators must 
not assume the role of authoritarian law makers to force individual souls into 
compliance that could harm, and non-compliance which could harm even more.  
The removal Religious and Philosophical exemptions from vaccination for school age
children with immediate implementation put many good, people with good reasons in 
the position of either harming their child, or harming their child.  
It is difficult to  understand how an intuition leading to an informed non-consent of a 
vaccination for a particular child or family comes about. Sometimes, it is because one 
child got a vaccine injury.  Sometimes, it is because it just seems that experiencing an 
illness would build the immune system in betters ways than a vaccine. 
I have seen good families forced into the social alienation of home schooling when 
they had done no to harm anyone.  There are promoters of immunization who believe 
that without forced immunization of EVERYONE certain diseases will make a 
comeback.  Yet, we have had the religious and philosophical exemption in Maine 
since vaccines became mandatory.  
Why was this?  Did former legislators add this just because they felt generous.  My 
belief is that they provided this exemption because the founding fathers wrote 
freedom of religion into the Constitution.  We have a fundamental right to follow 
God.  It is a little known fact that those who came to North America did not just come
to practice freedom of religion.  No.  They had to come, because while they were 
allowed to practice their religion, it cost them jobs, forced them into poverty and 
social isolation.
Why would we do this to our children, our own children, who had been going to 
school for many years with a religious or philosophical exemption, and then we 
forced them out of school, forced their families into economic hardship of 
homeschooling, forced them into social isolation, all within the idea of being good, 
and vilifying them and their families as people who wanted to make others sick.
Vaccination does not stop the spread.  Indeed, I have read where a school age 
vaccinated child unknowingly brings whooping cough home to a not yet vaccinated 
younger brother or a grandparent.   There were protocols in place for the unvaccinated
child with whooping cough.  These worked, I witnessed it in a family in my home 
town.  He was more the canary in the coal mine, than the one who was spreading it 
unknowingly.  
Our children and their parents, our intuitively aware, dare I call it, spiritually aware 
parent and families do not want to harm their children or others.  They do not take 
health lightly, nor do they wish to impose their view on others.  Yet, scientism, in the 
name of science, is more than willing to harm children who for some reason, get 
themselves born into families, where they believe in God, and they believe in their 
ability to listen to spiritual, intuitive, impulses, coupled with scientific investigation 
and understanding of immunity to make decisions over themselves and their children. 
I know it is hard for Scientistic-religiousity to think it has anything to learn from those
who believe in a spiritual world, protective beings, angels, ancestors, Christ, Mary, 
God, etc.  but, I do believe that if they put as much time into studying the ways of the 
spirit as they did to narrowly investigated science, that they would indeed see that 
every human being has the right to bodily sovereignty, and that parents have a duty to 
protect this in their children.
The thing is that science thinks we act out of ignorance. We believe that they are 
acting out of a narrow field of vision.  By excluding children from school for a bodily 
sovereignty choice because of a theoretical threat to life of other children is 
implementing a superstitious science, one based in ultimate fear. 
The job of the legislator is to protect the few from the opinion of the many, especially 
in areas of constitutional rights.  It is my assertion that we have an individual right to 
refuse any medical treatment, and if we have something that could hurt another, we 
would simply isolate when there is active cases in the community.  With Zoom 
options staying safe in “whooping cough” or measles outbreaks should be easier than 
ever. 
Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical exemption for school access.  Our parents 
are tax-payers, and their children have a right to attend school on a regular basis and 
develop into strong, healthy tax paying adults. 
God Bless.   
Sincerely, 
Jennifer Mitchell 
Brooklin, ME 
