Jennifer  Watkins
Lisbon
LD 51
I am strongly agreeing with LD 51 that needs to pass. Being pregnant at the time 
exemptions were taken away, I feared for this day and continued to hope “things will 
change, they’ll allow our kids to attend without forcing vaccinations”. Here we are, 
with a 5 year old ready to start school and we don’t have the heart to tell him he won’t
be going on the bus. He won’t be making friends at a lunch table. And better yet, I 
have to quit my job to homeschool our 3 children. It is a constant stressor to our 
family and makes no sense that we pay taxes in this town for a school district our kids
are banned to attend. I find it quite wrong on so many levels that “my body, my 
choice” doesn’t come in to play here, especially given the chance of risk. Why should 
one of the arguments be that the “immune compromised are at risk when we don’t 
vaccinate”? So the answer is to put MY child at risk to vaccinate instead? This is not 
the answer. There are other ways to protect those at higher risk than to force children 
into health decisions that parents don’t want to make, or aren’t ready to make. This 
health decision is up to the parent, just as it’s the same decision whether or not to 
circumcise at birth, breastfeed or formula, the list goes on and on. They are OUR 
children, not the state’s. But for some reason, health professionals are taught to force 
and coerce parents to vaccinate and frowned upon if you don’t. If a child is 
vaccinated, they’re in theory “protected”-yes? And if a child is not, then so be it. This 
information is personal and should be protected. By my children not attending public 
school, that’s a pretty significant giveaway as to the reason why. I think we have all 
learned from this recent pandemic that vaccine status does not matter-we all 
witnessed each of us get sick, pass it along, whether vaccinated or not. We saw it at 
colleges, we saw healthcare workers sick WITH covid and being forced to work, and 
yet hospitals were forced to fire so many that could have helped during this struggle 
that we saw. Make sense? They were fired because they were told they could catch 
and spread a disease, all while vaccinated workers were doing just that. The science 
doesn’t add up, and we see just that. So many have lost trust for our healthcare so I 
don’t see why coercing people into decisions was thought it would help. It has done 
the exact opposite. The only thing left for citizens to do is follow the money trail, 
because that’s all that makes sense in this upside down world right now. It’s time for 
Maine to come to terms with what the right thing to do is and allow so many parents 
to get back to work and give these kids the education they deserve (and that their 
parents are paying for). If not, send us our tax money back please so that we can put 
these funds toward our homeschooling or private tutors.
