Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 
In Opposition  to LD 51, An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions  
to Immunization Requirements  
 
Sponsored by: Representative Gary Drinkwater  
Hearing Date: April 3, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan,  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs , my name is  Jessica Shiminski  and I am the  director of the Maine 
Immunization Program  within the Department of Health and Human Services - Maine Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention  - Division of Disease Surveillance . I am here today to provide 
testimony on behalf of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC) and I will 
be sp eaking in strong opposition to  LD 5 1, An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical 
Exemptions to Immunization Requirements . 
This bill seeks to reinstate the religious and philosophical exemptions recently removed from Maine’s 
immunization laws for students in elementary, secondary , and post secondary schools, employees of 
nursery schools, and certain healthcare facilities.  
 
Public Law 2019 , Chapter 154 was enacted for three reasons : to keep our children safe and healthy 
from unn ecessary disease, to ensur e safe schools and childcare centers, and to protect vulnerable 
people against serious disease. The removal of religious and philosophical exemptions was decided 
through legislative process and upheld by a referendum vote in 2020 with 72% of Mainers in favor of 
this decision.  
 
The requirement to remove non -medical exemptions for required immunizations was effective 
September 1, 2021. Data obtained through the Maine Immunization Program’s annual School 
Immunization Assessment Surve y shows a significant increase of immunization rates from the 2020 -
21 school year  to the 2021 -22 school year. MMR rates increase from 94.3% to 96.7%. DTaP 
increased from 94% to 96.3%. Polio increased from 94.2% to 96.5% . Additionally, n on-medical 
exemptions decreased from 4.1% to 0.3%  and m edical exemptions increased from 0.5% to 1.5% , 
disproving the argument that medical exemptions are difficult to obtain in the State of Maine.   
 
Prior to September 1, 2021 , most of Maine’s school age exemptions w ere non -medica l, with the 
highest rates of non -medical exemptions being reported in Hancock and Waldo counties. These two 
counties also represented two of the four counties with the highest reported rates of pertussis cases in 
 
2018. Not only did high exemp tion rates likely contribute to higher rates of pertussis , or whooping 
cough,  in these two counties, but also for the entire State, with Maine report ing the highest rate of 
pertussis in the country for 2018. More recently , states across the country are facing outbreaks of 
both polio and measles . These vaccines are all required for kindergarten entry in Maine ’s public and 
private schools. Reinstating allowances for e xemptions for non -medical reasons would threaten the 
public health of Mainers . 
 
When someone chooses not to vaccinate, that decision can jeopardize the health and safety of entire 
communities, especially the most  physically  vulnerable among us . Evidence shows that states that 
have more restrictive  exemption laws have higher immunization ra tes and less disease  transmi ssion .  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC opposes  LD 51 . Health  policy is best  driven by evidence, and the 
scientific evidence is overwhelming, sound, and supported by the profession al medical community 
and majority of Maine voters. Va ccinations are proven to be safe and effective . 
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony today. I 
can address questions from Committee and I will be available to participate in the work session.  
 
 
