TESTIMONY 4/3/2023 
To the Esteemed Members of the Committee of Education and Cultural 
Affairs, 
I want to thank you for your service to the people of Maine. Expressly, I 
thank you for your ear today as you are faced with protecting the rights of 
the citizens in your communities. I am a mother, an educator, a registered 
nurse, and a lifelong Mainer.   
The last time I came before the state house was to speak in opposition to 
LD 798. At that time I was concerned that the freedoms my patients and my  
family had benefited from would be removed.  
While I believe deeply in the potential of Western Medicine. Like most 
Americans, I also maintain personal responsibility is imperative to a healthy 
body. Denying that religious and philosophical ideas have a place when 
discussing public health is antagonistic to the most basic tenet of Western 
Medicine “First, do no harm”. Denying religious and philosophical 
exemptions to any medical intervention is antagonistic to the most 
important maxim of medical ethics, “informed consent”.  LD 798 did harm. 
LD 798 took away informed consent. How little we knew when it passed 
that we were on the brink of a dramatically different world. In this new world  
LD 798 took away choice for Maine students and families. Mainers in the 
fight knew that was coming, what Mainers were not prepared for was for 
medical professionals to also lose their rights to exemptions and not just 
religious and philosophical exemptions. Many students in the public and 
private schools lost their medical exemptions I beg the committee to 
consider that reality. Many health care workers lost their medical 
exemptions, almost all lost their religious and philosophical. The climate of 
the Covid 19 Pandemic, abetted by the new law LD 798 put fear above 
judgment and medical reasoning. LD 798 is actually a clear indictment of 
the very reason we must keep philosophical and religious exemptions in 
place. Physicians became fearful they would lose their license if they gave 
exemptions. That is not hyperbole, ask a healthcare worker you know. LD 
798 has not stopped vaccine hesitancy, but it has turbo boosted conspiracy 
thinking. It has led Maine families to drop out of the system. Thousands of 
healthcare workers lost their right to their livelihood. Thousands more made 
a medical decision not of informed consent but out of pure coercion sowing 
anger and frustration at the very medical establishment they work within.  
It is the current prevailing medical paradigm that the safety of vaccines is 
unquestionable. That world view presumes the safety profile of most 
vaccines far outweighs individual risk and thus the socially responsible 
thing to do is to mandate what is best for society. However, that prevailing 
paradigm does not adjust to any facts that are contrary to the rigid view. 
Dissent is not allowed. It is a puritanical world view that does not consider 
diverse opinions and has in fact tried to silence opposing views at every 
corner to stop debate. The authorities actively aim to deny individuals of 
their healthcare experience and gaslight people who have been injured or 
have deeply held religious or medical beliefs that believe this intervention 
may be unhealthy for their body.Before LD 798 there were rules in place, 
rules that pertain to both vaccinated and unvaccinated students who 
become infected with communicable disease.Those rules did not disappear 
under LD 798 and are not undermined by LD 51.  
LD 51 has the potential to reverse the erosion LD 798 created. When LD 
798 passed it was among the strictest of laws in the country. Despite its 
narrow passing at the time I firmly believe if it was brought to the voters 
today it would be handedly defeated. Voting to support LD 51 is a good 
faith act that can restore some sense of harmony among political parties 
and begin to rebuild trust in a failing healthcare system. More importantly, it 
protects body autonomy. It also restores informed consent. The horrendous 
outcomes for families, children, and healthcare workers is hard to deny. LD 
798 has not protected our communities the way it was promised but rather, 
alienated and divided Mainers.  
 I ask you to surprise yourself and vote “ought to pass” on LD 51, keep the 
mandates if you must, but restore religious exemptions, philosophical 
exemptions, and real medical choice. 
 
“Medicine practiced well is beautiful. As a human pursuit it is 
pure…..conversely, medicine done poorly is painful to watch and worse to 
experience”.                                Vinay Prasad MD, MP 
(Footnote)  Vinay Prasad MD, MPH  “Ending Medical Reversal Improving 
Outcomes, Saving Lives” Vinay Prasad, MD, MPH, Adam Cifu, MD @2015, 
2019 Johns Hopkins University Press 2715 North Charles St Baltimore, MD 
21218-4363 
