Joanne Libby
Freeport
LD 51
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other members of the committee:
     My name is Joanne Libby and I live in Freeport.  I am testifying in support of LD 
51, LD 869, LD 1098, LD 1148, LD 1209, and LD 1228.
Last weekend I tried to write testimony for your April 3 session.  I am very passionate
about this topic but found it difficult to focus my thoughts and words in a way that 
was effective in explaining my point of view.  So I only composed a few sentences 
and decided that my testimony wouldn't be that good and that others would speak 
better than me.  I came to the hearing and listened for the first 3 hours and my 
thoughts were reinforced.  All the people who spoke in favor of these bills were more 
articulate than I would have been and touched on many aspects that I had not 
considered.  They were all amazing!  I went home thinking I had been right in not 
testifying and wasting your time.  I did think it curious, however that there were no 
people who had yet to testify against the bills.  Later in the afternoon I listened to the 
testimony again and there they were: the physicians, health care providers and a few 
others who testified that there couldn't be any deviations from "The Law."  These 
people were intent on only one thing- to get everyone to comply with the vaccination 
requirements to attend school.  Their testimonies were all the same.  That's when I 
decided that I had to submit a written testimony.
     So, how did we get to where we are today in April 2023 when we have to beg our 
elected legislators to restore our right to make decisions for our own bodies and those 
of our children?  Although many states implemented vaccine requirements for 
students in the early 1900's, it wasn't until 1977 that the Federal Government started a 
Childhood Immunization Initiative with the goal of getting more children vaccinated 
against diseases such as diphtheria, measles, and pertussis.  By 1980, all 50 states 
required vaccines for K-12 public schools.  
     Do you realize that these "vaccines" are preventatives?  Why are preventative 
measures mandated for anything?  A preventative is not guaranteed to prevent any 
disease 100%.  The people testifying against these bills want you to believe that if 
95% of the population received the vaccine, then any immune-compromised 
individual who cannot receive the vaccine will be protected.  That is a lie.  The 
vaccine may not even be effective for the person who took it, never mind others.  And
to submit 95% of the population to the toxic ingredients in vaccines such as fetal 
bovine serum, sorbitol, neomycin, , formaldehyde and others is criminal.  If you want 
to inject yourself or your child to these toxic products, go ahead.  but please leave 
others alone.  Children should not have to submit to innoculations to attend school. 
     Thank you for your time.
