1 
 
 
 
April 3, 2023     ANA -Maine P.O. Box 647 Kennebunk, ME 04043    www.anamaine.org  
To:  Maine Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 Senator Joseph Rafferty  
 Senator James Libby  
 Senator Teresa Pierce  
 Rep. Michael Brennan  
 Rep. Barbara B agshaw  
 Rep. Jan Dodge  
 Rep. Sheila Lyman  
 Rep. Rebecca Millett  
 Rep. Kelly Murphy  
 Rep. Edward Polewarczyk  
 Rep. Heidi Sampson  
 Rep. Holly Sargent  
 Rep. J. Worth  
From:  Juliana L’Heureux, B.S., M.H.S.A., R.N., ANA -Maine president / Juliana.lheureux@anamaine.org  
Testimony in oppos ition to  LD No. 51:   An Act to restore religious and philosophical 
exemptions to immunization requirements.   
The American Nurses Association of Maine (ANA -Maine) is an affiliate of the American Nurses 
Association and represents all registered nurses. Our  membership is 602 nurses that practice in 
all health care settings throughout Maine.  
In opposition to LD 51, I am enclosing the strong position statement from the American Nurses 
Association and supported by ANA -Maine.  In particular, please note, “ ANA does not support 
any exemptions from immunization other than for medical contraindications.  ANA does not 
endorse religious or philosophical exemptions ” The purpose of this position is rooted in decades 
of public health data where  vaccines to prevent communicable disease s are proven effective.  

2 
 
Immunizations : ANA Position Statement :  Historically, the American Nurses Association 
(ANA) has strongly supported immunizations to protect the public from highly communicable 
and deadly diseases such as measles, mumps, diphtheria, pertussis, and influenza (ANA, 2019; 
ANA, 2015; ANA, 2006), and has supported mandatory vaccination policies for registered 
nurses and health care workers under certain circumstances. Considering several recent and 
significant measles outbreaks in the Unit ed States, as well as the global pandemic of COVID -19, 
ANA has reviewed our current position statement for clarity and intent and examined present 
best practices and recommendations from the broader health care community.  
Statement of ANA position : Effecti ve protection of the public health mandates that all 
individuals receive immunizations against vaccine -preventable diseases according to the best and 
most current evidence outlined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the 
Advisory Co mmittee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). All health care personnel (HCP), 
including registered nurses (RNs), should be vaccinated according to current recommendations 
for immunization of HCP by the CDC and Association for Professionals in Infection Contro l and 
Epidemiology (APIC). ANA also believes that it is imperative for everyone to receive 
immunizations for vaccine -preventable diseases as vaccines are critical to infectious disease 
prevention and control. Moreover, nurses have a professional and ethica l obligation to model the 
same health care standards they recommend to their patients.  
ANA does not support any exemptions from immunization other than for medical 
contraindications. All requests for medical exemption from vaccination should be accompanied  
by documentation from the appropriate authority to support the request.  
Recertification of the medical exemption is an annual obligation. Individuals exempted from 
vaccination may be required to adopt measures or practices in the workplace to reduce the 
chance of disease transmission. Employers should offer reasonable accommodations in such 
circumstances. ANA does not endorse philosophical or religious exemptions.  
ANA -Maine strongly recommends that all registered nurses, health care workers and the public 
be vaccinated against COVID -19. There is significant clinical evidence on the safety and 
effectiveness of the three approved COVID -19 vaccines (Pfizer -BioNTech, Moderna, and 
Johnson & Johnson/Janssen) being administered under the Food and Drug Administrati on’s 
(FDA) Emergency Use Authorization process. With regard to these three vaccines, ANA does 
not support any exemptions other than for medical contraindications to being vaccinated against 
COVID -19. 
As novel diseases emerge, such as COVID -19, ANA supports ongoing research and development 
of safe, easily accessed vaccinations for these public health threats.  
Vaccinations must be available and accessible to all to ensure public health and safety.  
