Juni Charlton
Blue Hill
LD 51
Juni Charlton
P.O. Box 855
Blue Hill, ME  04614
April 2, 2023
Hello, My name is Juni Charlton and I am a Licensed Practical Nurse.  I am in 
support of LD51, An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to 
Immunization Requirements.  Born and raised in the state of Maine, one of 10 
children, I witnessed many times my mother assisting us back to health and how our 
natural immune systems work.  I have used the religious and philosophical exemption
for my son's attendance at school.  My son, a vibrant healthy child, received many 
well child visit vaccines, and I declined some.  At the age of 4 he received 4 
injections, which included the Measles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR).  He never once 
cried after the previous well child visit injections, and did this time.  Two weeks after 
the MMR injection, he had an episode of being glassy eyed, staring, not able to 
understand a simple command.  I called the doctor and reported this episode, only to 
hear that it was two weeks after the injection and that it was not something to be 
concerned about.  I reached out to a naturopathic doctor who helped my son.  This 
naturopathic doctor described how the MMR has had many complications and at the 
time she was treating several other children for similar symptoms.  I stopped then 
with any further injections.  At the age of 11 my son's therapist suggested that he have
a psychological evaluation test.  The psychological evaluation determined my son had
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder combined type (ADHD).   
https://childrenshealthdefense.org/news/government-corruption/cdcs-vaccine-science-
a-decades-long-trail-of-trickery/            
                                                                                                                     I believe 
there are far too many vaccinations for our children and that where there is risk there 
must be choice. There is a psychological and financial drain on parents due to having 
to follow through with dictates that are in essence quite harmful. Please restore the 
philosophical and religious exemption so that Maine parents can continue to raise 
vibrant healthy children. Sincerely, Juni Charlton
