To: The Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
From: Justine Tanguay, Esq. 
Re: Testimony Supporting LD 51: “An Act to Restore Religious and 
Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements" 
Date: 4/3/23 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and 
distinguished members of the committee, I am asking you today to vote 
ought to pass on LD 51. 
My name is Justine Tanguay. I am an attorney and former Assistant 
Attorney General for the State of Maine who has spent my entire career 
advocating on the behalf of children of all ages in various areas of the law, 
including health, child protection, child support, paternity, appellate, 
probate, and family law matters. I am also a certified mediator, Guardian ad 
litem, and Parenting Coordinator in high conflict cases. I grew up in Maine 
and up until 10 years ago, lived and worked here. 
I have family, friends, and colleagues who are still residents of Maine. From 
afar, I have the witnessed the changes that Maine has experienced in the 
least 3 years. 
I am grateful for the opportunity to testify before you in support of LD 51. 
While LD 51 would restore the religious and philosophical exemptions for 
students that existed for years before LD 798 was passed in 2019, LD 51 
would not repeal any current immunization requirements. 
As an attorney, I have concerns that the current law LD 798 that does not 
allow for students to obtain either a philosophical or religious exemption in 
order to attend school violates the 14th Amendment’s Equal Protection 
Clause. The Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment requires the 
States to “treat alike” all persons similarly situated within their borders.  
Specifically, the Supreme Court of the United States addressed this issue 
in a 1982 case called Plyler v. Doe. In that case, the Supreme Court ruled 
that a Texas statute that had denied undocumented school age children the 
free public education that it provided to children who were citizens violated 
the children’s equal protection rights. Simply stated, the Supreme Court 
concluded that that law was unconstitutional because it arbitrarily provided 
an education to some but denied it to others.  
Although “public education” is not a “fundamental right” granted to 
individuals by the Constitution, “neither is education some governmental 
benefit indistinguishable from other forms of social welfare legislation.”  
Many years ago, the Supreme Court emphasized the importance of 
education in preparing students for work and life as a citizen. The Court 
said that education is “pivotal” in maintaining our basic institutions, and 
when a child is deprived of an education, that deprivation will have a lasting 
impact not only on the life of a child, but it will affect the fabric of our 
society. The Plyler Court stated, “By denying these children a basic 
education, we deny them the ability to live within the structure of our civic 
institutions and foreclose any realistic possibility that they will contribute 
even the slightest way to the progress of our Nation.” This means that 
children who are denied the opportunity to attend school due to his or her 
vaccination status will create a grave harm not only to that child, but that 
that deprivation will affect the future of America.  
I strongly urge you to reconsider what is at stake and stop the furtherance 
of any class inequalities. Please allow all children the opportunity to attend 
school and bring back the philosophical and religious exemptions for those 
in need. Again, I am respectfully requesting that you vote ought to pass on 
LD 51. 
 
Thank you. I welcome any questions that you may have. 
 
 
