Karen Marysdaughter
Bangor
LD 51
April 1, 2023
Dear Members of the Joint Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs:
My name is Karen Marysdaughter and I am a resident of Bangor.  I am writing in 
opposition to LD 51 and any related bills that would undermine vaccinations in the 
state of Maine.
Over 20 years ago I contracted pertussis (whooping cough) and was miserably ill for 
at least 2 weeks.  The coughing was so severe that I could barely sleep, and had 
trouble keeping food down.  I lost 8 pounds during my illness.  All of this despite the 
fact that I was a middle aged healthy adult.  A few days before I developed 
symptoms, I visited a friend and met her newborn daughter.  When I realized I had 
pertussis, I was terrified I might have infected her child, who had not yet been 
immunized, since I know that pertussis is a very serious, possibly fatal illness for 
non-immunized infants.  Fortunately she did not catch it from me, although I did 
infect two other neighborhood children.  And fortunately, they had both been 
immunized and had mild cases.
Two years ago I contracted Lyme disease.  I believe we caught it in time to eliminate 
the bacteria, but Lyme is a sneaky disease and I worry about the possible long term 
consequences if the antibiotics didn’t get it all.  I learned that a vaccine for humans 
was developed at least 20 years ago, but in part due to anti-vaccination activism at 
that time, the vaccine was taken off the market.  This makes me furious.  As someone 
who gardens, hikes, and canoes on a regular basis, I hate it that I have to worry every 
time I am outdoors during tick season (which is ever expanding).  How much more 
parents must worry about their children playing outdoors!  I am eagerly awaiting the 
new vaccine that is currently in clinical trials.
We are so fortunate that for many years we have not had to worry about our children 
suffering the severe effects of many illnesses that used to ravage communities.  For 
this we can thank vaccines, safe and effective protectors of public health.  I am sorry 
that people who are opposed to vaccinations are being drawn in by gross 
misinformation and thereby putting themselves and their families at risk.  That risk is 
bad enough; I do not believe they should be allowed to risk the rest of the community 
by their actions.
I urge you to vote “Ought not to pass” on LD 51 and any related bills.  Thank you for 
your attention.

