Karen  Harrington
Clinton
LD 51
Greetings Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee.  I respectfully urge you to vote ought to 
pass on LD 51.  
My name is Karen Harrington and I live in Clinton.  I am married with four children.  
I have been a registered nurse for 18 years, with 16 of those years in the hospital 
setting.  I spent much of my career working in a LDRP of a small, rural hospital.  I 
spent most of my career working nights, weekends, and holidays (and many of them 
due to such a small staff).  Due to the nature of the small hospital, with limited staff 
and resources, and working night shift, I needed to have a vast, wide-ranging skill set.
For reference, one of my most memorable nights was when I had a labor patient (who 
had already birthed five children) present to my unit, ready to deliver, at 28 weeks 
gestation (preterm) with twins.  I was the only OB nurse in the unit (only one in the 
whole hospital as well).  There was no obstetrician in house, no anesthesiologist in 
house, and no other nurse in house with my skill-set.  In the small hospital setting I 
worked in, all these people are home on call at night, which may be up to 30 minutes 
from the hospital.  
I was a long-term, well-respected healthcare professional.  My colleagues and my 
patients loved me.  I was a charge nurse and preceptor.  I worked throughout the 
entirety of the pandemic, many weeks with extra overtime and call shifts.  The 
pandemic really magnified the problems that already existed in healthcare.  My job 
was heavy at times, especially during the pandemic, when women had to choose 
between the father of the baby (who they may or may not even still be in a 
relationship with) and their comforting mothers for labor support.  But not just during 
the pandemic.  Emergency situations where life or death hags in the balance, as well 
as fetal demises… every one of those takes a cumulative toll on a nurse’s heart.  This 
kind of high-stress hospital nursing was taking a toll on my health physically and 
mentally, to a point that I didn’t even fully realize until I was done.  Despite being 
burned out in the summer of 2021, I never would have willingly “turned in the towel.”
I had plans of retiring from that job.  I always joked that I would retire from floor 
nursing, as well as from night shift.  I had a passion for caring for the families in my 
community, a passion for doing whatever I could to improve the very concerning 
rising infant and maternal mortality/morbidity rate in our country.  My coworkers 
were like family.  Some of them I had worked with since 2006.  Even though it was a 
difficult job and one that I was getting burned out in, I never would have willingly 
left.  I would have seen that as abandoning my patients, community, and my unit.  But
with the removal of religious and philosophical exemptions and the covid vaccine 
mandate, I didn't have a choice.  Disobeying God to keep my job was not an option, 
not a choice.  
As a person of faith, who has dedicated my entire life thus far to ministry with my 
pastor husband, I will always obey God no matter the cost, even if it is a job or career 
I love.  The amazing thing is that God has provided for our family and rewarded me 
for my obedience.  My nursing income was necessary due to my husband’s low 
ministry compensation.  We always say that we’re in ministry for the outcome, not 
the income.  When I left my prior job due to the vaccine mandate, I was under the 
im[ression that I wouldn’t be able to work as a nurse in Maine anymore.  But, what I 
discovered is that there is a vast world of nursing opportunity in Maine that is not 
affected by the organizations that fall under the Maine Covid Vaccine Mandate.  And 
the new job I just was hired for is paying me more money than what I was making at 
my old hospital job.
The removal of religious and philosophical exemptions and the covid vaccine 
mandate pushed a lot of amazing healthcare professionals out of Maine hospitals, 
which were already severely short-staffed.  The unit I (and about ⅓ of my unit 
colleagues) left still is not fully staffed.  They have been relying on travel nurses 
since, sometimes three at a time, which is a lot of contract staff for a unit that consists 
of only about a dozen nurses.  Some of my healthcare colleagues found other jobs that
did not fall under the mandate, some left the state, some took up travel nursing, and 
some changed careers altogether.  I know someone who went into healthcare tech and 
is very successful and a few others who joined the real estate sector.  Maine cannot 
afford to lose anymore valuable and experienced healthcare professionals.  Maine is 
critically short-staffed and study after study demonstrates the negative effect this has 
on patient safety.   If I had time, I’d tell you all about the incident my 13 year old 
daughter had last fall at a MaineGeneral facility where she was exposed to another 
patient’s blood.  The state of Maine actually investigated the incident and paid 
MaineGeneral a visit.  Please right this wrong.  It would be one step in the right 
direction for Maine’s healthcare industry. 

