Kate Ledogar
Bowdoinham
LD 51
In the 21 years between 2000 and 2020, there were 12 measles deaths in the United 
States - a rough average of 1 measles death every two years. Even in the year 2019, 
when there was a significant uptick of cases, 1,282 in total, there was 1 measles death.
National death rates for mumps and rubella in the United States in the 21st century are
similar, ranging from 0 to 2 deaths per year. 
Each year, over the same time period, 6 school children died as passengers in yellow 
school bus crashes. Each year, over the same time period, 3 to 4 children, between the
ages of 5 to 14, died from baseball-related injuries. Thankfully, both of these 
categories of tragedy are extremely rare. And perhaps for that reason, riding a school 
bus and playing elementary school baseball are not considered to be "risky" activities.
So why, then, are unvaccinated school children in Maine considered to be risks to 
public health, in an age when less than one child in America dies each year of 
measles? They are, in fact, considered to be SUCH risks, that they are forbidden from 
attending school - public, private, parochial, day care, elementary, middle school, 
high-school, college, medical school... If you are unvaccinated, you may not attend. 
Because, at a time when you can count yearly deaths from measles, mumps and 
rubella on the fingers of one hand - and bear in mind that those statistics were 
recorded when the unvaccinated were still allowed to ATTEND school - my children 
are excluded from school, because they are deemed vectors of infection.
With an average of 4 deaths from measles, mumps and rubella per year in the United 
States, I am skeptical that any unvaccinated schoolchild in the 21st century has even 
ever BEEN a vector of fatal infection to another schoolmate. Or, if they have, they are
certainly no more numerous than the schoolchildren who have inadvertently thrown a 
baseball that has caused a fatal blow.
We have been told that an unvaccinated child in school is a threat to public health. 
This is ludicrous. So, what is it that an unvaccinated child threatens? And here is 
where I waste my advantage, because I realize I am not here to win anyone's vote, I'm
here to tell the truth. 
An unvaccinated child is a threat to the belief that what we are told by public officials 
must not be questioned. Because when you see an unvaccinated child, regardless of 
how readily you dismiss that child's parent as ignorant, misguided or irrational, a 
small voice beneath those patterned reactions still wonders "why".
Kate Ledogar
Bowdoinham
April 3, 2023
https://www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/topic/default?id=sports-injury-statistics-90-P02
787
https://vaxopedia.org/2018/04/15/when-was-the-last-measles-death-in-the-united-state
s/
https://vaccines.procon.org/vaccine-histories-and-impact/mmr/
https://www.injurytriallawyer.com/blog/child-injuries-from-school-bus-accidents.cfm
https://www.injuryclaimcoach.com/school-bus-accident-statistics.html

