 
 
Home , Hope and Healing, Inc. , P.O. Box 220 , Smithfield, M E  04978  
Phone: 207-250-0636            HR Fax: 207 -466-4472  
 
March 3 1, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee.   My name is Kathleen Hale and I’m the Human Resources Officer at Home, Hope and Healing, a home 
healthcare agency serving medically fragile children and adults in their homes, throughout Maine.   We employ 
professional nursing staff and paraprofession al caregivers.   Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment on 
the bill LD 51 – An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements.   On behalf 
of my company, I urge you to vote Ought to Pass  and support LD 51.  
 
Rein stating these exemptions means  that we could provide more homes with  vital services.   Nurses and caregivers 
could return to work, and caregivers  who submit  an employment application could wo rk again in their chosen field .  
Being a small healthcare entity in Maine, the impact of the removal of even a few employees and the inability to hire 
others  has placed additional burdens whe n we ’re already  struggling to find healthcare workers, especially to support 
Maine’s aging population.    
 
The removal of these exemptions has resulted in stricter state government al rules and the impact has been that 
there are less Main ers that can work in healthcare.  W e don’t believe that was the intention of Maine  voters .  LD 798 
was purported to be about protecting Maine children and students from childhood diseases.   But this bill didn’t just 
direct the Dept. of Ed ucation, it also added an inconspicuous  statement in the summary directing DHHS to also 
remove exemptions as well .  Had it been clear  at that time that this wasn’t only  about children and students  but also 
about healthcare, we would have been involved in the legislative process in 2019.    At that time, we were focused  on 
providing healthcare services in Maine to which there was and continues to be a staffing shortage.    
 
After this bill became law, the pandemic hit.   Religious and philosophical exemptions in place for decades that 
accommodated and protected staff rights were removed  (for the vaccinations from childhood diseases ). Our 
healthcare professionals worked during this incredibly challenging  time, even putting client  care before themselves 
and their own families to get us through it .  While nonessential workers stayed home, our nurses showed their 
selflessness by continuing to provide care to vulnerable populations in their homes when not much was known about 
the pandemic .  DHHS then added  seasonal flu and COVID -19 to its vaccination requirement s.  Families did not want 
to lose their nurse s, but they did. Nurses who wanted to work for more years retired early rather than compromise 
their religious or philosophical beliefs.   And office staff that have no client interaction were told that they could no 
longer work at the office .   
 
People were led to believe that there would at least be medical exemptions if needed since  the law stated that one  
could be issued when, “in a licensed profes sional’s judgement, immunization against one or more diseases was 
medically inadvisable. ”  Little did we know that there would be more stringency to obtain them such as needing to 
have a history of anaphylactic reaction to 2 vaccine components  (and yet we could not obtain a list of a ll the vaccine 
components ).  Very  few people with medical conditions would now qualify for a medical exemption in Maine.  Some 
staff with significant  health issues  shared with me how  they tried to obtain  a medical exemption to stay working but 
were denied.   Providers told them they feared losing their professional license and livelihood .  Staff relayed that  in 
the past they were able  to have shared decision -making conversations with their provider s, but now they felt 
conversations  were awkward  and that decisions were being made for them.   
 
Over ------------- → 
 
 
 
 
 
Page Two  
Test imony,  March 31, 2023  
 
 
The removal of these exemptions has put Maine healthcare entities like ours in a precarious position.   We are 
obligated to follow federal law prohibi ting discrimination based on  religion,  and to reasonably  accommodate the 
religious beliefs of  employees.  Citizens also have constitutional rights against vaccinations , so philosophical reasons 
for not wanting to get vaccinated  should  be honored.   Let me be clear, we are not opposed to vaccinations, and we 
follow the CDC rules.   But please understand that o ur company is being forced to either violate employees’ 
constitutional or religious rights, or risk violating state law and compromising our ability to provide healthcare 
services in the state of Maine, affecting even more clients and employees.    This is a no-win situation for Maine 
healthcare companies who want to do the right thing by following all laws.  
 
We have a nursing and caregiver shortag e in Maine.   Passing LD 51 can provide needed relief from this shortage and 
put Mainers back to work caring for families in their homes.   These families miss and need them desperately.   We’ve 
had qualified nursing and caregiver staff apply for jobs  for open positions , who  we are unable to hire  but are ready 
and willing to if these exemptions get re -instated.   You have the power to help reinstate philosophical and religious 
exemptions to vaccinations for healthcare workers to serve vulnerable population s in need and put professionals, our 
healthcare heroes, back to work in Maine.   Please vote ought to pass  on LD 51 .   
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Kathleen A. Hale, SPHR, SHRM -SCP 
Chief Human Resources Officer  
Home, Hope and Healing  
KHale@HHHCares4.ME   
 
 
