Kellie Welch
Gorham
LD 51
Kellie Welch
7 Aspen Lane
Gorham, Maine 04038
April 3, 2023
Good morning, Representatives Drinkwater and Perkins, and esteemed committee 
members.
I am here today to urge you to vote "ought to pass" for LD 51, An Act to Restore 
Religious & Philosophical Exemptions to Immunizations Requirements
My name is Kellie Welch.  I live in Gorham; I was a Licensed Radiologic 
Technologist in State of Maine until I was terminated from my job on October 26, 
2021, because of the mandatory vaccination requirements. This is why I am sending 
you my testimony to help you to decide why it is important for our state to restore the 
right to submit a religious/medical exemption when it comes to our bodies and our 
concerns regarding our religious or medical beliefs. 
Please take a moment to read why I feel this bill is so important for our families and 
communities in the State of Maine where medical/vaccinations should be a personal 
choice and not forced.
I used to work at Maine Medical Center as a Radiologic Technologist. I worked there 
for 31 ½ years before I was terminated because I refused the Covid vaccination. Of 
course, as a health care worker, I worked with very sick patients, and I was 
considered an essential worker during the covid pandemic. I worked with multiple 
covid patients, and today I have remained covid free. All these years working at 
MMC I never had the flu; I rarely called out sick other than some surgeries. At one 
point in my career, I was freely able to refuse the flu shot, which was once a medical 
freedom that was recognized by the state. I have a wonderful immune system that 
protected me from illness while working in the hospital.  I credit my good health to a 
strong immune system and taking the time to care for myself. All medical procedures/
vaccinations should be personal no matter your status as an individual, i.e.: healthcare
worker or student.
The State has a healthcare shortage and because of 2019 Law requiring healthcare 
workers to be fully immunized has impacted the State healthcare system. I could still 
be working today had I been able to submit a religious exemption. I could have 
helped lessen the shortage impact.  Again, I refused my religious belief once held as a
right! I still feel today that I made the right choice regarding the covid vaccination. I 
am saddened to hear of all adverse reactions and even death to patients caused the 
covid vaccination. Hopefully if we can reverse this law, maybe we can avoid this 
tragedy from ever happening again. 
Again, I will urge you to vote "ought to pass" for LD 51 as a safety measure for the 
State of Maine.  This is a good bill please put the State of Maine back to where “we” 
has a people have a legal right to decide what is the best medical choices for 
ourselves. No one person should be forced to take a vaccination they feel is not right 
for them or any medical procedure for that matter! Also, termination from 
employment is a bad decision and must be reversed from this now existing law.
Sincerely,
Kellie Welch
