 
Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
 
Staff 
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
Senator Rafferty and Representative Brennan, Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Services, my name is 
Dr. Laura Blaisdell and I am a resident of South Portland.  I am here to 
testify in opposition of LD51, LD 1098 and LD 1209 as practicing 
pediatrician, public health expert, a researcher of vaccine hesitancy, a 
mother and the current president of the Maine American Academy of 
Pediatrics.   
 
When standing before this committee in 2019 to discuss LD798, my 
testimony read: 
“I implore you to understand this legislation is some of the 
most important in a life-long dedication to caring for all 
children…One of the pillared miracles of human health is 
being pulled down one brick at a time—by its success and by 
our folly.  We must stand together on evidenced and 
educated ground and know that we will no longer be 
confused by misinformation. We will make choices for our 
children that demonstrate to them how immeasurably we 
value their health and education. We will keep calm with the 
knowledge that history’s long memory provides evidence on 
how we must move forward today and through times to 
come.  And with integrity, we will face the considered task of 
balancing individual and communal responsibilities: for where 
there are communities, there must be mutual care.” 
 
Sagaciously, this committee, Maine’s legislature and our governor passed 
LD798 and put it into law in September 2021.  Our schools immediately 
saw improved vaccination rates--  protecting them from outbreaks from 8 
vaccine preventable diseases in the midst of a global pandemic that 
shuttered in-person schooling.  I will state here for emphasis and 
clarification the COVID-19 vaccine was never required for school entry 
under this law, nor was influenza or HPV.   
 
A referendum allowed for further debate and state-wide public input on 
Maine’s Vaccine Law— more than 72% of voters, a wide majority in every 
county, chose to protect public health by eliminating loopholes in our 
school-ready vaccine laws.  After all this effort, did the legislation make 
schools safer?  Yes it did; opt-out rates for vaccination in kindergarten 
dropped from 6.2% in 2018 to 1.8% in 2021.  To my knowledge, there have 
been no further school outbreaks from these 8 preventable diseases. 
 
During this time as a pediatrician, I counseled undervaccinated families to 
ensure their children received vaccinations required for school entry in a 
manner acceptable to them-  spacing them out, ordering specific vaccines 
on request and carefully monitoring my patients.  I ensured children who 
should not receive vaccines had the appropriate medical exemptions so 
they could attend school.  I reassured families that COVID-19, influenza 
and HPV were not required for school entry.  The vast majority of 
 
undervaccinated families in my practice simply were waiting for some 
reason to vaccinate--  PL154 became their reason.   
 
I understand for a small minority Maine’s Vaccine Law is difficult to accept.  
Yet when it comes to mutual saftey, our right to live the way we want ends 
when affects the well-being of others.  The vast majority of Mainers believe 
that schools are a part of our communal life where safety is paramount and 
non-negotiable.  Maine’s vaccine law was duly debated and decided on 
these and other merits.  LD51, LD 1098 and LD 1209 were brought before 
this esteemed committee with no new evidence, consideration or new 
merits to support a re-examination of the law.  I strongly urge you to vote 
ought not to pass on these bills.  Thank you once again for your time and 
consideration of the health of all Maine children.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
