Lauren Knebel
Cape Elizabeth
LD 51
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of 
the Committee of Education and Cultural Affairs,
My name is Lauren Knebel. I am a long-time Maine resident, a homeowner, taxpayer,
parent, and teacher. This is my written testimony in SUPPORT of LD 51, LD 869, LD
1098, LD 1148, LD 1209, and LD 1228.  I 
I have sent two children through Maine’s school system and have one student still in 
the K-12 education.  As a parent, I have watched the harms of the educational and 
school closure policies of the past two+ years.  As a teacher, I see the destructive 
impacts of those same policies on behavior, academic performance, learning, and 
ability to connect in a healthy manner with classmates and peers.  I have seen the rise 
of mental issues in my own children and my children’s friends.
The COVID response in Maine - applicable to all students - is a statewide example of 
what those students have gone through, who, because of LD798,  had to leave not just
K-12 publicly-funded school (that would be bad enough), but private schools, and 
online schools chartered through Maine.  K-12 students have had to leave school, 
including the online program where I taught in 2021-2022 because they didn’t have 
all their vaccines. Adult students had to leave their college programs in Maine to 
pursue education in other states, where they didn’t have to compromise their health, 
religious, or philosophical beliefs in order to receive the education that their parents 
or themselves as taxpayers were already paying for.  Maine will likely never get those
students back.  It will also never get back the families who left the state because of the
Maine government’s legislative and executive branch overreach in selectively 
applying the concept of “My Body, My Choice,” which then progressed into outright 
one-branch, one-party tyranny during COVID times. 
Travel nurses can work in Maine without having received the COVID injections but 
Maine nurses can’t?
Families who can’t get the the elusive, unicorn medical exemptions for the school 
schedule injections, are unable to send their kids to attend the schools that they are 
still forced to pay for through taxes. Families who choose long-term wellness, 
knowing that you “can’t inject health” have to give up their students’ rightful 
education. As a result, families are still paying for a publicly-funded service, which 
they are outright denied access to. They can’t even pay again (in addition to their 
taxes) to attend private school without being denied their parental rights on how to 
keep their children healthy.
The rise in homeschooling in Maine and the decline in school enrollments began with 
the arbitrary and discriminatory implementation of LD798 in the Fall of 2020. 
Students who can’t attend school in Maine (public, private, parochial, or 
publicly-chartered online schools) because of their vaccination status can coach the 
school’s teams.  Parents can volunteer in schools, which their parents can’t attend.  
Faculty and staff don’t have to be vaccinated to attend schools, but students do. 
Students can’t graduate with their classmates and friends from their entire school 
lives. Immigrant students are being allowed to attend school without all the injections 
yet an unknown and untold number of Maine students (whose parents are paying for 
that education) can’t attend schools. Why are those immigrant students not kicked out
of school because of “health?”  Are their rights to education somehow stronger than 
those of other Maine students?
What does all this say?  It says - Your voice doesn’t matter, your rights don’t matter. 
Heck, your children’s education, mental, and physical health don’t matter. We’ll still 
collect your taxes but won’t let you use one of the few government-run services that 
most people expect to access.   Maine has abrogated its legal responsibility to provide 
equal and fair access to education under the state constitution and under the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.  Instead, it has set up a system of marginalization and 
discrimination.
I see the mental health challenges in my own kids, in my kids’ friends, and with the 
challenges of getting mental health supports in Maine.  Our young people have paid 
the price long-enough for  the short-sighted, irresponsible, inequitable, arbitrary, and 
harmful legislation that was LD798.  It is time to end the charade that any of this was 
about protecting health. 
I urge you to vote YES in support of all of the above bills.  Do not allow our students’
physical and mental health to be further harmed by keeping them away from the 
essential academic and social connections to which they have a right.  Do NOT try to 
add the experimental COVID injections to the school schedule, and restore the right 
for students to attend the schools of their choice by restoring philosophical and 
religious exemption in K-12 public, private, parochial, and charter schools, as well 
Maine’s institutions of higher learning.
Sincerely,
Lauren Knebel 
