 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
 
Testimony in OPPOSITION of LD 51, “An Act to Restore Religious and 
Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements”  
 
Good day, Senator Rafferty  and Representative Brennan, and honorable members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Lawrence 
Losey , MD . I am a r esident of  Harpswell , Maine, a pediatrician in Brunswick , and a long -
standing member of the Board of Directors for the Maine C hapter of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics .   
 
I regret that my schedule does not enable me to meet with you in person. I have 
appeared multiple times previously to provide testimony regarding childhood 
immunizations. For over 25 years, I have been involved with the Maine Immunization 
Program’s work to  improve access to childhood immunizations. For the last thirteen 
years I have been a board member of the Maine Vaccine Board to further this goal.  
 
I practice general pediatrics in Brunswick, starting in 1979.  I have borne witness to 
dramatic improvements in our children’s health with new vaccines now  available and 
improved immunization rates. The past three years have been difficult for all of  us. 
Initially, during the COVID pandemic, we were severely limited in our ability to see children for routine chec kups and immunizations. We are still working to get caught up 
on needed medical care for these children. Our immunization rates have significantly 
slipped,  and we have (nationally) seen outbreaks of disease in areas with more 
unimmunized, susceptible childr en. Measles is the most contagious of the diseases we 
routinely immunize against. In a susceptible population, each new case of measles 
results in 18 additional cases. That means it can spread like wildfire! The 
epidemiologists calculate that in order to prevent the spread of measles, we  
need a childhood immunization rate in excess of 95% of children be ing properly 
immunized. It  has dropped below that level in Maine and other states during the 
pandemic.  
 
To improve our  childhood immunization rates, in 2021 the legislature implemented a 
change, requiring children  attending school to only have exemptions fr om the mandatory 
immunizations if there is a  documented medical condition making immunizations 
contraindicated. We have seen substantial improvement in the rates of fully immunized 
children starting kindergarten with these more stringent requirements. In 2020 there was 
a referendum to repeal elimination of non- medical exemptions for immunizations. This 
passed with a more than 70% voter approval!  
 
Please help keep our children and communities healthier by leaving this requirement for  
adequate immunizations in place.  Please do not hesitate to contact me if there is any 
additional information I can help you with.  
 
SINCERELY,  
LAWRENCE J. LOSEY, MD, FAAP 
HARPSWELL, ME
 
  
