Linda Reardon
Orrington
LD 51
My name is Linda Reardon I am a Registered Nurse who is a Trauma Critical Care 
Nurse of 42 years. I put my license in retirement when the mandates came about so I 
could continue to help people with information and facts
I started to question the information being given to us all after listening to Fauci and 
the CDC director of Maine after 2 presentations. I decided to do my own research and
began my journey for true information.  My research started with the mask mandate.  
I researched and found Fauci's information to be false and Shah as well.  The South 
Korean doctors had found this Corona virus to be surface to face and not air borne 
unless the person was actively ill and coughing in the face of another person. Good 
hand hygiene was the recommendation.  We were at that point told to mask up.  
Masks can NOT and do not stop any virus this has been proven in multiple studies 
around the world  Masks do cause hypercapnia, hypoxia, irreversible brain and lung 
damage, eye damage, skin damage, periodontal disease and spread bacteria and 
viruses everywhere because of the touching of face with hands and other surfaces 
after messing with adjusting the masks.  This is the short list they decrease oxygen 
especially in asthma and other chronic lung patients.  For a virus with a 99.8% 
survival rate and medications that cure it easily Again so many studies have proven 
this time and time again.  This information is now available to everyone.  The 
vaccines are now found to be deadly and they were being investigated by Virologists 
and Infection Disease doctors worldwide. This is something doctors and nurses 
thought from the beginning but were told much different information from Shah the 
CDC director and Big Pharm  The dangers of the vaccines are again readily available 
by well known doctors and researchers.  The damage and deaths that have happened 
from the lockdowns are now coming out and will be for years to come  The healthcare
mandates have also caused deaths and completely ruined the healthcare of the state of 
Maine.  People not going to the hospital who need to because of the horrible if any 
care they are receiving or no care in most situations.  The hospitals are understaffed 
and have unqualified staff if they have any staff at all.  They are staffed by travelers 
who do not care about us they are on a 3 month assignment then gone.  If they finish 
their contracts many are leaving and not finishing contracts because the work 
environment is so bad they leave.  There is a nursing home down 8 staff members on 
one unit because people leaving before they finish orientation.NO CARE FOR 
PATIENTS BEING GIVEN NO STAFF Surgeries being cancelled oncology not able 
to treat patients no staff doctor or nurse.  2 trauma hospitals in the entire state and one 
in such financial hardship they are selling out to cooperates.  So healthcare will be 
even more expensive and worse than now.  I could go on for hours with the situations 
and cases I have been told in the last 3 years Right now one of the trauma units has 3 
wrong full deaths lawsuits pending  And more coming up.  It is overtime to stop these
horrible healthcare mandates.  I have one more point to make.  Our state has NOT 
been getting medical advice from a doctor of medicine for the past few years but from
a doctor of economics who was fired in his last job as CDC director in Illinois for 
letting Legionnaires spread through the VA homes and he did nothing  Fired by 
Senator Dick Durbin.  Hired by Janet Mills  We can not nor have ever been able to 
find a medical license in the state of Maine.  There have been many great medical 
doctors in our state fighting these mandates because of the damage and deaths 
occurring because of them and they were rewarded by losing their licenses  Please 
research the right sources and get the facts.  If you do you will stop these mandates 
now and realize this is not about health its about politics 
