Madhava Setty
Concord, MA
LD 51
I am for the proposed legislation, LD 51, An Act to Restore Religious and 
Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements.
I am an engineer and a board certified anesthesiologist. In my 20+ years of clinical 
practice I, like all my colleagues in medicine, regularly encounter patients who 
choose treatment options different from our recommendations. We honor their 
wishes. This is a pillar of ethical medical practice, to obtain informed consent.
The reason why informed consent is vital in medicine is because there is so much 
uncertainty around the risk and benefit of our interventions. We each have a different 
relationship with uncertainty. Moreover, “facts” change. Countless drugs, biologic 
products, vaccines and interventions have been eliminated from our therapeutic 
arsenal as real world data became available.
Personally, I have cared for patients with belief systems that I do not subscribe to. For
example, more than once I have had to promise a patient that I would not administer 
blood products to them during an operation, even if their life was in jeopardy because 
of their philosophical and religious position on the matter.
It is not up to me, a doctor, or you, legislators, to decide what constitutes a “valid” 
argument when it comes to a person’s philosophical or religious beliefs. The only 
ethical position is to honor their wishes, especially when there is so much that is 
unknown.
At this moment, the public is still unaware of the composition of the Covid-19 mRNA
vaccines. Despite numerous requests under FOIA, much of the ingredient list remains 
redacted. How can we properly and honestly inform people if we, ourselves, do not 
know what exactly we are demanding that they put in their bodies?
History will not look kindly upon these last years when personal religious and 
philosophical beliefs have been decimated by the institution of medicine which 
ultimately is built upon immutable ethics, not science, which is constantly in flux. 
Please restore these exemptions and bring ethics back to public health.

