April 1, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members 
of the committee, 
 
My name is Martha Bell and I am a mother of two children who will be directly 
impacted by your vote.  Therefore, I am asking for your support in passing LD 
51.   
 
In September of 2021, schools across Maine lost students because of the 
elimination of philosophical and religious vaccine exemptions, including RSU 
29 in Houlton which lost our two children.  They had both been in public 
school since they were in pre-K, while our rights to bodily autonomy were 
honored.  Our children were forced to leave the most interpersonal and only 
academic environment they had ever known. This has negatively impacted 
their social and emotional well-being.  While we have put in great effort to 
keep them engaged, most of their interaction is now through electronic 
devices.  As a result, their relationships have deteriorated over time.  It is my 
hope that you will take into consideration the well-being of the children being 
removed from classrooms.    
 
We have seen first-hand how ineffective the current law has been over the 
past two years.  The intent to enforce vaccines for all or to separate the 
vaccinated from unvaccinated children has not been accomplished.  For 
example, both of our children still engage in non-school sponsored sports 
programs which utilize public school gymnasiums and play against public 
school students from other towns across the state of Maine.  Our children are 
human beings that still interact in the communities and state in which they 
live so isolating them from the school day has negatively impacted school 
enrollment and the well-being of the students being removed.  Again, the 
current law is not effective!   
 
Our kids have experienced firsthand what discrimination is like.  Due to their 
high academic scores, they have had to try and understand how students with 
IEP's are able to attend school with exemptions, while they are told they are 
no longer allowed to be a part of their school.  By continuing to allow this to 
happen, you are supporting a law that discriminates against children like 
mine.  Will you stand up for them? 
 
We have learned through the recent pandemic that it is not in a child's best 
interest to be educated while isolated.  I am asking you to stand up for what 
is right.  Not only is this critically important for the students being affected 
now, but THIS IS THE TIME, to stand up and do what is best for generations 
to come.   
 
Please support LD 51 today, it is vital for our children and to the future of 
education in Maine. 
 
Gratefully, 
 
Martha Bell 
