Melissa North-Drain 
136 Old Greene Rd. 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
(413)717-0143 
Shocky2020@yahoo.com  
3/31/2023 
LD 51, “An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemp Ɵons to Immuniza Ɵon 
Requirements” 
 
Dear Commi Ʃee on Educa Ɵon and Cultural Aﬀairs,  
Please restore the religious and philosophical exemp Ɵons to immuniza Ɵons requirements for students 
and certain healthcare facili Ɵes so that more children can have EQUAL ACCESS to educaƟon.  
A child should not be denied an educa Ɵon because their parents are doing, what the parents believe , is 
the healthiest and saf est immuniza Ɵon approach for their child.  I didn’t make the decision to not 
inoculate my kids with ALL the required school vaccines because I’m an “an Ɵ-vaxer” or “s Ɵcking it the 
man”; I did it because it is what I believe is the healthiest choice for my children. And please note, many 
parents decide to inoculate their children with certain vaccines and not all the many, many vaccines 
recommended or required. This choice is made a Ōer extensive research, talking with the child ’s Doctor 
and knowing what ma kes sense for their unique child. Why wouldn’t I obtain a medical exemp Ɵon from 
my kids Doctor you may be thinking?  Because the law states the exemp Ɵon can only come from certain 
types of doctors (which doesn’t include Naturopathic Doctors – the type of Doctor my children have for 
their primary care doctor and who are licensed in the state of Maine). This does not make sense to me 
so I can only assume why Naturopathic Doctors are excluded from this ability.   
This is seƫng my children up for poverty if  they can not obtain an educa Ɵon. I will also be entering 
poverty and losing everything I have, including our home. If my kid’s can’t go to daycare or school, I will 
not be able to work. I don’t have anyone to babysit (or homeschool) my kids. I do not have any source of 
money coming in if I can’t work. What are we supposed to do?  
Thank you for Ɵme and please call me to discuss further. Peace.  
Sincerely, 
Melissa North-Drain 
 
