 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
 
TO:   Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
 
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate  
 
DATE:  April 3, 2023 
 
OPPOSE – LD 51; An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization 
Requirements 
 
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the members of the Education 
and Cultural Affairs Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, I am the Public Health and 
Government Affairs Associate for the Maine Medical Association and I live in Windham. The 
Maine Medical Association appreciates the opportunity to submit the following comments in 
strong opposition to LD 51 which would reinstate religious and philosophical exemptions to 
immunization requirements that was repealed in 2021 to protect against preventable diseases 
in the wake of the pandemic. 
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. 
 
“The impact of vaccination on the health of the world’s peoples is hard to exaggerate. With the 
exception of safe water, no other modality has had such a major effect on mortality reduction 
and population growth” ( Plotkin and Mortimer, 1988 ). 
 
Vaccination has made an enormous contribution to public health. Often it is stated that 
vaccination has made the greatest contribution to global health of any human intervention 
apart from clean water and sanitation. The intentions of this bill may come from a good place; 
but in seeking a balance between religious freedom and public health we must consider which 
possesses the greatest risk. The MMA’s top priorities include protecting and investing in our 
public health to ensure the safety of all Maine residents now and in the future. Vaccinations are 
an effective, safe, and efficient way to protect public health – of importance the pandemic has 
clearly demonstrated for us these past few years. 
 
In 2021, Maine repealed immunization requirements to remove religious and philosophical 
exemptions. This repeal, which required all children to have their immunization for school entry 
unless they had a medical exemption, was supported by 72% of Maine voters  in a March 2020 
referendum.  
 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 Immunization is the only way we can completely stop the transmission of communicable 
diseases and potentially eradicate them. However, immunization works best if everyone able 
has it – creating herd-immunity  to protect those with significant medical reasons preventing 
them from receiving the vaccine.  
 
Vaccine hesitancy is a significant public health issue we must work to address. It is 
understandable to want background research of the efficacy and evidence behind what we 
give our children. But vaccines are well researched, evidence-based, safe, and effective. We 
are already seeing news reports  of eradicated diseases such as measles spreading among 
school children because of vaccine hesitancy and refusal. This is putting children’s lives at risk.  
 
For these reasons we also oppose the following bills before the committee today: LD 869, 
1098, 1148, 1209, and 1228. With regards to LDs 1148 and 1228 as they impact colleges and 
universities this could pose an additional public health risk due to the close nature of dorms. 
LD 830 seeks to study providing on-campus housing for all students in response to the 
increased enrollment in community colleges. It is important to consider how to protect these 
students as we increase on-campus dorm opportunities.  
 
We thank the committee for hearing our comments and welcome any questions.  
 
Sincerely, 
Mikenzie Dwyer 
(mdwyer@mainemed.com )  
