Nicole Rines
Gardiner 
LD 51
I am in support of LD 51. When I found out I was becoming a mom a few years ago, I
did hours and hours and hours AND HOURS of research. Not just basic google 
research everyone assumes we do. I asked doctors and pharmacists for the vaccine 
inserts that are not given with the vaccines. I looked at the adverse reactions that were
possible from each vaccine, individual doses and 3 in 1 doses, I looked at what 
ingredients were in each vaccine and I read the books written by doctors. I needed to 
know what  and why they wanted to inject into my perfectly heathy child every 2 
months (30 doses of vaccines, some being a 3 in one, all before he turns the age of 1). 
After doing those  hours of research the best decision for my child and my family was
that it wasn't worth the risk to vaccinate our child. 
We were not going to inject a perfectly healthy newborn baby with ingredients such 
as: gelatin, Monosodium glutamate (MSG), aluminum phosphate, vero cell line: 
(which is an immortalized cell line established from kidney epithelial cells of the 
African green monkey) and MRC-5 (which is a diploid cell culture line composed of 
fibroblasts, originally developed from the lung tissue of a 14-week-old aborted 
Caucasian male fetus). 
With making this decision we didn't think much about our child's future in school, 
because we lived in Maine, we had all the exemptions he needed. We never thought 
we would have those exemptions stripped from us right before our eyes before our 
child even got to have a thought of going into daycare, yet alone pre k, elementary, 
middle or high school. 
Did you know the insert for the VARIVA Varicella Virus Vaccine Live under the 
Risk of Vaccine Virus Transmissions states: Post-marketing experience suggests that 
transmission of varicella vaccine virus (Oka/Merck) resulting in varicella infection 
including disseminated disease may occur between vaccine recipients (who develop 
or do not develop a varicella-like rash) and contacts susceptible to varicella including 
healthy as well as high-risk individuals. Due to the concern for transmission of 
vaccine virus, vaccine recipients should attempt to avoid whenever possible close 
association with susceptible high-risk individuals for up to six weeks following 
vaccination with VARIVAX. Susceptible high-risk individuals include:
• Immunocompromised individuals;
• Pregnant women without documented history of varicella or laboratory evidence of 
prior infection;
• Newborn infants of mothers without documented history of varicella or laboratory 
evidence of prior infection and all newborn infants born at <28 weeks gestation 
regardless of maternal varicella immunity.
Have you been told that you need to quarantine or isolate yourselves after being 
vaccinated? Have you been told that you couldn't be around babies, or pregnant 
woman after being recently vaccinated? Many haven't. This is how the spread starts, 
it's not by the unvaccinated. Its by the recently vaccinated that don't know they need 
to isolate. 
There is not one size fits all when it comes to vaccines and parents already have 
others judging their decisions along with mom guilt and wondering if they are  
making the right choices for their little ones. Give parents back their choice to allow 
their kids to go to Maine public schools. Where there is risk, there must always be a 
choice. Please help Maine provide the path our children need to the education they 
deserve. 

