Paul Michaud
Turner
LD 51
Religious and philosophical discrimination against Maine families has been made 
acceptable with the passing of LD 798 in 2019. Because of my family’s religious 
beliefs, my child is unable to attend public or private school in Maine and therefore is 
unable to experience the positive impact that public or private school can have on a 
developing child within a community. 
Participating in school is much more than an education - it’s developing friendships 
with peers and relationships with school faculty. Its collective and personal 
development through socialization with classmates of diverse backgrounds and 
traditions. It’s the opportunity to be influenced and inspired by classmates and to 
influence and inspire in return. Children participate in school sports, clubs and other 
afterschool and extracurricular activities where their families are present to cheer on 
their children and grandchildren. Communities are largely built through these 
school-related experiences but religious and philosophical discrimination has divided 
Maine by depriving Maine families of their ability to fully participate in their 
communities.
The Maine Human Rights Act (“MHRA”) is Maine’s anti-discrimination law. It 
prohibits discrimination on the basis of protected class in employment, housing, 
places of public accommodation, education, and extension of credit.  Protected classes
include: race, color, ancestry, national origin, sex, sexual orientation (which includes 
gender identity and expression), physical or mental disability, religion, age, and other 
categories in certain contexts. The passing of LD798 directly violated the MHRA by 
discriminating against children and their families based on their religious beliefs and 
their CIVIL RIGHT to a free public education.
Maine is better than this. As one of the most progressive and accepting states in terms 
of race, ethnicity, cultures, customs and traditions - why are we directly violating the 
MHRA and allowing this form of religious and philosophical discrimination? We 
must eliminate this discrimination and be accepting of others no matter what their 
beliefs are. My child and every Maine child deserves to go to school and participate in
every aspect of his or her community without discriminatory conditions. I urge the 
members of this committee to vote “ought to pass” on LD51 in respect for all of 
Maine’s families and for the sake of Maine’s communities. 

