Rachel White
Richmond
LD 51
Dear Education and Cultural Affairs Subcommittee,
Thank you for the opportunity to share thoughts here and for listening to my 
perspective.
As a lifelong Mainer and student of public schooling, I am writing to urge you to 
support LD 51, An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to 
Immunization Requirements.
I am writing from a unique perspective. My children were not affected the original 
LD 798, as they were fully immunized at that time. Yet, I had friends who were 
harmed by this requirement, whose children lost the right to public education at that 
time.
I believe that it is wrong to exclude children who have not received the 
CDC-recommended immunization shots from their right to a public education. This is
a form of discrimination based on an unfounded fear that these children would 
somehow spread disease. In fact, time and time again, it has been shown that these 
children have almost never been responsible for spreading any disease. Vaccines just 
don’t work that way. 
In fact, I personally know of a number of children instead who have been harmed by 
vaccines. Certainly, that has been the case especially recently with the alarmingly 
high number of myocarditis, sudden death and strokes among children receiving the 
Covid-19 experimental vaccine.
To condemn a group of people and to deny them education based on their parents’ 
unwillingness to subject them to potentially harmful shots is a morally reprehensible 
choice.
Now, I am personally not opposed to all vaccines. I believe they do serve a place in 
our culture. Yet, I also know that we live in a free society, where freedom of choice 
and freedom from bodily harm is an essential right to what makes us Americans. To 
force families to choose between a medical intervention that is risky and potentially 
permanently damaging to their children and a free education is wrong. I actually 
personally know of families who got their children a number of vaccines a few years 
ago so they could stay in public school. A few of those previously-healthy children 
have developed auto-immune diseases shortly after. This is heartbreaking.
I ask that you look into your hearts, and into your knowledge of reason and 
practicality, and restore the religious and philosophical exemptions to immunization 
requirements on all levels of education in Maine. It’s the right thing to do for all 
children.
Thank you for your time and consideration,
Rachel Horton White

