Renee Fortin
Lewiston
LD 51
Dear Chairs, Leads and Committee members,  
This email is to show my support of the following bills being heard today.  Thank you
LD 51      An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to 
Immunization Requirements (Drinkwater)
LD 869    An Act to Protect Education Access by Prohibiting a Mandate for 
Schoolchildren for a COVID-19 Vaccine
       or a Vaccine Under an Emergency Use Authorization (Keim)
LD 1098  An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions Regarding 
Immunization Requirements (Bagshaw)
LD 1148  An Act to Prohibit COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates for Students Enrolled in 
Public Institutions of Learning (Brakey)
LD 1209  An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine Exemptions 
for Private Schools and
                Virtual Public Charter Schools (Boyer)
LD 1228  An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from Requiring 
Vaccines Approved Under
                Emergency Use Authorization for Admission or Attendance (Emergency) 
(Smith)
     I believe it is our constitutional right to determine what form of medical treatment 
we should receive by conscience, religious liberty and freedom of choice. It is called 
personal bodily autonomy.  A particular party right now is pushing for the rights of 
women to be able to choose to have an abortion,  yet they advocate  persons should 
have no right to choose what should be injected into their bodies?? The injections 
have now been determined to be ineffective in stopping covid and bringing more 
harm than good. Please study the data and facts that are being released. Science began
with saying the young people were barely at risk and now there is a push to even 
inject infants. This is outrageous! Isn't it time to do what scientists do, "question the 
science"? Oh but wait, when certain doctors in Maine and elsewhere, began to 
question the so called science, they licenses were revoked, their livelihoods taken 
away from them, when all they were doing was what they always did, work to save 
lives!  Isn't it time to stop fear mongering. The people of Maine with understanding, 
have had enough of this. We are not ignorant and beyond being brainwashed by 
government/media fear tactics.  It is time to do what is right and stop unilateral 
mandates. Follow the laws, i.e., "LIFE, LIBERTY, AND THE PURSUIT OF 
HAPPINESS"!  Vote to support freedom, life giving choices, and let the people of 
Maine make their own decisions.  Support, LDs 51, 869, 1098, 1148, 1209, and 1228
Renee Fortin
doftndr@roadrunner.com
207-795-6927
207-240-1455 cell
I would have fainted, unless i had believed that i would see the goodness of the 
LORD in the land of the living. Wait on the LORD; be of good courage, and He shall 
strengthen your heart. Wait, I say, on the LORD! Ps.27:13-14
