To the Member s of the Committ ee on E ducation and Cultural Af fairs:
My name is Roberta  Manter, a nd I live in Fay ette.  I  am writing  to ask y ou to restore  the re ligious
and philosophical exemptions to C OVID vac cination.  I t is now recog nized that those who have
had COVI D have  better immunity  than those who a re fully vacc inated.  I ’m rea sonably  sure I
have ha d it twice.  I n 2020, shortly  befor e it was re cognized that COVI D was he re in Maine , our
daug hter’s f amily  got terribly  sick and shar ed it with us.  They  live in Bridg ton, where  just after
Christmas break the re was a na sty unidentified flu bug  that aff ected so many  teachers a nd
students that a couple of  schools in the are a actually  shut down.  I  was sick f or a c ouple of we eks. 
My husband, who ha s a compromised immune sy stem due to having  lymphoma, and who ha s a
history  of re acting  badly  to vacc inations, was sick for  twice a s long.
The sec ond time I  suspected I  had COVI D, I didn’t bother to g et tested be cause  it was fair ly mild. 
Then I  learned that a f riend who w as exposed to the person I  got it from, had tested positive for
COVI D.  My  husband, (much to my  surprise, a s he ca tches e verything that’ s going a round,) only
had a sc ratchy throat for  a couple  of day s.  We could only  chalk it up to his having  had a mor e
serious ca se the fir st tim e, and the refore ha ving built up strong er immunity .
Here’s an analog y for Ma ine hunters.  I f you’re  out hunting, late on the  last day  of hunting
season, a nd something move s behind the tree s but y ou are n’t sure w hat it is, do y ou shoot at it?  
Of course not.  You don’ t fire unless y ou’re  absolutely  sure y ou won’t har m your hunting  buddy
or anothe r person.  So why  would y ou demand someone  inject something  into their body  when it
has not y et bee n deter mined exactly  what the outcome  may  be?  I hope that other s who have
testified have  at the ver y least made  you unsure of  whether  or not COVI D vac cines a re safe.
The Moder na vac cine wa s develope d from fe tal stem cells.  Science  has shown that fr om the
moment of conc eption, an embr yo is taking in nutrition and g rowing ; theref ore it is alive.  I ts
DNA pr oves that life is human.  I  refused the Moder na vac cine on r eligious gr ounds based on
scienc e.  It was my  understanding  that the J  & J vacc ine was not de veloped f rom feta l stem cells, 
so when my  summer job require d vacc ination, I  took the J  & J vacc ine.  I t wasn’t until later that I
learned its associate d risk of blood clots and stroke.  I f I had known that, I  would have r efuse d
the vac cine on philosophical g rounds bec ause I  had alr eady had one stroke  a dozen y ears ago, and
now live with two small aneurisms in my  brain whic h could shed a  clot at any  time.  So as much
as I love my  summer job and depe nd on that boost to my  income, I  would have ha d to refuse  the
vaccine.  B oosters ar e not worth the r isk for me, but I  trust my  natura l immuni ty.
Here‘s another a nalog y. Yea rs ag o when I  lived in Massachuse tts, they  passed a  “no fa ult”
insurance  law.  A short time later  I was sitting in my  car, parke d nose in to a brick building , when
another  car zoomed into t he spac e next to me so fast it hit  the building.  I t was a w arm da y so our
windows wer e rolled dow n.  I gave the  driver of  the other c ar an incre dulous look.  He g rinned,
shrug ged, and sa id, “That’s w hy we ha ve insuranc e!”  Simi larly, those who ar e vac cinated ha ve a
false se nse of be ing pr otected.  T hose who a re not va ccina ted ar e more  careful be cause  they
know the risk. I  know for my self, I  had bee n very  careful to avoid c rowds, wa sh my  hands often,
and we ar a mask, so I  wouldn’t risk g etting COV ID and taking  it home to my  husband.  Onc e I
had the shot, I  caug ht my self being  much less ca reful.  L ater it was reve aled that the shot didn’t
provide a s high r ate of  immunit y as wa s hoped. Those w ho had the va ccine  could still get
COVI D without rea lizing it and transmit it to ot hers.  Those  who know they  are sick with
COVI D stay  home, but if the vac cine ke eps them fr om knowing the y have it, they  may  go around
merrily  sprea ding it, thinking the y are safe.
One mother  spoke of he r son who has immune issues and ha s to stay  home bec ause othe rs aren’t
vaccinated.  She complaine d that he’s missing out on important a spects of his educ ation beca use
he has to pa rticipate r emotely .  I agree that it’s unfair.  I ’m a fir m believer  that one func tion of
governme nt is to protect minorities from having  their rig hts overrule d by the majority . But
consider this.  F irst, those who are  vacc inated ca n still  sprea d the disease  without even knowing
they are sick, so depending  on the shots to keep an immune c ompromised child safe  is a false
secur ity.  Those who ha ve had COV ID have  better immunity  than those who ha ve had the  shot,
and ther efore are less of a  dang er to c hildren who c annot take the  shot.  And second, this mother
should realize that childre n who ar e being  forced to stay  home bec ause the y are depending  on
natura l immuni ty instead of a n experimental and unprove n shot suffer  the same de privations as
her c hild.  I ’m sure the re are ma ny more c hildren ar e in that ca tegory, so y ou must consider how
to do the least har m to the gr eatest number of Maine ’s childre n.
My grandc hildren ar e home sc hooled.  Their f amily  chose not to g et vac cinated, la rgely due to
family  history  on both sides of bad re actions to vac cines.  B ut being  home schooled ha s not kept
them from suff ering  depriva tion of many  educa tional opportunities.  My  oldest g rand da ughter
plays fiddle, and he r young er sister pla ys cello.  Their  lessons were  put on hold, and they  were
excluded from F iddle Camp beca use vac cination was r equire d.  They  were prohibited fr om
attending  many  other e nrichment prog rams bec ause the y were not vac cinated.  My  oldest g rand
daug hter wa nts to go into fre sh water  biology .  But he r options for Maine  schools looked dismal
until the rece nt lifting of the U  Maine sy stem’s vac cine r equire ment.  Financ es for  attending
school in another sta te would be a  problem.  And if she  went out of state, w hat is the likelihood
that she would take  a job there  after gradua tion?  Maine would then lose he r dedic ation and skills.
Those who a re pro-choic e empha size that wha t a woman doe s with her own body  should be left
up to her a nd her doc tor.  I s that not just as true reg arding  vacc ines?   People have  tried to g uilt us
into ge tting vac cinated by  telling us that those who do not may  kill Grandma.  Well, abortion
definitely  kills an unborn child, y et that choice  is left up to the mother.  Should an unproven
scare tactic be used to re move a pe rson’s rig ht to choose whe ther or not to have  the vac cine?
It is well known how Voodoo ca n kill a person.  I f someone in a uthority  tells a person w ho
believes in them that they  are going to die, the  result is often that the pe rson dies, eve n though
there  is nothing ac tually  wrong  with them.  How many  people ha ve died of  COVI D who mig ht
have pulled thr ough if they  had not bee n told COVI D was likely  to kill t hem?   My husband is
“high risk” due to his ly mphoma, but he didn’t believe  COVI D would kill him, and he survived.
During  the I nfluenza pande mic of 1918-1919, it was discove red tha t the survival ra te jumped up
drama tically  when they  started tre ating  the sickest patients by  taking  them outdoors wher e they
could g et fre sh air and sunshine.  Why  wasn’t that wide ly adver tised when COVI D hit?   Instead,
we we re told to stay  home, avoid g oing out whe re the re were people, a nd wea r a ma sk - which
keeps y ou from g etting a s much fre sh air.  Many  people we re afraid to even g o out of their
houses.  I t has now bee n shown that the people  who ar e most at risk of dea th from COVI D are
those who ar e obese  and/or a re de ficient in vitamin D and zinc.  I t has also bee n shown that
exercise, e ven as little as a f ew minutes of wa lking onc e or twic e a w eek, sig nificantly  reduc es
the cha nce of  death f rom COVI D.  So there a re thing s we c an do that will actua lly reduc e our
risk, but we we re told our only  hope wa s masking a nd vacc ination.
We were  told I verma ctin is dang erous f or humans, and tha t it’s horse  wormer . Taking  a horse
sized dose would  be dang erous.  B ut Iverme ctin has bee n used for  years in third world countries
to combat human par asitic infec tions.  I t’s very  safe and hig hly effective.  Studies show it’s
effective f or other c onditions as well, including some kinds of c ancer.  So if it’s safe, a nd seems
to help people who ha ve COVI D, why  has it been so vilified a nd prohibited?   Because  it’s chea p! 
Drug  companies w on’t g et rich on it.
We’ve be en ac costed for  refusing COVI D vac cination bec ause “ vaccines have  eradicated Polio
and Smallpox .”  But Flu viruses a re diff erent.  We’ve had f lu vacc ines for y ears, but are no c loser
to era dicating  flu than we  ever  were, bec ause it mutates so ra pidly .  We should know that,
because there  is a new f lu vacc ine eve ry year.  COVI D is no exception.
The a nalog y of vac cine testing  to randomized place bo testing of  para chutes is ludicrous.  I f you
jump from a plane  without a para chute, y ou will die.  There ’s no ce rtainty  that an unvac cinated
person will eve n get COVI D, let alone die  of it.  There ’s also no indication that we aring  a
parachute may  cause  serious injury  or dea th.  Yet statistics show COVI D vac cines ha ve ca used
many  serious side ef fects as well as numer ous deaths.  I f you jump from a plane  with a prope rly
opera ting pa rachute, y ou will most  likely  land safe ly. But it has now be en shown that the va ccine
is no gua rante e you will not get COVI D.  Ther e is eve n evidenc e now e merg ing tha t those who
have ha d the most doses of the vac cine a re more  likely  to die.  I f the surviva l rate f or jumping out
of a pla ne without a par achute  were as hig h as the surviva l rate f or having  COVI D, and if y ou
had to choose  whether  or not to rely  on a par achute  with a known fa ilure ra te and a  record of
injury  or dea th as hig h as those ra tes for the  COVI D vac cines, wha t would y ou choose?   So
compar ing te sting of va ccine s to testing of pa rachutes is not an appropr iate compa rison.
Finally , I look at the experienc es of our  friends.  We ha ve one f riend whose  grandmother  got
COVI D.  She was hospitalized, and wa s quite sick for a  while, but she pulled throug h.  Then she
got a COVI D vac cine.  Within 24 hours, she was dea d.  Another f amily ’s teen a ged daug hter wa s
hospitaliz ed with liver fa ilure shortly  after having  the COVI D vac cine.  She ha d no known hea lth
issues befor e she ha d the shot.  These a re not some va gue rumors of  people we  don’t know, these
are friends of  ours.
If others ha ve conf idence  in the vacc ine and c hoose to take it, that’s their c hoice.  I f we choose
not to, that should be our choice .  How would other s like it if we mandate d that they  could not
take the va ccine ?  They  would be ira te.  We are  simply  asking  for the f reedom to choose.  Please
protec t our Americ an freedom by  restoring  the re ligious and philosophical e xemptions from
vaccines.  Thank y ou.
