Robert Cote
Harford Me
LD 51
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education & Cultural 
Affairs Committee I would like to state my support for LD.51, and LD 1098. Since 
the passing of LD 798 My wife and I have been homeschooling our children, our kids 
were only missing one out of five Dtap shots which according to the system puts them
in the category of "unvaccinated". We decided to stop the last shot due to adverse 
reactions which we later found out our kid had a tumor. The passing set a dangerous 
signal of looking down on one group of people above another, very similar to the 
polices and propaganda pushed by the Nazi regime during the ten years leading up to 
WW2. This has pushed us who once supported the school to be distrustful of any 
propaganda that is pushed by trying to force the population into any decisions through
fear. The passing of LD798 has also forced thousands of others to pull good kids from
schools. The schools of Maine have felt the difference and teachers have been talking.
It thinned out some schools enough of very well behaved and smart kids from the 
ranks of the classrooms and left the classrooms with an overwhelming majority of 
misbehaved kids that have driven many teachers into asking why kids today are 
unteachable, many blame 2020 but in truth it started before then with LD798 which 
prepared many families to help others homeschool in 2020 and beyond. My wife and I
will never return to the public system as we've learned its too broken and the 
curriculums don't teach enough to kids compared to what parents can do with 7 hours 
at home, but if you wish to restore hope into future families of Maine, reinstating 
exemptions is a start. It was also rather foolish that without exemptions kids like mine
couldn't even attend online classes. Classes in which there are no other kids near 
non-fully vaccinated kids, Thats a crimson red flag to the eyes of many into how deep
this really runs or to how shallow in depth our government thinks with when passing 
laws.
