My name is Rolf Hazlehurst. I am the Senior Staff Attorney for Children’s Health Defense, a non -
profit organization, which advocates and litigates to protect the health rights of children. I 
respectfully request that you vote ought to pass on LD 51.  
 
I am from Tennessee, but  I was asked to speak today because I have over twenty years of 
personal and legal experience with the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986  (the 
Vaccine Act) and the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program  (NVICP) . In 2001, my son 
suffered severe and permanent brain damage as the result of a vaccine injury.  
 
In 2011, in the case of Brueswewitz v. Wyet h, the Supreme Court of the United States, 
interpreted a provision of the Vaccine Act to prohibit all lawsuits based upon  design defect 
claims against vaccine manufacturers. For all practical purposes, if a child is injured by a vaccine, 
the vaccine  manufacturers  cannot be held liable no matter how defective or unreasonably 
dangerous the vaccine may be.  
 
If a child is injur ed by a vaccine, the parents may seek compensation under the NVICP in what is 
deceptively referred to as “vaccine court.” The so called, “v accine court ” is not a court of law. It 
is an administrative proceeding in which there is no judge, no jury , and the most basic rules of 
law do not apply. In “vaccine court,” the Federal Rules of Evidence, Discovery and Civil 
Procedure do not apply. In “vaccine court,” the American legal system has been replaced by a 
special master.  A special master is nothing more than a government appointed attorney  in a 
government program.  
 
The Vaccine Act, the  NVICP  and Bruesewitz v. Wyeth  are all based upon the premise that vaccine 
injury is “unavoidable.” What that means is, if enough children  are vaccinated , some of those 
children will be injured. The acknowledged risk of injury includes brain damage and death.  
 
Since the Vaccine Act was enacted, the NVICP  has paid out almost $5 billion dollars in 
compensation for vaccine injuries.  This is an astonishing number when you consider tha t almost 
all vaccine injury claims in the NVICP  are denied.   
 
In the real world, if there is no liability, there is no incentive for safety.  
 
When there is a  known and  acknowledged risk of vaccine injury, including death or brain 
damage, c itizens of a free  state should have the right to vaccine exemption.  
 
Please vote ought to pass on LD 51.  
 
Thank you.  
 
Rolf Hazlehurst  
Senior Staff Attorney  
Children’s Health Defense  
 
