Scott Simpson
Ellsworth
LD 51
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, I am asking you today to vote ‘ought to 
pass’ on LD 51.
I have raised my three wonderful children in the state of Maine and have enjoyed all 
that this state and my local community has to offer.  I am a hard working self 
employed person that along with my family, has chosen to home school my children 
up until the children's' age of high school.  Our two older children were able to access 
public education as high schoolers and succeeded and flourished in their musical 
talents.  Unfortunately, they both have left the state of Maine during their higher 
education because of the recent restrictions due to LD 798.  Our third child 
unfortunately is also not able to attend the public school system(she is in the ninth 
grade) because of our desire to not vaccinate our children for the reasons of 
philosophical and religious beliefs, which I firmly believe is a universal right for any 
human being.  I believe that no person or government should be allowed to tell me or 
anyone what I or others should or should not put into their own body.  Especially if it 
is a chemical that has potential side effects.  We as parents and individuals should 
have a choice.  
Because of our choice to homeschool our children, we also chose to live on one 
income.  As I mentioned before, I work hard to provide for my family in this state of 
Maine.  I am required to pay my fair share of local taxes which I am happy to  and 
willfully do.  But seeing as my third child is unable to access the public education 
system because of our vaccine status,  I feel very upset that at this current stage of my 
life, my family is, in no way, benefiting in my taxpayer dollars to support public 
education.
I respectfully ask you to vote "ought to pass" LD 51 in order to restore our right to 
health choice as individuals and families of this wonderful state of Maine.
Thank you, I am very grateful for your time and consideration.
Scott Simpson
Ellsworth, Maine 
