Testimony in Support of LD 51, LD 869, LD 1098, LD 1148, LD 1209, and LD 1228 By Stacy Minkowsky, LMSW-cc, CADC, Lewiston Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the Committee of Education and Cultural Affairs: I was born in Lewiston, Maine and my late father, Honorable Carroll E. Minkowsky, served in the Maine Legislature for eighteen years. I grew up respecting our legislative process and the time that each of you invest in serving your communities. Likewise, I understand the importance of expressing my concerns as a Maine citizen and ensuring that our government creates policy based upon evidence rather than fear.  This is my third testimony on the matter of religious and philosophical exemptions. I opposed LD798 in 2019. Despite the hundreds of testimonies opposing LD798, especially from parents of vaccine injured children, the bill was passed. Nearly four years later, many questions remain unanswered. Please answer these questions as you consider LD 51, LD869, LD1098, LD1148, LD1209, LD1228.  1.Has the Maine CDC provided evidence of an immunocompromised child being harmed by an unvaccinated and/or partially vaccinated child? 2.How many immunocompromised children in Maine have not received the school required vaccinations? 3.Acknowledging that the V AERS database is passive, has the Maine CDC compiled an active database on the number of vaccine injured children/adults in Maine? If not, why? 4.Have Maine regulatory agencies required doctors to be trained to recognize/report vaccine injury? 5.How many medical exemptions are currently on record? What was the basis for those medical exemptions being accepted? How many medical exemptions were submitted and denied?  6.LD798 was enacted in the fall of 2021. Why are Maine school superintendents selectively allowed to dismiss this law without penalty? 7.LD798 demands that parents submit to aborted fetal DNA lines being injected into their children for school entry. How is this not a violation of religious freedom? 8.After the implementation of the Covid mandate for Maine colleges and universities, how many cases of Covid were reported among fully vaccinated students? What other illnesses were reported during this time? Were those illnesses considered “vaccine preventable”? 9.After the implementation of the Covid mandate for healthcare workers, how many cases of Covid were reported among fully vaccinated workers? What other illnesses were reported during this time? Were those illnesses considered “vaccine preventable”? In 2019, fear based speculation surrounded what the passage of LD798 would achieve in terms of public health. In reality, LD798 has achieved what those opposed to LD798 promised- a mass exodus of healthy children from the school system and a loss of revenue for schools. Please do your due diligence. We need evidenced based policy making not more fear mongering. Reinstate religious and philosophical exemptions. Thank you. 
