Susan Brenner
Ellsworth
LD 51
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, I am asking you today to vote ‘ought to 
pass’ on LD 51.
Maine families have suffered in the past two years.  Maine children have lost their 
access to public and private education, and families have felt the heavy burden of 
being asked to choose between two things that in this country are rightfully theirs; the 
right to choose which medical interventions they feel safe and comfortable with, and 
the right to a public education.   
As a Maine parent who has been homeschooling 3 children since 2005, I have happily
supported my older two as they transitioned into both the new state charter arts high 
school and our local public high school.  Our family was looking forward to our 
youngest attending the same local public high school, and planning for me to join the 
paid workforce full time.  Since our exemption rights were removed, our great state of
Maine has lost our two oldest children to other states that allow their philosophical 
exemption choice when it comes to their bodies and their educational goals.  Our state
has lost two incredibly talented (academically and musically) young people, and it is a
great loss for all of us.  Our family is currently looking into relocating so as to give 
our equally talented youngest child access to what she deserves educationally.  You 
can help by restoring our rights.
Realistically, exemptions have allowed a small percentage of parents who opt to use 
them the right to decide their own medical path, and have no studied, discernable 
negative impact on our state, nor the other 49 states.  Small pockets of illness and 
disease pop up everywhere, but there are no research studies that show any 
overarching negative risk on entire states as to warrant taking away a parents right to 
choose.  It is important to acknowledge that vaccines come with a risk, as with all 
pharmaceutical drugs, and where there is risk there must be choice.  We know there is
risk and injury, and because we know this, we have a duty and obligation to allow 
each one of us sentient beings to decide for ourselves which choice we will make, not 
at the expense of an education, and in some cases a lifelong career as a health 
professional.
I respectfully ask you to vote “ought to pass” LD 51 to restore health choice to all our 
children, and their loving families who are making the best, most educated and safe 
choice for their children, our torn communities, and our great state of Maine.  Let us 
be a leader in freedom and personal choice.   I also urge each one of you to reach out 
and speak to one family affected by a vaccine injury.  The mental, physical and 
monetary costs are lifelong, and there are no supports in place for when the vaccine 
injured’s parents pass on.  These parents, and our state, are facing the unimaginable.  
 
Thank you for listening to my concerns,
Susan Brenner
Ellsworth, Maine

