Susan  Belanger
LD 51
     Thank you Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the 
Education & Cultural Affairs Committee.
     My name is Susan Belanger and we( my husband and myself) are representing our 
two kids today and the stress and hardship weve endured with any and all mandates 
requiring vaccines for further public school attendance. We have had direct 
experience with vaccine reactions with our kids and almost lost our son with his very 
first one. Since then we have been hesitant but still were forced to do so just so that 
these kids could stay in public school setting even though a public school is supposed 
to be open to ALL public without any type of discrimination we somehow aren't 
welcome if we don't subject our kids to more of the past. We have been threatened to 
be kicked out of public school if we do not follow "vaccine requirements" despite our 
worries that we could have another reaction or worse...death. Our doctor advised for 
no more but now says she cannot support any more patients like us with previous 
medical exemption because her hands are tied. If she does support us and other like 
patients she can be fired. So where does that leave us? We should have the right to 
choose what "medical procedures" we have done to our bodies especially given our 
personal medical histories. This is our choice as it is for everyone else. All medical 
procedures and medicines including vaccines come with risks therefore it is up to the 
patients, us, to decide whats best for us. Our medical history and choices were once 
protected by any of the three exemptions but now we have been stripped of all three 
as they have been voted away by folks that had no idea what all of us have gone thru 
as we suffer thru people dictating what we can and cannot do with our own bodies 
despite our battle scars. Please hear us today that all kids deserve the opportunity to 
continue to attend public school and a chance to thrive without such places dictating 
what goes in their bodies just to attend. And if the Covid-19 vaccine gets added to the 
requirements for public school we will be forced to withdraw our kids from the public
school setting since this vaccine defines risk for us and that change will further alter 
our lives yet again as we pursue homeschooling and change work and life choices to 
avoid any more risks of the same accord. This will also prevent the type of education 
that is supposed to be free and/or accessible to ALL students including college 
students which is a slippery slope of discrimination. With that being said I'm writing 
in support of LD51 as well as the following bills:  LD869, LD1098, LD1148, 
LD1209, LD1228. I support  freedom,medical choice,bodily autonomy and school is 
no exception. Thank you for your time and listening to us.

