Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of 
the committee, I am asking you today to vote ought to pass on LD 51.   
 
My name is Tanya Blanchard and I live in Thorndike, Maine.  My husband and I were not born 
in Maine, but we are Mainers by choice.  We first moved here in 1999 because we wanted to 
raise our children in a state that recognized personal freedoms.  Even when a job transfer briefly 
moved us out of state, we chose to come back in 2008 and have made Maine our home.   There 
have been times that the state of Maine has passed laws that we felt were restricting our personal 
freedoms, but none like the law that removed our religious and philosophical rights to 
immunization exemptions, LD798. 
 
My husband and I are devout Christians.  Our faith and religious practice are fundamental to the 
very foundation of our lives.  We believe that scripture is the Divine Word of God, and that we 
are responsible for studying his word (2 Timothy 3:16-17).  We also believe that it is the 
personal responsibility of each believer to ensure that their faith is anchored in the Word of God, 
prayer, and seeking guidance from the Holy Spirit (Romans 8).   This responsibility exists apart 
from any organized church or leader thereof.  These are the tenants by which we have lived our 
adult lives, and by which we raise our children.   
 
We believe that God determines our mortality, and we honor God by keeping our minds and 
bodies healthy benefiting from those natural things which He has provided for us on this earth, 
such as fresh air water, food, and nutrients.  We honor God and His creation and the blessings He 
has bestowed upon us, and we receive with thanksgiving those things created by God (1 Timothy 
4:4). We believe that introducing materials into our bodies such as man-made vaccines 
demonstrates a lack of faith in and a violation of God’s will and suggests that God has not 
sufficiently provided for us.   
 
Scripture tells us that we are created by God, in His image, and that our bodies are a temple for 
the Holy Spirit (1 Corinthians 3:16-17)  In 1 Corinthians 6:19-20 the Apostle Paul speaks of the 
importance of our bodies, “Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit 
who is in you, whom you have from God?  You are not your own, for you were bought with a 
price.  Therefore, glorify God in your body.”  Romans 12:1 tells us to present our bodies as a 
living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God.  With all this in mind, we endeavor to protect our 
bodies from that which is considered biblically unclean.   
 
While the Word of God also instructs us to obey the law of the government placed over us, when 
the law of man conflicts with the Word of God, we must obey God.   The removal of our 
religious and philosophical exemptions regarding vaccinations has forced our family to make 
difficult choices regarding where we work, how we educate our children, what their future 
careers can be, and where they might choose to live when they become adults.  While we have 
not yet taken the steps to move out of Maine, the limitations placed on our family are steering us 
to move to a more faith-friendly state.   
 
We’d like to continue to make Maine our home, and to see our children stay in Maine to work 
and raise their own families.  Therefore, I ask you to please recommend LD51 as Ought to Pass 
to restore our religious freedom in the state of Maine.   
 
 
 
 
