Tara Ambrose
Swanville
LD 51
 Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of
the committee, I am asking you today to vote ought to pass on LD 51. 
I am 53 yrs old.  In my teens I experienced a long-lasting adverse vaccine reaction, 
something listed in the vaccine insert's warning information.  I developed 
neurological tics, a brain effect- I would suddenly and repeatedly twitch my head and 
eyes, over and over.  These confusing and embarrassing neurological tics lasted for 
more than a decade.   I later learned that I have MTHFR gene mutation that results in 
the body not being able to rid itself of toxins, and instead the toxins build up.  I 
continue to have health problems related to this including multiple environmental 
sensitivities and auto-immune illness.  These health problems make life difficult every
day for myself and my family, and I have sought to reduce the possibility of my 
children having the same health problems.  
With my now 9 yr old daughter, instead of injected vaccines, we opted for HP, 
homeoprophylaxis, which protects her and others from common childhood illnesses, 
with no risk of adverse reactions.  HP is used around the world in epidemic situations 
with success.  As parents, we have been thoughtful and responsible about vaccine 
decisions.  Please find additional info about HP below.  It could be affordably 
implemented here in Maine for those who can't or won't vaccinate, with improved 
outcomes for all.  I'd be glad to be a resource.
Back to our story:  
In order to attend Kindergarten and 1st grade in 2019 and 2020, my daughter had a 
medical exemption via her doctor's office that was based on my history of adverse 
vaccine reaction and our concerns.  Our doctor was understanding and supportive of 
our health decisions in response to the family medical history.  The medical 
exemption was phrased "due to mother's history of adverse vaccine reaction, MTHFR 
gene mutation status, food and environmental sensitivities, and parent concerns, this 
child is exempt from vaccine requirements for public school attendance."  
When ld 798 came into effect, we were told they could no longer give that medical 
exemption.  Our Doctor is still supportive of these health decisions but has no say.  A 
medical exemption now requires that a child have an adverse reaction to each 
individual vaccine prior to being exempt.  Given that some of these effects are 
significant and long-lasting, we won't risk our child's health in this way, and so public
school and all its benefits are not an option for her.  
Homeschooling puts an enormous amount of pressure financially, w/ time and 
educational resources on families for following their educated and deeply held beliefs.
It also takes a parent out of the workforce, with those many effects.  We fear for our 
child's future and for all the children in her shoes.  We wish for Maine to return to the 
mutually respectful, admiring of independent thinking and valuing all our neighbors, 
place that it was prior to 2019.  
Please reinstate the philosophical exemption so that children can return to school.  
Please vote ought to pass on LD 51.   
Thank you.  Tara and Wade Ambrose
Info about HP below:
https://www.homeopathyminneapolis.com/homeoprophylaxis
https://www.atlantaclassicalhomeopathy.com/homeoprophylaxis
https://www.amazon.com/Long-Term-Homeoprophylaxis-Study-Children-America/d
p/B08DSS7NVJ
