Vanessa McCausland
Littleton 
LD 51
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, 
My name is Vanessa McCausland from Littleton and I am writing to you today to ask 
you to vote "Ought to Pass" on LD 51 "An Act to Restore Religious and 
Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements"
When the National Childhood  Vaccine Injury Act was passed in 1986 Congress took 
away all liability from pharmaceutical companies. They can not be sued for injuries or
deaths caused by their vaccines. The only product in America where a consumer 
cannot sue the manufacturer. Our federal health agencies, the CDC, NIH and FDA 
were supposed to ensure Vaccine safety under the 1986 Act.  Health and Human 
Services was supposed to put together a task force that was to meet every two years to
report on Vaccine safety, to make sure these liability free products being injected into 
children starting on the first day of life were as safe as they could possibly be. They 
never met once and the task force was disbanded in 1988.  This information was 
uncovered through Freedom of Information Acts and lawsuits, information many of 
you might not have known.  I certainly did not know and believed our federal health 
agencies were doing everything possible to ensure safe vaccines.  If the federal 
government is not and has not followed this mandate for safer vaccines then parents 
should not have to adhere to any mandates either. CDC just released that 1 in 36 
children in our country has an autism diagnosis.  Health officials say vaccines are safe
and effective and do not cause autism but through another FOIA request and another 
lawsuit by ICAN's legal team both the CDC and FDA could not produce one single 
study that proves that the vaccines given in the first year of life do not cause autism.  
LD 51 would give parents the option of utilizing a religious or philosophical 
exemption and have their children attend a public school, either in person or online.  
Parents who have researched vaccines and have chosen to either not vaccinate or 
selectively vaccinate based on their child's own unique health circumstances deserve 
this option especially since our own health agencies have not kept up with what they 
were mandated to do under the 1986 Act.  Below you will find links to a video of 
Aaron Siri from the legal team explaining the 1986 act, the first 30 minutes, and links 
to the FOIA requests and responses if you'd like to read through them yourselves.  
Again I ask you to please vote "Ought to Pass" on LD 51.
https://thehighwire.com/videos/meet-ican-attorney-aaron-siri/
https://icandecide.org/vaccine-safety-debate/ 
https://icandecide.org/press-release/cdc-and-nih-unable-to-provide-a-single-study-to-s
upport-the-safety-of-injecting-aluminum-adjuvants-despite-its-widespread-use-in-chil
dhood-vaccines/ 
https://icandecide.org/press-release/the-cdcs-still-discussing-how-to-respond-to-vacci
ne-safety-debate-it-lost-to-ican-over-a-year-prior/

