Testimony in favor of LD51, An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical 
Exemptions to Immunization Requirements 
April 3, 2023 Public Hearing 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Verna O’Neil, a 15 year resident of the town of Phillips, until October 
2021. My family and I are an example of the tragic loss that has occurred and is 
occurring in Maine, as a result of the removal of religious and philosophical 
vaccine exemptions.  
After 30 years in the field, and over 20 years serving his rural community as a 
much-needed paramedic, my husband Jeremy was fired from his job for not taking 
the covid vaccine, even though he provided his employer with documented natural 
immunity. He was refused a religious exemption, though for many years 
previously he had been granted one for other vaccines. This was a terrible loss to 
us as he was barred from any job in the state of Maine.  
We lost our home in Maine. We lost health insurance in the middle of my 
pregnancy. We lost our community of family and friends. Phillips lost two 
firefighters, my husband and my eldest son.  
My eldest daughter, Deirdre, served as a CNA at a nursing home in Maine, 
working right through a covid outbreak there. She was terminated as well for 
refusal to vaccinate. What a loss to the community during a healthcare crisis! 
Deirdre had planned to study to be a midwife in Maine. She is now in her second 
year in a midwifery program in Texas. What a loss to Maine. 
University of Maine lost an engineering student in my son, Jackson, who planned 
to attend UMO. He is now an honors engineering student at Liberty University in 
Virginia. 
I have seven other bright children who have no future in Maine because the 
religious and healthcare freedom we had before was taken away. There are no 
educational opportunities for them. 
I know there are many other families that have suffered even worse than ours, and 
Maine has suffered greatly as a state from the loss of dedicated healthcare 
providers and students who would have been the future. Please vote in favor of LD 
51 and put Maine back on track to gain and not lose! 
