Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavilt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Opposition 
LD 1397: An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Right To Know Advisory 
Committee Concerning Records of Disciplinary Actions Against Public Employees 
Ben Grant — General Council, Maine Education Association 
Before the Judiciary Committee 
April 10, 2023 
My name is Ben Grant (he/him) and I am proud to serve as General Counsel for the Maine Education 
Association (MEA). The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, including teachers and 
other professionals in nearly every public school in the state and faculty and other professional staff in 
the University of Maine and Community College Systems.I 
I am here to convey MEA’s opposition to LD I397. We understand that the sponsor is open to ideas 
about how to make this bill more palatable to all impacted parties, and we are prepared to remain 
engaged in the process. In light of the notion that there is more work to do, I will use my time to 
highlight our concerns about the bill as drafted. 
First, I want to make clear that the MEA recognizes the policy underlying the current proposal — namely 
that of protecting employees, future employers, and the public in general from bad actors. There are 
classes of offenses that should be discoverable. 
However, this bill’s approach is too broad, and, in our view, susceptible to manipulation Qy bad actors. 
This Committee should seek to achieve an appropriate balance between the public’s right to know anda 
citizen’s right to privacy. To be specific, this bill forces into the public domain all levels of discipline in 
an employee ’s record — no matter how minor. Many disciplinary matters that fall short of suspension or 
termination involve actions or behaviors that are often corrected right away. Something like this should 
not live on in perpetuity. Further, the letters that describe these kinds of discipline often contain long- 
winded and one-sided statements of facts that are left uncontested or unedited. We are significantly 
concerned about how these kinds of minor matters could be twisted or manipulated by someone in the 
future with an axe to grind. 
We need to continue to allow parties to bargain away the existence of at least lower-level discipline— 
both in contract bargaining and in dispute resolution. The MEA is eager to remain engaged in this 
process so that appropriate lines are drawn to protect the privacy of employees who should not have 
minor acts follow them throughout their careers. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
. 7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
