Testimony of Jeff McCabe 
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
State House Room 438 and electronically 
In Opposition to LD 1397, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Right To Know Advisory 
Committee Concerning Records of Disciplinary Actions Against Public Employees, Reported by 
Representative Moonen of Portland 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, members of the Committee on Judiciary, l’m Jeff McCabe, 
Director of Politics and Legislation for the Maine Service Employees Association, Local 1989 of the 
Service Employees International Union. The Maine Service Employees Association represents over 
13,000 public sector and private sector workers. 
Throughout all departments of Maine State Government, the State is experiencing a real struggle to 
recruit and retain employees. State workers feel buried by workloads and cannot keep up. One in six 
positions in Maine State Government is currently vacant, further exacerbating the workloads of 
everyone doing the public’s work. Often legislation with the best intention can create further uncertainty 
for public sector workers. We understand the interest in bringing this bill forward but because of the 
signiﬁcant potential consequences to public-sector employees, we come today to speak against this bill. 
In the event this Committee chooses to proceed with this bill, we hope we can work with the committee 
to get us to a place of supporting this bill in an amended version. We understand efforts to protect the 
public and fellow employees that this bill may address. Below we're providing a list of concerns and 
questions. 
Concerns and Examples 
We are incredibly concerned about the ways in which this bill could create, intentionally or not, a quasi- 
permanent disciplinary record for the employees to whom it applies. Currently, our various collective 
bargaining agreements contain provisions for the removal of discipline from personnel ﬁles after certain 
periods of time, depending on the level of discipline and whether subsequent discipline has been 
imposed. Discipline in an employee's personnel ﬁle, in many cases, can and is used tojustify subsequent 
and more severe discipline for similar conduct. A reasonable removal period allows an employee to 
improve their behavior in the hopes of an eventual "clean slate" for disciplinary purposes. As drafted, 
this bill would impose substantially longer "active discipline" periods on employees, potentially leading 
to more severe discipline being issued simply because the prior discipline could not be removed from 
the personnel ﬁle. Similarly, this longer period of retention of the discipline, even outside of the 
personnel ﬁle, could cause an employee unnecessary burden or embarrassment, including for lower- 
level forms of discipline for things such as tardiness, minor work performance issues, or intraofﬁce 
dynamics, even though the employee's behavior, job, or duties could have changed signiﬁcantly since the 
time the discipline was issued. Additionally, keeping disciplines for such a lengthy period oftime could 
lead to more severe impacts on employees, such as denials of promotions or otherjob opportunities. 
This bill will also have signiﬁcant impacts on labor relations between the various public employers and 
labor organizations representing public employees. The meaning of ”ﬁnal written decision" and the ways
1
in which the proposed retention periods would apply do not necessarily comport with the reality of how 
discipline is handled, at least within our Executive Branch contracts. We ﬁle grievances when a discipline 
is issued that we assert violates the applicable contract, including disciplines that lack basis in fact. The 
goal of such a grievance, in most cases, is to have the discipline rescinded and removed, as if it had not 
been issued. The bill and underlying statute deﬁne a "ﬁnal written decision," in two ways — as either an 
ungrieved discipline or an arbitrator's written decision if grieved. Currently, a grieved discipline is not 
considered to be a ﬁnal written decision, but an ungrieved discipline is. However, given the ways in 
which our grievance processes operate, many disciplines that fall into a third, and perhaps even fourth, 
category - ones that are actively being grieved but have not yet made it to the arbitration stage of the 
grievance process and, relatedly, those that were grieved but resolve, by mutual agreement ofthe 
parties, prior to arbitration. As to the latter category, a grievance settlement will often include a 
reduction ofthe time that the discipline remains in the employee's personnel ﬁle. This bill would remove 
this incentive towards settlement and ensure that we will be forced to take many more cases to 
arbitration, particularly in those disciplines that make professionally damaging allegations but lack 
factual basis or proof. In those situations, among others, an arbitrator's decision would be the only 
means by which to entirely overturn and eliminate an issued discipline and for the disciplined employee 
to be vindicated. Put plainly, this bill will dramatically increase both the adversarial relationship between 
workers and the employers and increase the overall costs ofthe dispute resolution process borne by 
each party, including the various public employers impacted by this bill, will rise substantially. 
State workers enforce laws and rules that are not necessarily welcomed by the individuals against whom 
enforcement is made. Unfortunately, we have examples of employees across the public sector subjected 
to harassment by members ofthe public. Some examples involve workers in child protective services at 
Maine DHHS as well as workers in the Maine Department of Corrections, the Judicial Department and 
the Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. The list of workers subjected to harassment 
by members of the public goes on. Although the intent ofthe bill may be to provide transparency about 
state operations, the unintended consequence is that open records and extended retention periods can, 
and often do, provide an opportunity for the public, especially those who may have had negative, albeit 
professional, interactions with State workers to unreasonably and unnecessarily embarrass or harass 
state workers about past discipline which, as it currently stands, would have been removed from their 
personnel ﬁle and state records within a reasonable period oftime. As with their counterparts in the 
private sector, State employees should be able to, within reason, be able to improve their behavior and 
most beyond their prior discipline, without it following them indeﬁnitely. 
Clarifying Questions to be answered for work session 
What would prevent medical information, phone, numbers and addresses of employees from becoming 
public? 
Speciﬁcally, can this bill be amended to include language that would allow ”ﬁnal written 
decisions" to be redacted to avoid the disclosure of conﬁdential or personal information, such as 
that information protected under 5 MRSA 7070 (A)-(D-1) and the corresponding sections of the 
municipal and county statutes? 
lfthis bill is intended to retain records of serious misconduct, can serious misconduct be deﬁned?
2
If not in a personnel ﬁle, where would employers be required to retain these records? 
Thank you and I would be glad to answer any questions.
