         
 
Sen. Carney , Rep.  Moon en, members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary,  my name 
is Judith Meyer . I am the editor of the Sun Journal in Lewiston, the Kennebec Journal and the 
Morning Sentinel , and I have served on the Right to Know Advisory Committee for the past 20 
years .  
I am here today on behalf of both the Maine Freedom of Information Coalition and the New 
England First Amendment Coalition , on whose boards I serve,  to enthusiastically urge this 
committee to pass LD 1 397, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Right to Know 
Advisory Committee Concerning Records of Disciplinary Actions Against Public Employees.  
* * * 
In 2020, both the Portland Press Herald and the Bangor Daily News filed Freedom of Access 
Act reques ts with the Department of Public Safety for access to certain S tate Police disciplinary 
records.  
The newspapers found  that “under a union contract, some public records of disciplin e are 
destroyed. Troopers have been arrested but lack a public discipline history. And DPS  has 
revoked the licenses of troopers who resigned from the State Police with no public record 
documenting why .” (PPH/BDN report attached)  
That report prompted the Maine Freedom of Information Coalition to wonder how other police 
agencies manage disciplinary records and how they would respond to similar FOAA requests. 
So, in January 2021 the MFOIC filed FOAA requests for access to disciplinar y records with 135 
law enforcement agencies in Maine and documented the response. The results revealed 
widespread discrepancies in the public’s ability to access documents that members of the public 
are legally entitled to view , widespread redaction of tho se records  and, in 30 cases, no 
response at all . (MFOIC press release and Sun Journal report on audit attached ) 
In response to that audit and the PPH/BDN reporting, New England First Amendment Coalition 
Executive Director Justin Silverman wrote an opinion piece for the Sun Journal in which he 
highlighted the excessively redacted misconduct records produced by the State Police and the 
need for transparency within that department ( attached ). Referring to the PH report, he wrote: 
“Public awareness of whether law enforce ment agencies are engaged in effective oversight and 
discipline of officers serves as a vital check on public corruption and misconduct.”  
The PH and BDN filed suit against the Department of Public Safety and, in May last year, a  
judge ordered State Police to produce the requested records . (PH report attached ) 
It took a lawsuit to wrest these public records away from this state agency. During the two years 
of newspaper reporting along with the MFOIC audit, we learned that not only are some police 

agencies re luctant to provide public records, they actively remove disciplinary records from 
personnel files within a few short years, sometimes at an officer’s request.  
This is not the norm for other state agencies, or for county and municipal agencies where the re 
is greater retention of disciplinary records and their availability to the public is more accessible.  
A police officer who is disciplin ed should not have any greater privilege  of confidentiality than a 
school teacher, a county administrator,  or any oth er public employee.  Given the inherent power 
of law enforcement and the greater consequences of its abuse, even more transparency is 
needed relative t o other public servants.  
As Maria Haberfeld, an expert on police training and discipline at the John Jay College of 
Criminal Justice in New York, told the PH, transparency into misconduct isn’t solely for the 
public’s benefit to “see what kind of misconduct is  tolerated by the given police organization and 
why,” there is matching  public interest in knowing whether “there is an equal distribution of the 
discipline” within and across agencies.  
Through  this bill, the Legislature  requires  much  needed  public  access  to the disciplinary  records  
of all public  employees.  It prevents  those  records  from being  destroyed  or deemed  confidential  
based  on collective  bargaining  agreements.  The bill also requires  agencies  to provide  enough  
written  detail  in disciplinary  records  for the public  to understand  the underlying  behavior  and 
ensures  that all disciplinary  records  are retained  for a reasonable  period  of time to be 
determined  by the State  Archivist,  not individual  agencies  that might  otherwise  favor  secre cy. 
These are sound measures to preserve transparency and p rotect public trust.  
 
 
* * * 
To review MFOIC’s audit results, including disciplinary records provided by Maine’s police 
departments, go to:  http://www.tinyurl.com/mfoicaudit  
The password for access is Mainenews1!; click “my drive” on left to access documents.  
* * * 
The Maine Freedom of Information Coalition  is a broad co alition of public access advocates 
who strive  to educate Maine citizens and legislators about the rights and responsibilities of 
citizens in accessing information so they may participate more fully in our democracy. MFOIC 
supports open access to government  information, supports those who exercise their rights to 
access government information under Maine’s Freedom of Access Act , and periodically 
conducts audits of government agency practices in making government information available 
according to the spirit and letter of FOAA.  
The New England  First  Amendment  Coalitio n is the region’s  leading  advocate  for First 
Amendment  freedoms  and the public’s  right to know  about  government.  The coalition  is a non-
partisan  non-profit  organization  that believes  in the power  of transparency  in a democratic  
society.  Its members  include  lawyers,  journalists,  historians,  academics,  and other  private  
citizens . Learn  more  about  NEFAC  at nefac.org . 
1 / 1 3By Callie Ferguson, Matt Byrne and Erin Rhoda April 18, 2021Inside the Maine State Police, officer misdeeds are kept
secret
pressherald.com /2021/04/18/inside-the-maine-state-police-of ficer-misdeeds-are-kept-secret/
This is the first of three stories jointly investigated and written by the Portland Press
Herald/Maine Sunday T elegram and Bangor Daily News about how the Maine State Police
conceals officer wrongdoing. The project is funded by the Pulitzer Center .
For the final month of 2019, Maine State Police Sgt. Elisha Fowlie wasn’t allowed to work.
Starting Nov . 29, 2019, Fowlie began serving a 30-day suspension for violating two of the
agency’ s policies that summer , leaving the state police troop that patrols midcoast Maine
short a supervisor as the year drew to a close.
What did Fowlie do to warrant the punishment? It’ s a secret.
In discipline records that provide one of the only public windows into of ficer malfeasance, the
state police includes so few details about its troopers’ misbehavior that the public cannot
know what the of ficers did wrong by reading them. The practice defies the intent of the state
2 / 1 3law that makes discipline records public, according to those who helped craft the statute 30
years ago.
Related
Read the Maine State Police discipline records
The lack of information in the records illustrates one way Maine’ s largest police force exhibits
a pattern of secrecy that blocks it from public scrutiny .
In addition to keeping records with minimal information, they are incomplete. Under a union
contract, some public records of discipline are destroyed. T roopers have been arrested but
lack a public discipline history . And the state agency that oversees Maine law enforcement
has revoked the licenses of troopers who resigned from the state police with no public record
documenting why , according to a joint investigation by the state’ s two largest newspapers,
the Portland Press Herald/Maine Sunday T elegram and the Bangor Daily News.
The lack of transparency means lawmakers, of ficers and the public can’t fully assess how the
agency holds its of ficers accountable, making it more challenging for police overseers to
make policy changes and maintain the public’ s faith in law enforcement, lawmakers and
experts said.
State laws address access to discipline records dif ferently , but Maine is one of about 15
states where of ficer discipline records are public documents. More states are considering
similar laws amid a national examination of law enforcement and demands that of ficers be
held publicly accountable for misconduct. New Y ork and California each made discipline
records public in the last two years.
However , the Maine State Police’ s practices show how law enforcement agencies can skirt
transparency even in a state that makes the records public.
“I wish that they would be coming out and saying, ‘Y es, there are issues that need to be
fixed, and we care so much about our profession that we’re going to lead the charge on
fixing them because we know that trust is our currency ,’” said Rep. Charlotte W arren, D-
Hallowell. As House chairwoman of the Legislature’ s public safety committee, she is largely
responsible for oversight of police. “There’ s trust to be rebuilt for sure.”
Transparency into misconduct is important so of ficers and the public can see whether
discipline is fairly applied, said Maria Haberfeld, an expert on police training and discipline at
the John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New Y ork.
“The public has all the right to see what kind of misconduct is tolerated by the given police
organization and why , and whether or not there is an equal distribution of the discipline,” she
said.
3 / 1 3The newspapers obtained more than five years of state police discipline records. Of the 19
officers punished for misbehavior from 2015 through half of 2020 for whom there are public
records, it was not possible to discern with any certainty what 12 of them got in trouble for .
One of those of ficers was disciplined twice, and records were vague in both cases.
So the newspapers investigated the misconduct that the records kept hidden, discovering
how one trooper failed to report when his former fiancee committed a hit and run. Another
kept secret that he saw a fellow of ficer punch a handcuf fed man in the face.
Of the 12 of ficers whose records were vague, the newspapers’ investigation revealed details
of misconduct for seven of them. For the remaining five of ficers – who received among the
harshest punishments – it was not possible for the newspapers to confirm what happened.
All disciplined of ficers declined interviews or did not respond to requests for comment.
4 / 1 3The disciplined of ficers represent only a portion of the 65 internal af fairs cases where
allegations against of ficers were found to be true over the last six years. Whether the
remaining of ficers had their discipline destroyed, or were not disciplined at all, is not known.
There are about 300 sworn of ficers on the force.
Bare of description, records for Fowlie, the sergeant, say he was suspended for 30 days
because of “the July/August 2019 incidents,” during which he violated the “code of conduct
and chain of command policy .” He currently works in the state police unit that protects the
governor .
It’s not clear what part of the pages-long policies he violated, let alone what he did. That’ s
partly because the state police also blacked out part of the public record that appears to
detail Fowlie’ s misconduct.
In addition to having vague references to misconduct, the state police redacted what appear
to be more descriptive accounts of misbehavior in several cases.
Related
Newspapers join forces in lawsuit, investigation
The agency declined requests to lift the redactions, saying the information is confidential and
exempt from the state’ s open records law . Its staf f attorney , Christopher Parr , also declined to
cite the statutory reason for each redaction, saying to do so would reveal confidential
information.
The newspapers jointly sued the state police to lift the redactions under the Maine Freedom
of Access Act. The lawsuit is ongoing.
Col. John Cote, the chief of the state police, said his agency is following requirements set out
by Maine law .
“We ensure the records honor the law and protect privacy as established under personnel
law,” he wrote in an emailed response to questions. “I believe it is important for the public to
have an awareness of the agency’ s complaint and discipline process for of ficers and have
information about the corrective actions of the agency if warranted.”
Putting aside legal questions about the redactions, whether public agencies should generally
include more information about misconduct in discipline records is a policy question for
lawmakers, Parr said.
“Based on the language of the statute, such a record seemingly only must identify the
employee who is subject to disciplinary action and, presumably , must state what the
discipline imposed is,” Parr said.
5 / 1 3‘That almost makes no sense’
Thirty years ago, Maine lawmakers debated how much the public deserved to know about
state employees accused of wrongdoing. Sen. Beverly Bustin, D-Augusta, sponsored a bill to
ensure complaints and internal investigations of misconduct would stay confidential. It was
backed mainly by unions who sought to prevent the publication of unfounded accusations.
Pictured are some of the Maine State Police of ficers who were disciplined over the last five years or who
did not have discipline records but whose misconduct was documented elsewhere. T op left: Former
Trooper Justin Cooley , Cpl. T om Fiske, T rooper Christoper Rogers, and Sgt. Elisha Fowlie. Bottom left:
Cpl. Scott Quintero, Cpl. Michael Lane, T rooper T yler Maloon and T rooper Andre Paradis. Photos
courtesy of the Maine State Police and Portland Press Herald. Graphic by Coralie Cross, Bangor Daily
News
But a key provision of the proposal allowed the public to know about confirmed misconduct.
If an agency disciplined an employee, the records of that discipline would be public.
Lawmakers never weighed in on how detailed the records should be, but no one appears to
have intended for the law to hide substantiated malfeasance.
“I don’t think any one of us ever envisioned that something that was ultimately deemed public
after the fact would be incomplete to the extent that you couldn’t figure out what the person
had done,” Richard T rahey , a former lobbyist for the then-Maine State Employees
Association who helped craft the law 30 years ago, said in an interview . “That almost makes
no sense.”
6 / 1 3The Legislature’ s Judiciary Committee passed the bill believing it struck a balance between
privacy and transparency . Today , the state police routinely defy the spirit of that compromise.
For example, the state police punished Cpl. Scott Quintero after a July 4, 2020, “incident”
where he “communicated with a female subject while on duty in an inappropriate manner ,”
according to a discipline agreement reached between the state police and the Maine State
Troopers Association.
Quintero’ s punishment was relatively severe: a demotion from sergeant to corporal, in
addition to no longer being able to teach leadership at the training academy or apply for a
promotion for five years. If he committed “similar or other significant misconduct” again, he
would be fired.
But there is no description of whom Quintero “communicated” with, such as whether it was a
state police employee, a defendant in a case or another civilian. There is no record of how
his communication was inappropriate, no description of why his actions were considered
major misconduct, and no mention of what “communication” means, such as whether it was
electronic or verbal.
In another instance, the state police demoted Christopher Rogers to corporal, transferred
him to a dif ferent unit and prohibited him from applying for a promotion for three years
because he “engaged in conduct unbecoming” of a state police sergeant while on duty in
June or July of 2016, according to his discipline record. It’ s unclear why the state police did
not pinpoint which month. There is no description of what Rogers did or the ef fect of his
actions.
Similarly , the state police suspended Cpl. Kyle Pelletier for 20 days and required him to pay
back the state $108 “on account of the July 2019 incident.”
Pelletier ’s record appears to contain a description of his misconduct, but that sentence is
redacted, followed by another that states: “This is a violation of our Code of Conduct policy
(E-24) and V ehicle Use policy (E-80).”
In other parts of the country , some police chiefs actively publicize major discipline.
Luther T . Reynolds, the chief of police in Charleston, South Carolina, said he has held press
conferences after firing an of ficer. The audience is twofold, he said. Answering questions
about misconduct helps build trust among the public. It also demonstrates to other of ficers
the consequences for misbehavior .
The state police’ s argument that descriptions are optional “is a discretionary interpretation
used to conceal police misconduct from the public,” said Rep. Jef f Evangelos, I-Friendship,
who sits on the Judiciary Committee and has been a frequent critic of law enforcement
policies. “They could do a lot better job at transparency if they wanted to.”
7 / 1 3‘Under the hood of government’
The state police is not an outlier in failing to include details about of ficer misconduct in its
discipline records. When the BDN previously examined hundreds of discipline records  kept
by the state’ s 16 county sherif f’s offices, the newspaper found that many left out specific
descriptions of what police and corrections of ficers did wrong, especially when the
punishments were more severe .
The Maine State Police T roop C barracks in Skowhegan. Callie Ferguson/Bangor Daily News
Still, the county records ranged in their specificity , illustrating how law enforcement agencies
interpret their responsibility to document discipline dif ferently and that they can be more
forthcoming about their mistakes when they choose to.
The Cumberland County Sherif f’s Office, for instance, suspended a corrections of ficer in
2017 for 20 days – the same length of time as Pelletier – for showing favoritism, making
sexual comments toward a female inmate and then lying about it to supervisors when she
complained.
8 / 1 3The sherif f documented the incident in a seven-page record  that detailed the findings of an
internal investigation. It also noted the specific sections of policy that the corrections of ficer
violated, and a bulleted list of the of ficer’s objections and defense of his behavior .
It is important to show “that due process was provided, and there exists just cause for the
discipline meted out,” Cumberland County Sherif f Kevin Joyce said when he provided the
records last year .
While it’ s not uncommon for Maine police agencies to have vague discipline records, it
appears to be unusual for them to black out entire portions of them. The BDN examined
more than 1,000 pages of discipline records from county sherif f’s offices. T wo counties
redacted some portions of the records but agreed to unredact them when asked. The
Portland Police Department provided five years of records to the Press Herald, with no
redactions.
There should be consistency in public access across the state, one lawmaker said.
“I think if you’re finding dif ferent sets of rules and procedures in the dif ferent counties in
Maine, or in the hundreds of dif ferent municipalities we have, that means that people in
certain communities are getting less information than in other communities,” said Rep. Thom
Harnett, D-Gardiner , who is a former assistant attorney general. “Openness and
transparency protects the good actors. W e should not sacrifice the character of the good
actors by hiding the conduct of the bad ones.”
Lawmakers such as Harnett, W arren, Evangelos and Sen. Lisa Keim, R-Dixfield, all said they
want to consider requiring law enforcement agencies to add descriptions of misconduct to
the public records. Some also talked about the possibility of requiring the state police to
submit an annual report to the Legislature with statistics on of ficer misconduct and the
agency’ s response.
“The whole point of freedom of access laws is to allow us to see under the hood of
government,” said Keim, who sits on the Legislature’ s Judiciary Committee.
“They are completely sidestepping that if they’re keeping records that are so inadequate.”
Cote, who leads the state police, said he was unable to comment on legislation that has not
been drafted.
“We support transparency in all aspects of our work and remain committed to abiding by and
enforcing State of Maine laws,” Cote wrote, adding that the state police annually reports
broad agency information, such as statistics on allegations of excessive force, to the Maine
Criminal Justice Academy , the licensing body for law enforcement.
It does not report annual discipline matters, however .
9 / 1 3
Col. John Cote, chief of the Maine State Police,
addresses reporters during a press conference
in Norridgewock on April 27, 2018. Michael G.
Seamans/Morning SentinelOfficer misconduct is not the only type of
information concealed by the state police but
not by other agencies. For example, the state
police refused to disclose policies and
practices related to the use of digital
surveillance tools , such as facial recognition
technology , something other police agencies
have revealed. And while the state police relied
on a specific law to keep such information
secret, some lawmakers want to eliminate that
law to force more public disclosure .
‘He’s the boss’
Then there are the cases of trooper misconduct with no corresponding public discipline
records.
In the last five years, at least three troopers allegedly broke the law , but the state police had
no internal public records documenting the circumstances.
One example is T rooper Justin “Jay” Cooley , who resigned from the state police in January
2020, five months after being charged with domestic violence assault.
Another is Michael Lane. Saco police arrested the trooper for criminal mischief in 2016, but
York County District Attorney Kathryn Slattery decided not to prosecute after finding
insuf ficient evidence to prove the case beyond a reasonable doubt. What happened remains
unclear . The prosecutor declined to comment on the facts of the case. But Lane received a
letter of guidance from the criminal justice academy that provides general clues: The
academy reminded him to comply with the law at all times, maintain his composure in
“difficult and frustrating situations” and recognize how the use of alcohol could cloud his
judgment.
Lane remains with Alfred-based T roop A and was promoted to corporal last month.
The third involved T rooper Ethan Doody , who resigned in March 2015 shortly before the
criminal justice academy found he had committed theft by deception and revoked his law
enforcement license.
The investigation into Doody stemmed from the night of Dec. 26, 2014, when he responded
to a pickup truck that crashed into a bull moose in Aroostook County’ s Cyr Plantation. The
driver , Brian Dufour , and his passenger were not injured, but the moose was killed, and the
1 0 / 1 3truck was too damaged to drive.
When the driver ’s father , Joel Dufour of Madawaska, arrived on scene to help, he noticed the
moose’ s antlers had been cut of f, he said. His son told him the trooper , Doody , had done it,
even though he’d asked to keep the moose. Joel Dufour found it odd and didn’t get a clear
answer from Doody as to why he took the antlers from the family , he said.
“I was not in a position to argue. He’ s the boss,” Joel Dufour said.
More than two months later , the academy found the trooper had committed theft by
deception when he used a hack saw to claim the antlers for himself and falsely said they had
to be removed “to prevent people from just taking the antlers and discarding the carcass,”
according to the academy’ s paperwork documenting Doody’ s license revocation.
The Maine Attorney General’ s Office also looked into Doody’ s conduct, according to the
academy , but he didn’t face criminal charges.
Staff attorney Parr said there were no discipline records for Doody .
But the agency did reach an agreement with Doody to resign. The document shows Doody
was  investigated and quit. In return, the state police agreed to only verify his employment to
his future employers. Other parts of the agreement were redacted without explanation. There
was no mention of the moose antlers.
The only way to know why Doody resigned would be to ask a dif ferent agency than the one
that employed him.
This is how the process works, Cote said: If the state police can’t complete an internal
investigation, it is closed. The agency has no control over an of ficer’s decision to resign,
Cote said.
Police in other states complete internal investigations even after of ficers resign, however .
And while the criminal justice academy , which handles police licensing in Maine, may pick up
a complaint regardless of the of ficer’s employment status, it only reviews a limited number of
cases, nearly all of which involve allegations of criminal behavior . The police force also does
not assist the academy by handing over internal investigative reports into its of ficers. Rather ,
under its union contract , the agency only sends a synopsis. The union contract is approved
by a number of of ficers and of ficials, including the governor .
When law enforcement agencies don’t document or disclose misconduct, it makes it easier
for of ficers to get policing jobs elsewhere, including in other states.
1 1 / 1 3
Maine State T roopers Association Executive
Director Craig Poulin, left, speaks with Sen.
William Diamond, D-Windham, in 2009 in
Augusta. Andy Molloy/Kennebec Journal“This is one of the biggest problems in American policing because it’ s so seriously
decentralized. I’ve seen it over and over and over … that of ficers were allowed to resign
agencies, and then they joined another agency , and there was no record really of any type of
misconduct in the previous agency ,” said Haberfeld, with the John Jay College of Criminal
Justice.
There are other ways troopers can avoid public
documentation of their discipline. Under their
union agreement, troopers can request that the
state police remove corrective memorandums,
reprimands and suspensions from their
personnel files after varying periods of time.
Unlike other law enforcement agencies in
Maine with similar contracts, they are then
destroyed.
Cote pointed out that removal is not allowed if
the of ficer has received subsequent, similar
discipline.
Wiping clean an of ficer’s disciplinary history
hinders the ability of supervisors to discipline
officers in the future, said experts who study
police accountability . The practice can also
threaten the constitutional rights of defendants
who are entitled to know if the of ficer testifying against them has a history of dishonesty ,
violence or criminal behavior .
Click on the image below to read the Maine State Police discipline records.

1 2 / 1 3“It’s about fairness, about giving us the information we need to present to the jury that this
witness may or may not be credible, may or may not have his own biases or histories that
would make him less than heroic in the eyes of the jury ,” said T ina Nadeau, executive
director of the Maine Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers.
Craig Poulin, executive director of the Maine State T roopers Association and a former chief
of the state police, did not respond to three interview requests.
The state police does not track how many discipline records it destroys, Parr said.
But it’ s clear that cases resulting in discipline with a corresponding public record make up a
small percentage of total complaints.
Most reports to the state police’ s internal af fairs division – 477 out of 685 over the last six
years – are inquiries deemed informational only , according to statistics provided by the
agency . Of the 208 internal af fairs cases that resulted in findings for or against of ficers in
2015 through 2020, 65 were sustained, meaning the allegations against of ficers were found
to be true.
It’s not known how many of the 65 cases resulted in discipline, but the newspapers received
20 records of discipline for 19 of ficers through the first half of 2020.
‘Where the problem starts and ends’
Political leaders who oversee police departments are ultimately responsible for ensuring
agencies release more information about misconduct, said Haberfeld, with the John Jay
College of Criminal Justice.
“There’ s too much focus on what police organizations can or cannot do,” she said, “and not
enough focus on the fact that it’ s the politicians that can tell or not tell them to do certain
things.”
The overseers of the state police include lawmakers and the governor – a former attorney
general who has worked closely with law enforcement throughout her career .
Gov. Janet Mills’ of fice didn’t respond directly to questions about whether the governor
believes a lack of detail in misconduct records is a problem and, if so, what she wants to do
about it. Mills believes the records “must strike the appropriate balance between providing
transparency into matters of police misconduct while adhering to state laws involving
personnel matters – and that these must be the only considerations when creating these
records,” spokesperson Lindsay Crete said.
1 3 / 1 3In addition to guarding transparency , politicians are also responsible for picking the leader of
the state police, who, per state law , must be chosen from within the ranks of the
organization.
Lawmakers and experts were split on the requirement that the colonel come from within the
state police. Some said they believe it could be a good motivator for the rank and file, and
picking from within the organization ensures the leader knows the operations thoroughly .
Others questioned why it was a requirement and said only being allowed to pick from within
the state police could create a culture that rejects outside oversight.
Haberfeld said the practice is not common, but she’ s not opposed to it. “The question
becomes: Who is picking the person? If it’ s a local politician, this is where the problem starts
and ends,” she said.
Within the last two decades, no one has been sworn in as leader of the state police with less
than 20 years of experience in the agency . Over that period, the Legislature’ s criminal justice
committee didn’t turn down any of the five colonels’ nominations. They were confirmed with
zero opposition in the Maine Senate.
Have more information to share? Contact us at [email protected] , [email protected]  and
[email protected] .
Coming Monday: Misconduct kept secret by the Maine State Police is revealed, and some
details raise doubts about accountability .
Coming T uesday: A woman who was married to a state trooper says it took weeks for the
agency to take seriously her reports of domestic violence.
« Previous
Clammers digging through pandemic, but shellfish are fewer
Next »
Newspapers join forces in lawsuit, investigation
© 2023
PRESS RELEASE  
 
 From: Maine Freedom of Information Coalition Embargoed: Until 4 a.m. Friday Morning January 7, 2022  
Further Information: mfoic@earthlink.net, 207 930 -2400  
  
Only Half of Maine Law Enforcement Agencies  Offer Insight into  
Complaints and Discipline   
 A nearly year -long investigation from the Maine Freedom of Information Coalition into 
135 law enforcement agencies highlights inconsistencies in record keeping and access to information.   
 
The Maine Freedom of Information Coalition (MFOIC) is a 501(c)(3) non- profit, 
non-partisan statewide membership organization that exists to broaden knowledge and 
awareness of public access to Maine government proceedings and government records.  
 
In a recent project, using Maine’s Freedom Of Access Act (FOAA), MFOIC reques ted 
information from 135 Maine law enforcement agencies regarding citizen complaints and police disciplinary action and record keeping. The results revealed widespread 
discrepancies in the public’s ability to access documents members of the public are legally entitled to view.   
 Beginning in January of 2021, the Maine Freedom of Information Coalition requested police departments in Maine provide all records concerning the total number of complaints filed against law enforcement officers from January 2016 to present. The 
coalition asked agencies to provide the total number of complaints received, their type, time period from the initial complaint to determination made, and any disciplinary action that resulted from the complaints.   
 The coalition’s findings demonstrate Maine has no uniform system of tracking and maintaining records on police discipline.  Some records were redacted. Those that were 
not redacted revealed a wide- ranging approach to accessing police records.  
   - 52% of agencies provided an aggrega te number of complaints against officers.   
   - 32% demonstrated disciplinary action having been taken against at least one 
officer.  
   - Portland Police reported the most complaints with 116, with data from 2020 still 
unavailable. Augusta Police reported 71 complaints with 18 incidents resulting in discipline.  
  
  - Kennebunk  Police reported 55 complaints with none of the events result ing in 
discipline.  
 
  - Maine State Police said the agency does not maintain an aggregate number of 
complaints but reported 17 disciplinary incidents.   
 Beyond the basic information of number of complaints and their resolution, information about disciplin ary action also varied widely.  
   - Incidents resulting in disciplinary action included a written reprimand from Pittsfield’s 
Town Manager to Police Chief Pete Bickmore for failing to follow CDC COVID -19 
guidance while ill.  
   - Documents released by the Waterville Police Department revealed Officer Brian 
Gardiner was demoted for allegedly having a “sexual in nature” extramarital affair while on duty.  
   - Internal documents from the Skowhegan Police Department show officer Alex Burns 
was assigned to writ e a 500 word essay, with citations, on “the importance of following 
orders” over accusations of being insubordinate.   
 While most departments agreed to waive fees to produce the requested records, 9 departments requested payment for the time needed to coll ate documents. In several 
cases, the MFOIC chose to withdraw requests due to payments deemed excessive. The Cumberland County Sheriff’s Office asked for $353 to produce records, citing 16 hours of research. Sanford Police provided a cost estimate of at least $225 for 10 hours of research.   
 Access to detailed findings, including MFOIC’s initial FOAA request, a spreadsheet containing police department responses, and the full text of disciplinary records that were provided by police agencies are open to the public and are available at  
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1IhAS4pvP2uL9ja2MUffWxH4QTHio8M9E?u
sp=sharing  
using the following sign- in information:  
Emai l: Mainefreedomofinfo@gmail.com  
Password: Mainenews1!  
  
#END#
 
1 / 6By Vanessa Paolella January 7, 2022Maine Freedom of Information Coalition audits Maine law
enforcement agencies
centralmaine.com /2022/01/07/maine-freedom-of-information-coalition-audits-maine-law-enforcement-agencies/
The Maine Freedom of Information Coalition sent Freedom of Access Act requests to 135
law enforcement agencies across Maine last year , seeking records of people’ s complaints
and disciplinary letters over five years.
After receiving the request for records, some departments presented the coalition with an
abundance of disciplinary records, while others of fered only basic information that lacked
identifiable details.
Find It
Detailed findings, including Maine Freedom of Information Coalition’ s Freedom of Access Act
request, a spreadsheet containing police department responses, hundreds of email and
voice messages exchanged with members of law enforcement over the last year , and the full
text of disciplinary records that were provided by police agencies, are available here.
2 / 6Email:
[email protected]
Password: Mainenews1!
Click “my drive” on left to access the documents.
One in five did not respond, despite being required to do so under Maine’ s public access law .
Among the disciplinary actions reported by law enforcement agencies, an Auburn police
officer was admonished after leaving headquarters with his loaded service pistol in plain
sight inside his open locker . The of ficer received a verbal reprimand, according to one of the
disciplinary records provided by the Auburn Police Department.
Other Auburn police records show multiple of ficers received oral or written warnings when
they failed to show up at court hearings or for their scheduled shifts, and three of ficers were
disciplined for more serious infractions.
In Mexico, the Police Department did not create written disciplinary records for two sustained
complaints of rudeness and conduct unbecoming an of ficer. It is unclear whether any public
records detailing the incidents exist because they were not provided to the coalition.
Similarly , a three-sentence disciplinary letter issued to a Windham police of ficer stated he
was suspended for 40 hours, but provided no information as to why , beyond referencing
Article 17 of “the contract.”
Many departments, including Augusta, Monmouth and Rumford, supplied registers with the
most basic details, but did not provide the actual disciplinary letters.
Thirty agencies did not respond to the Freedom on Access Act request, including sherif f’s
offices in Aroostook, W ashington and Y ork counties.
In January 2021, the nonprofit coalition submitted public records requests to law
enforcement agencies related to people’ s complaints and police disciplinary records,
including all municipal police departments, all of Maine’ s county sherif fs’ of fices, and a few
state agencies.
The requests sought access to the total number of complaints received, their type, time
period from the initial complaint to determination of discipline, and copies of all final written
disciplinary letters from January 2016 to January 2021.
All correspondence and the records obtained by the coalition, which is made up of
representatives of Maine’ s news media, librarians and other public access advocates, were
made public this week.
3 / 6The coalition board members say the informal audit demonstrated a need to standardize the
creation and maintenance of complaints and disciplinary records in law enforcement
agencies.
“In this particular case, it makes sense if complaints are filed, to have a system for
determining how they are handled that is consistent across the state,” coalition President Jim
Campbell said. “What’ s the process of generating and maintaining the records? That is the
question. That, as far as I know , is not mandated in any way and is not consistent across
different departments or dif ferent levels of policing.”
Disciplinary action, too, was highly variable. When an of ficer failed to pay the Skowhegan
Police Department the balance of $9.95 he owed for the purchase of an external vest, he
was ordered to pay that balance and to write an original 500-word essay on the importance
of following orders. When writing, he was ordered to use T imes New Roman size 12 font,
single spaced, with 1 inch margins and citations.
In Waterville, two of ficers were disciplined for holding down a 12-year-old boy by his wrists
and ankles in 2018 as the child’ s mother spanked him. One of the of ficers was suspended
without pay for three days. The second of ficer was suspended for two days.
The purpose of the project was not necessarily to compile a database of complaints and
disciplinary records, said coalition V ice President Judith Meyer , who is also executive editor
of the Sun Journal, Kennebec Journal and Morning Sentinel. Rather , the organization sought
to gauge how agencies respond to Freedom of Access Act requests, as well as the
availability and thoroughness of complaint and disciplinary records.
“The problem, I think, is that having records is not perceived to be a core responsibility for a
lot of agencies,” Campbell said. “T o their mind, dealing with the everyday things they have to
deal with, it’ s just one more dumb thing that they have to pay attention to. Except it isn’t a
dumb thing.”
In one notable instance, the South Portland police chief promised to remove a reprimand
from an of ficer’s personnel file six months after the reprimand if the behavior were not
repeated. The removal date was set at Nov . 14, 2020. However , the department provided
that record to the coalition as part of its response to the records request in January 2021,
months after the of ficer was told the document would be removed.
Under state law — T itle 30-A for municipalities and counties and T itle 5 for state employees
— final written decisions of discipline taken against public employees are not confidential,
and the decisions are required to contain enough information about the details of the conduct
for the public to understand the basis on which the disciplinary action was imposed, and
what that action was.
There is no allowance for removal of disciplinary records from personnel files.
4 / 6Rep. Jef frey Evangelos, I-Friendship, serves on the Judiciary Committee in the state
Legislature, where he is a strong advocates for law enforcement reform. He said he has
found it dif ficult and, at times, impossible to obtain clear disciplinary records for serious
wrongdoing.
“The police (should) be held accountable to the same laws that you and I have to follow ,”
Evangelos said. “And if they break them, they (should) be held to the same standards, and it
should be public information.”
The Maine Freedom of Information Coalition board members were inspired to pursue the
unofficial audit after learning about the joint investigation by the Portland Press Herald and
Bangor Daily News into the redaction of information in Maine State Police disciplinary
records .
“If we had done this as a journalistic project, I would have hammered every one of those
police chiefs to get me a response within 30 days, or something like that, and then written
back to them again, and again, and again until we got it,” Meyer said. “This was more of a
point-in-time survey . We’re going to send it out, see what we get, and let the public know
what we found.”
All but 10 of the departments that responded waived search and copying fees, under the
provision in the Freedom of Access Act that fees may be waived in the public interest
“because doing so is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of the
operations or activities of government.” The coalition withdrew requests from five agencies
which requested more than $200 in fees.
Those five departments were the Maine W arden Service, the police departments in Sanford,
Brewer and Belfast, and the Cumberland County Sherif f’s Office.
At least 10 of the agencies that responded redacted information, including the Maine State
Police; the sherif f’s offices in Oxford, W aldo and Piscataquis counties; and police
departments in Cumberland, Scarborough, Farmington, Fairfield, Pittsfield and Kittery .
State law allows disciplinary records to be redacted only if an employee who has been
disciplined appeals the decision and wins, according to Meyer .
If a decision is overturned, the employee’ s name may be redacted from the otherwise public
document, unless the employee publicly discloses the discipline on their own.
“The statute is really clear that a final disciplinary letter is a public document,” Meyer said. “It
doesn’t say ‘except for .’ It says the whole record is a public record, so when we strike the
content out of what is supposed to be a public record, it just raises questions and, for some
people, it may raise suspicions.”
5 / 6The Pittsfield Police Department redacted one of three final written decisions made available
to the coalition. It was dated Feb. 24, 2020, involving a sergeant. The letter concludes the
officer engaged in conduct that discredited the department. He was issued a written
reprimand, but there is no detail of that conduct.
Two other disciplinary letters were not redacted, including one very detailed decision issued
to police Pittsfield Chief Pete Bickmore in March 2020 by T own Manager Kathryn Ruth for
violating COVID-19 protocols, violating a directive to leave the of fice when he was sick and
joking about the pandemic in early 2020.
The chief was instructed to read state Center for Disease Control & Prevention guidance and
the governor ’s directives on COVID-19 protocols, follow the instructions of Emergency
Management Director Bernard Williams, provide medical clearance to return to work and
apologize to all of his co-workers.
Standardizing the type of information disciplinary records should and should not contain
could lead to fewer redactions and increased public trust, Meyer said.
“It was clear from Auburn, because we’ve got dozens of (disciplinary letters), that that’ s a
high priority for them, that of ficers are held accountable,” Meyer said. “The public should
know that, for the good, as well as when of ficers misbehave, that the department itself is
upholding its standards in a very regular , consistent way .”
The issues are not only with law enforcement agencies. Other public service sectors struggle
to maintain records, too.
According to data from the Of fice of State Fire Marshal, 61% of fire departments in Maine
submitted at least one report to the state in 2020, despite being mandated to do so for every
response under the law .
From 2016 to 2020, Maine Public Access Ombudsman Brenda Kielty received 429 inquiries
and complaints related to municipalities, compared to 85 for law enforcement, according to
annual reports from the Of fice of Attorney General.
Most members of the public are not familiar with navigating Freedom of Access Act laws, so
it is important that requesting records be as simple as possible, Meyer said. When people
encounter barriers, they may feel their only option is to give up.
“I’ve seen it happen too many times,” Meyer said. “I wish it would never happen. But you
know , people don’t necessarily have the perseverance to just, you know , push and push and
push until they get a record.”
Oftentimes, when people meet resistance, they contact the Maine Freedom of Information
Coalition, journalists or the state public records ombudsman for help, according to Meyer .
6 / 6“Everybody’ s willing to help,” she said, “but the best help would be if the records are
available and accessible to the public when they ask for it.”
« Previous
Judge awards almost $1 million to families of fishermen who died on the Emmy Rose
Next »
Hospitalizations set record in Maine as omicron creates new hot spots for infections
© 2023
1 / 3
Justin SilvermanMarch 13, 2022Justin Silverman: W ithout more transparency
requirements, potential for police secrecy is staggering
sunjournal.com /2022/03/13/justin-silverman-without-more-transparency-requirements-potential-for-police-secrecy-is-
staggering/
A judge in Bangor heard arguments in January
about whether Maine State Police must release
details about the discipline of its of ficers. The case
— brought by the Portland Press Herald and the
Bangor Daily News — involves excessively
redacted misconduct records and has spotlighted
the need for transparency within the department.
The newspapers explained in their lawsuit that:
“Public awareness of whether law enforcement
agencies are engaged in ef fective oversight and
discipline of of ficers serves as a vital check on
police corruption and misconduct.”
Such misconduct, however , often goes unchecked
in Maine. As a recent survey of more than 100
local law enforcement agencies suggests, there’ s a
blue wall of silence that extends far beyond the state police headquarters in Augusta.
Fortunately , there is a common-sense solution that can help increase public awareness and
allow citizens to better oversee their police departments. But first, it’ s important to understand
the breadth of the problem and how police misconduct secrecy is pervasive throughout the
state.
The Maine Freedom of Information Coalition (MFOIC) earlier this year released a survey of
135 law enforcement agencies that were asked to provide the number of citizen complaints
against their respective of ficers since 2016. The coalition also asked for the details of any
disciplinary actions taken.
Despite being required to release this information under the state’ s Freedom of Access Act,
nearly half of all agencies (48%) declined to release any information or failed to respond at
all. Of those agencies that did respond, some demanded hundreds of dollars to release the
data.
2 / 3Several agencies that did comply with the law — such as Pittsfield, W aterville and
Skowhegan — underscored the need for transparency by revealing instances of misconduct
that citizens have a right to know . Without this knowledge, after all, there can be no public
oversight and accountability .
Instances of misconduct and disciplinary actions included:
A police chief not following Centers for Disease Control and Prevention COVID-19
guidance while ill.
An of ficer allegedly having a “sexual in nature” extramarital af fair while on duty .
An of ficer being required to write a 500-word essay with citations on “the importance of
following orders” after accusations of being insubordinate.
When questioned by WMTW about the agencies that did not respond to the requests, Maine
Chiefs of Police President Jared Mills blamed a lack of resources and inconsistent internal
policies on how the information should be maintained.
Granted, some agencies are understaf fed. Without a uniform policy on how misconduct
records should be maintained and released, it can also be dif ficult to comply with the state’ s
public records law . But while these may be valid explanations in some cases, we should not
accept them as excuses for any .
The Freedom of Access Act requires that agencies respond to requests within five days and
produce records within a reasonable period of time. Compared to public record laws in other
states, these are very lenient requirements. There is no excuse for not responding. There is
no excuse for not taking the time — especially when broadly defined as “reasonable” — to
gather records. There is no excuse for the secrecy .
Still, it’ s incumbent on all of us to look for solutions and to create, whenever possible, a
better system. Considering the comments of Mills and the challenges he said police
departments encounter when receiving requests for instances of misconduct, there is a very
simple way we can guarantee transparency , at least in respect to citizen complaints:
Require by statute that all law enforcement agencies not only maintain but also publicly and
regularly post the number of citizen complaints against their of ficers and the disciplinary
action taken.
Legislating such a requirement will make the expectation of transparency explicitly clear . It
will force agencies to maintain data on police misconduct in a way that it can be easily
managed and made accessible. It will remove the burden of making public record requests
— requests that are often ignored. This required transparency will also encourage citizens to
come forward with complaints and to help deter misconduct in the future.
3 / 3A longer-term consideration is to comprehensively reform the Freedom of Access Act. A goal
of the MFOIC survey was to show how dif ficult it is for citizens to get access to basic law
enforcement data. Under the current law , there is little recourse when that data is denied
other than to pursue litigation. Most citizens (and most newsrooms) lack the time and money
needed to sue agencies for records they are entitled to under FOAA. Whether we grant the
state’ s public records ombudsman powers to enforce the law or provide statutory incentives
such as mandatory attorney fees for prevailing plaintif fs, we need to create more avenues for
enforcement.
Prior to commencing their lawsuit against the Maine State Police, the Portland Press Herald
and the Bangor Daily News requested about five years of disciplinary records. But because
not all the information requested was provided, the newsrooms couldn’t determine the
misconduct of a majority of of ficers disciplined during that time.
Now take that one experience and multiply it by the 100-plus law enforcement agencies
throughout the state. That is what’ s at stake. The opportunity for secrecy is staggering.
Justin Silverman is executive director of the New England First Amendment Coalition.
Learn more about the coalition’ s work at nefac.org .
© 2023
1 / 3By Penelope Overton May 31, 2022Court orders state police to reveal more details about
misconduct by troopers
sunjournal.com /2022/05/31/court-orders-state-police-to-reveal-more-details-about-misconduct-by-troopers/
A Superior Court judge has ordered the Maine State Police to provide the state’ s two biggest
newspapers with previously concealed parts of disciplinary records detailing misconduct and
rule-breaking by its troopers.
In a May 26 ruling, Judge William R. Anderson of Penobscot Superior Court also ordered the
Maine State Police to search for and turn over missing disciplinary records the state failed to
release in response to public records requests from the Portland Press Herald and Bangor
Daily News.
Anderson sided with police, however , in defending redactions that may reveal confidential
medical data.
“We got what we really needed,” said Stephen Stich, supervising attorney at Y ale Law
School’ s Media Freedom & Information Access Clinic at Y ale Law School, which helped the
newspapers file their suit. “W e’ll not only find out why these of ficers were disciplined, but we
could get the missing records, too.”
The ruling did not say when the Maine State Police must provide the papers with the
unredacted records, or how long the agency has to conduct a new search for the missing
disciplinary records. The agency may even appeal the ruling. A state police spokeswoman
did not respond to calls or emails T uesday seeking an interview .
The lawsuit , which combined separate complaints filed by both newspapers, centers on
records requests filed under the state’ s Freedom of Access Act seeking final decisions of
discipline for all Department of Public Safety employees between 2015 and 2019.
2 / 3Final disciplinary measures against public employees, including police, are public records in
Maine.
In response to the request, the state handed over documents involving disciplinary cases of
22 of ficers. But in 13 of those cases, the records were either too heavily redacted or too
vague to provide any meaningful description of the conduct that gave rise to the discipline.
The state refused to cite a specific legal justification for each redaction in the records, saying
that to do so would reveal the contents of the redacted sections. It also did not provide all
disciplinary records referenced in the released information or information about an unknown
number of inactive disciplinary measures.
During the investigation, the Maine State Police revealed that some final disciplinary actions
were removed from trooper personnel files after a period of time, ranging from as little as a
year for minor infractions and preventable accidents to five years for demotions and serious
infractions.
Police lawyers say they cannot find all of these “inactive” files, and the court can’t be sure
they were not destroyed, which is prohibited under Maine’ s record retention laws. Anderson
has ordered a second review for these missing inactive disciplinary records.
Related
Inside the Maine State Police, officers misdeeds are kept secret
The newspapers published a three-day series revealing the nature of misconduct in the
ranks of the state police based on the records the police provided. The reporting showed a
secretive process  in which misconduct records are only briefly available to the public before
they are destroyed. The lack of disclosure prevented public accountability of the troopers and
the department’ s disciplinary process.
State police redacted substantive descriptions of what some of ficers did to warrant
punishment.
The reporting and the lawsuit were supported by the Pulitzer Center and the Media Freedom
and Information Access Clinic at Y ale Law School, where law students help media
organizations advocate for greater government transparency through legal action.
Sigmund Schutz of Preti Flaherty , the lawyer representing the Press Herald, was pleased
with the ruling.
“This is a terrific win for government transparency and police accountability ,” Schutz said.
Related Headlines
3 / 3Read our investigation on how Maine State Police keeps of ficer misdeeds and
misconduct a secret
« Previous
Hallowell Pride festival, parade to kick of f month of events celebrating LGBTQ community
Next »
Independent qualifies for Maine governor ’s race
© 2023
