MAINE ASSOCIATION OF POLICE 
 
 
 
 
President: 
Kevin Riordan 
Vice Presidents: 
Chris Todd 
Shane Stephenson 
Jonathan Barnes  
Steve Borst 
Secretary/Treasurer: 
Jason Burke 
Executive Director: 
Paul Gaspar  
 
   Post Office Box 2263 
South Portland, ME  04106 
 
 
 
 Legal Counsel: 
 
 Troubh, Heisler, P.A. 
          William K. McKinley 
 Daniel R. Felkel 
 Jonathan M. Goodman 
  
 Kelly & Chapman 
 John W. Chapman 
  
 (207) 767-2558 
 
     “In Valor There Is Hope” 
 
Maine Law Enforcement Coalition 
Maine Law Enforcement Association – Maine Association of Police – Maine State Troopers Association – Maine 
Lodge-Fraternal Order of Police 
 
Judiciary Committee Hearing Testimony  
By Paul Gaspar, Maine Law Enforcement Coalition 
 LD 1397 - "An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Right To Know Advisory 
Committee Concerning Records of Disciplinary Actions Against Public Employees" 
 
April 10th, 2021 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary. My 
name is Paul Gaspar and I am a resident of South Portland. I am the executive director of the Maine 
Association of Police and I am glad to provide this testimony on behalf of our 850 members as well as a 
member representative to the Maine Law Enforcement Coalition.  The Coalition, and its member 
organizations, represents about 3,000 state, county, and municipal law enforcement officers and public 
safety dispatchers throughout Maine.  
 
On behalf of the Coalition, its partner organizations and combined memberships throughout the state of 
Maine, I am here today to speak in opposition to LD 1397, "An Act to Implement the 
Recommendations of the Right to Know Advisory Committee Concerning Records of 
Disciplinary Actions Against Public Employees" 
 
On behalf of my fellow representatives of the Maine Law Enforcement Coalition (MLEC) and our 
respective memberships, I express our deep concerns over this legislation as well as the exponentially 
chilling effect that it will have on a public safety sector that is already in crisis in its efforts to protect the 
people of Maine. 
 
Maine’s law enforcement ranks are depleted to what can only be characterized as critical. In the wake of 
uninformed and unsubstantiated efforts to increase oversight through a national narrative of derision of 
law enforcement, we have seen vacancies numbering in some quarters as much as 300 vacant Maine law 
enforcement positions throughout our state.  
 
In valuing our already high commitment to only hiring the most qualified candidates who possess the 
highest values and integrity, these efforts have only served to act as a deterrent to people committing to a 
Maine calling that is constantly being judged as equal to the narrative on officers and states with no 
connection or comparative value to Maine. 
 
Although we agree that transparency is an utmost need, we believe both the transparency and the high 
expectations of the people we serve be the same and consistent across the spectrum of ALL public trust 
positions, and not just those who are the daily representatives of all public trust positions, the public 
employee. 
 
 
 
Website:  www.maineassociationofpolice.com 

 
 
 
Although we have no doubt that the advisory committee charged with bringing this recommended 
legislation worked diligently to do so. However, we are also disappointed and concerned that this 
committee, although large in nature, did not reserve a single solitary seat to a representative of any group 
that represents the actual individuals who would be affected by it. I have attached the list of 
representatives to this testimony and would say this complete oversight in the committee’s make up to be 
a clear indicator of the efforts to hold Maine law enforcement and other public employees accountable 
based on narratives, political benefit and inherent disregard for the very people this legislation would 
affect.  
 
LD1397 attempts to bring a scale of conformity and consistency across municipal, county and state 
employees, however completely ignores the fact that every other statute dealing with labor laws, pensions, 
accountability and contracts are all addressed in their very own statute for each division of government.  
 
Some of our concerns include very different recognitions, descriptions and results to what is, or isn’t, 
serious, minor, or de minimis levels of discipline. Many of these are subjects to bargaining and defined in 
collective bargaining agreements set between the municipal, county and state divisions of government 
under their own specific labor statute, rights of appeal and local controls.  
 
In short, LD 1397 is punitive to individual employees as it advocates for what is a permanent stain within 
their permanent record without any consistency of definition for their actions. This defeats what is widely 
known as the true purpose of disciplinary action; to provide accountability and an expectant route for the 
employee to improve and expand their level of accountability and service. If the individual is unable to 
provide this expectation, there is already a recognized process known as progressive discipline which 
ultimately provides for what CAN be agreed is the most serious of discipline: termination. 
 
Due to the fact that this legislation does not proportionately provide accountability for all public trust and 
governmental sector positions, and was devised by a committee that omitted representatives of affected 
parties such as labor, the MLEC cannot support this one-sided effort.  
 
LD 1397 unsuccessfully and intrusively, spans the breadth and scope of three separate and distinct 
divisions of government and their specific statutes, stunting their ability to negotiate collective bargaining 
agreements under them. Because we believe that this is extemporaneous with much legislative and 
partisan vitriol from the 121st legislature, the legislation before us is and will be perceived as based in a 
flawed effort to effect change based on political and anecdotal, rather than a factual experience in Maine. 
 
Passage of this bill into law will assuredly accomplish not only paralyzing the effort to recruit hire and 
retain future law enforcement officers, but also push many of those currently serving the people of Maine 
to flee the profession for fear of their past and remediated behavior being used as a means to also provide 
identifying information which will not only jeopardize their safety, but that of their families, their homes 
and their communities. 
 
We hope that you will consider all of these things and vote ought not to pass. We do not advocate for 
never pursuing accountability, but to include ALL stakeholders in the spirit of cooperation to strive for 
fair and consistent accountability for all public trust representatives and one borne out of mutual respect 
and the public’s expectation in the interest of the public trust.  
 
Thank you for your efforts. I’m happy to answer any questions for the committee. 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Paul D. Gaspar 
Executive Director 
Maine Association of Police 
Maine Law Enforcement Coalition. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

