 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
Neither For Nor Against  
LD 1296- An Act to Authorize Municipalities to Allow Firefighters to Have Increased Lighting on Their 
Personal Vehicles 
 
April 18, 2021 
 
 
 Sen. Chipman, Rep. Williams and distinguished members of the Transportation 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am offering testimony in opposition to LD 1296 
An Act to Authorize Municipalities to Allow Firefighters to Have Increased Lighting on Their 
Personal Vehicles, on behalf of MMA’s 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC) who 
are elected by their selectboards and councils in Maine’s 35 senate district to establish positions 
on legislation impacting municipalities with the broadest understanding of the difference in 
impacts of policy on these vital services in all areas of the state.  
 
 Officials are trying to understand why another increase in size of light on a personal vehicle for 
volunteer fire, ambulance or other non-police emergency vehicles is necessary. All emergency vehicles, 
including police vehicles, encounter individuals who simply do not yield to their operation regardless of 
the number of lights or sirens on the response vehicle. Officials do not believe adding extra lights, bigger 
lights or sirens will change this reality.   
 
As drafted, officials appreciate allowing municipal officials to weigh-in on the necessity of lights 
on these vehicles and to determine if such lights are necessary. This is vital because these vehicles are 
personal vehicles that respond to public emergencies and must be covered by publicly paid insurance 
should they cause an accident enroute to a call or become injured in the course of using that vehicle to 
respond.  
 
Municipal officials frequently receive operation complaints regarding the response of volunteers 
to emergency calls in personal vehicles. While there is no obligation for a motorist to yield to red lights 
on personal vehicles, they frequently feel obligated to and recognize that the operation is very different 
from types of operation that they see in other emergency vehicles. Unlike municipally owned vehicles, 
where training is required at the monthly meetings to maintain operation skills, there is no emergency 
vehicle operation training for each individual personal vehicles. It’s important for officials that they have 
the ability to balance the risk of this operation, which is vital to our communities, with the risks they 
create.  
 
If the committee moves forward with the proposed legislation, officials ask that you maintain 
their review of need for these larger lights since the last bill has not yet had time to be evaluated. 
However, municipal officials would prefer that you simply leave the existing law in place. 

