To: Maine Legislature Committee on Judiciary
From: Amy Eshoo, Director, Maine Climate Action Now
Date: March 6, 2023
Re: LD 78: RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of Maine 
Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations - OUGHT TO PASS
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Committee on Judiciary, my 
name is Amy Eshoo. I am a resident of North Yarmouth and Director of Maine Climate Action 
Now, a statewide coalition of 15 social justice and climate justice grassroots organizations. We 
support transformative action in response to the climate crisis. We hold social, racial, and 
economic justice as critical to the transition to zero carbon emissions by 2030.
I would like to thank the sponsor of this bill, Speaker Talbot Ross, for bringing it forth. As an 
organization we support bringing equity forward so that we as a state can move forward 
together in the face of the climate crisis.
We recognize that it does not appear that the amendment of 1876, removing Article X, Section 5 
from printed copies of the Constitution, was intended to take away any rights from Maine’s tribal 
communities. The amendment and the hiding of the language about the State’s duties and 
obligations did not actually change the State’s relationship with tribes. We feel that what is 
important today is transparency and accountability in state/tribal relations. It is important to 
Maine Climate Action Now that recognition of the Maine/Wabanaki relationship and history be 
reflected in making Article X, Section 5 visible. We believe that recognizing the complex history 
of treaties, negotiations, and power inequalities is important. 
We urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass for LD 78. Thank you.
Amy Eshoo
Maine Climate Action Now
LD 78
To: Maine Legislature Committee on Judiciary
From: Amy Eshoo, Director, Maine Climate Action Now
Date: March 6, 2023
Re: LD 78: RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of Maine
Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations - OUGHT TO PASS
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Amy Eshoo. I am a resident of North Yarmouth and Director of
Maine Climate Action Now, a statewide coalition of 15 social justice and climate 
justice grassroots organizations. We support transformative action in response to the 
climate crisis. We hold social, racial, and economic justice as critical to the transition 
to zero carbon emissions by 2030.
I would like to thank the sponsor of this bill, Speaker Talbot Ross, for bringing it 
forth. As an organization we support bringing equity forward so that we as a state can 
move forward together in the face of the climate crisis.
We recognize that it does not appear that the amendment of 1876, removing Article 
X, Section 5 from printed copies of the Constitution, was intended to take away any 
rights from Maine’s tribal communities. The amendment and the hiding of the 
language about the State’s duties and obligations did not actually change the State’s 
relationship with tribes. We feel that what is important today is transparency and 
accountability in state/tribal relations. It is important to Maine Climate Action Now 
that recognition of the Maine/Wabanaki relationship and history be reflected in 
making Article X, Section 5 visible. We believe that recognizing the complex history 
of treaties, negotiations, and power inequalities is important. 
We urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass for LD 78. Thank you.

