Friends	Committee	on	Maine	Public	Policy	James	Matlack,	Clerk	5	Duck	Pond	Road	Camden,	Maine	04843	LD	78	RESOLUTION,	Proposing	an	Amendment	to	Article	X	of	the	Constitution	of	Maine	Regarding	the	Publication	of	Maine	Indian	Treaty	Obligations	and	LD	578	RESOLUTION,	Proposing	an	Amendment	to	the	Constitution	of	Maine	Concerning	the	Publication	of	Maine	Indian	Treaty	Obligations	March	7,	2023	To	the	Honorable	Senator	Anne	Carney	(chair),	Honorable	Representative	Matt	Moonen	(chair)	and	Members	of	the	Joint	Standing	Committee	on	Judiciary:	My	name	is	Anne	D.	Burt.	I	live	in	Edgecomb.	Today	I	am	testifying	in	support	of		LD	78	and	LD	578	on	behalf	of	the	Friends	Committee	on	Maine	Public	Policy.	The	Friends	Committee	is	a	statewide	network	of	Quakers	who	are	focused	on	public	policy	issues	in	Augusta.	For	several	decades	we	have	addressed	issues	of	concern	to	the	Wabanaki	peoples	in	Maine	and	worked	to	improve	and	strengthen	tribal-state	relations.	•Friends	believe	that	passing	the	resolutions	to	amend	the	Constitution	to	require	that	Article	X	Section	5	be	printed	whenever	the	Constitution	is	published	is	timely	and	would	represent	another	step	forward	in	repairing	the	centuries-long	frayed	relationship	between	the	state	and	Wabanaki	nations.	People	hunger	to	know	the		truth	in	his-tory	and	look	to	resources,	such	as	the	Constitution,	for	that	information.	Maine’s	treaty	obligations	with	the	tribes,	while	always	legally	in	force	since	1820,	have	not	been	published	in	the	state	Constitution	since	1875,	when	the	Maine	legislature	passed	and	Maine	people	then	ratiWied	a	constitutional	amendment	to	omit	Section	5	whenever	the	Constitution	was	printed.	Recent	attempts	by	Maliseet	legislative	representative	Henry	Bear	to	amend	the	Constitution	and	require	that	Section	5	be	printed	were	unsuccessful.	 •Of	note,	legislators	and	all	Maine	government	ofWicials	take	an	oath	of	ofWice	to	uphold	the	state	Constitution.	Also	Maine	schoolchildren	study	the	state	Constitution	in	social	stud-ies	and	history	classes.	It	seems	important	for	you,	your	colleagues	and	our	school-children	to	know	all	of	the	obligations	set	forth	in	the	Constitution,	including	honoring	treaties	with	the	Wabanaki	nations	in	Article	X	Section	5,	currently	not	printed	in	the	published	Constitution.	LD	78	or	LD	578	would	amend	that. Friends	are	grateful	to	House	Speaker	Rachel	Talbot-Ross	and	Senator	Rick	Bennett	for	in-troducing	two	nearly	identical	resolutions	(LD	78	and	LD	578),	reWlecting	growing	bi-parti-san	support	for	legislation	and	other	efforts	to	improve	state-tribal	relations.		
We	strongly	urge	your	committee	to	unanimously	pass	LD	78	and/or	LD	578	and	to	encourage	your	legislative	colleagues	to	do	likewise.		Respectfully	submitted,	Anne	D.	Burt	Friends	Committee	on	Maine	Public	Policy
Anne Burt
Friends Committee on Maine Public Policy
LD 78
Friends Committee on Maine Public Policy
James Matlack, Clerk
5 Duck Pond Road
Camden, Maine 04843
LD 78 RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of Maine 
Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations and LD 578 RESOLUTION, 
Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Concerning the Publication of Maine 
Indian Treaty Obligations
March 7, 2023
To the Honorable Senator Anne Carney (chair), Honorable Representative Matt Moonen 
(chair) and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary:
My name is Anne D. Burt. I live in Edgecomb. Today I am testifying in support of  LD 78 and 
LD 578 on behalf of the Friends Committee on Maine Public Policy. The Friends Committee is
a statewide network of Quakers who are focused on public policy issues in Augusta. For 
several decades we have addressed issues of concern to the Wabanaki peoples in Maine 
and worked to improve and strengthen tribal-state relations.
Friends believe that passing the resolutions to amend the Constitution to require that Article X
Section 5 be printed whenever the Constitution is published is timely and would represent 
another step forward in repairing the centuries-long frayed relationship between the state and 
Wabanaki nations. People hunger to know the  truth in history and look to resources, such as 
the Constitution, for that information. Maine’s treaty obligations with the tribes, while always 
legally in force since 1820, have not been published in the state Constitution since 1875, 
when the Maine legislature passed and Maine people then ratified a constitutional 
amendment to omit Section 5 whenever the Constitution was printed. Recent attempts by 
Maliseet legislative representative Henry Bear to amend the Constitution and require that 
Section 5 be printed were unsuccessful. 
Of note, legislators and all Maine government officials take an oath of office to uphold the 
state Constitution. Also Maine schoolchildren study the state Constitution in social studies 
and history classes. It seems important for you, your colleagues and our schoolchildren to 
know all of the obligations set forth in the Constitution, including honoring treaties with the 
Wabanaki nations in Article X Section 5, currently not printed in the published Constitution. 
LD 78 or LD 578 would amend that.
Friends are grateful to House Speaker Rachel Talbot-Ross and Senator Rick Bennett for 
introducing two nearly identical resolutions (LD 78 and LD 578), reflecting growing bi-partisan 
support for legislation and other efforts to improve state-tribal relations. 
We strongly urge your committee to unanimously pass LD 78 and/or LD 578 and to 
encourage your legislative colleagues to do likewise. 
Respectfully submitted,
Anne D. Burt
Friends Committee on Maine Public Policy
