To: Senator Anne Carney, Representative Matt Moonan And Members of the Judiciary
Committee
From: Becky Layton Bartovics
Date: March 7, 2023
Re: LD 78 and LD 578  RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the
Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian
Treaty Obligations
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonan and Members of the Judiciary,
It appears that LD 78 and LD 578 are identical in purpose. Therefore, it is assumed that they will
become one resolution going forward. I am writing as an individual to support them and urge the
Judiciary Committee to vote “ought to pass.”
The first words in the Maine State Constitution are “We the people of Maine, in order to
establish justice, insure tranquility, provide for our mutual defense, promote our common
welfare, and secure to ourselves and our posterity the blessings of liberty.” It is difficult to rectify
those words and their intent with the arbitrary occlusion of the treaty documents of that
Constitution, Article X Section 5, by a Governor who held office for only two years, Nelson
Dingley.
The inherent invisibility of Article X,Section 5 has exacerbated a systemic treatment of the
indigenous peoples who cared for the area we now call Maine for thousands of years prior to
annexation by European ancestors. The hubris of our ancestors to assume ownership of these
lands and subsequently renege on the promises made in treaty and on becoming a state are an
embarrassment and an anachronism.  It is high time that we begin to repair the damages done
to the Peoples of the Dawn, whose care for this territory made colonization possible and to
whom we owe a great deal.
The Rule of Law based on the Magna Carta in 1215, establishes that judgements are made
based on written law, not arbitrary happenstance. Pretending, by not printing it, that  the State of
Maine did not agree to the treaty with the Indigenous peoples flies in the face of the basis of the
Constitution. My grandson says this repair should have happened even before he was born,
maybe even before I was. I agree! Please vote to pass LD78, LD578.
Respectfully submitted,
Becky Layton Bartovics
273 North Shore Rd
North Haven, ME 04853
