Testimony of Maine Conservation Voters
In Support of LD 78
“RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the
Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian
Treaty Obligations”  March 7, 2023
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary
Committee. My name is Beth Ahearn and I am Director of Government Affairs for Maine
Conservation Voters, a nonprofit organization with over 13,000 members and supporters
committed to protecting our environment, democracy, and climate future. I am pleased to
submit testimony in support of LD 78, “RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to
Article X of the Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty
Obligations.”
Thank you to Speaker Talbot Ross for introducing this Resolution and to Senator Bennett,
who sponsored LD 578, which aimed to do the same thing. This resolution would amend
the Maine Constitution to require that the text of Article X, Section 5 of the Constitution,
which describes our State’s obligations to the tribes of Maine, be included in any printed
copies of the Constitution. This obligation language was removed in 1876, ostensibly to
pare down and make Maine’s constitution more accessible. Section 5 has, and has always
had, the full force of law. Yet one would not know that because the language is not there.
The Resolution before you would replace language, written in 1820, when Maine
separated from Massachusetts and became a state under the Missouri Compromise: “
The
new State [Maine] shall, as soon as the necessary arrangements can be made for that
purpose, assume and perform all the duties and obligations of this Commonwealth
[Massachusetts], towards the Indians within said district of Maine, 'whether the same
arise from treaties, or otherwise; and for this purpose shall obtain the assent of said
Indians, and their release to this Commonwealth of claims and stipulations arising under
the treaty at present existing between the said Commonwealth and said Indians.”

I have no evidence that this language was removed for nefarious purposes, but replacing
it is clearly the right thing to do. We do not hide from our history; rather we can learn
from it and grow together as a state. The language was never legally removed from the
Constitution, just omitted from printed versions since 1876.  Replacing the language
would provide honesty and transparency concerning Maine’s original obligations to the
Tribes, which outweighs any justification for keeping it omitted.
I urge you to vote unanimously “Ought to Pass” on LD 78. Thank you for your time in
reading this testimony.
