Testimony in Support of “LD 78: RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the
Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations”
March 7, 2023
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Committee on
Judiciary,
My name is Claire Horne and I am a resident of Appleton, Maine. I am writing today in support
of “LD 78: RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of Maine
Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations”.
I believe that the Maine Constitution should be able to be printed as it is written. Learning about
the aforementioned bill was the first time I learned that some sections of Article X from our state
constitution are not included in printed versions of the Maine Constitution. These sections are in
effect and are relevant today, considering they describe treaties with Passamaquoddy and
Penobscot Nations. While I realize these sections can be found online, I know that I would be
confused and potentially misled if I referenced a printed version of Maine’s constitution with
Article X incomplete in this way. If a printed version of the state constitution is the most
accessible copy to someone, I believe they should be able to still read these sections of Article
X. We should be clear about what the state constitution contains so that regardless of whether
the copy you’re reading is online or in print, the information reads the same.
Thank you for all that you do on the Judiciary Committee, and for our state. I hope you will
support “LD 78: RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of
Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations”, so that omitted sections of
Article X can be included in printed copies of the Maine Constitution.
Sincerely,
Claire Horne
Claire Horne
Appleton
LD 78
Testimony in Support of “LD 78: RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to 
Article X of the Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian 
Treaty Obligations”
March 7, 2023
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the 
Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Claire Horne and I am a resident of Appleton, Maine. I am writing today 
in support of “LD 78: RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the 
Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty 
Obligations”.
I believe that the Maine Constitution should be able to be printed as it is written. 
Learning about the aforementioned bill was the first time I learned that some sections 
of Article X from our state constitution are not included in printed versions of the 
Maine Constitution. These sections are in effect and are relevant today, considering 
they describe treaties with Passamaquoddy and Penobscot Nations. While I realize 
these sections can be found online, I know that I would be confused and potentially 
misled if I referenced a printed version of Maine’s constitution with Article X 
incomplete in this way. If a printed version of the state constitution is the most 
accessible copy to someone, I believe they should be able to still read these sections 
of Article X. We should be clear about what the state constitution contains so that 
regardless of whether the copy you’re reading is online or in print, the information 
reads the same.
Thank you for all that you do on the Judiciary Committee, and for our state. I hope 
you will support “LD 78: RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of 
the Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty 
Obligations”, so that omitted sections of Article X can be included in printed copies 
of the Maine Constitution. 
Sincerely,
Claire Horne

