Testimony of Darren Ranco, PhD, Maine Indian Tribal State Commission, in Support of 
LD78, “Resolution, Proposing and Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of Maine 
Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations”
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary.
My name is Darren Ranco, I am one of two Penobscot Nation representatives to the 
Maine Indian Tribal-State Commission.  I am here to testify in support of LD 78 on behalf 
of the Commission.
I believe Jud Esty-Kendall will testify later or has already, reflecting on the report he 
wrote for MITSC with Rachel Hampson from January of 2021, describing the 
circumstances of the removal of Section 5, Subsection 5 from printing of the Maine 
State Constitution.  
While I have lectured about these circumstances myself and even presented some of my 
own congruent findings in February of 2019 to this Standing Committee, I am here to 
testify on a related but equally important matter.  My testimony is about what it means 
for me as a Wabanaki Tribal citizen and educator to restore this language to the printing 
of the State Constitution.  
I have heard people opposed to this say that this is an unimportant distraction or is not 
meaningful because these sections remain in full force of the law.  I suggest, instead, 
that it is ALL about meaning, and how we, as Wabanaki people, form the basis of our 
social contract with the state of Maine.
If I may, I would like to read another part of the State Constitution that identifies the 
social contract all of Maine
FROM THE PREAMBLE:
We the people of Maine, in order to establish justice, insure tranquility, provide for our 
mutual defense, promote our common welfare, and secure to ourselves and our 
posterity the blessings of liberty, acknowledging with grateful hearts the goodness of 
the Sovereign Ruler of the Universe in affording us an opportunity, so favorable to the 
design; and, imploring God's aid and direction in its accomplishment, do agree to form 
ourselves into a free and independent State, by the style and title of the State of Maine 
and do ordain and establish the following Constitution for the government of the same.
FROM Current Article X SECTION 7:
Sections 1, 2 and 5, of Article X of the Constitution, shall hereafter be omitted in any 
printed copies thereof prefixed to the laws of the State; but this shall not impair the 
validity of acts under those sections; and said section 5 shall remain in full force, as part 
of the Constitution, according to the stipulations of said section, with the same effect as 
if contained in said printed copies. 
FROM THE ORIGINAL, Maine Constitution Article X, Section 5 Subsection 5, [in part], 
(1820):
 
“The new State [Maine] shall, as soon as the necessary arrangements can be made for 
that purpose, assume and perform all the duties and obligations of this 
Commonwealth [Massachusetts], towards the Indians within said district of Maine, 
'whether the same arise from treaties, or otherwise; and for this purpose shall obtain 
the assent of said Indians, and their release to this Commonwealth of claims and 
stipulations arising under the treaty at present existing between the said 
Commonwealth and said Indians.”
This framework—that Maine is the successor of all Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
Treaty obligations (despite them being in violation of the 1790 Federal Nonintercourse 
Act), and that these cannot be changed without our assent, identifies how my ancestors 
and Tribal Nation came into relationship with the State of Maine.  This forms the basis of 
our social contract with the State.
To maintain this as an omission serves to erase this definitive and auspicious beginning, 
which so many of us, including the Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary, have worked so hard to un-erase.  For these reasons, we ask you to vote in 
favor of LD 78.
