 
 
 
Senator Anne Carney 
Representative Matt Moonen 
Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta ME 04333 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee, 
 
The Appalachian Mountain Club strongly supports LD 78, Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to Article 
X of the Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations and LD 578 
Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Concerning the Publication of Maine 
Indian Treaty Obligations. We appreciate Speaker Talbot Ross and Senator Bennett for bringing them 
forward.   
 
AMC is the nation’s oldest conservation, recreation, and education organization, with the mission to 
foster the protection, enjoyment and understanding of the outdoors. We have 6,600 members in Maine 
and own 100,000 acres of forestland in the 100-Mile Wilderness region of Piscataquis County, managed 
for multiple use including sustainable forestry, backcountry recreation, and environmental education.  
As a participant in the First Light Learning Journey, we have gained a new perspective on the history of 
the place we now call Maine. These two bills address a troubling piece of that history.  
In choosing to separate from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in 1920, the citizens of Maine freely 
took on obligations to the indigenous people living here. Specifically, the 1820 constitution read: 
The new state shall, as soon as necessary arrangements can be made for that purpose, assume and 
perform all the duties and obligations of the Commonwealth, toward the Indians within said District of 
Maine, whether the same arise from treaties, or otherwise; and for this purpose shall obtain the assent 
of said Indians, and their release to this Commonwealth of claims and stipulations arising under the 
treaty at present existing between the said Commonwealth and said Indians; 
Yet for nearly 150 years the State of Maine has hidden its obligations by preventing the printing of that 
section of its constitution. While the amendment made clear that “section five shall remain in full force”, 
the passing of time has meant that most people are unaware of the State’s obligations.  
Printing Article X, Section 5 will not automatically and immediately improve relations between the State 
of Maine and the Wabanaki, yet it is important. Printing that section of the constitution is a small step 
the state can take to improve those relations, an act of transparency which simultaneously 
acknowledges longstanding obligations and removes suspicions over their being hidden. Further, asking 
the voters of Maine to ratify the proposed amendment is a “teachable moment”—an opportunity to 
discuss and reflect on the history of the relationship between the state and the Wabanaki, its current 
condition, and the benefit to all of us in improving it.  
 
A December 2022 report from the Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development found 
that the Wabanaki’s inability to access federal policy has left them far worse off economically relative to 
their peers across the country. The Wabanaki suffer from lower incomes, higher rates of unemployment 
and higher rates of child poverty relative to either all Maine residents or other tribes. These challenges 
affect not just those who directly experience them, but all of us.   
If we want to live in a healthy community where everyone can thrive, we should take steps to improve 
the well-being of our Wabanaki neighbors, and to improve the relationship between the State of Maine 
and the tribes. LD’s 78 and 578 are not cure-alls, but they are a reasonable start. 
Sincerely, 
Eliza Townsend 
Maine Conservation Policy Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
