 
1 
 Testimony of the Wabanaki Alliance  in support of  
LD 78 RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of Maine 
Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations  & 
LD 578 RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Concerning the 
Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations  
Presen ted for the Public Hearing Before the  Maine Legislature’s  Judiciary Committee  
March 7, 202 3 
 
Sen. Carney , Rep. Moonen , and members of the  Joint Standing Committee on the 
Judiciary ; my name is John Dieffenbacher -Krall. I reside in Old Town, and I am the Executive 
Director of the Wabanaki Alliance . The group was founded in June 2020 by the five federally 
recognized nations in what we today call the State of Maine, the Houlton Band of Maliseet 
Indians, Mi’kmaq Nation, Passamaquoddy Tribe at Motahkmikuk, Passamaquoddy Tribe at 
Sipayik, and Penobscot Nation.  The Wabanaki Alliance was created to educate the peop le of 
Maine about the need for securing the sovereignty of  Wabanaki Nations .  
 
The Wabanaki Alliance supports LD 78 RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to 
Article X of the Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty 
Obligations , and LD 578 RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
Concerning the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations . We thank Speaker Rachel 
Talbot Ross and Senator Rick Bennett for introducing the se bills.  
 
 In the Wabanaki Nations continual work to educate  settler people and institutions about 
Wabanaki inherent sovereignty, ensur ing peo ple underst and the history and the commitments 
and obligations settler governments made to the Original Peo ples and Nations of this land  is an 
essential condition for a healthy Wabanaki/State of Maine relationship.  Omitting the printing of 
Article X, Secti on V of the Maine Constitution deprives people from k nowing that the State of 
Maine pledged as a condition of state hood to “assume and perform all the duties and obligations 
of this Commonwealth, towards the Indians within said District of Maine, whether the same arise 
from treaties, or otherwise; .” At the most basic level, these bills would  make our Maine 
Constitution more transparent increasing the li kelihood current and future residents of this state 
do understand the obligations of the State of Maine to t he Wabanaki Nations.  
 
 Detractors of th ese bills may say they change nothing. They would be correct to the 
extent Article X, Section V re mains in effect. What passage of LDs 78 and 578 wo uld 
accomplish  shou ld they succe ed through the entire p rocess of amending the Maine Constitution 
is people could much more readily access this information . All pe ople who sup port the r ule of 
law and the primacy of the Maine Consti tution in considering matters of Maine law should 
strongly support these resol utions.  
 
The Wabanaki Alliance urges the Judiciary Committee to vote ought to pass on this bill.  
 
