TO:The Honorable Anne Carney, Co-ChairThe Honorable Matt Moonen, Co-ChairMembers of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
DATE:March 7th, 2023
RE:LD 78: RESOLUTION,Proposing an Amendment to ArticleX of the Constitution of MaineRegarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations
Good morning Senator Carney and Representative Moonen.
My name is Lane Sturtevant.  I’m a resident of Warren. I am submitting testimony on behalf of theLeague of Women Voters of Maine in support of LD 78,RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment toArticle X of the Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations.
The League of Women Voters of Maine is a nonpartisan political organization that has been working forover 100 years to encourage informed and active participation in government, to increase understandingof major public policy issues, and to influence public policy through education and advocacy. We neversupport or oppose any political party or candidate.
As stated in theNational League of Women Voters’publication of the League’s policy positions: “TheLeague of Women Voters of the United States believes that democratic government depends uponinformed and active participation at all levels of government. The League further believes thatgovernmental bodies must protect the citizen’s right to know by giving adequate notice of proposedactions, holding open meetings, and making public records accessible.” The publication goes on to saythat “transparency is a key tenet of the League.”
The League of Women Voters of Maine takes the tenet of transparency seriously. If a democraticgovernment represents the people, serves the people, then the people need to know how they are beingrepresented and served. If governing documents, including statutes, regulations, and constitutions,delineate the scope and obligations of government, then it follows that the people should have easyaccess to those documents in their entirety.
LD 78 seeks to address one instance in which the state of Maine has not been fully transparent with itspeople. The fact that the treaty obligations in Article X of the Maine Constitution remain a part of theConstitution but have been redacted and not included in printed copies of the Constitution for almost150 years means that the people of Maine have not had easy access to the entirety of this centralgoverning document for a long time. This is a lapse in transparency that we can, and should, correct.Passage of LD 78 will mean that the people of the state of Maine will be able to openly know theunpublished wording, as should be their right, and make an effort to fulfill its obligations.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. We hope you will support LD 78.
PO 18187
Portland, ME 04112
info@lwvme.org
207.622.0256
www.lwvme.org

