 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
LD 78 – Ought  To Pass  
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution 
of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
March 7 , 202 3 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen , and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on  Judiciary, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede , and I am 
Policy Counsel  for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to support 
LD 78, legislation that would ensur e that whoever reads the Maine constitution 
reads the full constitution, without omission, and knows the full scope of the state’s 
treaty obligations to Wabanaki nations.  
 
In 1876, the Maine Constitution was amended “ to remove from printed copies of 
that Constitution, but not from the Constitution itself, the original language 
directing Maine to assume ‘the duties and obligations of this Commonwealth, 
towards the Indians within said District of Maine. ’”1 Researchers  have been unable 
to find a clear record explaining the reasons behind the constitutional commission ’s 
recommend ation .2 However, some ha ve suggested that Frederick Pike, a Calais 
politician who served on the commission, spearheaded the omission 
recommendation to enjoy a personal financial benefit from Maine dishonor ing its 
treaty obligations to Wabanaki nations.3 Whatever the reasons, the redaction does 
not help heal Maine’s fraught relationship with Wabanaki nations.  
 
Constitutions are not just documents that set out rights and duties. They are also 
expressions of the collective will, and of a polity’s identity. This bill gives Maine a 
chance to be more honest, more forthcoming about its duties. Healing evades those 
who hide the truth. If Maine is to right the wrongs that structure its relationship 
 
1 Judson Esty -Kendall* and Rachel T. Hampson, Research Report on the 1876 Removal of Article X, 
Section 5 from Printed Copies of the Maine Constitution at 1, Jan. 11, 2021, Maine -Indian Tribal 
State Commission, available at  mitsc.org/library/research -report -on-the-1876 -removal -of-article -10-
section -5-from -printed -copies -of-the-maine -constitution -2021.   
2 Id. at 12 -13. 
3 Id. at 13 -14. 
  
 
with Wabanaki nations, then it must, at the very least, tell the t ruth in its most 
important legal document.  
 
We urge you to vote ought to pass .  
