i-1alneTrans.Hr:\‘ 'A 
'1 \ "‘ iislibr ".'i,-»='@,,i¢.=sU EQUALlTYMAi ﬁE 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Testimony of Maine Transgender Network, Maine Women's Lobby, Equalitylvlaine 
LD 78 RESGLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of Maine 
Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations
& 
LD 578 RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Concerning 
the Publication of Maine lndian Treaty Obligations 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Judiciary Committee: my 
name is Quinn Gormley, I am the Executive Director of the Maine Transgender Network, and I am 
testifying today on behalf of MaineTransNet, Maine Women’s Lobby, and EqualityMaine in support 
of both LD 78 and LD 578. 
As organizations that combat transphobia, sexism, and homophobia in our society on a daily basis 
we regularly bump into a simple truth: these harmful systems of marginalization are culturally 
specific and among the most harmful exports of European colonialism. Women, Two Spirit, Queer, 
and Gender Diverse peoples were and are valued, integral, and beloved 
members of Indigenous cultures and communities whose land we occupy. And they are harmed 
multiple times over by the sexism, racism, and colonialism that our society continues to uphold. 
Achieving a Maine where people of all genders and orientations can lead lives free from 
oppression requires us to address the roots of stigma. That means addressing the historic and 
current forms of colonization of this land and its peoples. To do this, we must tell the truth about our 
history and name our obligations to people whose land we stole and whose cultures our 
government has worked to eradicate. LD 78 and LD 578 are an important step in that effort, 
ensuring that these obligations are included in all copies of our state constitution. 
ln recent years, this body has supported vital steps towards reconciliation and justice with the 
Indigenous people of what is now Maine. That support is a shift from the work of your 
predecessors and one we strongly encourage you to embrace. The right thing is clear. Vote ought 
to pass on LD 78 and LD 578.- 
Thank you, 
Quinn Gormley on behalf of: 
Maine Transgender Network 
Maine Women's Lobby 
EqualityMaine
