,. STATE OF MAINE 
Q 13’ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
SPEAKER'S OFFICE 
Q, AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
T4‘ " 
(207) 2237-1300 
RACHEL TALBOT ROSS 
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
Tuesday, March 7th, 2023 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross presenting 
LD 78 RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the 
Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian 
Treaty Obligations 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary 
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and other 
distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee. I am Rachel Talbot Ross andI 
represent House District 118 which is the Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, 
Bayside, East Bayside, Oakdale and the University of Southem Maine Campus and 
I also have the distinct honor of serving as Maine Speaker of the House. I am here 
today to present LD 78, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the 
Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty 
Obligations. 
Amending the Constitution of Maine is not and should not be a simple task. 
Each and every section of the document as it is currently printed has been 
incorporated because of an extreme necessity. That necessity which is at least 2/3 ’s 
of the Maine Legislature and a majority vote of referendum that gave approval of 
making a change to how we as the State of Maine decide to govern ourselves. For 
instance: 
Article III, Section 1: Powers Distributed. The powers of this govermnent 
shall be divided into 3 distinct departments, the legislative, executive and 
judicial. 
Section 2. To be kept separate. No person or persons, belonging to one of 
these departments, shall exercise any of the powers properly belonging to 
either of the others, except in the cases herein expressly directed or 
permitted. 
District 118: Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, Bayside, East Bayside, Oakdale and 
the University of Southern Maine Campus
Article I, Section 22: Taxes. No tax or duty shall be imposed without the 
consent of the people or of their representatives in the Legislature. 
Those are some of the issues and the wording that are precisely realized 
were set in place because of a need. The need for a separation of government 
because no one branch of government should have more power over another 
branch of government. The need for no unruly and unapproved taking of money 
without legislative representative decision. That is why I am asking for us to 
amend the Constitution to reveal Article X, Section 5 and be printed in future 
editions of the State of Maine Constitution. 
Article X of the Constitution is the original founding document that led to 
the creation of our home, the State of Maine. This part of the Maine Constitution 
encompasses the original Articles of Separation from the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts. To this day, the Articles of Separations shall not be amended unless 
with approval of the Massachusetts government. The Articles are written 
instructions from the Massachusetts government about how Maine government 
should be organized. Emphasis has to be given that this is a legally binding 
agreement. It is not a recommendation. For instance: 
Section 1 instructs when the ﬁrst Legislature shall meet and the number of 
Senators and Representatives shall be distributed according to population. 
Section 2 details how long a term may last. 
Section 4 creates the ability for the Constitution to be amended if the 
Legislature and citizens ﬁnd the need to do so. 
In 1875, then Maine Governor Nelson Dingley Jr. called a Constitutional 
Convention during his state of the State address because he believed that the 
Constitution “has become a piece of legal patch-work, in which the patches and 
out-of-date shreds cover half of the thirty-two pages which the Revised Statutes 
devote to the instrument, and the casual reader often ﬁnds it difﬁcult to understand 
what is the fundamental law of the State” . You can bet there was more behind this. 
As a result, a Constitutional Convention met and in less than l month 
reported back their recommendations of making amendments and to which also 
included that Article X, Sec’s 1, 2, & 5 were to be no longer printed.
In 2021, Maine legal historian Judson Esty-Kendall and scholar Rachel 
Hampson researched how and why the Maine Constitution was amended in their 
“Research Report on the 1876 Removal of Article X, Section 5 from Printed 
Copies of the Maine Constitution ” . Their ﬁndings of why these sections are 
excluded: 
“There is no recorded legislative debate, nor did the Maine legislature make 
ﬁndings as to why it amended the Constitution to omit Article X, section 5 
from printed copies” 
As an aside after 7 years in the Legislature, I believe this is justa 
phenomenally quick amount of time to decide how to change the founding 
document of the State. Additionally, for there to be no debate is outstanding. 
This bill will correct what the 1875 Constitutional Convention failed to 
consider when they decided that it was not necessary to no longer print those three 
speciﬁc sections of the Constitution of Maine. By responding to Governor Dingley 
to make the Constitution more streamlined for the “casual reader” , how would not 
printing sections of the Constitution make it less “difﬁcult to understand ”? 
It has to be said that that our culture is a written culture — where we pride 
ourselves on the knowledge passed from one generation to the next through text, 
through books, through poetry, through history. Our laws should be no different. If 
the casual reader of the Maine Constitution who does not have a strong civics 
education would like to understand the building blocks of law in the State of Maine 
— they would need to ﬁrst ﬁnd a Constitution, then after making their way through 
Articles I through IX, at Article X section l ﬁnd a reference to section 7 which 
states that: 
Section 7. Original sections 1, 2, 5, of Article X not to be printed; 
section 5 in full force. Sections 1, 2 and 5, of Article X of the Constitution, 
shall hereafter be omitted in any printed copies thereof preﬁxed to the laws 
of the State; but this shall not impair the validity of acts under those 
sections; and said section 5 shall remain in full force, as part of the 
Constitution, according to the stipulations of said section, with the same 
effect as if contained in said printed copies. 
That certainly leaves ambiguity about the Words behind those speciﬁc 
sections of the Constitution.
But really, why are we making Maine citizens have to jump through hoops 
to ﬁnd these words? They are in effect. Article X, Section 7 says so. Isn’t it 
disturbing that we lack transparency in our own Constitution? I think so. 
To give Govemor Dingley and the members of the 28*“ Maine State 
Legislature some credit, if they were worried about the labors of the printing 
process, it was a little more complicated than it is nowadays. 
In every way that we operate, transparency is critical to truly have an elected 
govermnent that decides on how we live, what the norms of our society are, and 
ultimately who gets to participate. Our constitution is the document that not only 
instructs us how we should live, but what our rights are and the history that has led 
us to the point that we are at today. 
Simply enough, our constitution should not contain hidden sections, 
especially those that are fully in effect. With LD 78, I am asking for you to decide 
whether we ask the voters of Maine if they would like a constitution that has every 
section currently in effect printed, or if we would like to continue to proceed to 
need to research about what actually are the rules that govern each and every 
Mainer. 
I leave you with the question of why would we not want our constitution to 
be fully transparent if there are sections that are in full effect? 
For speciﬁc questions relation to the history of how we got here, I’ve asked 
Professor Dr. Darren Ranco Associate Professor of Anthropology and Coordinator 
of Native American Research at the University of Maine to speak to this. Secretary 
of State Shenna Bellows and Attorney General Aaron Frey will also be speaking 
behind me. I would ask for you to direct questions relating to the Archives and the 
applicability of the law to them. 
In addition to my testimony, I am including the original unprinted language 
from Article X, Sections 1, 2 & 5, as well as the “Research report on the 1876 
Removal of Article X, Section 5 from Printed Copies of the Maine Constitution ” 
by Judson Esty-Kendall and Rachel T. Hampson. 
Thank you for your time and attention as you in the Judiciary Committee 
and us in members of the 1315‘ Maine State Legislature consider making an 
amendment to the founding document of the State of Maine.
wuoowv 
ipeatca Talbot 
xxiv CONSTITUTION or MAINE. _ 
rﬁllepéauaonéhe Seer. 4. And in case the elections, required by this 
orlianqlrieinll Constitution on the ﬁrst Wednesday of January annually, by 
}‘§om“§I,‘}”{;‘§§,, tlﬁe ‘ago H(l!1uS8S of -the ,Le3gislaitiire, slilalfl notdbe C0IX:1pleted on 
t at ay, t e same may ea __]ourne rom ay to ay, unti 
» 
completed,-in the following order: the vacancies in the Senate 
shall ﬁrst be ﬁlled ; the Governor shall then be elected, if there 
be no choice by the people; and afterwards the two Houses 
shall elect the Council. i-
. 
Every civil om. Snow. 5. Every person holding any ClV1l0i'llC8 under this 
°" my "° .1'°‘ State, may be removed by impeachment, for. misdemeanor in 
moved by im- , 
rgiaghment or oﬂice ; and every person holding any oliice, m"y be removed 
a W by the Governor with the advice of the Council, on the- 
address ofboth branches of the Legislature. But before such 
address shall pass either House, the causes of remr 'al shall 
be stated and entered on the journal of the House in which 
it originated, and a copy thereof served on the persoi_ in oiﬁce, 
that he may be admittedto a hearing in his defence. .
, 
1-mm, ofomce, Seer. 6. The tenure of all ofiices, which are not orshall 
not be otherwise provided for, shall be during the pleasure of 
the Governor and Council. , l 
I» _, 
Valuation. “ Sec'r. _ '7. While the public expences shall be assessed on 
polls and estates, a general valuation shall be taken at least 
once in ten years... 
Real Estate m Snocr. 8. All taxes upon real estate, assessedby authori- 
§‘,fg””,§‘§,“”,f°,Ii‘§.‘l,fty of this State, shall be apportioned and assessed equally,' 
according to the just value thereof. »‘
. 
ARTICLE X. 
SCHEDULE. _- 
1£1;§i§{;§u;'§_ ﬁI5* Seer. 1. The ﬁrst Legislature shall meet on the last 
° 
Wednesday in May next. The elections on the second Monday 
in September annually shall not commence until the year one 
r 
thousand eight hundred and twenty one, and inthe mean time 
the election for Governor, Senators and Representatives shall 
me,,;o,,,'f°,. be on the ﬁrst Monday in April, in the year of our Lord one 
‘°2°- thousand eight huiidred and twenty, and at this election, the 
same proceedings shall be -had as are required at the elections, 
provided for in this Constitution on the second Monday in 
September annually, and the lists of the votes for the Governor 
and Senators shall be transmitted, by the town and plantation 
clerks respectively, to the Secretary of State pro tempore, 
seventeen days at least before , the last Wednesday in May next, 
and the President ofthe Convention shall, in presence of the 
Secretary of State, pro tempera open and examine the attested 
copies of said lists, so returned for Senators, and shall have all
eonsrrrurion or MAIN}?!-. | _.xxv 
the powers, and be subject to all the duties, in ascert_ai_ning ‘, 
notifying, and summoning the Senators, who appear to he 
elected, as the Governor and council ‘have, and are subject to, 
by this Constitution ‘: Promldeol, He "shall -notify said Senators 
fourteen days at least before the last Wednesday in May, and' 
vacancies shall be ascertained and ﬁlled in the manner herein 
j rovided ; and the Senators to be elected on the said ﬁrst §,§§§§>'@ =’PP°\“ 
glonday of April, shall be apportioned as follows : V’ 
The County of York shall elect three.~ 
The County ‘of Cumberland shall elect three». 
;Th _e County of Lincoln shall elect three-. 
_ The County‘ of Hancock shall elect two.' 
The "County of "Washi-ngton shall elect one-. 
Thl‘? County of Kennebec shall elect three»V
. 
The County of Oxford shall elect two. 
Tl1e‘County of Somerset shall elect two. 
The ‘County of Penobscot shall elect on'e~. _ _ __ 
_C 
-And the members of the House of Representatives shall be Ma M.‘ Sam 
"elected, ascertained, and returned in the same manner as herein lives. P" 
provided at_e_lections on the second Monday of September, and' 
the ﬁrst ll’-Iouse of Representatives shall consist of the following 
m1mber, _t' 0 he elected as follows : '‘ 
‘COUNTY OF YORK. yam 
The towns of York and Wells may each elect two ~represent=- 
"atives ; and each of the remaining towns may elect one» .A
‘ 
_ ' i 
COUNTY OF CUMBERLAND.‘ 
y 0.-,-mb,,-rm;- . 
_ The town of Portland may elect three representatives;’ 
North-Yarmouth, two; Brunswick, two; Gorham, two; Free-~ , 
%ort and Pownal, two; Rayn _1ond_and Otisﬁeld, one; Bridgton, 
aldwin and Harrison, one ; Poland and Danville, one ; and 
each remaining town one.At 
‘COUNTY OF LINCOLN: iimmxu; 
The towns of Georgetown and Phipsburg, may elect ‘one 
representative; Lewiston and Wales, one; St. George,\Cnshing 
and Friendship, one' 
; Hope and Appleton Ridge, one; 
Jefferson, Putnam and Patricktown plantation, one; Alna and 
Whitﬁeld, one; Montville, Palermo, and Montville plantation, 
one; Woolwich and Dresden, one; and each remaining 
town one.' 
COUNTY OF HANCOCK. V 
__ _ iimock, 
The town of Bu'cksport may elect one representative ; Deer 
Island; one; Castine and Brooksville, one; Orland and 
Penobscot, one; 1V[ount.D_esert and Eden- , one; Vinalhaven 
and Islehorough, one; Sedgwick and B1uehi_l1,one; Goi1l¢_ lS-
Xxvi., 
Washington. 
1l.€nneb8(l- 
Dxford 
‘ﬁolncrset. 
Yenobscot. CONSTITUTION ‘OF MAINE. 
borough, Sullivan ’ and plantations No. "8 "and 9 nortli ,oli’- 
Sullivan, one ; Surry, Ellsworth, Trenton and plantationlof 
ll/Iariaville, one; Lincolnville, Searsmont and Belmont, one; 
Belfast and Northport, one; Prospect and Swanville, one; 
Frankfort and Monroe, one; Knox, Brooks, Jackson and 
Thorndike, one. - 
CQUNTY OF WASHINGTON."'
~ 
The towns of Steuben, Cherryﬁeld and ‘Harrington, may 
elect one representative; Addison, Columbia and Jonesbo-' 
rough, one; Machias, one; Lubec, Dennysville, Plantations 
No. 9, No. 10, No. ll, No. 12, one ; Eastport, one; Perry, 
Robinston, Calais, Plantations No. 3, No. 6,,No.’ '7, No. 15, 
and No. 16, one." 
“COUNTY QF KENNEBEC. - 
The towns of_Belgrade and Dearborn may elect one repre~ 
sentative ; Chesterville, Vienna and Rome, one; Vlfaynei and 
Fayette, one ; Temple and l/Vilton, one; Winslow and China, 
one; Fairfax and Freedom, one-; Unity, tl<> _;-n-an,d 25 mile 
pond -plantation, one; Harlem andls/iralta, one; and each 
remaining town one. 
. CGUNTY OF OXFORD. . 
. The towns of Dixﬁeld, Mexico, Weld and Plantations Nos. 
1 and 4, may. elect one ~-representative; Jay and Hartford, 
one; Livermore, one ; Rumford, East Andover and Planta- 
tions Nos. '7 and 8, "one; Turner, one; Woodstock, Paris 
and Greenwood, one; II-Iebron and Norway, one; Gilead, 
Bethe], Newry, Albany and Howard’s gore, one, Porter, 
Hiram and Brownﬁeld, one; VVaterford, Sweden and Lovell, 
one; Denmark, Fryeburg and Fryeburg addition, one5 
Buckﬁeld and Sumner, one. 
‘COUNTY OF §‘ >OMERSET. _ 
The town of Fairﬁeld may elect one representative; Nor- 
ridgwock and Bloomﬁeld, one; Starks and Mercer, one .; 
Industry, Strong and New-Vineyard, one; Avon, Phillips, 
Freeman and Kingﬁeld, one; Anson, N ew—Pfortland, Embden, 
and Plantation N 0. 1, "one; Canaan, 'Warsaw, Palmyra; St. 
Albans and Corinna, one ; Madison, Solon, Bingliam, 
Moscow and l\lorthhill, one; Cornville, Athens, Harmony, 
Ripley, and Warrenstown, one. 4 V, 
COUNTY OF PENOBSCOT.i 
"The towns of Hampden and Newburg may elect one repre- 
sentative; Orrington, Brewer, and Eddington and Plantations 
adjacent on the east side of Penobscot river, one; Bangor,
'€3ﬂNSTI'I‘UTIGN’ or MAFNE... xxvii 
Orono and Sunkhaze Plantation, one ;* Dlixmont, Newport, 
Carmel, Hermon, Stetson, and Plantation No. 4, in the 6th 
range, one ;. Levant, Corinth, Exeter, New/— _Gl1arlestown, 
Blakesburg, Plantation No. 1 in 3d range, and Plantation 
No.1 in 4th range, one; Dexter, Garland,.Guilford, Sanger- 
ville, and Plantation No. 3, in6 _th range" , one ;, Atkinson, 
Sebec, Foxcrott, Brownville, Williamsburg ‘ , Plantation o. 
I, in '7th range, and Plantation No. 3, .in '7th range, one. 
' 
And the Secretary of State prote1n_pore shall have the same rowerswgi.- ﬂu; 
powers, and be subject to the same" duties,'in relation to the §€%?I¢§§%if$2, ‘3. 
votes for Governor, as the Secretary of Etate has, and is subject §,'I,{;f,'f “‘°“‘°“‘° 
to, by this Constitution: and the election of Governor shall, 
on the said last "Wednesday in ll/lay, be determined and 
declared, in the same manner, as other elections of Governor 
are by this Constitution; and in case of vacancy in said office, 
the President of the Senate, and Speaker, of the House of 
Representatives, shall exercise the oﬂice as herein othervvise 
provided, and the Counsellors, Secretary and Treasurer, shall 
also he elected on said day, and have the same p0WB1'S, ‘ﬂIl(l be 
subject to the same duties, as is provided in this Constitution ; 
and in' 
case of the death or other disquali ﬁcation of the 
President of this Convention, or of the Secretary of State pro 
tempera, before the election and qualiﬁcation of the Governor 
or Secretary of State under this Constitution, the persons to 
be designated by this‘ Convention at their session in January 
next, shall have all the powers and perform all the duties, 
which the President of this Convention, or the Secretary pro 
tempers, to he by them appointed, shall have and perform. . 
Snow. 2" . The period for which the Governor, Senators Du;-mo“ OHM,‘ 
and Representatives, Counsellors, Secretary and Treasurer, ﬁ“‘L°§i“‘“‘"*'¢“ 
ﬁrst elected or appointed, are to serve in their-respective oﬁices 
and places, shall commence on the last “Tednesday in May, in 
the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and twenty, 
and continue until the ﬁrst Wednesday of January, in the year 
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and twenty two. 
Snow. 3. All laws now in force in this‘ state, and not paws no}? in 
repugnant to this Constitution, shall remain, and be in force, \§i§ii§:;i ‘eii@=‘ii}_, 
until altered or repealed by the Legislature, or sha-ll expire by 
their own limitation.' 
Sear. 4. The Legislature, whenever two thirds ofboth gg3§‘»§§*:§°11 be‘ 
houses shall deem it necessary, may propose amendments to amended-y 
this Constitution; and when any amendment shall be so agreed 
upon, a resolution shall be passed and sent to the selectmen of 
the several towns, and the assessors of the several plantations, 
empowering and directing them to notify the inhabitants of 
their respective towns and plantations, in the manner prescribed 
by law, at their next annual meetings in the 'm0nth‘0f Sep-, 
tember, to give in their votes on the question, whether such-
\\l 
XXV111 CONSTITUTION OF MAINE“ . _. 
amendment shall be made ;: and if it shall appear thata 
majority of the inhabitants voting on the question are in favor 
of such amendment, it shall become apart of this Constitution. 
aegrmgntgeoptce SE01‘ . 5. All oﬂicers provided for in the sixth section oi 
h,,;¢,;,,,,.,,, ﬁ[’ ,,_ an act of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, passed on the 
nineteenth day of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand 
eight hundred and nineteen, entitled “ An act relating to the 
Separation of the District of Maine from Massachusetts Proper, 
and forming the same into a separate and Independent State,” 
shall continue in oﬁice as therein provided; and the following 
provisions of said act shall be a part of this Constitution, 
subject however to he modiﬁed or" 
annulled as therein is 
prescribed, and not otherwise,.t0 wit :" 
Partofalaw of “ Snow. 1. Whereas it has been represented to this Legislature, that 
ta majority of the people of the District of Maine are desirous of establishing 
the constitution. a separate and Independent Government within said District: Therefore, 
_ “ Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Represen"tat'i'ves in General 
Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, That the consent of 
this Common wealth be, and the same is hereby given, that the District of 
Maine may be formed and erected into a separate and Independent State, 
if the people of the said District shall in the manner, and by the majority 
hereinafter mentioned, express their consent and agreementthereto, upon 
thefollowingterms and conditions-2 And, provided the Congress of the 
,United States shall give its consent thereto, before the fourth day of 
March next: which terms and conditions are as follows, viz. 
“ First. All the lands and buildings belonging to the Commonwealth, 
within Massachusetts Proper, shall continue to belong to said Common- 
wealth, and all the lands belonging to the Commonwealth, within the 
District of Maine, shall belong, the one half thereof to the said Common- 
wealth, and the other half thereof, to the State to be formed within the 
said District, to be divided as is hereinafter mentioned"; and the lands 
within the said District, which shall belong to the said Commonwealth, 
shall be free from taxation, while the title to the said lands remains inthe 
Commonwealth ; and the rights of the Commonwealth to their lands, 
within said District, and the remedies for the recovery thereof, shall 
continue the same, within the proposed State, and in the Courts thereof, 
as they now are within the said Commonwealth,and in the Courts thereof; 
for which purposes, and for the maintenance of its rights, and recovery of 
its lands, the said Commonwealth shall be entitled to all other proper and 
legal remedies, and may appear in the Courts of the proposed State and 
in the Courts of the United States, holden therein ; and all rights of action 
for, or entry into lands, and of actions upon bonds, for the breach of the 
performance of the condition of settling -duties, so called, which have 
accrued, or may accrue, shall remain in this Commonwealth, to be enforced, 
conirnutecl, released, or otherwise disposed of, in such manner as this 
Commonwealth may hereafter, determine: Provided howemrr, That, 
whatever this Commonwealth may hereafter receive or obtain on account 
thereof if any thing, shall, after deducting all reasonable charges relating 
thereto, be" divided, one third part thereof to the new State, and two third 
parts thereof to this Commonwealth.i 
“ Second. All the arms which have been received by this Common_~ 
wealth from the United States, under the law of Congress, entitled, “ An 
act making provision for arming and equipping the whole body of militia 
_of the United States, passed April the twenty-third, one thousand eight 
hundred end eight, shall, as soonas the said District shall become a sep-
CONSTITUTION OF MAINE. _ 
arate State, be divided between the two States, in proportion to the 
returns of the militia, according to which, the said arms have been re- 
ceived from the United States, as aforesaid.~ 
“ Tl:/ird. All money, stock, or other proceeds, hereafter derived from 
the United States, on account of the claim of this Commonwealth, for 
disbursements made, and expenses ‘incurred, for the defence of the State, 
during the late war with Great Britain, shall be received by this Com- 
monwcaltlnandwhen received, shall be divided between the two States, 
in the proportion of two thirds to this Commonwealth, and one third ‘to 
the new State. Y -~ 
“Fourth. All other property, of every description, belonging to the 
Commonwealth shall be holden and receivable -by the same, as a fund 
and security, for all debts, annuities, and Indian subsidies, or claims due 
by said Commonwealth ; and within two years after the said District shall 
have become a separate State, the Commissioners to be appointed, as 
hereinafter provided, if p the said States cannot otherwise agree, shall 
assign a just portion of the productive property, so held by said Common- 
wealth as ‘an equivalent and indemniﬁcation to said Commonwealth, for 
all such debts, annuities, or Indian subsidies or. claims, which may then 
remain due, or unsatisﬁed : and all the surplus of the said property, so 
holden, as aforesaid, shall be divided between the said Commonwealth 
and the said District of Maine, in the proportion of two thirds to the said 
Commonwealth, and one third to the said District--and if, in the judg- 
ment of the said Commissioners, the whole of said property, so held, as a. 
fund and security, shall not be sufﬁcient indemniﬁcation for the purpose, 
the said District shall be liable for and shall pay to said Commonwealth, 
one third of the deﬁciency. .4 
“ Fifth. The new State shall, as soon as the necessary arrangements 
can be made for that purpose, assume and perform all the duties and 
obligations of this Commonwealth, towards the Indians within said 
District of Maine, ’whether the same arise from treaties, or otherwise ; 
and for this purpose shall obtain the assent of said Indians, and their 
release to this Commonwealth of claims and stipulations arising under 
the treaty at present existing between the said Commonwealth and said 
Indians; and as an indemniﬁcation to such new State, therefor, this 
Commonwealth, when such arrangements shall be completed, and the 
said duties and obligations assumed, shall pay to said new State, the 
value of thirty thousand dollars, in manner following, viz. : The said 
Commissioners shall set off by metes and bounds, so much of any part of 
the land, within the said District, falling to this Commonwealth, in the 
division of the public lands, hereinafter provided for, as in their estima- 
tion shall be of the value of thirty thousand dollars ; and this Common- 
wealth shall, thereupon, assign the same to the said new State, or in lieu 
thereof, may pay the sum of thirty thousand dollars at its election ; which 
election of the said Commonwealth, shall be made within one year from 
the time that notice of the doings of the Commissioners, on this subject, 
shall be made known to the Governor and Council; and if not made 
within that time, the election shall be with the new State. 
" Swlrth. Connnissioners, with the powers and for the purposes men- 
t' oned in this act, shall be appointed in manner following : The Execu- 
tive authorit 7 of each State shall appoint two; and the four so appointed, 
pr the majorxpart of them, shall appoint two more; but if they cannot 
‘agree in the appointment, the Executive of each State shall appoint one 
in addition ; not however, in that case, to be a citizen of its own State. 
And any vacancy happening with respect to the Commissi0ners,ishall be 
supplied in the manner provided for their original appointment ; and, in 
addition to the powers herein before given to said Commissioners, they 
shall have full power and authority to divide all the public lands within 
the District, between the respective States, in equal shares, or moieties, 
in severalty, having regard to quantity, situation and quality ; they shall , xxia
a
XXX CDNSTITUTION OF MAINE. 
determine what lands shall be surveyed and divided, from time to time. 
the expense of which surveys, and of the Commissioners, shall be borne 
equally by the two States. They shall keep fair records of their doings, 
and of the surveys made by their direction, copies of which records, au~ 
thenticated by them, shall be deposited from time to time, in the archives 
of the respective States ; transcripts of which, properly certiﬁed, may be: 
admitted in evidence, in all questions touching the subject to which they 
relate. The Executive authority of each State may revoke the power of 
either or both its co-rnmissioners ; having, however, ﬁrst appointed a sub- 
stitute, or substitutes, and may ﬁll any vacancy happening with respect to 
its own Commissioners; four of said Commissioners shall constitute a 
quorum, for the transaction of business; their decision shall be ﬁnal, 
upon all subjects within their cognizance. In case said commission shall 
expire, the ' 
same not having been completed, and either State shall 
request the renewal or ﬁlling up of the same, it shall be renewed or ﬁlled 
up in the same manner, as is herein provided for ﬁlling the same, in the 
ﬁrst instance, and with the like powers ; and if either - 
State shall, after six 
months’ notice, neglect or refuse to appoint its Commissioners, the other 
may ﬁll up the whole commission. 
“ Seventlt. All grants of land, franchises, immunities, corporate 01' 
other rights, and all contracts for, or grants of land not yet located which. 
have been or may be made by the said Commonwealth, before the separa- 
tion of said District shall take place, and having or to have effect within 
the said District, shall continue in full force, after the said District. shall 
become a separate State. But the grant which has been made to the 
President and Trustees of Bowdoin College, out of the tax laid upon the 
Banks, within this Commonwealth, sh-all becharged upon the tax upon- 
the Banks Within the said District of Maine, and paid according to the 
terms of said grant; and the President and Trustees, and the Overseers 
of said College, shall have, hold and enjoy their powers and privileges in 
all respects ; so that the same shall not be subject to he altered, limited, 
annulled or restrained, except by judicial process, according to the 
principles of law ; and in all grantshereafter to he made, by either State, 
of unlocated land within the said District, the same reservations shall be 
made for the beneﬁt of Schools, and of the Ministry, as have heretofore 
been usual, in grants made by this Conm1onr='ealt_l1. And all lands . here- 
tofore granted by this Commonwealth, ‘ to any religious, -literary, or 
eleemosynary corporation, or society, shall he free from tzrxation, while 
the same continues to be owned by such corporation, or society. 
“ Eighth. N o laws shall be passed in thepropnsed State, with regard 
to taxes, actions, or remedies at law, or bars, or limitations thereof, or 
otherwise making anydistinction between the lands and rights of property 
of proprietors not resident in, or not citizens of said proposed State, and 
the lands and rights of property of the citizens of the proposed State, 
resident therein; and the rights and liabilities of all persons, shall, after 
the said» separation, continue the sarne as if the said District was stilla 
part of this Commonwealth, in all suits pending, or judgments remaining 
unsatisﬁed on the ﬁfteenth day of March next, where the suits have been 
commenced in Massachusetts Proper, and process has been served within 
the District of Maine; or commenced in the District ofliiiainc, and proce:_ s 
has been served in Massachussetts Proper, either by taking bail, makinj..g 
tion remains to be dohe ; and in such suits, the Courts within Massachu ~ 
setts Proper, and within the _ proposed State, shall continue to have the 
same jurisdiction as if the said District had still remained a part of the 
Commonwealth. And this Commonwealth shall have the same remedies ‘ 
within the proposed State, as it now has, for the collection of all taxes, 
bonds, or debts, which may be assessed, due, made, or contracted, 
by, to, or with the Commonwealth, on or before the said ﬁfteenth day of 
March, within the said District of Maine ; and all officers within Massa attachments, arrestinv and detaining persons, or otherwise, where execu\i
QONSTITUTION OF MAINE. - 
gxxxi 
ehusets Proper and the District of Maine shall conduct themselves accord- 
in l . .- 
%‘§~I"inth. .'.I‘hesc terms and conditions, as here set forth, when the said 
District shall become a separate and Independent State, shall, ipsofacto 
be incorporated into, and become and be a part of any Constitution, pro- 
visional or other, under which the Government of the said proposed State, 
shall, at any time hereafter, be administered ; subject however, to be 
modiﬁed, or annulled by the agreement of the Legislature of both the . 
-said States; but by no other power or body whatsoever. ” _ 
SE0. 6. This Constitution shall be enrolled on parchment, Eonstitultliotp to 
deposited in the Secretary ’s oﬁiee, and be the supreme law ot' ;.§\-§1ii§ieiii. on 
the State, and printed copies thereof shall be preﬁxed to the' 
Ybooks containing the laws of this State.” 
Done in Cirnoeniion, October 29, 1819. ,
L 
WILLIAM KING, President' 
qfthe Con-vention a-ndmemberfrom Bath. 
Yonx, 
Klttery, 
Wells,. 
Berwick, 
Bioldeford, 
-./flrundel, 
Saco, 
Lebanon, 
B uxton, 
I/_1/man, 
siwgpzetgi, 
.'Parson:»; ﬁeZd, 
Waterborough, 
Dimington, 
Cow/isk,' 
ALFRED, 
Hollis, 
South-Berwz' _ck,_ 
Limerick, COUNTY OF YORK.W 
Elihu Bragdon, 
David Wilcox.' 
Alexander Rice. 
Joseph Thomas. 
l/Villiam Hobbs, 
Nathaniel Hobbs, 
Richard F. Cutts. 
George Thacher, 
Seth Spring. 
Simon Nowell. 
William Moody, 
Ether, Shepley, 
George Thacher, junior, 
David , Legrow.' 
Gideon Elden, 
Josiah Paine, 
Edmund Woodman 
John Low, 
John Burbank. 
John Leighton. 
David Marston, 
Abner Keazer. 
Samuel Bradeen, 
Henry Hobbs. 
David Boyd. 
Thomas A. Johnson 
John Holmes. 
Ellis B. Usher, 
Timothy Hodgdon 
Benjamin Green. 
John Burnham.
xxxii CONSTITUTION or MAINE. 
Scarborough, 
.lV' orth- Yarmoutlz, 
Falmouﬂz, 
Brunswick, 
.Har]os'well,' 
Gorham,‘V 
Cape-Elizabeth, 
.?V'ew- Gloucester, 
Gray, 
Standish, 
Porvrnann, 
Freeport, 
Durham, 
Bridgton, 
Poland, 
Minot, 
_'Danm'll,e,, 
Baldwin, 
Raymond, 
Pownal, . 
Westbrook, 
Harrison, 
Georgetown, 
JV'ew- Castle, 
Woolwich, 
Wxsoas SET, 
Bowdoinham, 
TOPsHAM, 
Boothbay, _LIN CUMBERLAND.' 
Benjamin Larrabee, junior, 
Joseph Fogg.' 
William Buxton, 
Ephraim ' 
Sturdevanr, 
Jeremiah Buxtoni 
Peter M. Knight, 
Nathan Bucknam. 
Robert D; Dunning, 
Jonathan Page,. 
Benjamin Titoomb. 
Stephen Purrington. 
"Lathrop Lewis, -" 
Joseph Adams, 
James Irish. 
Ebenezer Thrashers 
Joseph E. Foxcroft, 
Isaac Gross. . 
Joseph McLellan. 
Theodore Mussey‘. 
Albion K. Parris, 
William P. Preble, 
Solomon Dennison ‘ 
_ Secomb Jordan, 
Allen H. Cobb. 
Phinehas ‘Ingalls. 
Josiah Dunn, junior» 
Asaph Howard, 
Chandler Freemans 
Joseph Roberts. 
Lot Davis.> 
Zachariah Leach. 
Isaac Cushman. 
Silas Estes, _ 
Thomas Slemonds, 
John Jones. 
Amos Thomes. 
COLN. 
Benjamin Riggs; 
Ebenezer Farley, 
Ebenezer Delano. 
Abiel Wood, 
Warren Rice. 4 
Ebenezer Herrick,~
- 
Elihu Hatch. 
Nathaniel Green. 
Daniel Rose, 
John McKown,
CONSTITUTION on Mania. _ xxxm 
Bristol 
W aldoborougiz, 
Etlgcomb, 
WARREN, 
Tﬁomaston, - 
Bath, 
Union," 
B owcloin, _ 
Nobleboroug ﬁ, 
Cashing, 
Camden, 
Dresden, 
Lewisto-n, 
Litchﬁeld, 
I/Zsbon, 
_St. George, 
Hope, 
Palermo, 
Montoille, 
Jeﬁerson, 
Friendship, 
W hizfﬁelcl, 
Putnam, 
ﬂlna, 
Wales,‘‘ 
Hallowell, 
Winthrop, 
V assalborougis , 
Winslow, 
Pittston, 
Green, 
Readﬁeld, Samuel Tucker, 
‘William M’Clintock, 
John Fosset. _ 
Joshua Head, 4 
Isaac G. Reed, 
J acoh Ludwig, Junior. 
Stephen Parsons. 
John Miller, 
Cyrus Eaton. 
Isaac Barnard, 
John Spear." 
-Qloshua Wingate, junior, 
Benjamin Ames. 
Robert Foster. 
Joseph Carr. 
Ephraim Rollins. . 
Edward Killera-n. 
Nathaniel Martin. 
Isaac Lillie. 
John Herrick. _ 
John Neal, 
David G. Burg‘. 
Nathaniel Eames,S 
James Small. 
Joel Miller. 
Fergus M’Claine. _ 
Thonias Eastman. 
Cyrus Davis. 
Jesse Rowell. 
Melzer Thomas. 
Joseph Bailey. . 
Mark I-latch. 
John Dole. 
Joseph Small. 
KEN N EBEC. 
Samuel Moody, 
William H. Page, 
Benjamin Dearborn. 
Alexander , Belcher, 
Daniel Campbell; 
Samuel Redington, 
Ahiel G:retchel. 
Willialn Swan. 
Eli Young. 
Luther Robbins. 
John Hubbard, 
Samuel Currier,\
xxxiv CDNSTITUTION 01-‘ MMNE. 
Jlfonmouth, 
.Monnt- Vernon, 
Sidney,'
, 
Farmington, 
New-Slzaron, 
Clinton, 
Fayette, 
Belgrade, 
Ifarlem, 
Anew STA, 
VVa _1/ne, 
Leeds,' 
Chesterville, 
Vienna, 
Waterville, 
Gardiner, 
Temple,~ 
Wilton,'
, 
Rome, 
Fa'i0faa2,_ 
Unity, 
Malta, 
Freedom, 
J9?/1 
China, .John _ Chandler, 
Simon Dearborn, junior. 
David I‘/.[cGaﬁ' ey. 
Ambrose Howard, 
Reuel Howard. 
Nathan Cutler, 
Jabez Gay. 
Christopher Dyer. 
Herbert Moore. 
Charles Smith. 
Elias Taylor. 
Wil‘liam Pollen. 
Daniel Corny, 
Joshua Gage, 
James Bridge. 
Joseph Lamson. 
Thomas Francis. 
Vvrard Locke._ 
Nathaniel "Whittier. - 
Abijah Smith, 
Ebenezer Bacon. 
Jacob Davis, 
Sa nford .Kingsbery. 
Benjamin Abbot. 
Ebenezer Eaton. 
John S. Colbath. 
Joel Wellington. 
Rufus Burnham. 
VVilliam Hilton. 
Matthew _Randall.. 
James Parker. 
Daniel Stevens. 
' 
HAN COCK. 
Belfast, 
Islesbarougk, 
Deer-Isle, 
Bluehill, 
Twenton-,- 
S-ullivan, 
Go-nldsboroughv, 
Veinalhaven, 
Fran lg/‘ art, 
Bucksport, 
Prospect, 
CASTINE, 
Northport, 
E den , Alfred Johnson, junior. 
Josiah Farrow. 
Ignatius Haskell, 
Asa Green." 
Andrew VVitham. 
Peter Haynes. . 
George Henman. 
Samuel Davis. . 
Benjamin Beverage. 
Alexander Millikan, 
Joshua Hall.V 
Samuel Little. 
Abel W. Atherton. 
Vvilliam Abbot. 
David Alden. 
Nicholas Thomas, junior.
I
CONS'I‘ITU'1‘ION OF MAINE. 
Orland. 
Ellsworth, 
Idneulnoille, 
Belmont, 
Brooks, 
Jackson, 
Searsmont, 
S:.0a-nville, 
T /1.0'rndilce, 
Mtniroe, 
Knox, 
MAcm'_ As, 
Steuben, 
Harrington, 
E astport, 
J onesborougfz, 
Clzlais, 
Lubéb,I 
Rebbinston, 
Olz.e1"r'y_ ﬁeld, 
Perry, 
F-ryeburg, 
Turner, _ 
H ebron, 
Buclcjield, 
Buns, 
J-<12/5 , 
Liverrizore, 
Bethel, 
W aterford, 
N erway, 
H (lTi_f07'(l, 
S-u.-m11.er, 
Rumfoarcl, 
Lovell, 
Brownﬁeld, 
Albany, 
Diaﬁeld, 
E ast-Andover, 
Gilead, 
N ewry, 
De n-mark, 
Porter, 
Himm,’ 
Woodstock, 
Greenwood , 
Sweden, 
Weld, 
Me.-mica, WAS‘ :-HI 
OXF Horatio Mason. 
Mark Shepard. 
Samuel A. Whitney. 
James Weymouth. 
Samuel VVhitney. 
Bordman Johnson. 
Ansel Lathrop. 
Eleazer Nickerson. 
Joseph Bleihen. 
Joseph Nerilly. 
James Weed. 
NGTON. 
John Dickinson. 
Alexander Nichols. 
James Campbell. 
John Burgin. 
Ephraim Whitney. 
William Vance. 
Lemuel '.l"rescol.t ‘. 
Tliomas Vose.~ 
Joseph Adams. 
Peter Golding. 
ORD. 
Judah Dana. 
John Turner,l 
Philip Bradford.- 
Alexander Greenwooci. 
Enoch Hall. 
James Hooper, 
Benjamin Chandler. 
(Jomelius Holland. 
Benjamin Bradford, 
Thomas Chase; junior. 
John Grover. I- 
Josiah Shaw.i 
Aaron Wilkins. 
Joseph Tobin. 
Calvin Bisbee. 
Peter C. Virgin. 
Josiah Heald, 2d. 
James Steele._ 
Asa Cummings. 
Solomon Leland. 
Sylvanus Poor.‘ 
Eliphaz Chapman. 
Luke Reily. 
Cyrus Ingalls. 
Williarn Towle. 
Marshal Spring. 
Cornelius Perkins. 
Isaac Flint. 
Samuel Nevers. 
La Fayette Perkins. 
VValLer P. Carpenter, .1 
XXXV
_l>lSm@we1> KM 
Spewdﬁtlelizrlwt lest 
Lb =12‘ 
January ll, 2021 
Research Report on the 1876 Removal of Article X, Section 5 from Printed Copies 
of the Maine Constitution 
By Judson Esty-Kendall * and Rachel T Hampson ** 
I. Introduction and Synopsis 
The purpose of this Report is to explain from a legal perspective, and to the extent possible in 
light of the century and a half that has since passed, how and why the Maine Constitution was amended 
in I876 to remove from printed copies of that Constitution, but not from the Constitution itself, the 
original language directing Maine to assume “the duties and obligations of this Commonwealth, 
towards the Indians within said District of Maine.“ 
Maine separated from Massachusetts in I820 and became a state as part of the Missouri 
Compromise. The process of becoming a state ﬁrst required legislation by Massachusetts, called the 
Articles of Separation,2 followed by a vote of the people of Maine to approve separation, and ﬁnally 
approval by the federal government. For Maine’s purposes, once the people had voted in favor of 
separation, Maine required a constitution, which in turn also had to be approved by vote of the people. 
Article X of the 1820 Constitution had 6 sections. A portion of Article X, Section 5 reads as 
follows: 
The new State shall, as soon as the necessary arrangements can be made for that purpose, 
assume and perform all the duties and obligations of this Commonwealth, towards the 
Indians within said District of Maine, whether the same arise from treaties, or otherwise; 
and for this purpose shall obtain the assent of said Indians, and their release to this 
Commonwealth of claims and stipulations arising under the treaty at present existing 
between the said Commonwealth and said Indians . . .3 
* Judson Esty-Kendall has been a lawyer in Maine since 1977 and retired in 2019 after more than 30 years as a legal 
services attorney with Pine Tree Legal Assistance including many years as the Northern Regional Directing Attorney and as 
Directing Attorney of the Native American Unit. He has served on the Board of Governors of the Maine State Bar 
Association, as a member and chair of the Professional Ethics Commission, and as a member and chair of the Board of 
Overseers of the Bar. 
** Rachel Hampson is a 3rd year law student at the University of St. Thomas in Minnesota where she is the Symposium 
Editor of the Law Journal. Rachel served as a Public Interest Fellow at the Maine Indian Tribal-State Commission during 
the summer of 2019. She holds a master’s degree in Historic Preservation from the University of Florida. 
1 
ME. CONST. art. X, § 5 (1820), available at https://digitalmaine.corn/senate_docs/1; ME. CONST. art X, § 4 (1875), 
available at http://digitalmaine.com/senate_docs/11. 
2 Referred to altematively as the “Articles ” and as the “Act” of Separation, this report will refer to the “Articles ” to avoid 
confusion. See RONALD F. BANKS, MAINE BECOMES A STATE 270, App. XIV (1970). 
3 ME. CONST. supra note 1.
1
More than ﬁfty years later, after a constitutional commission in 1875, Maine made several 
amendments to its constitution including the addition of Section 4 to Article X, as follows: 
Sections one, two and ﬁve, of article ten of the existing Constitution, shall hereafter be 
omitted in any printed copies thereof preﬁxed to the laws of the State; but this shall not 
impair the validity of acts under those sections; and section ﬁve shall remain in full force, 
as part of the constitution, according to the stipulations of said section, with the same effect 
as if contained in said printed copies.4 
It is important to note that the removal of Sections 1, 2, and 5 from printed copies was 
accomplished by amending the Maine Constitution and not by a statutory change. As a result, 
full reversal of that action would also require an amendment to the Constitution and not justa 
statute, which is the primary reason why efforts to restore the language to printed copies have 
not been successful. 
The questions addressed in this report are: (1) what was the process by which Article X, Section 
5 was removed from printed copies of the Maine Constitution, (2) what was its legal effect, and (3) 
why was it done. 
The process of removal was straightforward, but it is helpful to understand that process for 
discussion of the other two questions. The legal effect is also fairly easy to evaluate; removal of the 
language did not affect either the way the treaties were viewed or discussed in court decisions or the 
formal legal relationship between Maine and the Tribes in the period following removal, at least as far 
as the State saw that relationship. The question as to why the language was removed cannot be 
deﬁnitively answered, although in context it seems most likely that it was clerical in nature rather than 
directed at the Indians. This is not because there was no ofﬁcial animus against Maine’s Indians in 
1876; rather, this change in the Constitution was not a signiﬁcant factor in how that animus was 
expressed from either a legal or a practical standpoint. The removal of the language from printed copies 
of the Constitution may have actually assumed more importance in the present day, following the 
federal court litigation in the 197 Os that clariﬁed the actual legal relationship between Maine and the 
Tribes (subsequently modiﬁed by the Settlement Act in 1980), as the language removed from view in 
1876 was the legal cornerstone from which the relationship between Maine and the Tribes began. 
II. Historical Background 
In 1820 when Maine became a state and assumed Massachusetts ’ duties and obligations to the 
Indians in Maine, the basic framework of the relationship between Massachusetts (later Maine) and the 
Indians had been laid out in treaties with the Passamaquoddy and the Penobscot tribes; speciﬁcally 
Massachusetts ’ treaty with the Passamaquoddy in 1794 and treaties with the Penobscots from 1796 and 
1818. 5 
In brief summary, in 17 94 the Passamaquoddy Tribe ceded much of its ancestral land to 
Massachusetts, but reserved the land at Indian Township and Pleasant Point as well as “the privilege of 
ﬁshing on both branches of the river Schoodic without hinderance or molestation and the privilege of 
4 ME. CONST. art. X, § 4 (1875), available at http://digitalmaine.com/senate_docs/11. 
5 Passamaquoddy Tribe and Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 1 795 Resolve RegardingA Treaty Between the 
Passamaquoddy and Massachusetts (2017), available at https://digitalmaine.com/native __tribal_docs/12 Treaty; 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts; Robbins, Edward 1-1.; Hill, Mark Langdon; and Davis, Daniel, 1818-06-29 Treaty 
Between Massachusetts and the Penobscot Nation (1818), available at https://digitalmaine.com/native_tIibal_docs/ 10.
2
passing the said river over the different canying places thereon. ”6 The Penobscots similarly ceded 
much of their ancestral land to Massachusetts in their treaties, allowing most of the shoreland along the 
Penobscot River to be opened for settlement and development in exchange for certain annual 
payments.7 
On June 19, 1819, the Massachusetts legislature passed the Articles of Separation that allowed 
Maine to vote on independence, which it promptly did, favorably, in July 1819.8 Maine helda 
Constitutional Convention in October 1819. That Convention approved a draft constitution on October 
29, 1819, which was then put to another vote of the people on December 6, 1819 and also passed.9 
After approval by the federal government, the Maine Constitution took effect in 1820 upon Maine's 
admission to the Union as the 23rd state on March 15, 1820.10 
A. Article X of the Maine Constitution 
Article X of the 1820 Maine Constitution had 6 Sections. It is important not only to know what 
was in Section 5, the speciﬁc section herein under discussion, but also to have a basic understanding of 
the other Sections in Article X, all of which came under the heading “Schedule ” . Sections 1, 2, and 5, 
in bold below, were the sections removed from printed copies in 1876. 
- Section 1 set out when the ﬁrst Maine legislature would meet, when initial elections would be 
held, and how Senate and House seats would be apportioned as between counties and towns. 
- Section 2 set out the initial term of Maine’s elected and appointed ofﬁcers as being from the 
last Wednesday in May, 1820, to the ﬁrst Wednesday in January, 1822. 
— 
Section 3 explained that the then existing laws of Massachusetts would remain in force, as long as 
they weren’t in conﬂict with the new Constitution, until altered or repealed by the Maine 
legislature. 
- Section 4 set out the process for amending the Maine Constitution. 
- Section 5 contained the verbatim text of the Articles of Separation, which, in turn, had nine 
sections. The ﬁfth of those sections contained the language about “the duties and 
obligations . . . towards the Indians within said District of Maine.” 11 
- Section 6 said that the Constitution was to be written on parchment, kept in the Secretary ’s office, 
be “preﬁxed to the books containing the laws of this state,” and be the supreme law of Maine. 12 
6 Transcription, Treaty between the Passamaquoddy Tribe & The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 1794, App. A, Abbe 
Museum, available at https://staticl.squarespacecom/static/56a8c7b05a5668f743c485b2/t!5a67a309ec212dd424162e5f/ 
15 167413 8 8247/’ Wabanaki+Timeline--l-Resistance+Making+War+and+Negotiating+Peace.pd£ 
7 See Transcription, Treaty Between Massachusetts and the Penobscot Tribe, June 29, I818, Digita|Maine Transcription 
Project, https:/fdigitalmaine.com/native_tribal_docs/ 10. 
8 The Articles of Separation required approval by more than a majority of Maine voters; in order to pass, the votes in 
favor of separation had to outnumber the votes against by at least 1,500. 
9 ME. CONST. art. I, (1820), available at https://digitalmaine.com/senate_docs/1; See generally Maine State Legislature ’s 
Legislative History Collection for a collection of amendments to the Maine Constitution from 1820-present available at 
https://wwwmaine.gov/legis/lawlib/lldl/constitutionalamendments/. 
1° The federal vote allowing the creation of Maine was part of the “Missouri Compromise. ” See e. g., Missouri 
Compromise, HlSTORY.COM, bttps://www.history.com/topics/abolitionist-movement/missouri-compromise (last visited Jan. 
9, 2021). 
11 
ME. CONST. aﬂ. X, (1820), available at https://digitahnaine.com/senate_docs/ 1. 
12 1d.
3
B. The Articles of Separation 
The Articles of Separation, as incorporated into Article X, Section 5 of the 1820 Constitution, 
had nine sections, with the section about Indians being the flflIh.13 The Articles read more like a divorce 
judgment than a constitutional document. 14 While they lay out the process for Maine’s separation from 
Massachusetts, they were primarily concerned with the practical details of that separation; speciﬁcally 
the division of property and obligations as between the two states. The general content of the nine 
sections is as follows: 
- 
@t — divided the public land in Maine as between Maine and Massachusetts; 
- Second — divided in proportion to “the returns of the militia” the arms given to Massachusetts by 
the federal government in 1808; 
- Lhjrg - divided the money due Massachusetts by the federal govemment from the War of 1812 
(2/3 to Massachusetts, 1/3 to Maine); 
- Fourth — provided for all other property in Maine owned by Massachusetts to be set aside for two 
years for payment of “all debts, annuities, and Indian subsidies, or claims due by said 
Commonwealth ” with provision for resolving any surplus or shortfall existing after the two year 
period; 
— 
Lift}; — required Maine to “assume and perform all the duties and obligations of this 
Commonwealth, towards the Indians within said District of Maine, whether the same arise from 
treaties, or otherwise; and for this purpose shall obtain the assent of said Indians; and their release 
to this Commonwealth of claims and stipulations arising under the treaty at present existing 
between the said Commonwealth and said Indians” and in addition indermrify Maine $30,000, 
either in cash or in land, for taking on these obligations; 15 
- 
M — created a 6-person Commission to survey and divide the public lands in Maine; 
- Seventh — made provision for the continuation of funding and exemption from taxation of “any 
religious, literary, or eleemosynary corporation, or society” with particular focus on Bowdoin 
College and its grant that came from a tax on banks; 
U ME. CONST. art. X, (1820), available at https://digitalmaine.com/senate_docs/l. 
14 Court judgments granting divorces are typically more concerned with the mechanics of how property is to be divided, 
or how children are to be cared for, than the momentous nature of the separation itself. In essence, the Articles of Separation 
“divorced ” the close “family” relationship between Maine and Massachusetts, but the document was primarily focused on 
dividing property. 
“The full text of the Fifth paragraph of the Act of Separation reads as follows: 
Fifth. The new State shall, as soon as the necessary arrangements can be made for that purpose, assume and perform 
all the duties and obligations of this Commonwealth, towards the Indians within said District of Maine, whether the 
same arise from treaties, or otherwise; and for this purpose shall obtain the assent of said Indians, and their release 
to this Commonwealth of claims and stipulations arising under the treaty at present existing between the said 
Commonwealth and said Indians; and as an indemniﬁcation to such new State, therefor, this Commonwealth, when 
such arrangements shall be completed, and the said duties and obligations assumed, shall pay to said new State, the 
value of thirty thousand dollars, in manner following, viz.: The said Commissioners shall set off by metes and bounds, 
so much of any part of the land, within the said District, falling to this Commonwealth, in the division of the public 
lands, hereinafter provided for, as in their estimation shall be of the value of thirty thousand dollars; and this 
Commonwealth shall, thereupon, assign the same to the said new State, or in lieu thereof, may pay the sum of thirty 
thousand dollars at its election; which election of the said Commonwealth, shall be made within one year from the 
time that notice of the doings of the Commissioners, on this subject, shall be made known to the Governor and 
Council; and if not made within that time, the election shall be with the new State. 
Supra note 13. In the end, Massachusetts paid the $30,000 in cash.
4
n 
- 
E_ig@ — provided equal rights for Maine and Massachusetts citizens for any existing litigation 
involving parties in the diverse states and for Massachusetts ’ collection of taxes or debts 
assessed or due, but not yet collected, before the separation; and 
- Ninth — provided that the tenns and conditions of the Articles of Separation must become and 
remain part of Maine’s Constitution unless both the Maine and Massachusetts legislatures 
agree to amend or annul any provision. 
Other than a provision in Article II prohibiting “Indians not taxed” from voting, the Articles of 
Separation contain the only reference to Indians in the original Maine Constitution. Nevertheless, it was 
no secret at the time that Maine had obligations to the Indians under the Articles of Separation and the 
Constitution. This was covered in the national and New England press 16 and was mentioned favorably 
by Maine’s ﬁrst Governor in his initial address to Maine’s very ﬁrst legislature in 1821.17 In that same 
year, and consistent with the Fifth Section of the Articles, the Maine legislature ratiﬁed a new treaty 
with the Penobscots and apspointed “Agents” for the Passamaquoddy and Penobscot tribes specifying
. 
_ . .
1 
their authority and duties. 
As a legal matter, from the outset of statehood the Maine govermnent ’s understanding of what 
its “duties and obligations ” were towards the Indians appears to have been no more than the dutiesa 
guardian might have to a ward, without any independent rights for the ward. 19 This was the import of 
Maine’s ﬁrst Governor ’s remarks about Indians in his address to the legislature in 1821, and the 
Commission created to implement the Articles of Separation, which completed its work in 1822, only 
16 
See, Separation of Maine, NILES WEEKLY REGISTER, Vol XVI, (June 26, I819) at 294, 
https1//babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=nyp.3 3433081664462&view=1up&seq=310 (quoting the Boston Daily Advertiser; 
“The new state to assume all obligations to the Indians resident within the district, and in compensation for it, to have set off 
by metes and bounds from the share of lands assigned to Massachusetts so much as shall be valued by the Commissioners to 
be appointed, at the sum of $30,000, or $30,000 in rnoney... ”). In 1820, Niles Weekly Register was an inﬂuential national 
magazine based in Baltimore. 
17 Resolves of the Legislature of Maine (Address of Governor William King, January ll, 1821) available at 
http://llde.mainelegislature.org/Open/Laws/l 821/Lawsl 82lres_s0045-0049_GovMessage_l 821-01-ll.pdf: 
In compliance with the provisions of the Act relating to the separation, and in conformity to the Resolve of this State, 
Col. Lewis was designated to negotiate with the Penobscot Indians. He has accordingly effected with them a new 
treaty or agreement, by virtue of which this State assumes all the duties and obligations of the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts in relation to that tribe; the payment of the annuities to commence as soon as the stipulated sum to be 
received from Massachusetts for that purpose, shall have been paid over to this State. On their part the Indians have 
released to Massachusetts all claims and stipulations arising under any treaty between them and that Commonwealth. 
The ready compliance of these Indians with the wishes of this government, the unhesitating manner, in which they 
acceded to the existing arrangements, should constitute on our part, additional inducements not only to respect their 
rights, but to aid’ them in obtaining, at least, the ordinary and common comforts, of which it is but too evident, they 
are destitute. Should the Friends or Quakers of our State be inclined to become the ﬁiends of a friendless people, 
they would here ﬁnd a ﬁeld for the exercise of those qualities for which they have long been distinguished, and, at 
the same time, might do much toward producing a union of sentiment hereafter in relation to their exemption from 
services, which they may be conscientiously scrupulous of performing. 
Id. at 47. 
18 Although Maine “negotiated ” a treaty with the Penobscot Tribe affirming the previous treaties with Massachusetts and 
absolving Massachusetts from further liability, there was no attempt to do so with the Passamaquoddy Tribe. However, this 
did not make any difference in any Court cases concerning Indian rights or Article X, Section 5 of the Constitution. 
19 The Maine Supreme Court’s view in 1879 was that “[T]he wandering and improvident habits of the remnants of the 
Indian tribes within our borders led our legislature at an early period to make them, in a manner, the wards of the state, and 
especially to take the control and regulate the tenure of their lands.” John v. Sabattis, 69 Me. 473, 476-77 (I879); see also 
Jason M. Door, Changing Their Guardians: The Penobscot Indians and Maine Statehood, 1820-1849 (I998). Electronic 
Theses and Dissertations, http://digitalcommons.libraryumaine.edu/etd/2746.
5
mentioned the Penobscot Tribe in its report because they were entitled to a “subsidy or annuity” , while 
the Passamaquoddy were not due a subsidy and were not mentioned. 2° 
In the ﬁrst several decades after Maine became a state, the smattering of court decisions that 
dealt with native rights and issues adopted the premise that the Indians in Maine were among the 
“small tribes or remnants of tribes yet denominated tribes, which had before that time and have ever 
since continued to be under the control and guardianship of a State, and were without power to carry on 
commerce or trade, except by permission and under the regulation of the State laws.”21 Government 
title to land reserved to the Indians by treaty was considered superior to Indian title, and Maine’s 
Supreme Judicial Court dispensed summarily with the concept of original Indian title in 1870 and 
1874. 22 The Court in Moor mentioned Article X, Section 5, but only by way of suggesting that Maine 
had become the guardian of the Indians in place of Massachusetts, and it belittled the agreements made 
between the states and the Tribes by referring to them as “contracts denominated as treaties ” . 23 
Unquestionably there was some public debate and awareness at the time about Indian issues. 
For example, in order to sue in Penobscot Tribe v. Veazie, in which the Penobscots were the plaintiff, 
the Tribe either required (or believed it required) authority to sue from the Maine Legislature, which 
authority it got by legislative resolve in 1868. 24 Within a month the Legislature acted again to amend 
that resolve to require the Penobscots to pay the defendants ’ court costs if the Penobscots lost the case, 
with the costs to come out of the money held by Maine for the Tribe.” However, there is no indication 
2° Commonwealth of Massachusetts and State of Maine, 1822-05-25 Agreement Between Massachusetts and Maine 
Adjusting the Personal Concerns Between the Two States (1822) available at https://digitalmaine.com/native_t:ribal_docs/l7 
2‘ Moor v. Veazie, 32 Me. 343, 366 (I850). 
22 Penobscot Tribe v. Veazie, 58 Me. 402 (1870); Granger v. Avery, 64 Me. 292 (1874). As the Court explained in Veazie, 
The fact must not be overlooked, that the reservation referred to did not create in the Indians any new title, did not 
operate as a grant to them of the islands therein described. Its effect was simply to leave in them the title which they 
before had, and no more. It is clear, therefore, that if the plaintiffs prevail, it must be upon the ground that the title of 
the aborigines of this country to the wild lands over which they roamed is superior to that of the government. The 
executive and legislative departments of the government have generally treated with the Indians as if they were the 
owners of those vast territories. But when the title to any particular tract of land has been called in question, in the 
courts of justice, no such doctrine has been admitted. The courts have uniformly held that the title of the government 
is superior to that of the aborigines. (citations omitted). 
Veazie at 407. 
23 Moor, supra note 21 at 367. 
24 Maine Legislature, Acts and Resolves of the Forty-Seventh Legislature of the State of Maine 1868, ch. I95, approved 
February 5, 1868, available at http:1’/lldcmainelegislature.org/Open/Laws/1868/1868_RES __cl95.pd£ 
Resolved, That the attomey general of this state is hereby authorized and directed to commence, in the supreme 
judicial court, in and for the county of Penobscot, a suit or bill in equity, in the name of the Penobscot tribe of Indians, 
in order to settle the title to the Grassy Islands, in Penobscot river, and the Fishways, at Oldtown Falls, in said river, 
and, to prosecute the same to ﬁnal judgement, after notice has been given to all parties interested in said islands and 
said ﬁshway. And for all purposes of said suit, said Penobscot tribe of Indians, shall be considered as properly parties 
in court, and the judgment or decree of said court, as affecting the title to said islands and ﬁshway, and its construction 
of the treaties referring to the same, shall be ﬁnal and conclusive. 
Id. at 1 75. 
25 Maine Legislature, Acts and Resolves of the F arty-Seventh Legislature of the State of Maine 1868, ch. 235, approved 
Feb. 29, 1868, available at http:/llldcmainelegislature.org/Open/Laws/1868/1868_RES_c233.pd£ 
Resolved, That any judgment or judgments for defendant's costs, arising from a suit or suits originated under the 
authority of the above named resolve, shall be paid to said defendant or defendants on demand, from the treasury of 
the state, upon warrant or warrants drawn therefor, in his or their favor by the governor and council, and the same 
be charged to the Indian fund, or general or special appropriations from the state in favor of said Indians. 
Id. at 188.
6
that the level of controversy, public or legal, was sufﬁcient to motivate Maine to remove the language 
in Article X, Section 5 from printed copies of the Constitution. 
In sum, there are neither court decisions nor other evidence prior to 1876 suggesting that Maine 
recognized any inherent or retained Indian rights from Article X, Section 5 of the Maine Constitution 
beyond the strict boundaries of the land reserved by/for the Penobscot and Passamaquoddy tribes in 
their treaties with Massachusetts and Maine. Section 5’s removal in 1876 from printed copies of the 
Constitution, as discussed below, was reﬂective of the official view largely held since statehood that the 
“duties and obligations ” Maine assumed from Massachusetts were solely the duties and obligations of 
guardian to ward. It is understandable to suspect that Maine’s motive in removing the Section 5 
language was to hide its treaty obligations. However, to put it bluntly, the Maine government did not 
believe that it had any obligations to hide. By the l870’s, the only obligations Maine ofﬁcially 
recognized it had towards the Indians were the statutes it had passed, beginning in 1821, for the 
regulation of the Penobscot and Passamaquoddy Tribes. 
III. The removal in 1876 of Article X, Section 5, from printed copies of the Maine Constitution 
In 1876, more than 50 years after the Maine Constitution was originally enacted, Maine 
amended the Constitution to add (amongst other amendments) a new section to Article X, as follows: 
Sections one, two and ﬁve, of article ten of the existing constitution, shall hereafter be 
omitted in any printed copies thereof preﬁxed to the laws of the State; but this shall not 
impair the validity of acts under those sections; and section ﬁve shall remain in full force, 
as part of the Constitution, according to the stipulations of said section, with the same effect 
as if contained in said printed copies.“ 
It is fairly easy to answer the question as to how this was done. It is harder to determine why it was 
done or what the effects of having done so have been over the ensuing 150 years. 
A. Amendment of the Maine Constitution in 1876 
On January 7, 1875, as part of his “state of the State” address to the legislature, ” Governor 
Norman Dingley proposed the establishment of a commission to make recommendations to clean up 
and re-codify the Constitution. He explained that after 55 years’ worth of amendments, the Constitution 
“has become a piece of legal patch-work, in which the patches and out-of-date shreds cover half of the 
thirty-two pages which the Revised Statutes devote to the instrument, and the casual reader often ﬁnds 
it difficult to understand what is the fundamental law of the State.”28 
The Governor gave no other reasons for recommending a constitutional commission, and he 
made no suggestions as to any speciﬁc sections of the Constitution that should be considered for 
26 ME. CONST. art X, § 4 (1875), available at http://digitalmaine.com/senate_d0cs/l1. 
2’ See ME. CONST. art V, § 9. 
28 Public Documents of Maine: Annual Reports of the various Public Ofﬁcers and Institutions 1875 (Address of 
Governor Dingley to the Legislature of the State of Maine, Jan. 7, 1875), 37, available at 
http1//lldc.mainelegislature.org/Open/Rpts/PubDocs/PubDocs1 875vl/PDl 875vl_04.pdf. The Governor noted that the 
people were already scheduled to vote the following September on a constitutional amendment abolishing the ofﬁce of land 
agent and that a com1nission ’s recommendations could be put to a vote at the same time.
7
amendment. Most of his speech on this point was about the process for doing so; he advocated for the 
appointment of a select commission to make recommendations to the legislature, noting on the one 
hand that no existing legislative committees had the time for proper consideration of the issues, while 
on the other hand that a full-blown constitutional convention was expensive and unwieldy. He made no 
reference to Article X, Section 5 in his discussion, although he was not unaware of Maine’s Indians, as 
he mentioned them in the sections of his address relating to disbursements (“rents of shores belonging 
to the Penobscot Indians”) and expenditures (“$12,553 for aid to the Penobscot and Passamaquoddy 
Indians”).29 Viewed objectively, his state of the State address was a comprehensive, detailed, and well- 
reasoned speech clearly intended to self-portray as a progressive thinker. For example, he 
recommended the abolishment of debtor’s prison,” something that wasn’t accomplished for another 
100 years, advocated for legislation allowing women to hold certain offices such as Justice of the 
Peace“ (although women were not constitutionally allowed to vote), and challenged the legislature to 
decide once and for all whether capital punishment should be abolished. 32 
Things then moved swiftly. Less than a week later, on January 12, 187 5, the legislature 
responded to the Governor ’s challenge and gave him the authority to appoint a Constitutional 
Commission. ” The Commission deliberated for less than a month and on February 10, 1875, ﬁnalized 
its recommendations and reported them to the legislature for its action. 34 Two weeks later, on February 
24, 1875, following discussion and revision of each proposed amendment by the relevant legislative 
committees, the legislature approved a modiﬁed set of recommendations and sent them for a vote of the 
people. 35 The amendments were passed by statewide vote on September 13, 1875, and took effect on 
January 5, 1876.36 
B. What were the 1876 Amendments? 
The Commission ’s proposal consisted of seventeen separate amendments on a diverse set of 
topics ranging ﬁ'om the Govemor’s power to pardon to abolishment of the ofﬁce of land agent, 
appointment rather than the election of local judges, bribery at elections, and taxation of personal as 
well as real property. None of them affected the fundamental structure or lines of authority in the 
Constitution. The legislature did not just rubber-stamp the Commission ’s recommendations, which 
suggests that debate went on prior to the Legis1ature ’s vote on the ﬁnal set of amendments. By way of 
example, the Commission recommended executive appointment rather than election for both probate 
and municipal judges, but in the end the Legislature retained the election of probate judges 37 and only 
amended the constitution to require the executive appointment of municipal judges. 
29 Id. at 4, 24. 
3° Id. at 35. 
3‘ Id. at 35-36. 
32 Id. at 31-33. 
33 Maine Legislature, Acts and Resolves of the F iﬁy-Fourth Legislature of the State of Maine I875, ch. 1, approved Jan. 
12, 187 5, available at http://lldcmainelegislature.org/Open/Laws/1875/1875_RES_c001.pdf. 
34 Const. Comm’n 1875, Proposed Amend. (Feb. 10, 1875), available at 
http://lldcrnainelegislature.org/Open/Rpts/PubDocs/PubDocs1875v2/PDl875v2_14.pdf. 
35 Maine Legislature, Acts and Resolves of the F ifty-F ourth Legislature of the State of Maine 1875, ch. 98, 36, approved 
Feb. 24, 1875, available at http://lldcmainelegislature.org/Open/Laws/1 875/1875_RES_c098.pdf. 
36 See Maine State Legislature ’s Legislative History Collection amendments to the Maine Constitution, available at 
https://Www.maine.gov/legis/lawlib/lldl/constitutionalamendments/,' Debates and Journal of the Constitutional Convention 
of the State of Maine 1819-20, available at httb://lldc. mainelegislature. org/Open/Rpts@'k2825_18I9_a1_1894.pdf 
37 Which continues to this day.
8
The Commission ’s proposed amendment to Article X of the constitution, entitled “Codiﬁcation 
of the Amended Constitution ” , required that Sections l, 2, and 5 of Article X be omitted from printed 
copies of the Constitution, while conﬁrming that Section 5 would remain in full force with the same 
effect as if still contained in printed copies. 38 The Senate Judiciary Committee considered this 
particular amendment, but made no changes, and the ﬁnal set of amendments approved the original 
proposal verbatim. 39 When ﬁnally arranged and edited by the Chief Justice as per the amendment to 
Article X, Section 6, the seven sections of Article X were reduced to four in the printed Constitution, 
with Section 4 reading as follows: 
SEC. 4. Sections one, two and ﬁve, of article ten of the existing Constitution, shall hereafter 
be omitted in any printed copies thereof preﬁxed to the laws of the State; but this shall not 
impair the validity of acts under those sections; and section ﬁve shall remain in full force, 
as part of the Constitution, according to the stipulations of said section, with the same effect 
as if contained in said printed copies. 4° 
C. What speciﬁc language was then omitted from printed copies of the Constitution? 
Omitted Section l of Article X had set the schedule in 1820 for Maine’s initial legislative 
assembly and initial elections for Governor and other executive ofﬁces, which would thereafter revert 
to the regular Constitutional schedule starting in 1821. Section l also apportioned the Senate and House 
seats by naming each county and town and the number of representatives each would initially elect. 
Section l covered almost three pages of text in the original Constitution. 
Omitted Section 2 provided that the initial legislative and executive terms would begin in May 
1820 and end in January 1822, at which point the regular Constitutional pattern of two, four, and six 
years terms — with elections every other September - would commence. 
Omitted Section 5, which contained the language about “all the duties and obligations. .. 
towards the Indians” , incorporated all nine sections of the Articles of Separation into the Maine 
Constitution. As noted above, the Articles contained much more than the language about Maine’s 
Indians and were primarily concerned with dividing assets and obligations as between Massachusetts 
and Maine, with Massachusetts ’ obligations to the Indians considered as one of the latter. Section 5 
covered more than three additional pages of text. 
The Articles of Separation, by their own terms, had to “be incorporated into, and become and be 
a part of any Constitution, provisional or other, under which the Government of the said proposed 
State, shall, at any time hereafter, be administered; subject however, to be modified, or annulled by the 
3* Supra note 34. The proposal also recommended amending Section 6 of Article X, which had originally directed simply 
that the Constitution be “enrolled on parchment ” , placed in the Secretary of State’s ofﬁce, and “be preﬁxed to the books 
containing the laws of this State.” Amended Section 6 added a process by which the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 
would be responsible to “arrange” and edit the Constitution prior to being “enrolled on parchment ”. 
39 Compare Committee on the Judiciary, Resolve concerning an amendment of the Constitution of Maine, available at 
https://www.maine.gov/legis/lawlib/lldl/constitutionalarnendments/054-sd-0065-n22.pdf, with Maine Legislature, Acts and 
Resolves of the F ifly—F0urth Legislature of the State of Maine I 8 75, ch. 98, 36, approved Feb. 24, 1875, available at 
http://lldc.mainelegislature.org/Open/Laws/l 875/l 875_RES_cO98 .pdf. 
4° ME. CONST. art X, § 4 (1875), available at http://digitalmaine.com/senate_docs/l1.
9
agreement of the Legislature of both the said States; but by no other power or body whatsoever. ”"’1 In 
other words, the Articles of Separation, which included Maine’s assumption of Massachusetts ’ duties 
and obligations towards the Indians, could not be “modiﬁed or annulled ” by Massachusetts or Maine 
alone, or by the federal government, but only by vote of the legislatures of Maine and Massachusetts. 
If Maine really was primarily concerned with simplifying and shortening printed copies of its 
Constitution by removing the “patches and out-of-date shreds [that] cover half of the thirty-two 
pages”42 , then the only way to remove the several pages of Article X, Section 5 — without legislative 
action by Massachusetts - was to remove the language from printed copies, yet afﬁrm that the content 
remained part of the Constitution. This is precisely what Maine did in 1876. 
A ﬁnal legal question in this regard is worth mentioning: whether the Articles of Separation can 
be amended solely by mutual action of the Maine and Massachusetts legislatures or whether any 
change in the Articles Would, by deﬁnition, be an amendment to the Maine Constitution and would 
therefore, as per current Article X, Section 4, also require a 2/3 vote of both legislative houses along 
with a vote of the people? 
There is no clear answer. The Articles of Separation by its express terms says that it can be 
“modiﬁed, or amiulled by the agreement of the Legislature of both the said States; but by no other 
power or body whatsoever ” , suggesting that further process to amend the Constitution would not be 
required. However, it remains part of the Maine Constitution, which by its express terms, can only be 
amended as per Article X, Section 4. Potentially the answer might be “yes” to both questions if the 
Articles are ﬁrst considered as a contract between the states and then viewed as part of the Constitution. 
In 1973, the Maine Supreme Court was asked by the legislature to opine on the constitutionality 
of proposed legislation affecting reserved public lands/*3 Since Maine’s reserved public lands arose 
from the Articles of Separation, among the questions put to the justices were (1) whether the proposed 
legislation violated the Articles of Separation and (2), if so, “would such provisions be constitutional 
upon consent to such provisions by the Legislature of Massachusetts? ”44 Since the Justices found that 
the proposed legislation did not violate the Articles of Separation, they declined to answer the question 
as to whether the Articles could be amended with consent of the Massachusetts legislature without 
amending the Maine Constitution. However, they clearly recognized that the Articles of Separation 
remained part of the Maine Constitution even though since 1876 it had not been included in printed 
copies.“ In their interpretation of the public lands provision of Article X, Section 5, the Justices put 
considerable stock in cases decided by the Maine Supreme Judicial Court shortly after Maine becamea 
state, when the Articles of Separation were in recent memory, and the statement of facts in the 
legislature ’s request for the opinion included a reference to a situation in 1831 when the Articles of 
4‘ Articles of Separation, ME. CONST. art. X, §5, Ninth, available at https1//digitalmaine.com/senate_docs/l. 
42 Gov. Dingiey Address, supra note 28 at 37. 
43 Opinion of the Justices, 308 A.2d 253 (Me. 1973). 
‘*4 
Id. at 257’. 
45 Id. at 268-69. The Justices included the following enigmatic footnote on this issue: 
By thus concentrating attention upon the Articles of Separation in this aspect as a part of the Constitution of Maine, 
We intend no suggestion that the "Articles" are without independent legal effectiveness as limitations upon the 
sovereignty of the State of Maine imposed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Cf. Green v. Biddle, 8 Wheat. 
(21 U.S.) l, 5 L.Ed. 547 (1823). As the ensuing discussion will disclose, our undertaking to answer the questions 
propounded need not involve an investigation of this facet of the Articles of Separation. 
Id. at 269, n.la.
1O
Separation were amended by mutual action of the Maine and Massachusetts legislatures without 
amendment of the Maine Constitution. 46 
IV. What was the legal and practical effect of removal of Sections 1. 2. and 5 of Article X? 
Other than removing the words from printed copies of the Maine Constitution, the 1876 
amendment had no legal effect on Article X, Section 5. The amendment itself conﬁrmed that the 
Section 5 “shall remain in full force, as part of the Constitution, according to the stipulations of said 
section, with the same effect as if contained in said printed copies.” Subsequent to its removal from 
printed copies, in 1892 the Maine Law Court noted the continued viability of Article X, Section 5, 
speciﬁcally in reference to the State’s rights and responsibilities towards the Indians. ” In Stare v. 
Newell, Peter Newell, a Passamaquoddy tribal member killed two deer on January 14, 1891 , and was 
charged with violating State hunting laws. His defense was that the 18"‘ century treaties with both 
colonial and post-colonial Massachusetts guaranteed his traditional rights to hunt and ﬁsh, because the 
Passamaquoddy had never ceded those rights. 48 
The situation in Newell seems to have been instituted by the Passamaquoddy almost as a test 
case. Although we do not know for sure if they were one and the same person, a Peter J. Newell was 
the Passamaquoddy Tribal Representative to the Maine Legislature in 1889. His term would have 
ended in 1891, just before the arrest of Peter Newell for hunting deer out of season. 49 An article from 
an unnamed newspaper dated February 6, 1891, described the dispute as follows: 
Game Warden French of Calais, has arrested 2 Indians, Peter Newell and Joseph Gabriel 
for the unlawful killing of deer. They were brought before Justice Dresser at Princeton, 
Feb. 3, found guilty and bound over to the Supreme Judicial Court to be held in Calais in 
April. There [sic] defense is truly an ingenious one and they base it on very solid 
foundations. They claim that they have the right to ﬁsh and hunt whenever and wherever 
they please, the ﬁsh and game law to the contrary not withstanding. An interesting 
question thus arises. Are the Indians amenable to our game laws? The Indians [sic] 
conﬁdently asserts that he is not, and it cannot be denied that he presents cogent reasons 
for his claim. It is none other than a right derived from treaties, in 1725, again in 1727, 
and ﬁnally in 1794 the Commonwealth of Massachusetts granted to this same Tribe of 
Passamaquoddy Indians by bounden and solemn treaty the right to ﬁsh and hunt forever. 
These treaties, the Indians say, neither the Legislature nor the courts have a right to vary, 
46 The Justices stated, 
In 1831 the Legislature of Maine sought to modify the Articles of Separation to acquire the power to ‘direct the 
income of any fund arising from the proceeds of the sale of land required to be reserved for the beneﬁt of the Ministry, 
to be applied for the benefit of primary schools, in the town in which such land is situate, where the fee has not 
already vested in some particular Parish in such town, or in some 'mdividual ’." Massachusetts responded with 
legislation which repeated, substantially verbatim, the Act of the Maine Legislature and which recited that the Articles 
of Separation were thereby "so far modiﬁed, as to permit an exercise of legislation by the Government of the State 
of Maine, over the subject of ministerial and school lands within its territorial jurisdiction, granted or reserved for 
those purposes before the separation of that State from the Commonwealth. 
Id. at 254~55. 
‘*7 
State v. Newell, 84 Me. 465, 24 A. 943 (1892). 
‘*8 
1d. at 943-44. 
49 Maine State Legislature, Tribal Representatives to the Maine Legislature, 1823- , avaiiable at 
https://legislature.n1aine.gov/lawlibrary/tribal-representatives-to-the-maine-legislature-1823;'9257 (last visited Jan. 9, 2020).
11
treaties which were made with them by commissioners of Massachusetts, before Maine 
became a State, which same treaties were not only ratiﬁed by the new State, but it was 
part of the agreement in the act of separation that the rights of the Indians by treaty and 
otherwise, should be protected. This treaty, the Indians Claim, is to be considered like any 
other treaty as the supreme law of the State and any act of the legislature that conﬂicts 
with it are null and void. At any rate they propose to test it and conﬁdently appeal to the 
courts for redress of what they consider wrongs done them by the game laws. They have 
appealed to the Legislature again and again, but to no purpose. They now seek the domain 
of the law for vindication and propose to ﬁght it out on that line. This much is sure: the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe is stirred up to its very foundations. This question has excited a 
lively interest in Calais. Many of the city's prominent citizens have volunteered their aid 
and counsel to the Indians and the case will be presented at the next session of the Supreme 
Judicial Court in April. 5° 
In deciding against Mr. Newell, the Supreme Judicial Court accepted the existence of the 
treaties presented in the record and noted the continuing validity of Article X, Section 5 of the Maine 
Constitution. However, they discounted those documents by deciding (1) that the Passamaquoddy Tribe 
in 1891 could not show that it was the successor to the Passamaquoddy Tribe with whom the treaties 
were made, (2) that over the intervening century they had essentially forfeited any independent legal or 
political existence, and (3) that in any event the treaty of 1794 only spoke of ﬁshing rights in the 
Schoodic (St. Croix) River and did not grant any hunting rights. 51 
Though these Indians are still spoken of as the ‘Passamaquoddy Tribe,’ and perhaps 
consider themselves a tribe, they have for many years been without a tribal organization in 
any political sense. They cannot make war or peace; cannot make treaties; carmot make 
laws; cannot punish crime; cannot administer even civil justice among themselves. Their 
political and civil rights can be enforced only in the courts of the state; what tribal 
organization they may have is for tenure of property and the holding of privileges under 
the laws of the state. They are as completely subject to the state as any other inhabitants 
can be. They cannot now invoke treaties made centuries ago with Indians whose political 
organization was in full and acknowledged vigor. 52 
For purposes of this report, the primary point is that in 1891 the Passamaquoddy Tribe, the State 
of Maine, the Supreme Judicial Court, and the public were all aware that the Articles of Separation 
remained a part of the Maine Constitution even though the language was no longer included in printed 
5° Email from Donald Soctomah to Donna Marie Loring (Nov. 6, 2000) available at 
https://www.une.edu/sites/default/ ﬁles/1-penobscothistoricinfo 1 -treatyrightsl891 .pdf. 
5‘ Newell, supra note 47 at 943-44. Consistent with Maine’s ofﬁcial position throughout the 19"‘ century, the Court saw 
the treaties as, at most, a grant of land and/or rights from Massachusetts to the Passamaquoddy rather than a grant of certain 
land by the Indians with all other existing rights retained. The Court stated, "What the report calls the treaty of 1794 was 
simply a grant by the commonwealth to the Passamaquoddy Tribe of Indians of certain lands and the privilege of ﬁshing in 
the Schoodic River, in consideration of their releasing all claims to other lands in the Cormnonwealth. Clearly the defendant 
gains no right to hunt under that grant.” Id. at 944. 
52 Id. This despite the revisions in Maine Statutes from 1821 on, speciﬁcally covering the Penobscot and Passamaquoddy 
tribes and state accountings; see State of Maine, Revised Statues of the State of Maine 1871, available at 
http://lldc.mainelegislature.org/Open/RS/RS187 l/RSl871 __c009.pdf.
l2
copies. A secondary point is that as far as the State of Maine was concerned it did not matter; the 
Passamaquoddy derived no rights from that part of the Constitution or the treaties it incorporated. 53 
V. Whv were Sections 1, 2, and 5 of Article X omitted from printed copies of the 
Constitution? 
There is no recorded legislative debate, nor did the Maine legislature make ﬁndings as to why it 
amended the Constitution to omit Article X, Section 5 from printed copies. 54 In urging the legislature to 
review the Constitution and amend it where appropriate, Governor Dingley noted only that the 
Constitution with its amendments was poorly organized, had “out-of-date shreds” , and had become so 
long (32 pages) that “the casual reader often ﬁnds it difficult to understand what is the fundamental law 
of the State/’55 
A. Governor Dinglev’s Reasoning 
Taken at face value, Governor Dingley’s expressed reasons make sense. Omitted Sections 1 and 
2 covered four pages of text, dealt only with the initial officeholders and legislative session when 
Maine became a state, and had no practical application after 1822. Omitted Section 5, as noted above, 
also occupied several pages of text and dealt with the way Massachusetts and Maine divided their 
property and obligations — from land to munitions to Indian subsidies — when they separated. Since 
those items had been apportioned and divided at the time of separation or soon thereafter, oﬁicials 
might well not have seen a reason to keep the Articles of Separation in printed copies of the 
Constitution even though the language itself, and the obligations is expressed, could not be altered or 
nulliﬁed without simultaneous action by the Massachusetts legislature. 
Since the Supreme Judicial Court continued to recognize the existence and validity of Article X, 
Section 5 after the language was removed from printed copies, it does not appear that the amendment 
of 1876 was intended to take any rights away from Maine’s Indians. Rather, as far as the State of Maine 
was concerned at that time, Maine’s Indians did not have any treaty rights to take away. For both legal 
and practical purposes, the amendment and the hiding of the language about the State’s duties and 
obligations did not change the way the State conceived of or administered its relationship with the 
Passamaquoddy and Penobscot Tribes. 
B. Redact: Obscuring the Maine Constitution 
In September 2020, the Maine Historical Society presented an exhibit REDACT: Obscuring the 
Maine Constitution. “ It suggested a possible motive for redaction in the connections between some of 
53 The language in the Newell decision suggests a deliberate attempt by the Justices to minimize any legal effect from the 
treaties, describing as one of the “treaties made centuries ago” a 1794 treaty that was actually less than 100 years old when 
the decision was rendered. Newell, supra note 47 at 944. The Court’s interpretation of the law was ﬁnally corrected in the 
1970s in the federal litigation culminating in Joint Tribal Council of the Passamaquoddy Tribe v. Morton, 528 F.2d 370 (lst 
Cir. 1975). 
54 There is a “Journal of the Constitutional Commission of the State of Maine, 1875” located in the safe of the Secretary 
of State in Augusta, Maine which might shed some light on these issues, but has not been reviewable. 
55 Gov. Dirzgiey Address, supra note 28 at 37. 
56 The information contained herein regarding the Redaet Exhibit was obtained through a visit to the Exhibit 
(https://www.mainehistory.org/museum_current.shtml#Redact) and a webinar/panel discussion entitled "REDACT: A panel 
discussion on the redaction of Maine’s 1820 Constitution" that aired on November 19, 2020.
13
the individuals involved in the case of Granger v. Avery 57 and the Constitutional Commission of 1875. 
One of the members of the 1875 Commission was Frederick Pike, a Calais politician and lawyer who 
began his practice of law in the ofﬁce of Joseph Granger, Esq., the plaintiff in Granger. “ 
The issue in Granger was whether Granger or the Passamaquoddy Tribe owned Grass Island in 
the St. Croix River. Granger claimed ownership of the Township ofBai1eyvil1e, including Grass Island. 
He traced his chain of title from a 17 93 deed from Massachusetts to a William Bingham. He sued 
Avery, Maine’s agent for the Passamaquoddy Tribe, for Passamaquoddy “trespass ” on Grass Island. 
Avery defended based on the Tribe’s indigenous title and its 1794 Treaty with Massachusetts, which 
“expressly mentioned ” Grass Island as Passamaquoddy land. 59 The Maine Supreme Court, noting 
Granger’s chain of title, was unimpressed by either the claim of indigenous title or the 1794 Treaty, 
which post-dated Granger’s claim: 
It was determined in Penobscot Tribe v. Veazie, 58 Maine, 402, that the title of the 
government was superior to that of the aborigines. The Passamaquoddy Indians had no title 
originally to this island in controversy. They acquired none by the conveyance from 
Massachusetts, nor have they since acquired any by adverse possession. “ 
The Redact Exhibit emphasized the personal/professional connections between Granger and 
Pike and suggested that, as a member of the 1875 Constitutional Commission, Pike proposed and 
advocated for redaction as a hedge against the pending Granger decision. 61 The Exhibit posited thata 
decision favorable to Granger might have required Maine to reimburse the Passamaquoddys for the loss 
of Grass Island, based on the Constitutional obligation under Article X, Section 5. 
Since records are limited, this theory cannot be fully proven or disproven. However, froma 
legal perspective, the State did not need a nefarious motive for redaction. The Maine Supreme Court 
had already dispensed with the concept of indigenous title in 1870 in Penobscot Tribe v. Veazie, 62 the 
case upon which its decision in Granger was based. In 1892, seventeen years after redaction, the Court 
speciﬁcally mentioned the Articles of Separation as part of the Maine Constitution in State v. Newell.“ 
As far as the Court was concerned, redaction had no legal effect on substantive law. In fact, after the 
Granger decision, the legislature voted both to compensate Granger for the trespass allegedly done to 
him and to ascertain the value of the land taken from the Passamaquoddys and reimburse their trust 
57 Granger v. Avery, 64 Me. 292 (1874). 
58 State of Maine, Resolve providing for the payment of the members of the constitutional commission, 1 8 75, ch. 45, 
available at http2;’/lldcmainelegislature.org/Open/Laws/ 1 87 5/ 1 87 5_RES __c046.pdf. 
59 Granger, supra note 57 at 294. 
6° Id. at 296. 
6‘ Pike and Granger were certainly acquainted, probably personally as well as professionally. Both Pike and Granger 
were Republicans who served terms as Mayor of Calais, as did C. R. Whidden, the lawyer who defended Avery, who served 
as Mayor directly after Granger did. See The Political Graveyard." A Database of American History, Calais, Maine, 
POLITICALGRAVEYARDCOM, http:/lpoliticalgraveyard.com/geo/ME/ofc/calaishtml (last visited Jan. 9, 2021). 
62 Penobscot Tribe v. Veazie, 58 Me. 402 (1870). 
63 84 Me. 465, 24 A. 943 (1892). The Court described MI. N ewell’s defense to the charge of illegal hunting as follows; 
“He claims that these treaties are made, by the fifth section of the act of separation, (incorporated into our constitution,) a 
constitutional restraint upon the power of the legislature to limit the freedom of the Passamaquoddy hidians in hunting and 
fishing. ” Id. at 944.
14
ﬁind from the State treasury. 64 In sum, it is hard to see why the Granger case would have provided 
motivation sufficient for a Constitutional Commission to redact the entire Articles of Separation, of 
which Maine’s obligations to the Indians was but a small part. 65 
VI. Aftermath 
As time went on, despite the continuing legal “duties and obligations ” in Article X, Section 5, 
general awareness of those duties and obligations obviously declined and/or vanished. When the 
language in Article X, Section 5 has been “rediscovered ” from time to time, there have been attempts to 
re-include the Articles of Separation in printed copies of the Constitution. However, this would of 
course require amendment of the Constitution. Edward Hinckley, brieﬂy Maine’s Commissioner for 
Indian Affairs in the 1960s, made an effort to do so, but was unsuccessful. “ The “hidden language ” 
was referenced in the context of the Maine Indian land claims, 67 and in 2015 and again in 2017 John 
Henry Bear, the Maliseet representative to the Maine legislature, sponsored bills to amend the 
Constitution to again include Article X, Section 5 in printed copies. 68 The ﬁrst attempt ended witha 
different bill that did not amend the Constitution, but instead simply required the State Law Librarian 
to make Article X, Section 5, more easily available. 69 Representative Bear’s second attempt in 2017 
passed the Maine House, but died in the Senate. 7° 
Article X, Section 5 remains a part of Maine’s Constitution, although not part of any printed 
copies. As such, it cannot be amended or removed from the Constitution without the consent of 
64 See Maine Legislature, Acts and Resolves ofthe Fifty-Fi ﬁh Legislature of the State 0fMaine 1876, Chap. 154, 1l6—l7, 
approved Feb. 21, 1876, available at http://lldc.mainelegislature.org/Open/Laws/1 876/1 876_RES_c154.pdf; Maine 
Legislature, Acts and Resolves of the F ifty-Seventh Legislature of the State of Maine 1878, Chap. 83, 31, approved Feb. 21, 
1878, available at http://l1dc.mainelegislature.org/Open/Laws/1878/1878_RES_c083.pdf. 
65 The Redact Exhibit suggested that the decision in Granger was not issued until after the public vote for redaction in 
September 1875. The trial in Granger occurred in April 1874 in the Maine Supreme Court (Maine’s basic trial court) with 
Justice Cutting presiding. The case then appears to have been submitted to the Law Court for a decision on the underlying 
legal issues. That decision was written by Chief Justice Appleton with ﬁve other Justices including Cutting concurring and 
issued in 1874 prior to redaction. The Law Court dealt solely with the legal issue and did not mention or decide the amount 
of damages. The case would then have gone back to the Supreme Judicial Court for determination of damages and costs. 
That judgement, presumably by Justice Cutting, was entered on October 20, 1875, after redaction. 
66 Colin Woodard, Legislation would put hidden sections of Maine is constitution back into print, PORTLAND PRESS 
HERALD, (June 1, 2015), https:/iwwwpressherald.com/2015/06/01/1egislation-would-put-hidden-sections-of-maines- 
constitution-back-into-print/. 
67 See e.g., Jt. Tribal Council of the Passamaquoddy Tribe v. Morton, 388 F. Supp 649, 652 n.2 (1975) (Judge Gignoux 
discussing the treaty duties and obligations assumed and perfonned by the State of Maine, “The Articles of Separation were 
incorporated into the Maine Constitution as Article X, Section 5.”); see also Francis J . O’Toole & Thomas N. Tureen, State 
Power and the Passamaquoddy Tribe: A Gross National Hypocrisy, 23 ME. L. REV. 1,2, n. 5, 10 (1971) (discussing the 
omitted language of Article X, § 5, “Although this compact of separation remains a part of the Maine Constitution, it is no 
longer printed”). 
6* L.D. 893 (l27th Legis. 2015) available at http://legislature.maine.gov/legis/bills/display_ps.asp?LD=893&snum=127; 
L.D. 428 ( 128th Legis. 2017) available at https://legislaturemaine.gov/legis/bills/display_ps.asp?LD=428&snum=128. 
69 This bill finally passed over the Governor ’s veto. The language reads, “Sec. 1 Articles of Separation more prominently 
available. Resolved: That the Secretary of State, Maine State Library and Law and Legislative Reference Library, Within 
existing resources, shall make the Articles of Separation of Maine from Massachusetts, including the ﬁfth subsection, more 
prominently available to educators and to the inquiring public.” Maine Legislature, Resolves 2015, ch. 40 available at 
htip://legislature.maine.g0v/legis/bills/getPDEasp?paper=HP0612&item=6&snum=12 7. The Legislature has created a 
webpage titled “Sections of the Maine Constitution Omitted From Printing ” available at 
http://legislaturemaine.gov/lawlibrary/sections-of-the-maine-constitution-omitted-from-printing/9296/. 
7° L.D. 428 supra note 68.
15
Massachusetts and, possibly in addition, by amendment of the Constitution through Maine’s 
constitutional process. Hence, as a constitutional matter, Maine still retains “all the duties and 
obligations ” Massachusetts had to the Indians in Maine as contained in “treaties or otherwise ” . In the 
19th century, the Maine Supreme Court recognized the existence of those treaties, although it 
downgraded them to mere contracts, but did not recognize the Indians of their day as the legal 
successors to the Tribes that negotiated those treaties. This view was clearly ovenuled in the land 
claims litigation in the 1970s." 
Hence, the question remains whether or not the Maine Constitution retains any Tribal rights 
beyond the Maine Implementing Act and the Settlement Act, a question that is outside the scope of this 
report. The State might argue, as the Attorney General did in 2015, that the Settlement Act gave Maine 
“a general discharge and release of all obligations ... arising from any treaty or agreement with, or on 
behalf of any Indian nation, or tribe or band of Indians or the United States as trustee” to the tribes. 72 
The State’s current position, as expressed by Assistant Attorney General Chris Taub, remains that the 
relationship between the state and the tribes is governed by law and not treaties. ” However, the Maine 
Constitution cannot be amended simply by legislative acts of the State of Maine or the Federal 
Government. We know that in 1831, even a relatively small change in the Articles of Separation 
involving the proceeds from the sale of public land required contemporaneous identical legislation in 
Massachusetts to succeed. 74 
As an example, in the 1794 treaty between the Passamaquoddy and Massachusetts, the 
Passamaquoddy retained “the privilege of ﬁshing on both branches of the river Schoodic without 
hinderance or molestation ” . 75 Maine assumed that obligation in 1821, and the state’s duty to honor its 
obligations under that treaty remains in the Maine Constitution. In order to deny that treaty-based right, 
Maine would have to claim that federal legislation released them from a constitutional obligation. 76 
VII. Conclusion 
The duties and obligations Massachusetts had towards the Indians in the District of Maine were 
transferred to the new State of Maine as part of the Articles of Separation and, as such, were written 
into the Maine Constitution. However, as the Articles of Separation were concerned almost solely with 
dividing assets and obligations as between the two states, one reading/interpretation of what 
Massachusetts and Maine intended was that Massachusetts ’ “duties and obligations ” to the Indians 
were ﬁnancial in nature and that Maine would take on those obligations and hold Massachusetts 
harmless. Within the next generation, based on the decisions of Maine’s Supreme Judicial Court, by 
71 See Jt. Tribal Council of the Passamaquoddy Tribe v. Morton, 528 F.2d 370 (lst Cir. l9'?5). 
72 Woodard, supra note 66; 25 U.S.C. 1731. 
73 Caitlin Andrews, Maine lawmakers endorse sovereignty bid in historic win for tribes, but obstacles remain, BANGOR 
DAILY NEWS (August 6, 2020), https://bangordailynews.com/2020/08/06/politics/maine-lawmakers-endorse-sovereignty- 
bid-in-historic-win-for-tribes-but-obstacles-remair ﬂ 
7‘ Supra note 35. 
75 Supra note 6. 
76 The Settlement Act purports to prevent any future lawsuits based on the laws of Maine respecting the transfer of any 
land or natural resources by the Indians prior to the Settlement Act. However, the Passamaquoddy ’s ﬁshing rights were not 
transferred in 1794, but instead retained. See State v. N ewell, 84 Me. 465, 24 A. 943 (1892) (Maine’s Supreme Court 
expressly discussed that treaty; “What the report calls the treaty of 1794 was simply a grant by the commonwealth to the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe of Indians of certain lands and the privilege of ﬁshing in the Schoodic River, in consideration of their 
releasing all claims to other lands in the commonwealth. ”).
l6
law the Indians had no corresponding rights from those duties and obligations other than the land and 
the stipends speciﬁcally described in the treaties. 77 
The constitutional amendment in 1876 that removed several sections of the constitution from 
printed copies does not appear to have been directed towards the duties and obligations the state had as 
regards the Indians. There is no clear evidence that these issues were even discussed at the time, and 
the amendment was focused on removing from print the sections of the constitution that appeared, at 
least to non-Indians, to be antiquated. Maine at that time had statutes regulating its relationship with the 
Tribes, and it is doubtful that the legislature in the 1870s would have recognized that it had any legally 
binding obligations not contained in those statutes. Finally, even after the Articles of Separation were 
hidden from view, the Maine Supreme Judicial Court continued to recognize the existence of Article X, 
Section 5 and the prior treaties with Massachusetts and Maine, yet did not consider those treaties to 
apply to the Indians then living in Maine beyond the subsidies granted and the lands retained in the 
treaties.7 
By removing Article X, Section 5 from printed copies of the Constitution, Maine does not 
appear to have intended to hide its obligations to the Indians from public view. As a practical matter, 
Maine already believed that through legislation and litigation it had reduced those obligations toa 
minimum. 79 It is more important that in the present day, with the ongoing evolution of the perception 
and recognition of the Maine/Wabanaki relationship and history, there is increased awareness of Article 
X, Section 5, perhaps including the question of its continuing legal viability, and a greater opportunity 
for positive change in that relationship. 
77 See Murch v. Tomer, 21 Me. 535 (1842); Moor v. Veazie, 32 Me. 343 (1850); Penobscot Tribe v. Veazie, 58 Me. 402 
(1870); see also Door; supra note 19. 
78 See State v. Newell, 84 Me. 465, 24 A. 943 (1892); Stevens v. Thatcher, 39 A. 282, 283 (Me. 1897) (“Notwithstanding 
any treaties with Indians upon the tenitory of Maine, the political jurisdiction of the state includes every person and every 
acre of land within its boundaries ”). 
79 This remained Maine’s official view until the land claims litigation in the 1970s showed otherwise.
17
