122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Support of:  
LD 78: RESOLUTION: Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of Maine Regarding 
Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations  
and 
LD 578: RESOLUTION:  Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Concerning the 
Publication of Maine  Indian Treaty Obligations  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
State House, Room 438 Tuesday , March 7, 2023  
 Good afternoon, Senator Carney , Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary . My name is Rebecca Boulos . I am a resident of South Portland and executive director 
of Maine Public Health Association.  MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent 
more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously. 
 MPHA is in support of LD 78: “ RESOLUTION: Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of 
Maine Regarding Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations ” and LD 578: “RESOLUTION: Proposing an 
Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Concerning the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations .” 
These bills propose to amend  the Maine Constitution to require that the text of Article X, Section 5 , which 
pertains to Indian treaty obligations, be included in pr inted copies of the Constitution.  
 While  this obligation language was  removed in 1876, S ection 5 has always “remain[ed] in full force. ” The 
removal of these obligations from printed copies of the Constitution serves as erasure, even if the obligations were enforceable by law. Rei nstating their inclusion in printed versions of the Constitution improves 
transparency and voter education of Maine history and treaty obligations ; and is one step towa rd improving 
relations between the S tate of Maine and the Wabanaki Nations.  
 Thank you for consider ing our testimony. 
  
 
