Thom Harnett 
52 Marston Road
Gardiner, Maine 04345
Testimony in Support of
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of Maine 
Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary 
Committee. I am Thom Harnett and I reside in Gardiner, Maine. I am pleased to be here with 
today to testify in support of LD 78 a RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of 
the Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations. I thank 
Speaker Talbot Ross for introducing this Resolution and thank Senator Bennett for his 
submission of LD 578 which seeks to accomplish the same goal. 
Every person I have ever known has basic needs. Included in those basic needs is the desire to be 
seen, heard, valued, and respected. This resolution proposes an amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to require that the text of Article X, Section 5 of the Constitution, which pertains to Maine 
Indian treaty obligations, be included in any printed copies of the Constitution included with the 
laws of the State. This Resolution, if enacted, would make certain that the Wabanaki Nations are 
no longer invisible in the Maine Constitution and that instead, they are truly seen, valued, and 
respected in that most important document. 
As you have heard today, due to actions taken by the Maine Legislature and amendments made 
to the Maine Constitution in the 1870s, language pertaining to the State’s obligation to honor 
those treaties was removed from printed copies of that Constitution. Though Maine was and still 
is obligated to honor those treaties, those obligations and the benefits that accrued to the 
Wabanaki were and are nowhere to be found in printed copies of our Constitution. Those 
obligations along with the rights of Maine’s first people in essence became and remain invisible. 
You have the opportunity before you today to change that and make the Wabanaki and their 
treaty rights literally seen again. I encourage you to advance this proposal as I believe it is right, 
just, and moral to do so.
In addition to simply being the right thing to do, restoration of the text of Article X, Section 5 of 
the Constitution accomplishes much more. It provides historical clarity about Maine’s treaty 
obligations and the rights of the Wabanaki. It also says quite clearly to our Wabanaki friends and 
neighbors that Maine sees you, Maine acknowledges its sacred treaty obligations to you, and 
Maine recognizes your longstanding rights under those treaties.
While some might argue this is just a symbolic gesture, I disagree. In my mind, this can be 
another important and meaningful step in an ongoing process to improve the relationship 
between the State of Maine and the Wabanaki Nations. While we have made some significant 
and positive changes in that relationship, we all know that much more remains to be done.  Do 
not squander the opportunity as the improvement of that relationship benefits not only the 
Wabanaki, but the State of Maine as a whole.
Thank you for your time and attention this afternoon and thank you for all the work that you do. I 
am happy to answer any questions you might have.
Thom Harnett
Gardiner
LD 78
Thom Harnett 
52 Marston Road
Gardiner, Maine 04345
Testimony in Support of
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of Maine Regarding 
the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary 
Committee. I am Thom Harnett and I reside in Gardiner, Maine. I am pleased to be here with 
today to testify in support of LD 78 a RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of 
the Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations. I 
thank Speaker Talbot Ross for introducing this Resolution and thank Senator Bennett for his 
submission of LD 578 which seeks to accomplish the same goal. 
Every person I have ever known has basic needs. Included in those basic needs is the desire 
to be seen, heard, valued, and respected. This resolution proposes an amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to require that the text of Article X, Section 5 of the Constitution, which 
pertains to Maine Indian treaty obligations, be included in any printed copies of the 
Constitution included with the laws of the State. This Resolution, if enacted, would make 
certain that the Wabanaki Nations are no longer invisible in the Maine Constitution and that 
instead, they are truly seen, valued, and respected in that most important document. 
As you have heard today, due to actions taken by the Maine Legislature and amendments 
made to the Maine Constitution in the 1870s, language pertaining to the State’s obligation to 
honor those treaties was removed from printed copies of that Constitution. Though Maine was
and still is obligated to honor those treaties, those obligations and the benefits that accrued to
the Wabanaki were and are nowhere to be found in printed copies of our Constitution. Those 
obligations along with the rights of Maine’s first people in essence became and remain 
invisible. You have the opportunity before you today to change that and make the Wabanaki 
and their treaty rights literally seen again. I encourage you to advance this proposal as I 
believe it is right, just, and moral to do so.
In addition to simply being the right thing to do, restoration of the text of Article X, Section 5 of
the Constitution accomplishes much more. It provides historical clarity about Maine’s treaty 
obligations and the rights of the Wabanaki. It also says quite clearly to our Wabanaki friends 
and neighbors that Maine sees you, Maine acknowledges its sacred treaty obligations to you, 
and Maine recognizes your longstanding rights under those treaties.
While some might argue this is just a symbolic gesture, I disagree. In my mind, this can be 
another important and meaningful step in an ongoing process to improve the relationship 
between the State of Maine and the Wabanaki Nations. While we have made some significant
and positive changes in that relationship, we all know that much more remains to be done.  
Do not squander the opportunity as the improvement of that relationship benefits not only the 
Wabanaki, but the State of Maine as a whole.
Thank you for your time and attention this afternoon and thank you for all the work that you 
do. I am happy to answer any questions you might have.

