 
Senator Tipping, Rep. Roeder and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Adam Zuckerman and I am the lobbyist for the Maine People’s 
Alliance.  
 
I am glad to testify in favor of LD 1376, An Act to Create a Livable Wage by Increasing the 
Minimum Hourly Wage. 
 
MPA is Maine’s largest community action organization with over 32,000 members across the 
state. Our mission is to create a world where everyone has what they need, contributes what they 
can, and no one is left behind. 
 
Thousands of our members have volunteered in the last several years on the statewide campaign 
to raise Maine s minimum wage, which was at passed at the ballot by voters by an historic 
margin in 2016. Many of those members understand first-hand the difference that a little extra 
money each month can make in their budget, their families, and their lives. 
 
Our members also understand the impact that historic inflation has had on their purchasing 
power. With inflation at nearly 9% last year, many Mainers saw their purchasing power 
decrease. Hitting low-income families the hardest, many struggled to afford groceries, utility 
bills, child care, car payments, and rent. This bill ensures that inflation will never outpace wages 
for the lowest-income Mainers.  
 
Before the 2016 minimum wage increase, the big business lobby said that the sky was going to 
fall. In fact, the opposite happened. Employment is up, unemployment rates remain at record 
lows. Mainers are working more hours and taking home bigger paychecks.  
 
The minimum wage is one of the most-studied policies that exist, and macro-economic data 
from a multitude of states demonstrates that raising the minimum wage is one of the most sure-
fire ways to improve the lives of families.  
 
This proposal is very modest. It only raises the minimum wage by $1.20 from its current level in 
the first year. According to MIT’s Living Wage Calculator, a childless single adult in Maine needs 
to earn $16.53 per hour to have a living wage. With one child it is $34.84 per hour and with two 
children it is $44.99 per hour. This proposal is measured and it is fair. I urge you to support it. 
Thank you. 
 
 

Adam Zuckerman
Maine People's Alliance
LD 1376
Senator Tipping, Rep. Roeder and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Adam Zuckerman and I am the 
lobbyist for the Maine People’s Alliance. 
I am glad to testify in favor of LD 1376, An Act to Create a Livable Wage by 
Increasing the Minimum Hourly Wage.
MPA is Maine’s largest community action organization with over 32,000 members 
across the state. Our mission is to create a world where everyone has what they need, 
contributes what they can, and no one is left behind.
Thousands of our members have volunteered in the last several years on the statewide
campaign to raise Maine s minimum wage, which was at passed at the ballot by voters
by an historic margin in 2016. Many of those members understand first-hand the 
difference that a little extra money each month can make in their budget, their 
families, and their lives.
Our members also understand the impact that historic inflation has had on their 
purchasing power. With inflation at nearly 9% last year, many Mainers saw their 
purchasing power decrease. Hitting low-income families the hardest, many struggled 
to afford groceries, utility bills, child care, car payments, and rent. This bill ensures 
that inflation will never outpace wages for the lowest-income Mainers. 
Before the 2016 minimum wage increase, the big business lobby said that the sky was
going to fall. In fact, the opposite happened. Employment is up, unemployment rates 
remain at record lows. Mainers are working more hours and taking home bigger 
paychecks. 
The minimum wage is one of the most-studied policies that exist, and 
macro-economic data from a multitude of states demonstrates that raising the 
minimum wage is one of the most sure-fire ways to improve the lives of families. 
This proposal is very modest. It only raises the minimum wage by $1.20 from its 
current level in the first year. According to MIT’s Living Wage Calculator, a childless
single adult in Maine needs to earn $16.53 per hour to have a living wage. With one 
child it is $34.84 per hour and with two children it is $44.99 per hour. This proposal is
measured and it is fair. I urge you to support it. Thank you.

