 
  
 
Testimony In Opposition To  
LD 1376, An Act to Create a Livable Wage by Increasing the Minimum Hourly Wage  
 
April 11 , 2023  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder , and Honorable Members of the Labor and Housing  Committee,   
 
My name is Alexander Price. I am here  today  on behalf of the Maine Jobs Council  to speak in opposition to LD 
1376, An Act to Create a Livable Wage by Increasing the Minimum Hourly Wage . The Maine Jobs Council is a 
statewide, nonpartisan, member -driven advocacy organization that advances public policies to support the 
creation and preservation of foundational jobs in Maine.  
 
Maine emerged from the pandemic as the most economically vulnerable state in the nation. We received that 
ranking due to our percentage of small businesses and their limited ability to cope, our aging workforce, an d our 
dependence on tourism and retail. If LD 1376 passes, w hat appears to be well -intentioned may do considerable 
harm to the people it aims to help.  
 
Other states with similar minimum wage laws are New York, Massachusetts, and California. These states can do 
this because they are wealthier states. Everything is more expensive, they have the high est living costs  in the 
nation , and this generates higher w ages. Maine’s regulatory and business environments already rank among the 
lowest in the nation. We are 44th in the nation in overall economic ranking and 42nd in the nation in capital 
investment, both of which are the worst in New England. We should be pas sing legislation that helps make Maine  
less of an outlier.  
 
The Maine Jobs Council supports making workers a top priority. The best way to do that is with a robust economy 
full of quality foundation al jobs that provide choices, career growth, and increasing wages.  This law would lead to 
just the reverse. Supporting working people is critical, but the important word is working. If our companies cannot 
compete, if money isn’t invested here, if jobs stagn ate or leave, then we will have more and more people who are 
not working. There is no substitute for a good job and those jobs come from companies that compete successfully 
to provide goods and services.  
 
Individual pieces of legislation, such as LD 1376, are not the solution to solving Maine’s economic problems. We 
encourage this committee to take a step back, look at the bigger picture of where Maine ranks compared with the 
rest of New England and the nation, and start taking a more comprehensive look at how taxes, regulations, 
infrastructure, workforce challenges, and other issues that act as a barrier to job creation in our state. Maine 
needs to develop and follow a long -term strategic to make us more competitive, not less.  
 
The MJC thanks the committee for it s time and consideration of this issue , and we would welcome any opportunity 
to discuss it with you . 
 
Thank you,  
 
Alexander Price, Pierce Atwood 
On behalf of the Maine Jobs Council  
