 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members 
include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural 
and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and 
annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alison  Sucy,  Chief Operating Officer and Director  of Government  Affairs,   
on Behalf  of the Maine  Tourism  Association  
 
In Opposition To 
 
LD 1376, An Act to Create  a Livable  Wage  by Increasing  the Minimum  Hourly  Wage  
 
 
April 11, 2023 
 
Senator  Tipping, Representative  Roeder, and Members  of the Joint  Standing  Committee  on Labor  and Housing:  
 
My name  is Alison  Sucy  and I am the Chief  Operating  Officer  and Director  of Government  Affairs  for the 
Maine  Tourism  Association.  The Maine  Tourism  Association  is the state’s  largest  tourism  organization  with 
1500  members  in every  type of tourism  business  such  as lodging,  restaurants,  campgrounds,  retail,  guides,  
tour operators,  amusements,  and historical  and cultural  attractions.  We’ve  been  promoting  Maine  and our 
members  for over 100 years.  I present  this testimony  in opposition  to LD 1376.  
 
The increases in the minimum wage that took place over the past several years and continue to grow with annual 
indexing pose a significant challenge to many of our members. Many of our smaller members are struggling under 
increased wages, benefits, supply costs, and other costs of doing business; and rather than expand or reinvest in 
their businesses, they are hiring fewer workers or providing fewer work hours for employees just to remain 
operational. 
 
Tourism was one of the hardest hit industries during the pandemic. Maine’s tourism businesses are starting the slow 
process of recovery. Predictions are that it will be at least 2024 before the industry returns to pre-pandemic levels. 
Maine’s economy is dependent on a successful tourism industry. According to the Maine Office of Tourism, 2022 
numbers indicate that: 
 
•   Direct tourism expenditures totaled $8.6 billion 
•   Without tourism, Maine households would have had to pay an additional $2,172 in state and local taxes 
•   Tourism supported 151,000 Maine jobs 
 
Maine needs tourism to be successful, not just for the 151,000 people in its jobs and the direct economic impact but 
also for the indirect impact. Tourism businesses utilize contractors, landscapers, plumbers, and electricians; and 
they buy from our farms, fisheries, wineries, and breweries. If tourism businesses can’t succeed, these other 
businesses suffer as well. We want the tourism industry to continue to recover and grow and provide tens of 
thousands of jobs and billions of dollars to the Maine economy. 
 
Tourism has a broad mix of entry-level jobs through highly-skilled, management, and entrepreneurial career 
opportunities. In some areas of the state, even entry-level tourism jobs are paid well above the minimum wage. 
However, forcing all businesses across the state to raise their starting wage, and thus increasing all other wages, is 
cost prohibitive. Therefore, I respectfully request that you oppose LD 1376. Thank you for your time and 
consideration. 

 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members 
include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural 
and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and 
annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
