  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce In Support 
of   
L.D. 948 An Act to Create a Liaison Position Between the Department of 
Education and the Department of Health and Human Services on Early Childhood 
Education Matters 
 
Chairs Rafferty and Brennan, and esteemed members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in Gardiner and I 
represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association 
made up of both large and small businesses, here to provide you with my 
testimony in support of creating a liaison between the department of education and 
department of health and human services on early childhood education matters. 
 
The Maine State Chamber supports this legislation in the spirit of business 
leaders’ responses in the latest Making Maine Work report. The availability of 
Maine’s workforce was referenced three separate times on business leaders’ top 
ten concerns. A major strategy outlined in Making Maine Work for expanding 
Maine’s workforce is to increase the workforce participation of our current 
population. Two action items feeding into this strategy is to engage working 
parents and new Mainers. We knew before the COVID-19 pandemic that childcare 
and early childhood education opportunities were on a razors edge for many 
parents. The childcare and early childhood education provider closures that still 
linger from the pandemic have forced many parents to have work disruptions or 
leave the workforce entirely. Through out the pandemic, and even now, Maine’s 
population has grown due to net in migration. This in-migration is important to 
continued growth as our population growth is not keeping up with workforce 
needs organically. Not all who have moved here in the last three years have 
stayed. Many who have left did so because of uncertainty surrounding the 
availability of childcare and early childhood education. 
 
While this position may not solve all the workforce challenges parents and 
employers face due to constraints around childcare and early education, it is a step 
in the right direction. The department of education and the department of health 
and human services each play a critical role in supporting our youngest and often 
most vulnerable citizens. The departments are also specialists. Their work often 
leads them to hold different specific concerns for the same individual or area. This 
specialization, while effective in solving specific problems, often results in siloed 
approaches in any type of organization. The addition of a liaison will likely break 
down this silo, allow for cross functional work, and ensure that an adequate flow 
of communication is occurring between the two departments. I ask that you give 
LD948 your support as a resource to help the departments meet their mission. 
    
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.   
 
    
  
  
