ta- .i. 
Jeffrey Timberlake THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 17 1315f Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Jeffrey Timberlake 
LD 251, “Resolve, To Classify Employee Health Insurance as a Fixed Cost for MaineCare 
Reimbursement in Nursing Facilities ” 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
February 7, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services: I am Jeff Timberlake and I represent Senate District 17, which includes the 
Towns of Durham, Greene, Leeds, Lisbon, Litchfield, Sabattus, Turner, Wales, and Wayne. 
It is my pleasure to be here to present LD 251, “Resolve, To Classify Employee Health Insurance asa 
Fixed Cost for MaineCare Reimbursement in Nursing Facilities. ” 
Those of you who sat on this Committee the past couple sessions may recall I stood before you twice 
before and presented this same bill, LD 1126 from the 129th Legislature and LD 1112 from the 130th. The 
measures ultimately died but not for lack of interest or support. In the 129*“ , the session ended early 
because of the pandemic, in the 130*“ , this Committee voted unanimously in support of the bill but we came 
up short in fmiding at AFA. 
To provide a little background, back in December of 2013 the bipartisan Commission to Study Long Term 
Care Facilities released a series of recommendations, several of which were implemented. One 
recommendation by the Commission that has not yet been put in place is to make health insurance a ﬁxed 
cost in nursing homes. Facilities generally do offer health insurance to employees, but this has become 
extremely diﬁicult because of the rising premium costs. 
We must keep in mind that now more than ever, with Maine’s population being the oldest in the nation, 
nursing homes need to be able to attract and retain the best employees; and this can be done with 
competing wages and beneﬁts. 
Two prior "iterations of this Committee reported out the same proposal unanimously. It is my 
hope this panel will again send this measure to the Chambers with a report to pass. We need to show our 
support for nursing home facilities and the hardworking staff who take care of our friends, neighbors and 
family members. 
I appreciate your attention and will try to answer questions. However, folks who will be testifying after me 
are much better versed than I at explaining the different aspects of MaineCare rates and reimbursements; 
and they have a better handle on the intricacies of Chapter 101 of the MaineCare Beneﬁts Manual, the 
piece this Resolve proposes to amend. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
