  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
February 7, 202 3 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 251 – Resolve, to Classify Employee Health Insurance as a Fixed Cost for MaineCare 
Reimbursement in Nursing Facilities  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
This letter is in opposition to  LD 251, Resolve, to Classify Employee Health Insurance as a Fixed 
Cost for MaineCare Reimbursement in Nursing Facilities . This bill requires the department to amend 
the MaineCare Benefits Manual to move health ins urance costs for personnel from direct care routine 
cost components to fixed costs components . 
 
The Department opposes this bill as it introduces change s to current rate reimbursement methodology 
at a time when  rate reform is underway for this service, undermining  the rate reform process and 
principles established last year in  P.L. 2021 , ch 639, which was passed in the last legislature as LD 
1867, An Act to Codify MaineCare Rate System Reform . The intent behind that bill was to establish 
“… a rate -setting system for the development and maintenance of MaineCare payment models … to 
be consistent with efficiency, economy,  and quality of care; that are adequate to support MaineCare 
member access to services; and that are equitable an d data -driven.”  The change proposed in this 
legislation does not appear rational, as health insurance costs are variable, not fixed costs , for which 
it is best practice for employers to shop around to ensure good value for their employees and 
organization.  
 
The Department acknowledges the many challenges with the current  nursing facility reimbursement  
system , which is why it is prioritizing rate reform  for MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapter III, 
Section 67, Principles of Reimbursement for Nursing Facilities , with a planned implementation date 
of January 1, 2025 . The Department does not have the capacity to continue to devote resources to 
manipulating the current flawed model . 
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If you 
have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

