"i~ 
7f,i,$1:;:$- ‘ 
Maine Health Care Association 
Testimony of Wanda Pelkey, Board Chair of Maine Health Care Association and 
CFO of First Atlantic HealthCare 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services 
February 7, 2023 at 1:00 pm 
in Support of LD 251, Resolve, To Classify Employee Health Insurance as a Fixed Costfor 
MaineCare Reimbursement in Nursing Facilities 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members ofthe 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Wanda Pelkey, and l serve as the board 
chair of the Maine Health Care Association and CFO of First Atlantic HealthCare. My company 
represents 23 nursing and residential care facilities and at full capacity care for roughly 2,000 
residents and employ similar number of workers across Maine: Saco, Portland, Freeport, 
Falmouth, Skowhegan, Lewiston, Dexter, Dover-Foxcroft, Bangor, Ellsworth, Machias, Lincoln, 
Millinocket, Calais, Houlton, Waterville and Madawaska. l fully support l.D 251 and sincerely 
thank Senator's Timberlake, Keim and Stewart and Representative Morris for their co- 
sponsorship. 
This bill would require Mainecare always pay for it's fair share of health insurance costs. Why is 
this a good thing? Because guaranteed funding will‘ enable homes to offer better coverage 
choices and lower employee out of pocket costs, thereby helping our homes attract and 
retain healthcare workers.
Here's our company's situation. Our current insurance annual premiums cost $8,500 for single 
and $25,000 for family coverage of which our company pays roughly 75%. Beyond their 25% 
cost-share, our workers also face high deductibles and coinsurances which can easily hit $8,000 
with moderate use. In short, it's expensive. These premiums increased 30% at our last annual 
renewal, when two awful quotes left no good options. We couldn't reduce our plan coverages 
and be compliant with the ACA coverage minimums. Additionally, passing along the premium 
increase to workers would have violated ACA "affordability" law. So, for our worker's sake, our 
company is bearing this increase, strainingalready tight company cash flows. 
Would this bill completely solve this problem? No, but as today's Mainecare regular rates 
aren't funding this increase, having Mainecare pay its ratable share is a terrific start. It would 
help facilities weather mandated yet uncontrollable cost increases and help companies like ours 
afford better coverage and lower costs to our employees. Further, the FMAP would fund most 
of the cost, leveraging federal support. 
Said simply - this bill promotes better health care coverage for health care workers. And 
that's a very good thing. Thank you for your time and I urge you to support LD 251.
LD 251 Benefits: 
0 Requires Mainecare pay its fair share of health insurance costs 
0 Promotes better health care benefits for healthcare workers 
0 Mitigates uncontrollable and unpredictable cost increases to employees and employers 
0 Maximizes federal funding dollars 
0 Better coverage reduces hospital and physician bad debts from underinsured families 
I Recommended by 2013 Long Term Care Study Commission
