 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 552: An Act Regarding the Definition of “Reportable 
Accident”  
 
March 2, 2023  
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Transportation, my name is Jason Stuart, and I am a lieutenant at Bangor Police Department.   On 
behalf of the City of Bangor, t hank you for the opportunity to provide testimony to adjust the 
damage threshold related to a “reportable accident” under 29 -A MRSA §2251.  
There were 2 ,092 crashes reported to Bangor Police Department in 2022 with 80% being 
reportable crashes.   The vast majority of the crashes involved minor damage, and only 13% 
involved any report of injury.  
We request the committee considers adjusting the damage threshold of a “reportable accident” under the statute.   Currently, total damage in a car crash must be $1 ,000 or more to be 
considered a reportable ac cident.   With today’s repair rates, this is virtually all crashes involving 
any repair.    
A $2 ,000 threshold is seemingly more accurate based on present -day repair costs.   This request 
does not change any other provision of the statute regarding crashes wi th injury.   Any motor 
vehicle crash with any level of injury is still considered a reportable accident.  
Staffing challenges across Maine have created wait periods that frustrate those involved in the crash.  In many communities, an increase in the apparent  property damage threshold , and the 
ability to report such damage via online portals , will eliminate the unnecessary wait period while 
still meeting the reporting requirements of the insurance carriers and hopefully improve the experience of those involved  in a crash.   It would also have the added benefit of freeing time up 
of Police Officers to address other calls and concerns.  
Thank you for your time.   Please do not hesitate to connect with me if you have questions.     
Jason Stuart, Lieutenant   jason.stuart@bangormaine.gov
  
Debbie Laurie, City Manager Debbie.laurie@bangormaine.gov  
Rick Fournier, Council Chair Richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov   
 

