*'*3 
6 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
j;;;*, AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
~° (207) 287-1400 
Laura Supica TTY. MAINE RELAY 711 
34 Highland Avenue 
Bangor, ME 04401 
(207) 717-5702 
Laura.Supica@legislature.mainegov 
March 2, 2023 
Representative Laura Supica Introducing 
LD 552, An Act Regarding the Definition of “Reportable Accident ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 0 . HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVESI 
cl 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Committee on Transportation, I am I 
Representative Laura Supica and I am honored to represent part of Bangor here in the Maine 
Legislature. Today, I present to you LD 552, An Act Regarding the Deﬁnition of “Reportable 
Accident. ” 
Under current Maine law, a “reportable accident ” means “an accident on a public way or a place 
where public trafﬁc may reasonably be anticipated, resulting in bodily injury or death to a person 
or apparent property damage of $1,000 or more. Apparent property damage under this subsection 
must be based upon the market value of the necessary repairs and may not be limited to the 
current value of the vehicle or property. ” 
My bill would only make a small change to one piece of this language by updating the threshold 
for “reportable accident ” to more accurately reﬂect current costs. The bill does this by raising the 
threshold of apparent property damage from $1,000 to $2,000. Not only does this better reﬂect 
current costs, but it also critically helps correct an unfortunate dynamic whereby law 
enforcement ofﬁcials have been getting bogged down processing very minor accidents, taking 
resources away from other, more pressing matters and causing long wait times for everyone 
involved. 
Importantly, this change does not prohibit individuals from reporting an accident of any apparent 
level of property damage, however small or large, but rather it eliminates the requirement to do 
so when the estimated costs are below $2,000. This is something that both law enforcement 
ofﬁcials and members of the public will beneﬁt from and have, in fact, advocated for. 
I ask that you support this measure which will make a signiﬁcant difference for law enforcement 
ofﬁcials seeking to meaningfully and positively engage in communities across the state, reduce 
needless incidents of contact with law enforcement for many individuals and generally minimize 
costs by limiting the time and resources needed to process minor accidents. 
Thank you for your time, and I’m happy to take any questions you may have, although I expect 
others more knowledgeable on this subject than I will be presenting after me and may be better 
equipped to answer your questions. 
District 22 Bangor (part)
