TESTIMONY of Charlie Summers 
President/CEO 
Maine Energy Marketers Association 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
Environment and Natural Resources 
t IN SUPPORT TO LD 319 
An Act to Amend Maine's Underground Oil Storage Tank Laws 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
Committee. My name is Charlie Summers, I am the President and CEO of the Maine'Energy Marketers 
Association (MEMA). 
MEMA is a trade association composed of approximately 300-member companies and over 5,000 direct 
and 5,000 indirect people working in energy delivery and servicing businesses delivering heating oil, 
biofuels, motor fuels, propane, pellets and kerosene and offering service and installations on the 
equipment that operates these fuels. In addition, our members own and operate 70% of Maine's 1,300 
convenience stores in Maine and employ approximately 10,000 Maine people and sell more than1 
billion gallons of gasoline and diesel fuel each year. Our members also sell more than 90% of all the 
propane sold in our state every year. We provide education and training to the heating, ventilation, air 
conditioning, weatherization, and energy auditing trades for hundreds of Maine citizens annually A 
through our courses at our own state of the art training facility MEMA Technical Education Center 
(MTEC) in Brunswick. MEMA has recently started offering a CDL Class B Theory Training with tank and 
hazmat endorsements as a member benefit, MEMA saw the need in our industry to recruit more CDL 
drivers and worked through 2022 with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to create this new education 
program for members. A 
MEMA and members support LD 319 and believe that it would be a great improvement to Chapter 691 
and would be meaningful to the industry as well as consumers. 
Under current Maine law, upon the expiration date of a manufacturer's warranty on underground oil 
storage tanks, the tank and its associated piping must be removed from service and properly 
abandoned, except that a double-walled underground oil storage tank may continue in service up to 10 
years beyond the expiration of the warranty if certain testing is conducted to verify the integrity of the 
tank. This bill removes the 10-year limitation, thereby allowing such double-walled tanks to continue in 
service indefinitely as long as the same testing requirements are satisfied. This would be beneficial to 
many Maine businesses and a huge cost savings. Replacing these tanks so often is a large expense to
Maine businesses and in some cases outweigh the profit margins, thus resulting in business closure 
when it comes time to replace the tank. 
I hope that you will see the great benefit to Maine businesses this bill offers and vote ought to pass on 
LD 319.'
