 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 18, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee o f Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1339 , Resolve, to Establish  the Task Force to Study Forming the Maine 
Commission on Disabilities  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter provides information regarding LD 1339 , Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to 
Study Forming the Maine Commission on Disabilities . The Department opposes this bill 
which seeks to establish a task force to study the formation of a statewide  commission on 
disabilities and consolidation of services for persons with  disabilities .   
 
It is true that the state “has a significant role in supporting more inclusive state programs… to 
help people with disabilities to be well and active in th eir communities .”  There are a variety 
of services for all Mainers spread across multiple agencies . The best way to ensure that 
individuals with disabilities have equal access to services is to educate and train staff in those 
agencies , which  ensure s that accommodations are made as necessary to serve everyone, 
whether or not they have disabilities . Separating out some disability groups or services and 
folding them under one umbrella does not accomplish  that.   
 
In addition, there would be a negative program matic impact, as participation in the task force 
requires state staff resources, which will take them away from other work underway. Should 
the taskforce move ahead with recommendations to implement a commission such as 
described in this bill, there would be significant rule  and policy  changes,  and state staff time 
needed for th at work  as well . 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Elizabeth Hopkins  
Associate Director  
Office of Aging and Disability Services  
 

