Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: 
 
My name is Brad Williams from Freeport and I am here in support of LD 
1339, "Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Forming the Maine 
Commission on Disabilities".  
 
Since my accident in 1987, I have been fighting an endless battle with what 
I like to refer to as “legalized segregation”.  The Americans with Disability 
Act was signed into law in 1990 but ever since, nobody has really held 
anyone accountable for not abiding by the law.  33 years and it is still an 
issue.  Forget about how difficult daily life is for someone with a disability, 
now imagine that you have to plan out where you want to go or the 
obstacles you will face. 
 
I can’t go out to eat, go shopping, to a park or even worse, on vacation 
without doing some sort of research beforehand.  I have to worry about 
where I am going to park even before I find out whether I can even get into 
the establishment or not.  I am not talking about older businesses that have 
been around forever, I am talking about new construction too.  For the most 
part, there is no real policing of the ADA unless a complaint is made.  It’s 
not just whether you can get in or out of the building.  Sometimes it’s as 
simple as someone parking in the access aisle between the handicap spots 
and you can’t even get into your vehicle.  If I am by myself I have to rely on 
the help of strangers to get into my van and back it up for me so I can get 
in. 
 
We recently went to a new store that opened where a previously 
established business had been for years.  The handicap parking was not 
striped properly in the parking lot and the signs were not posted properly.  
Has it always been this way?  Why was it never addressed before? This is 
part of the law so why was this business allowed to open without these 
areas being addressed?  Because nobody cares and there is nobody to 
enforce it. It is my understanding that each community is supposed to have 
an ADA compliance officer to address such issues but I know my town 
does not have one or if they do, they are not doing a good enough job. 
There are so many issues surrounding these violations that they would 
need someone full time to keep up with them. 
 
I have been employed at my job for 34 years as a 911 Dispatcher for 
Portland Police, Fire and Rescue, and it took them 8 years to get an 
accessible bathroom on the same floor that I work on and took almost twice 
as long to get an accessible parking space for me to use.  For several 
months, patrol officers and supervisors would park their patrol vehicles in 
my parking space and multiple complaints by me to both the Chief of Police 
and City Hall made no difference until I parked blocking in the vehicles one 
day.  Then folks were willing to pay attention when they could not access 
their vehicles.  These were my own co-workers preventing me from 
parking. 
 
I mentioned going on vacation earlier.  There is so much planning that is 
involved, you can’t just pick a hotel and call it good.  You have to make 
sure it is accessible or they have an accessible room and that is just the 
beginning.  If I had a dollar everytime someone said “They have to be 
accessible don’t they, it’s the law”, I would be a very rich man.   
 
 
