T¢§_timQny4m LD 1339 from Brendan K, Williams 
Hello Committee Members: 
My name is Brendan Vlrilliams and I’m a resident of South Portland and a member of the 
South Portland Human Rights Commission and the South Portland Civil Service Commission. I 
am speaking this afternoon on LD 1339, a ‘Resolve to establish a task force to study forming the 
Maine Commission on Disabilities. ’ 
I am healing impaired and I fully support this bill. When I ran for South Portland Council 
last fall, I proposed a Disability Commission for the city and wl1ileI lost, I am very glad to see 
the state do their part for the disability community in Maine. 
One of the biggest struggles I’ve had with being hearing impaired is the communication 
barrier. Many people who are unable to hear rely on lip reading to communicate. Not all of us 
know sign language. When it came to calling various state offices regarding my state tax and my 
unemployment during Covid, among other items, I was unable to hear the other end of the 
phone. When I suggested that I pass the phone off to a roommate to make it easier, they would 
not talk to anyone unless it was me because of conﬁdentiality. 
With the advent of zoom calls, a good idea would be to allow Mainers who rely on lip 
reading and subtitles to make zoom appointments for various government ofﬁces and they can 
get their needs met and their questions answered. We also tend to use a TTY that translates what 
someone is saying over the phone into a text message, but because of how slow it can be, many 
times people will hand up on us because it doesn’t feel like a nonnal conversation.
7 I‘ 
I think if a Disability Commission is fonned, they can tackle various issues such as the 
communication barriers in the state govemment as well as housing issues. We do need more 
housing in the state; however, it won’t be a big difference if the housing that we build in the state 
isn’t accessible. 
One in four people in this country has a disability and I think having a Disability 
Commission will make the state more inclusive. 
Thank you for listening.
