      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 18, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1339, Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Forming the Maine Commission on 
Disabilities   
 Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of 
Maine or CHOM.  I am also the parent of a 26 -year-old son with Intellectual/Deve lopmental 
Disabilities (ID/DD).  I serve as Chair of the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality Services, a 
coalition of some 4000 people, consisting primarily of parents, that focuses on housing and quality 
services for people with ID/DD.  I also serve a s chair of the Maine Developmental Services 
Oversight and Advisory Board (MDSOAB).   
 I am testifying in support of LD 1339, Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Forming the 
Maine Commission on Disabilities .  The task force is directed to study the formation of a statewide 
commission on disabilities and the consolidation of services for persons with or at risk for disabilities , presenting a final report to the Health and Human Services  Committee , which may 
introduce legislation related to the repor t to the Second Regular Session of the 131st Legislature.
 
 
The State plays a large role in service delivery for people with disabilities, including inclusive 
programs administered and/or overseen by state agencies that are critical to people having 
access to the services they need to live and thrive, and be included within their communities.  
Services for people with disabilities are delivered across Maine and overseen by various 
offices within the State of Maine.  As such, many of these offices and departments are siloed 
which can negatively affect the efficiency and effect iveness of service provision.  It also 
creates issues with communication, transparency, and accessing services.   
 
People with disabilities would benefit most from a comprehensive, holistic, and collaborative 
approach in which various state offices work in tandem to develop synergistic, person- centered 
approaches  to service delivery .  This is exactly what other states such as New Hampshire did 
with great success.  New Hampshire’s Commission on Disability specifically analyzed the 
system of care for people  with intellectual/developmental disabilities and made 
recommendations for improvements  “to ensure that the state’s service delivery model is 
structured to provide maximum benefit and  tailored services to individuals with developmental 
disabilities .” (Source : https://www.nh.gov/disability/mediaroom/documents/hb4final.pdf ).  
 
With various initiatives currently u nderway to make changes to Maine’s system of care, 
specifically for people with ID/DD, it appears to be an ideal time to further analyze Maine’s 
support service system for people with disabilities through a comprehensive, broad group of 
stakeholders – which LD 1339 would accomplish.  
 
I will as k that this bill be amended to include a member of the  Maine Developmental Services 
Oversight Advisory Board (MDSOAB), a  statutorily established statewide organization that 
represents the full spectrum of people with disabilities including people  with the highest level 
of need and oversees DHHS Office of Aging and Disability S ervices (OADS) in optimizing 
services.  The MDSOAB provides oversight of systemic issues facing this  population. The 
MDSOAB  has regular interactions with OADS and procures system performance information 
and feedback from the ID/DD population, families, service providers, and advocates.  Having 
a representative from the MDSOAB will ensure people with the very highest needs are seen  in 
the most accurate light.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro  
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins  
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan  
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell  
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba  
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea 
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon  
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill 
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
Cullen Ryan
Portland
LD 1339
I have amended my testimony to include an additional final paragraph .  Full amended
testimony is below:
April 18, 2023, amended April 21, 2023
Re: LD 1339, Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Forming the Maine 
Commission on Disabilities 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of 
Community Housing of Maine or CHOM.  I am also the parent of a 26-year-old son 
with Intellectual/Developmental Disabilities (ID/DD).  I serve as Chair of the Maine 
Coalition for Housing and Quality Services, a coalition of some 4000 people, 
consisting primarily of parents, that focuses on housing and quality services for 
people with ID/DD.  I also serve as chair of the Maine Developmental Services 
Oversight and Advisory Board (MDSOAB).  
I am testifying in support of LD 1339, Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study 
Forming the Maine Commission on Disabilities.  The task force is directed to study 
the formation of a statewide commission on disabilities and the consolidation of 
services for persons with or at risk for disabilities, presenting a final report to the 
Health and Human Services Committee, which may introduce legislation related to 
the report to the Second Regular Session of the 131st Legislature.
The State plays a large role in service delivery for people with disabilities, including 
inclusive programs administered and/or overseen by state agencies that are critical to 
people having access to the services they need to live and thrive, and be included 
within their communities.  Services for people with disabilities are delivered across 
Maine and overseen by various offices within the State of Maine.  As such, many of 
these offices and departments are siloed which can negatively affect the efficiency 
and effectiveness of service provision.  It also creates issues with communication, 
transparency, and accessing services.  
People with disabilities would benefit most from a comprehensive, holistic, and 
collaborative approach in which various state offices work in tandem to develop 
synergistic, person-centered approaches to service delivery.  This is exactly what 
other states such as New Hampshire did with great success.  New Hampshire’s 
Commission on Disability specifically analyzed the system of care for people with 
intellectual/developmental disabilities and made recommendations for improvements 
“to ensure that the state’s service delivery model is structured to provide maximum 
benefit and tailored services to individuals with developmental disabilities.” (Source: 
https://www.nh.gov/disability/mediaroom/documents/hb4final.pdf). 
With various initiatives currently underway to make changes to Maine’s system of 
care, specifically for people with ID/DD, it appears to be an ideal time to further 
analyze Maine’s support service system for people with disabilities through a 
comprehensive, broad group of stakeholders – which LD 1339 would accomplish.
I will ask that this bill be amended to include a member of the Maine Developmental 
Services Oversight Advisory Board (MDSOAB), a statutorily established statewide 
organization that represents the full spectrum of people with disabilities including 
people with the highest level of need and oversees DHHS Office of Aging and 
Disability Services (OADS) in optimizing services.  The MDSOAB provides 
oversight of systemic issues facing this population. The MDSOAB has regular 
interactions with OADS and procures system performance information and feedback 
from the ID/DD population, families, service providers, and advocates.  Having a 
representative from the MDSOAB will ensure people with the very highest needs are 
seen in the most accurate light.  
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.

