  
Testimony of Jena Jones on Behalf of 
the Maine Council on Aging to the Committee on 
Health and Human Services 
 
In Favor of LD 1339 - Resolve, to Establish the 
Task Force to Study Forming the Maine Commission 
on Disabilities 
 
Delivered on April 18, 2023 
 
 
Greetings, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. 
My name is Jena Jones, and I am the Director of Policy and Advocacy at the Maine Council on 
Aging (MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy, engaged and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings. I am testifying in favor of LD 1339. 
According to U.S. State Profile Data, 1 in 4 people in Maine have a disability.1 That statistic 
represents over 300,000 people across our state, more than 90,000 of them over 65.  Many of 
these people have been historically disenfranchised and shut out of systems and opportunities 
throughout their lives, and still suffer discrimination and disregard. 
Ableism is alive and well in our culture. We see it when we look to the invisible: the lack of 
proper investment in a care infrastructure to support people with disabilities; a lack of investment 
in and availability of paratransit services, on-going bias and discrimination in employment, and a 
built environment constructed without an eye to accessibility.  
The oversight and opportunity for inquiry that a commission provides will create a process for 
answering questions that demand attention. We currently know that there are Mainers with 
disabilities who are entitled to direct care services, but we cannot say how many people are 
without care nor can we say how many hours these people are owed. We understand there are 
swaths of the state where people cannot find care and support services because there are literally 
no workers, but we do not know where the geographic boundaries of these so-called “care 
deserts” are, and we know many people with disabilities do not know what services are available 
to assist them living fully engaged lives.   
 
 
1 (Bureau, 2022)  

The Commission established in LD 1339 establishes a holistic scope to consider the many ways 
the state can ensure people with disabilities have the ability to live a life with autonomy, choice, 
and opportunity in their homes, communities, and natural spaces. Approaching the 
Commission’s work through the lens of accessibility and inclusivity with further needed efforts 
toward an equitable Maine.  
It is critical that state agencies work together to solve challenges for people with disabilities, and 
this work must be informed by the lived experience of people with disabilities.  We encourage 
the Committee to accept a friendly amendment which is to include both the Department of 
Agriculture and UMaine’s Cooperative Extension Service on the Commission.  The latter runs 
Maine AgrAbility, a program that helps farmers, fishers, and forest workers work safely with a 
disability.  As Maine’s farmers, fishers and forest workers age, the tools offered through this 
program can help extend the time these workers can continue to work. 
The MCOA urges this committee to support the efforts of LD 1339.  
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions.  
Jena Jones 
 
