April 1s, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee, 
My name is Kandie Cleaves and I reside in Garland. I am here testifying in support of LD 1339 
“Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Forming the Maine Commission on 
DisabiIities. ” 
I am an individual who identifies with mental, physical, and developmental disabilities. AndI 
should be the only one who decides what my limitations are, just as others with disabilities 
should define for themselves, unfortunately that isn't always what society allows. 
I am going to move us to an example that was seen on the national stage. U.S. Senator John 
Fetterman. After being asked about his ability to handle the job, enough voters in Pennsylvania 
decided to elect him. As you probably know he later sought help and was admitted to Walter 
Reed Hospital for Depression. During that time, not only did I hear comments from across the 
country I heard many of them right here in Maine. Many people questioned whether someone 
with Depression, or other mental health issues, should be holding office. This type of rhetoric is 
part of why we still have doctors, police officers, service members and others still committing 
suicide. Stigma keeps them from seeking the help they need to remain in theirjobs and to 
remain alive, all out of fear they will be deemed unfit due to mental health issues. This issue 
happens across all disabilities, and it‘s wrong. If an individual has the education and skills to do 
the job, should be what the only focus is. 
Being disqualified or excluded based on a disability is discrimination. While you can’t cast a vote 
here that changes the national stage, you can help lay the groundwork to change it here in 
Maine. 
As you heard already, creating a Commission on Disabilities could provide research to ﬁnd 
where the issues are, make recommendations on how to correct them and assist with 
information and referrals. 
While I would ratherjump straight to forming the Commission, this bill seeks to form a task force 
to study it first. To me either one is a step in the right direction. The next step would require 
making sure that the formation of either be filled with a majority of individuals with disabilities 
and that those voices include people with mental, physical and or developmental disabilities. 
Just because an individual has no disabilities currently, doesn’t mean they won't end up with 
a disability in the future. By supporting this bill, you would be supporting and protecting all 
Maine residents. I ask again that you please vote in favor of LD 1339. 
Kandie Cleaves 
Garland
