                                                                                             LD 1339 Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Forming the Maine Commission on Disabilities Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and Human Service Committee My name is Kim Humphrey and I am the founder and president of Community Connect Maine (CCME), a parent of an adult with severe autism and bi-polar characteristics who lives in a Section 21 group home. I am also a founding member of the Maine Coalition of Housing and Quality Services (MCHQS) a board member of Maine Parent Federation (MPF) and a member of the Maine Developmental Services Oversight Advisory Board (MDSOAB).  There are over 4,000 people in the CCME network. Our board of directors is mainly comprised of family members of adult individuals with higher needs including significant communication challenges and chronic physical and mental health disabilities. Our vision is that all people get the support they need, when then need it, to live a full life within communities of their choice.  I am in support of LD 1339. BUT ask that it be amended to include a representative such as a member from Maine Developmental Services Oversight Advisory Board (MDSOAB), a statewide organization that represents the full spectrum of people with disabilities including those with the highest level of need. It provides oversight of systemic issues facing this community. It has monthly contact with Office of Aging and Disability services and has regular channels for obtaining feedback from community members as part of it’s role. There is an active movement in our country led by self-advocates to bring more attention, inclusion and opportunities to the disability community. It is an important and positive movement. Those with more complex disabilities facing barriers that prevent them from participating in such activites also need to be included. This sub-population should not be left behind as the result of their disabilities--and nor should current disability policy.  Adding a family member of a statewide developmenat disablities service oversight committee to the task force would help to ensure that the needs of those who require the highest level of support are recognized, addressed and equitable represented. Kim Humphrey,  mother of Daniel Founder and President of Community Connect Maine	 Community Connect Maine…84 Boulder Drive, Auburn, ME 04210…207-754-3435
	     CommunityConnectME.Org   

