‘ ‘ 61 Winthrop Street - Augusta, ME 04330 ““\\_ 
' 1-800-499-U229 ' FGX 207~62l~()509 
~ ’ l\/lLTCOP@i\/laineOmbudsman org 
0IMBU1$sMAN Pr 
TESTIMONY 
In Support of 
LD 1339; Resolve to Establish the Task Force to Study Forming the Maine Commission 
on Disabilities 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 18, 2023 
Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. 
My name is Laura Harper. I am a Senior Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. l am here today 
to present testimony in support of this legislation on behalf of the Maine Long-Term Care 
Ombudsman Program. 
The Ombudsman Program is a nonproﬁt agency that provides statewide advocacy for older and 
disabled residents of nursing homes, residential care, assisted living and for recipients of home 
care services. Additionally, the program serves patients in hospitals who experience barriers in 
accessing the long-term services and supports they need when they are ready for discharge. 
This resolve establishes the Task Force to Study Forming the Maine Commission on 
Disabilities. The task force is required to study the formation of a statewide commission on 
disabilities and the consolidation of services for persons with or at risk for disabilities. The task 
force must submit a report no later than December 6, 2023, including suggested legislation, for 
presentation to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. 
There are approximately 308,824 adults in Maine with a disability. This equals 27% or 1 in4 
adults in Maine. (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) The task force required by this 
resolve offers an opportunity to begin to identify the strengths and weaknesses in programs, 
services and resources for persons with disabilities. The establishment of a commission on 
disabilities has the potential to be very beneﬁcial in focusing our state's efforts on assuring that 
all persons with disabilities are provided with supports and opportunities to participate in all 
aspects of community life. We believe that this is an important goal.
Many other states have established commissions. Some statewide and others with several local 
commissions. The Governor's Commission on Disabilities in Rhode Island's mission statement 
is as follows: “To ensure that all people with disabilities are afforded the opportunity to exercise 
all the rights and responsibilities accorded to citizens of this state and each person witha 
disability is able to reach his/her maximum potential in independence, human development, 
productivity and self-suf ﬁciency”. 
The task force is an important ﬁrst step. We are very pleased to support the amendment of this 
resolve that requires one member with lived experience with a disability, not affiliated with an 
organization represented by another member of the task force, and the state's protection and 
advocacy agency. Both would contribute much to the work of the task force. 
Thank you for your consideration.
