Lisa Wesel
Bowdoinham
LD 1339
My name is Lisa Wesel, and I am the mother of a 26-year-old daughter named Lidia, 
who has a rare genetic condition called Dup15q that causes intellectual disabilities 
(IDD) and debilitating seizures. We live in Bowdoinham. I would attend the hearing 
to testify in person if I were not at Maine Medical Center with Lidia, who is having an
EEG to determine if brain surgery might calm her seizures and slow the damage they 
are likely doing to her brain.
I strongly support LD 1339, and I hope it results in the formation of a Commission on
Disabilities. And I applaud the inclusion of a broad representation from the disability 
community, especially a self-advocate with IDD. The role of self-advocates in 
charting their own course is decades overdue and critically important. But I would 
urge you not to neglect another segment of the disability community that is at risk of 
being forced back into the shadows if they are once again left out of these 
all-important conversations: Those whose intellectual and developmental disabilities 
are so severe that they cannot advocate for themselves. For their voices to be 
represented, this task force, as well as any resulting commission, must include a 
representative from the Maine Developmental Services Oversight Advisory 
Board—an organization that includes family members of individuals with severe 
intellectual disabilities.
For the first 21 years, a person with severe IDD relies on their family to advocate for 
a comprehensive and inclusive education, competent healthcare, and targeted 
therapies. Families navigate the government bureaucracies that provide financial 
support and wage ongoing, sometimes arduous battles to force insurance companies 
to provide lifesaving coverage. No one knows them, their history, and their 
often-unique method of communication better than their family, and no one has 
fought harder for them to achieve the highest possible level of independence. But in 
some cases, when people with severe IDD turn 21, they are no more capable of 
advocating for themselves than they were at 20, or 15 or 5, and no amount of magical 
thinking can make it be so. 
There is nothing these families want more than for that loved one to be able to 
advocate for him- or herself—to be able to comprehend what they need to live a full 
and meaningful life, and to have the means to articulate those needs. But the truth is 
that not every person with IDD can be a self-advocate. And those who cannot are no 
less valuable, their lives are no less important, and their representation on any task 
force or commission is no less vital. Denying them this representation implies that 
they don’t matter.
Please amend LD 1339 to include the family member of a person with severe IDD to 
ensure that all people with IDD are fully represented.

