526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207 -480-1478      833-713-2618     www.maineddc.org  
 
 
  
 
April 1 , 2023  
 
Testimony in Support  of LD 1339 Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Forming the 
Maine Commission on Disabilities .  Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the 
distinguished members of the Committee on Health and Human Services:  
 
My name is Nancy Cronin , and I am the Executive Director  of the Maine Developmental 
Disabilities (DD) Council .  DD Councils have been around for  fifty (50) years funded by the 
federal DD Act.  The reason for our ex istence is to make sure that people with DD and their 
families have an active voice in policies that affect them.  Our Council inclu des a super ma jority 
of people with  DD and families of children with DD or adults with DD who cannot advocate for 
themselves.  The other 39% of the Council include s representation by every State agency that 
provides services for people with DD, the State wide Self Advocacy Organization, the University 
system, and the Prot ection a nd Advoca cy system.   
 
We understand the desire to have a commission that represents the entirety  of the disability 
community.   While we represent only a portion of the disability comm unity, it is  very  
concerning that w e were left out of this bill, and we ask that the Maine DD Council is included 
as a member of this task force to study a commission on disabilities.    
 
A friendly  email was forwarded to me this morning referencing that th is bill aims to im prove 
accessibility.  Accessibility is not, and should not  be, just for thos e with physical disabilities.  
Accessibil ity also includes plain language documents  and discussion s around how to include 
people with a variety of abilities into communit y.  If you move forw ard with th is bill, we ask that 
you please in clude the Maine Developmental Disabilit ies Council and help fulf ill the DD  Act that 
aims to include everyone.  
 
Thank  you for this opportunity to provide input  and I will make myself available for the work 
session.  
.  
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council  
