District 102: Freeport 
  
 
Melanie Sachs 
84 Kelsey Ridge Road 
Freeport, ME 04032 
Residence: 207-299-6825 
Melanie.Sachs@legislature.maine.gov  
  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 
 
 
April 18, 2023 
 
Testimony of Representative Melanie Sachs, sponsor of LD 1339, “Resolve, to Establish the Task 
Force to Study Forming the Maine Commission on Disabilities” before the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services: 
 
My name is Melanie Sachs and I represent the town of Freeport in House District 102. I am pleased to 
submit this testimony as a sponsor and strong supporter of LD 1339.  
 
This bill is entirely due to the hard work of a dedicated group of constituents in my community. Freeport 
is not only designated as an Age-Friendly Community; it also has the Freeport Accessibility Task Force. 
The task force works with our Town Council, businesses, and civic groups to recommend changes and 
coordinate efforts in our community to increase access for those with different abilities. A few years ago 
the group began to dig into what state regulations and services might bolster their efforts. They began 
with their lived experiences, and with the lens of “If I needed something, where would I go? How easy is 
it for a Maine resident, business, municipality, or community group to access information and services?” 
 
What we found was a patchwork of services sprinkled throughout state government, with some notable 
lapses.  If I were blind or visually impaired, for example, I would perhaps know about vocational services 
through the Department of Labor to obtain a job, but maybe not about the complimentary fishing licenses 
from the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,  or the resources available to me through the  Maine 
State Library .  As we continued to dig, we found different pieces embedded within different entities, 
making it potentially difficult for Mainers to navigate.  
 
What we also found is that there is a lack of support for municipalities and businesses who would like to 
be more thoughtful about adhering to the guidelines for the Americans with Disabilities Act.  The state 
used to have an ADA Coordinator within the State Planning Office who could guide residents or 
municipalities on ADA requirements and services, but that position was eliminated. There is one state 
employee  to deal only with state compliance issues, particularly with state owned buildings – a huge job.  
 

District 102: Freeport 
 In another area, the State Fire Marshall’s Office does not have to review all new construction, so it falls to 
the local code enforcement officers, who do not have the ongoing training and focus on this issue. In the 
experience of Alpha One, a statewide agency focused on keeping people with disabilities in their homes 
through adaptive equipment, services and supports, they might get a call only after construction has taken 
place, and are now in the position of having to talk with the town on behalf of the individual for 
enforcement.  
 
These were just some of the examples that we found. The CDC states 1 in 4 Maine  adults is living with a 
disability. 19 % of school aged children  have an identified disability, per the KidsCount report, and that 
does not include those younger than 5. I have never sponsored a study bill, and no intention of doing so 
this session. But as I spoke with the many groups around the state and in my own community, it was clear 
that given the number of people in Maine impacted, and the challenges involved, that it is time to bring 
everyone around the table and talk about it.   Many of those groups will be testifying in support of the bill 
today. There are three states here in New England with excellent models that could provide guidance in 
scope, access and policy for the taskforce: 
 
- New Hampshire’s Commission on Disability  
 
-  Rhode Island’s Governor’s Commission on Disabilities  
 
- Massachusetts Architectural Access Board  
 
The Committee will note that I have submitted an amendment to the original bill. I had submitted these 
two task force participants in the draft, but they had not made into the final version; this amendment 
corrects that oversight. I also would like to propose one more category of participant as a friendly 
amendment to the bill: 
 
17. “A statewide organization representing providers of services for people with intellectual 
disabilities and autism spectrum disorders”. 
 
I have been heartened by the statewide positive interest in this bill. It is a testament to the collaborative 
and critical work of so many entities that they are willing to take the time to ensure that our system and 
access is strong for all Maine residents. Thank you for your time and consideration of this legislation. I 
welcome any questions and will be available for the work session. 
 
 
