Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services:My name is Sally Walsh. I am from Freeport and am the coordinator of the Freeport Accessibility Task Force.  I am writing in support of LD 1339, "Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Forming the Maine Commission on Disabilities". ..Ten years ago, 2 men bombed the Boston Marathon and changed the lives of hundreds of people. Per the recent article in Sports Illustrated, 250 were injured, losing their limbs and their normal lives that day. But, the State of Maine doesn’t prepare for these people to come to visit, live, or work. The State also seems to not want to participate in the lives of those citizens who have survived Covid, recovered from Chemotherapy, suﬀered sports injuries, incurred injuries in the military, or who are either in baby strollers or those who use canes or wheelchairs.
	 I state these examples to show the  breadth of people who are denied the experience of being in our great state. There is discomfort in considering those with disabilities who are visible but the numbers of those aﬀected go far beyond those we can see. Everyone this room knows someone who, 
through circumstance, can no longer gain access to places they previously could.  Indeed, by looking in the mirror today, you will see someone who, as they age, will be part of this population.
	 Business owners and/ or building owners currently do not want to spend money to make modiﬁcations which would allow these aforementioned people access even if that would increase proﬁts by a large margin. Municipalities also struggle with funding from a resident funded tax base who do not see the beneﬁts of spending that money on a population which they do not notice since most disabilities are hidden. There also is a dearth of personnel in towns and cities to assist them in guiding and monitoring code enforcement for accessibility and safety. So code enforcement is often minimized or even eliminated from town management out of ﬁscal necessity.
	 I am in support of the request for funding to support this task force which will address the necessary exploration of solutions to provide access to all these age groups and speciﬁc populations who will energize and provide economic and societal beneﬁt to our state, Everyone deserves the 
opportunity to enjoy the state of Maine and contribute to it as we do. Thank You. Sally Walsh
