DISABILITY 
RIGHTS 
MAINE April 18, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Cross Office Building, Room 209 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Re: L. D. 1339, Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Forming the Maine 
Commission on Disabilities 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee; 
My name is Sara Squires and I am the Public Policy Director for Disability Rights Maine (DRM), 
Maine's designated protection and advocacy agency for people with disabilities. On behalf of 
DRM, I want to thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in support of LD 1339, Resolve, 
to Establish the Task Force to Study Forming the Maine Commission on Disabilities, as amended 
by the sponsor. 
As this bill notes, "services for those with disabilities are dispersed throughout state 
departments, which can result in lack of effectiveness or utilization." Too often, people with 
disabilities must navigate multiple service systems in order to access benefits to which they are 
entitled or the services they need in order to live and work in their communities. They must 
navigate red tape and administrative burdens between each silo. And even when services 
themselves may be (more) readily available, individuals are confronted with attitudinal, physical 
and policy barriers on a near daily basis. 
When the Americans with Disabilities Act was passed in 1990, the purpose was to ensure that 
people with disabilities were afforded the same rights and opportunities as their non-disabled 
peers. But, what we know is that achieving that goal is still in process. By establishing a 
Commission on Disabilities, Maine could reduce redundancies across systems and establish 
effective cross-systems communications, which would benefit both the state and its citizens 
with disabilities. 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330 
207.626.2774 - 1.800.452.1948 - Fax: 207.621.1419 - drme.org 
MAlNE'S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
DRM is the only statewide cross disability advocacy organization in Maine and we are part ofa 
national network of 57 such agencies. We support any effort in which leaders and policy makers 
discuss positive changes that will improve lives for I\/laine citizens with disabilities, but we also 
know that we should be part of those conversations since we directly represent the expressed 
interests of Maine people with disabilities. Because of the work we do and the individuals we 
serve, I wish to extend my thanks to Representative Sachs for offering her amendment that, in 
part, adds ”one member representing the state's designated protection and advocacy agency" 
to the task force. 
I also want to highlight the amendment ’s inclusion of an individual ”with lived experience" with 
a disability. Too often the disability community bears witness to decisions made and policies 
enacted without the benefit of having their voice heard. As DRM's Public Policy Director, asa 
woman with a disability who grew up in I\/laine, and as the director of DRM's intake for 21 years 
I would be happy to share my insights from my lived experience and those of the thousands of 
people with disabilities in Maine with whom I have talked at length over the years. Although I 
would be honored to represent DRM on this task force, I recognize the importance of including 
the voice and experience(s) of someone who is unaffiliated with another member of the task 
force. No discussions about the services, supports and policies that impact people with 
disabilities should be made without us. 
Sincerely, 
3;./vq l'\_.% 
Sara R. Squires 
Public Policy Director
