MAINE FAMILY LAW ADVISORY COMMISSION 
Report to Maine Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
LD 136, An Act to Clarify Court Jurisdiction of Actions Involving Children 
Brought Under the Maine Uniform Probate Code 
The Maine Family Law Advisory Commission (FLAC) is submitting proposed legislation 
pursuant to Title 19-A, section 354, subsection 2, to amend P.L. 2015, c. 460, the so-called 
“Home Court Act.” This brief report provides the background of the proposed legislation along 
with an explanation of each proposed amendment. 
Background 
In 2016, the 127d‘ Maine Legislature enacted Chapter 460, “An Act to Ensurea 
Continuing Home Court for Cases Involving Children, ” which made an important change to the 
Maine District Court’s jurisdiction over family law matters. Chapter 460, commonly referred to 
as “the Home Court Act,” allows the District Court to hear cases brought under Title 18-C, the 
Maine Unifonn Probate Code (Title 18-C), involving children —and speciﬁcally adoption, minor 
guardianship, and name change petitions —-—if there is a pending proceeding involving the child in 
the District Court (such as a divorce, child protection, or parentage matter). The District Court 
then becomes the child’s “home court” and has exclusive jurisdiction over all of the pending 
matters involving the child. 4 M.R.S.A. § l52(5-A). This means that a petition in a Title 18-C 
matter involving a child must be filed in the District Court, rather than in the Probate Court, if 
there is a pending proceeding involving that child in the District Court at the time of the ﬁling. 
Previously, such Title 18-C matters were under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Probate Court. 
The central aim and effect of the Home Court Act is eliminate the possibility of simultaneous 
proceedings involving the same child in both Probate and District Courts. 
Chapter 460 has now been in effect for six years, and it is working reasonably well in 
achieving the aims of the legislation. However, FLAC has learned that there are certain scenarios 
in which the current language of the statute does not provide sufficient clarity to litigants, 
practitioners, and judges about which court has jurisdiction over a matter involving a child or in 
which the literal application of the statute does not enable courts to best serve the interests of 
children and families. After consulting with practitioners, judges, and court employees, FLAC 
proposes certain amendments to the Home Court Act in the draft legislation provided with this 
report. 
Explanation of Proposed Amendments 
Section 1 of the proposed bill makes several changes to 4 M.R.S.A § 152, sub-§5-A, 
which sets forth when the District Court has jurisdiction over actions brought under Title 18-C 
concerning children. First, Section 1 adds proceedings pursuant to the Juvenile Code to the list of 
pending actions involving a child that will give District Court exclusive, continuing jurisdiction 
over Title 18-C actions involving that child, and it removes actions for protection from abuse and 
harassment from that list. These amendments would ensure that the District Court has
jurisdiction over Title 18-C matters when adjudicating ongoing proceedings involving custody or 
parental rights. Juvenile Court matters sometimes involve questions of custody of a child witha 
guardian, especially for older children, but it is not currently identiﬁed in the statute as a matter 
that would trigger Home Court jurisdiction. This amendment would ensure that the District Court 
exercising jurisdiction over the child in a Juvenile Court matter also has jurisdiction over any 18- 
C matters that arise concerning the child while such juvenile matter is pending. FLAC also 
recommends the statute be amended to remove Protection from Abuse and Protection from 
Harassment matters from the list of case types that can trigger Home Court jurisdiction. The 
summary, expedited nature of these proceedings, which may be pending for only a few weeks, 
have made it difﬁcult for courts to implement the Home Court Act in the rare instances when 
there was a brieﬂy pending Protection from Abuse matter involving a child in the District Court 
while there was an ongoing action in the Probate Court concerning that same child. 
Next, Section l provides that the District Court shall have exclusive, continuing 
jurisdiction over Title 18-C actions involving the child if the child has been the subject ofaj 
District Court order for the termination of parental rights, the appointment of a guardian 
including a pennanency, emergency or interim guardian, an award of parental rights to a third 
party, or an adoption. The aim of these proposed amendments is to ensure that the District Court 
can continue to exercise jurisdiction over a child Who was the subject of a child protection 
proceeding under Title 22 resulting in the appointment of a guardian or the termination of 
parental rights or a Title 18-C proceeding involving the appointment of an 
guardian or an 
adoption. Such outcomes arise in cases where a child’s Welfare was at stake and a high standard 
has been applied to provide a permanent change in custody for the child. In these contexts, 
FLAC concluded, the child’s interests would be best served by having the same court hear any 
subsequent proceeding brought under Title 18-C. There have been some occasions in whicha 
later proceeding involving a child had to be brought in a different court from the one that had 
adjudicated signiﬁcant issues about that child’s welfare, generally involving the same parties. 
FLAC believes that maintaining the jurisdiction of the original court makes sense in these 
contexts. 
Third, Section 1 provides a deﬁnition for the term “pending” used in Subsection 5-A to 
clarify when the DistrictCourt ’s jurisdiction is triggered by pending actions in two courts. The 
proposed bill would also prohibit the transfer of jurisdiction of a pending Probate Court matter to 
the District Court where the action is under advisement with the Probate Court after a testimonial 
hearing, unless the Probate Court determines that the District Court is the more appropriate- 
forum for the action. Under a literal reading of the current statutory language, a case that had 
been fully adjudicated through a ﬁnal testimonial hearing in the Probate Court would need to be 
transferred to the District Court if a person initiates an action in the District Court while the 
Probate Court matter was under advisement with that court. This could, for example, enablea 
party fearing an unfavorable result in the Probate Court as a result of the evidencepresented at 
the ﬁnal hearing to ﬁle an action in District Court with the aim of removing jurisdiction from the 
Probate Court before the final decision is issued. Such result is not only highly inefﬁcient but 
would reward attempts to exploit a loophole in the statute that was not intended by the original 
enactment. In most instances, it would be appropriate for the matter to remain with the Probate 
Court to enable that court toissue its decision. If the Probate Court determines that a transfer to 
the District Court would be more appropriate in a particular case, it would have the discretion to 
effectuate that transfer.
2
Section 2 of the bill would enact amendments to 4 M.R.S.A. §25 l-A, which addresses the 
jurisdiction of the Probate Court, to be consistent with those set forth in Section l. . 
Conclusion 
FLAC believes that these amendments will serve the aims of the Home Court Act and 
provide clarity for practitioners, litigants, and courts who are involved with these important 
matters involving children and families. A representative of FLAC will attend the public hearing 
and Work sessions on the bill to provide further information and answer questions. 
Thank you for your consideration of this proposed legislation. 
Dated: December 5, 2022 
Respectfully submitted: 
Maine Family Law Advisory Commission 
Hon. E. Mary Kelly, District Court Judge (Chair) 
Hon. Wayne Douglas, Superior Court Justice 
Hon. Steven Chandler, Family Law Magistrate 
Hon. Libby Mitchell, Probate Court Judge 
Franklin L. Brooks, Ph.D., LCSW 
Tim Robbins, Esq., Executive Director, Kids First Center 
Edward S. David, Esq. 
Diane E. Kenty, Esq, Maine Judicial Branch, CADRES 
Catherine Miller, Esq. 
Linsey Ruhl, Esq., Pine Tree Legal Assistance 
Debby Willis, Assistant Attorney General, representing the Maine Dept. of Health and 
Human Services 
'1
J
