<~.., 
, HQUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
ti,7 
5 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Allison Heplel. TTY: MAII\TE RELAY 7ll 
417 Montsweag Rd. 
Woolwich, ME 04579 
Phone: (207)319-4396 
All1S()ﬁ .l~lepier@,legislature.mainegov 
May 8, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Allison Hepler 
presenting 
LD 958, An Act to Expand Protections to Maine's Loons from Lead Poisoning by 
Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Good moming, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and fellow members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Allison Hepler and I represent the towns of Arrowsic, 
Georgetown, Phippsburg, West Bath and Woolwich. I am here today to present LD 958, An Act 
to Expand Protections to Maine's Loons from Lead Poisoning by Prohibiting the Sale and 
Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs. 
LD 958 is designed to help address a gap in Maine’s lead ﬁshing tackle laws that allows for the 
sale and use of painted lead jigs. Following a ﬁve-year phase-out process, it has been illegal to 
sell and/or use lead sinkers and bare “unpainted ” jigs (weighing less than an ounce in weight or 
measuring less than 2 1/». inches in length) in Maine since 2017. 
Phasing out lead ﬁshing tackle has been and continues to be an important conservation measure 
for Maine’s Common Loons. Lead poisoning has long been one of the leading causes of death 
for adult loons in our state. Loons ingest a striking amount of ﬁshing tackle — lead and otherwise 
— that is either lost or left behind or is in ﬁsh that have ingested tackle. Despite Maine’s existing 
lead tackle laws, educational campaigns and lead buyback programs, lead poisoning continues to 
be one of the leading causes of death in loons where the ultimate cause of death could be 
determined. 
Recent studies have shown that a paint coating on ﬁshing gear, speciﬁcally jigs, does NOT 
prevent the exposure of a lead content core during the digestive process of the Common Loon. 
This bill addresses this loophole and phases out painted lead jigs, speciﬁcally using the same 
methodology used in 2013. 
LD 958 is a common-sense adjustment to Maine’s lead ﬁshing tackle laws. It prohibits the sale 
of small-sized painted lead jigs by September 1, 2024 and the use of small-sized painted lead jigs 
by September 1, 2026. Additionally, this bill would not add any new responsibilities for game 
wardens, as its enforcement is compatible with lead tackle laws already on the books. 
District 49: Arrowsic, Georgetown, Phippsburg, West Bath and Woolwich
Since the enactment of the earlier bill to ban lead tackle, lead-free tackle alternatives have 
become more widely available, especially lead-free jigs. Prices are comparable, with some 
alternatives costing less than a dollar, and supplies are getting easier to ﬁnd as more states— 
including New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts and others — pass and expand regulations to 
limit toxic lead tackle. As the market grows for lead-free tackle, economies of scale will also 
likely continue to help to bring relative costs down. 
Additionally, programs are in place to provide lead-free tackle samples at no cost to anglers and 
to swap out lead tackle for non-toxic alternatives. Maine Audubon and the Maine Department of 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIFW) have partnered with Maine-based tackle shops to 
provide a $10 store voucher to any person who turns in one ounce or more of lead ﬁshing tackle 
(including lead jigs and sinkers containing any amount of lead). 
It is clear that the continued presence of lead — speciﬁcally lead painted jigs ~ in Maine’s lakes 
and ponds is negatively impacting the health and survival of loons in Maine. Commons Loons 
are an iconic wildlife species in Maine. Protecting wildlife — especially those that are closely tied 
with the Pine Tree State ~ is an essential principle of our state’s shared vision to conserve 
priority wildlife species and habitats. This bill is an opportunity to help us exemplify that. 
Mainers care deeply about this iconic species and are eager to support initiatives like this one to 
help protect Common Loons. We have an opportunity to tackle this loophole and put an end to 
these avoidable deaths. 
Thank you for your time. I am happy to take any questions you may have. 
District 49: Arrowsic, Georgetown, Phippsburg, West Bath and Woolwieh
