Testimony to the Inland Fisheries & Wildlife Committee in favor of Legislative Document No. 
958 (H.P. 605) An Act to Expand Protections to Maine’s Loons from Lead Poisoning by 
Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs 
 
Dear IF&W Committee Members, 
 
I write today in support of the Act to protect Maine’s loons by strengthening the prohibition of use and 
sale of lead fishing tackle by closing the painted lead jig loophole. I am the Director of the Somes 
Meynell Wildlife Sanctuary on Mt. Desert Island and two of our major activities are the study of loon 
behavior and reproductive success in territories on MDI’s lakes and a collaborative effort with Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife, College of the Atlantic, and retired Tufts University wildlife veterinarian Dr. Mark 
Pokras to necropsy loons who die in Maine to ascertain as best as possible the cause(es) of death; and to 
collect tissue samples for numerous studies around the country. Many of the loons necropsied over the 
past two years have died from lead poisoning, usually caused by the ingestion of lead jigs consumed as a 
result of eating a fish with an embedded lure. 
 
A very important part of the loon digestive system is the muscular gizzard chamber that is filled with 
small stones for grinding up fish bones, crayfish and crab shells, and other hard to digest prey parts. If a 
fish is eaten that has a lead jig in it (the fish broke off the fishing line and survived to be later captured by 
a loon), the fish will be digested but the lead jig usually remains in the gizzard.  
The stones that surround other gizzard contents grind everything up gradually. They can even break down 
steel fishhooks into small pieces and the stones themselves get ground smaller requiring the acquisition 
(swallowing) of new larger stones periodically. Paint on a jig does not stay in place long due to abrasion, 
and whatever barrier value the paint (sometimes also made with lead) had is removed quickly. Tufts 
University student Jillian Hojsak has simulated the erosion of paint off the surface of various size lead 
jigs in rock tumblers and found that the jigs became unpainted in short order. 
Loons who ingest lead sinkers from the bottom of a lake (thinking they are suitable "stones" to go along 
with the others in their gizzard) or ingest a fish with a lead jig die within a few weeks, as lead leaches into 
the bloodstream and multiple systems fail due to the poisoning. The loss of a territorial, breeding loon on 
our lakes is particularly damaging due to reduced capacity to produce chicks as a result of disrupted pair 
bonding and territorial knowledge of the best place to nest (not many suitable locations).  
I posted photos showing effects of lead jigs in loons in two posts to the Sanctuary Facebook Page 
(https://www.facebook.com/somesmeynellwildlifesanctuary/ ) this morning if you would like to see 
relevant photos and descriptions. 
Thank you for addressing this loophole and providing better protection for Maine’s loons and other 
wildlife.  
 
Sincerely, 
Billy Helprin 
 
 
Billy Helprin, Executive Director 
Somes-Meynell Wildlife Sanctuary 
P.O. Box 171, 57 Pretty Marsh Rd. 
Mt. Desert, ME 04660 
207.460.9390 
