 Testimony in Support of LD 958       
An Act to Expand Protections to Maine ’s Loons from Lead Poisoning                 
by Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs  
     Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, Members of the Committee on Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife:  My name is Diane Winn. From February of 1999 through April of 2022, I was the Executive 
Director of Avian Haven, a wild bird rehabilitation center in Freedom. Avian Haven currently admits 
about 3,300 injured, sick, or orphaned individuals annually, and, on the basis of case load, is the 
largest wild bird rehab center in northern New England. Avian Haven works closely with the biologists 
and game wardens of MDIFW, having contacts in all of the state ’s regions. Common Loons are 
among my species of expertise as a wildlife rehabilitator, and I have been a primary caregiver of loons 
admitted to Avian Haven throughout the time frame noted above. In that capacity, I have collaborated 
on numerous loon cases over the years, not only with MDIFW personnel, but also with the loon team 
of Biodiversity Research Institute, with New Hampshire ’s Loon Preservation Committee, and with the 
Vermont Center for Ecostudies. I retired as Avian Haven ’s Executive Director in 2022, but am still 
considered the organization ’s loon specialist.  
     Since 2000, Avian Haven has admitted a total of 455 Common Loons, of which 41 
have presented with ingested lead sinkers or jigs and extremely high blood lead 
levels. Lead exposures are confirmed with in -house x -rays and measurements of 
blood lead levels (photos to right). Loons with lead poisoning are found beached 
or sometimes floating listlessly close to shore. They appear to be debilitated and 
often seem to have difficulty breathing. By the time they are incapacitated to this 
point, their blood lead levels are almost always beyond the upper limit of the 
LeadCare ® II screening instrument we use, which is 65 µg/dl (micrograms per 
deciliter). The loons admitted to Avian Haven with lead poisoning over the years 
have originated from many locations statewide, including several of the Belgrade 
Lakes, Lake St. George, Crystal Lake, Sebec Lake, and Megunticook Lake. 
Admission dates range from late June through mid -September.  
     Lead poisoning in wildlife is treated just as it is in humans —with a chelating drug that binds with 
lead ions to form a nontoxic compound that can be excreted. When lead poisoning is confirmed in a 
loon admitted to Avian Haven, chelation therapy is implemented. Ultimately, however, in order for 
chelation to be successful, lead must be removed from the bird ’s GI tract, specifically, from the 
gizzard, a specialized muscular stomach that also contains small rocks eaten to aid digestion of fish. 
Options for removal of sinkers and jigs from loons are limited. In general, these objects are too large 
and heavy to be defecated, even if the bird is given laxatives. Endoscopy is a possibility, but is time - 
consuming and requires considerable skill. Surgical removal is a theoretical option, but these birds are 
almost always too debilitated to be candidates for surgery. Current standard practice is removal by 
gastric lavage —a stomach flush.  
   The basic procedure is shown in this photo of a loon recued in 
2021 from Wesserunsett Lake. A general anesthetic is delivered via 
a tube inserted into the trachea. The anesthetized bird is positioned 
at a downward angle, and a second tube is directed from the mouth, 
through the esophagus, and into the gizzard. The other end of this 
second tube is connected to a faucet. Body -temperature water      
delivered under pressure from the faucet to the gizzard flows back 
out of the mouth by gravity, carrying the contents of the gizzard.  
LeadCare® II  
   Sadly, despite lavage and chelation, none of the lead -poisoned 
loons admitted to Avian Haven over the years have survived. Lethal 
damage to body systems had already been done by the time the 
birds were rescued. But no matter how grim the prognosis, knowing 
that the loon will certainly perish if the object is not removed is an 
incentive to make the effort. The lavage technique has become 
standard operating procedure at Avian Haven (as well as at other 
top-notch facilities).      Those contents will include the small rocks mentioned previously as well 
as the sinker or jig. The procedure is a four -person job —someone holds the 
bird, someone controls the flow of water from the faucet, someone monitors 
the patient ’s vital signs, and someone controls the lavage tube. The flush 
itself takes just a few minutes compared to the much longer time required for 
endoscopy. We performed our first lavage at Avian Haven in 2012; in the decade 
since then, we have removed lead objects from another 10 loons. A few of those 
objects are shown below. Sometimes, other pieces of fishing gear are also flushed,  
as was the case with the 2022 loon from Great Pond (photo to the right).  
      It is important today to note that Avian Haven has admitted lead -poisoned loons in the last 10 
years with roughly the same frequency as over the years prior to the 2013 legislation —an average of 
just under two per year. It is tempting to speculate that this continuing trend reflects, at least in part, a 
failure of paint to seal off the toxic component of the object. Such speculation notwithstanding, 
however, perhaps the most important thing I can share with you today is a description of what 
happens to a loon that has ingested a lead sinker or jig after mistaking it for a small rock.  
     The rocks in the gizzard quickly grind lead from the object. Toxic metal is absorbed through the 
digestive system; from there, it is distributed to other parts of the body, affecting virtually all organ 
systems, particularly the circulatory system and the nervous system. Just as it does in people, lead 
damages red blood cells and interrupts the formation of new ones, which produces anemia.  Damage 
to the nervous system causes, among other symptoms, muscle weakness and loss of coordination. 
These loons are lethargic, unable to fly or dive, and sometimes incapable of even holding their heads 
up. Their beathing is labored.    
     Ironically, the term “leaden ” is an apt descriptor of lead -poisoned loons; 
they are listless, sluggish, and “leaden -eyed ” (an adjective that in other 
contexts means dull -eyed or heavy -eyed). That look is evident even in photos 
of lead -poisoned loons. Seeing loons in this condition can be very upsetting 
to members of the public. They may express disbelief that lead fishing gear is 
still in use, given all that is known about lead poisoning in children and adult 
humans, and the many other efforts to remove lead from the environment.  
   Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, Committee Members:  
Thank you for allowing me to provide testimony on behalf of Maine ’s 
loons. I implore you to vote in favor of LD 958.     The proposed legislation, like the one in 2013, may cause some minor  
inconvenience in tackle -swapping, and perhaps a small added expense. 
However, I believe that none of that would seem important to people who 
held a loon dying of lead poisoning in their arms to witness, close up, a    
life ending because of toxic lead fishing gear.  
D.w. 
