May 8, 2023 
Good Morning, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and Members of the Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife Committee: 
My name is Elizabeth Neale Pollock and I support LD 958 to prohibit the sale and use of painted 
lead jigs for ﬁshing. 
I am the Coordinator of both the annual Loon Count on Cobbosseeconte Lake as well as the 
Coordinator of the Loon Restoration Project here on Cobbosseeconte. I am president of Friends 
of the Cobbossee Watershed board and head of Lake Health for the Cobbossee Lake Association. 
But I am here today as a proud citizen of the state of Maine. 
Historically, Cobbosseconte Lake has had one of the largest loon populations in the state of 
Maine. In the last few years, each annual count has alarmingly shown smaller numbers of both 
adult and chick loons. 
Cobbosseeconte Lake is one of the most popular ﬁshing lakes in the state. It is about 5,000 plus 
acres, easily accessible from both 95 and 295 and has a history of successful ﬁshing tournaments 
over the years. 
While large boat wakes have undoubtedly had some effect on nesting loon populations over the 
last few years, lead poisoning has long been one of the leading causes of death for adult loons in 
Maine. Loons ingest a striking amount of ﬁshing tackle that is either lost or left behind. Some of 
this tackle contains hazardous and life threatening lead. 
When the ultimate cause of death of loons can be determined, lead poisoning continues to be one 
of the leading causes of death. Once having consumed lead, loons experience a 2-4 week slow 
death, causing blindness, paralysis, seizures and “wing droop” during this painful and preventable 
death. 
Death of these magniﬁcent birds, which represent Maine as an iconic symbol is avoidable. 
Unpainted jigs have been now outlawed since 2017. Both experts and current research indicate 
there is a remaining impact on loon life across our state due to this loophole in the law to continue 
the use of painted jigs. 
It has been l0 years since the last bill to protect loons was passed. We must revisit this loophole 
in the existing law to turther protect the health and safety of this beloved bird here in Maine. 
I grew up hearing the call of loons on our lake. It was inspiring, jaw dropping and a sound never 
to forget. My children and grandchildren know and love this bird, its call, and it's graceful 
presence. Losing just one more elegant and exquisite loon to the fate of a painful death due to 
painted led jigs is something I know you will consider most important for now, and for the future 
of both loons and their human admirers here in Maine. 
Sincerely, 
Elizabeth Neale Pollock
