MAINEQ 
AUDUBON 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
% Legislative Information Oﬁice 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
May 8, 2023 
RE: LD 958, An Act to Expand Protections to Maine ’s Loons from Lead Poisoning by Prohilaiting the 
Sale and Ufve of Certain Painted Lead jigs 
Dear Chair LaFountain, Chair Landry, and Members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee: 
My name is Francesca Gundrum and I am Maine Audubon’s Policy Advocate. Maine 
Audubon is a wildlife conservation non-proﬁt - we fulﬁll our mission to “conserve Maine’s wildlife 
and wildlife habitat” by engaging people of all ages in nature through a science—based approach to 
education, conservation, and advocacy. On behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 members, 
supporters, and volunteers, thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 958, 
An Act to Expand Protection: to M aineiv Loons from Lead Poisoning by Prohibiting the Sale and Use of 
Certain Painted Lead figs. 
Common Loons hold a special place in the hearts and minds of all who see and hear them. 
Their striking plumage, soulful cries, and ability to seemingly vanish under water have inspired legends 
of magic, mysticism, and creation for many centuries. For the past 40 years, Maine Audubon has 
worked to assess the status and safeguard the future of Maine’s loon population. Through the Maine 
Loon Project we work with residents and partners statewide to promote healthy lakes, clean water, and 
quality habitat for loons and to understand trends in their population over time. Across Maine, there 
are roughly 1,500 loon conservation volunteers that dedicate time and energy to observing and 
protecting Common Loons. Mainers care deeply about this iconic species and are eager to support 
initiatives - like this bill — to help protect Common Loon habitat and health. LD 958 will help 
expand protections to Maine’s Common Loons by closing a deadly loophole in Maine’s lead 
ﬁshing tackle laws.v 
ISSUE SUMMARY 
For every ﬁve loons killed by other causes, including illness, old age, other loons, disease, 
injuries, boat collisions, disturbance, or predators, one loon is killed by ingesting lead ﬁshing tackle. 
Z0 Gilslancl Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 ' 
(Z07) 781-Z330 ° maineaudubonorg
MAINEQ 
AUDUBON 
Characteristic signs of lead poisoning include: disorientation, heavy breathing, weakness, paralysis, 
regurgitation, extreme thirst, seizures, blindness, vocal changes, and “wing droop.” Loons typically die 
Within 2-4 Weeks of ingesting lead ﬁshing tackle. 
4‘ />v»4 
This loon was found by dedicated loon volunteers on Great 
Pond in Belgrade, ME in September, 2022. With a “sky high” 
blood test For lead poisoning directly attributed to ingestion 
of both -.1 lead sinker and jig, there was no other option than 
to euthanize the bird to put it out of its misery. 
L___ 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 ' 
(207) 781-Z330 ° m;1ineaudub0n.org
MAINEQ 
AUDUBON 
Throughout the spring and 
summer months, loons routinely Bare/Unpainted Lead Jig Painted Lead Jig 
gather and swallow pebbles from the - \\ I‘ 
beds oflakcs and ponds throughoutI
\
I 
Maine. These gritty-substancesr 
. ). 
collect in the loon s gizzard where QO both acidic reactions and muscular s* 
__ 
contractions help aid digestion and 
nutrient absorption. Unfortunately, 
loons are not only collecting pebbles 
when they perform this necessary behavior. Loons ingest a striking amount of ﬁshing tackle that is lost 
or left behind, or is in ﬁsh that have ingested tackle, some of which contain hazardous and life 
threatening chemicals — chief among them are those manufactured with lead. 
Of the lead objects taken from loons that died from lead poisoning between 1987-2013, more 
than half (58%) were lead-headed jigs. Recent mortality data collected by the Maine Department of 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIFW), Tufts Veterinary Clinic, Center for Wildlife, Biodiversity 
Research Institute (BRI), wildlife rehabilitation clinics, and others indicate that the continued 
presence of lead in Maine’s lakes and ponds is negatively impacting the health and survival of loons in 
Maine. In 2013, researchers determined that lead poisoning was the ultimate cause of death in ~30% of 
Common Loon mortalities in Maine. Based on soon-to-be released data, lead poisoning was 
determined the ultimate cause of death in ~1S% of known Common Loon mortalities in 
Maine from 2017-2022 — the years since the current ban went fully into effect. 
LEGAL BACKGROUND 
In 2002, lead sinkers weighing less than ‘/2 an oz. were banned. Following a ﬁve-year phase-out 
process, it has been illegal to sell and/or use lead sinkers and bare “unpainted ” jigs (weighing less than 
an ounce in weight or measuring less than 2 ‘/2 inches in length) in Maine since 2017. While this law 
and subsequent education and lead—buyback programs have proven effective in many ways, a loophole 
allows for the sale and use of painted lead jigs within these size and weight limitations, which both 
experts conclude and research indicate are still impacting loons. 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmoutli, Maine 04105 ' 
(207) 781-2330 ' maineaudubonorg
MAI NEQ AUDUB ON 
THE PROBLEM WITH PAINTED LEAD JIGS 
Despite speciﬁc exclusion from Maine’s lead tackle laws, wildlife biologists and 
researchers have long believed that lead jigs coated with a layer of paint are just as deadly to 
loons as bare, “unpainted ” lead jigs. A recent study conducted at the Cummings School of 
Veterinary Medicine at Tufts University addressed this very issue. Experts in wildlife toxicology found 
that a paint coating on ﬁshing gear, speciﬁcally jigs, does not prevent the exposure of a lead-content 
core during the digestive process of the Common Loon. The paint sloughs off quickly in a loon’s 
digestive system through the work of both stomach acids and mechanical scouring by lake pebbles, 
which are ingested and stored in the loon’s gizzard to help break up food: 
“This study simulated the function of the loon gizzard in order to document the extent to whicha 
jigivpaint coat, hoo/2, and lead core degrade and lose mass within a seven day testing period. 
Lortone 3A Rotary Roc/e Tumblers were used to simulate the gizzard is digestive action. Small 
quartzite rocks and an H Cl acid solution placed in the tumblers simulated the materials that are 
normally jbund in loon gizzards. This study in vestzgated to what extent the rocks and acidic 
environment of the loon giuzard and a simulated contraction of its thic/e muscular walls will 
erode the paint within a week of ingestion. Both sale and usage of lead ﬁshing gear need to be 
prohibited across the common loons’range, regardless of a paint c0at”(H0jsak 8c Pokras, 2022— 
I n Press). 
Painted lead jig AFTER tumbler. 
Painted lead jig BEFORE tumbler. 
NON-TOXIC TACKLE ALTERNATIVES 
Lead-free tackle alternatives have become more Widely available, especially lead-free jigs. Lead-free jigs 
are made in a variety of metals ~ such as tin, bismuth, tungsten, steel, and others — by large and small 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 ° 
(207) 781-2330 = maineauclubonorg
MAINEQ 
AUDUBON 
businesses in the U.S. and Canada. Prices are often comparable with some alternatives costing less than 
a dollar. Supplies are getting easier to ﬁnd as more states — including New Hampshire, Vermont, 
Massachusetts, and others — pass and expand regulations to limit toxic lead tackle. As the market grows 
for lead-free tackle, economies of scale will also likely continue to help to bring relative costs down.
n Compa y Jig Type t \MaterialI*f 9 
Costl 
g p r i# per Cost Each 
ti 
Size P Package i 
Cabelas/ Eagle Claw Tin 1/+ oz. $6.99 8 $0.87 
Bass Pro Painted Tin 
Shops Round 
Jighead 
Assortment 
Cabelas/ Bass Pro Lead ‘/¢ oz. $4.89 10 $0.49 
Bass Pro Shops 
Shops Painted 
Jigheads 
10-Pack 
Table 1. Comparison between costs of the cheapest lead and tin painted ﬁshing jigs weighing ‘/4 oz sold 
online at Cabelas and Bass Pro Shops. 
EDUCATIONAL AND LEAD BUYBACK PROGRAMS 
In addition to legislative efforts to address this issue, a diverse group of stakeholders have invested and 
championed educational and lead tackle buy-back and exchange programing to encourage public 
knowledge and compliance. Created nearly a decade ago, Fish Lead-Free is a region-wide cooperative 
partnership designed to help anglers switch to lead-free tackle. Maine’s participating partners include 
Maine Audubon, MDIFVV, the U.S. Fish 8: Wildlife Service (USFWS), Maine Lakes, B.A.S.S. Youth 
Nation, Sportsmen ’s Alliance of Maine, and The Maine Sportsman. 
For several years now, Maine Audubon staff have attended angling tournaments, sportsmen shows, and 
more all around the state to help educate the public about lead-free tackle alternatives, help retailers 
participate in buy-back programs, attend outdoor industry events, help anglers exchange their tackle, 
provide lead-free products, help manage collection bins for lead-based tackle throughout the state, and 
more. Fish Lead Free has partnered with Maine-based tackle shops to provide a $10 store 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmoutli, Maine 04105 ' 
(207) 781-2330 ° maineaudubonorg
MAINEQ 
AUDUBON 
voucher to any person who turns in one ounce or more of lead ﬁshing tackle (including lead 
jigs and sinkers containing any amount of lead) and/or provide lead-free tackle samples at no 
cost to anglers who swap out lead tackle for non-toxic alternatives. 
Between three sportsmen shows this year alone — thanks to all the anglers who hrought u: lead — we have 
collected a total 31 lbs., 13.1 oz , an estimated total of 2,050 pieces of lead. The Augusta show traded in 
30 lb, 4oz, or roughly 2,000 pieces; Orono had 15.7 oz, or 27 pieces; and Presque Isle brought in 9.4 oz, 
about 22 pieces. That’s 2,050 pieces that loons won’t mistake for grit to help digest their food. It only 
takes one small piece of ingested lead for a loon to experience the effects of lead poisoning — We are 
proud of our collective progress and this program. 
THE TIME IS RIGHT TO CLOSE THE PAINTED LEAD JIG LOOPHOLE. 
Loon Health and I/Velfare 
There are ﬁve species ofloons in the world, but only the Common Loon breeds in Maine. Common 
Loons are protected by both state and federal laws prohibiting harassment ofwildlife, yet they facea 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 ' 
(207) 7812330 - maineaudubon.org
MAINEQ AUDUBON 
myriad of challenges — lead is an obstacle that we can collectively address. Maine’s 2015-2025 
Wildlife Action Plan designates the Common Loon as a Priority Level 3 Species of Greatest 
Conservation Need (SGCN). Efforts to address lead poisoning are in line with the necessary aid and 
attention that accompanies said designation. 
From trauma caused by boat strikes, climate change impacts, habitat loss, mercury, nest washouts from 
boat wakes, etc., loons face tremendous obstacles when it comes to hatching and raising chicks on 
Maine’s lakes and ponds throughout the spring and summer months. Additionally, Common Loons 
do not reach breeding age until they are ~6-7 years old, which is signiﬁcantly later than other water 
birds. Addressing preventable threats will help this species survive long enough to contribute 
to the population and mitigate the compounding impacts faced by loons. 
To put a ﬁner point on elevated concerns regarding climate change-related impacts to loons, the species 
is predicted to shift their breeding range north of Maine by 2050 at current planet-warming emissions 
projections. These trends indicate that one day, loons may no longer breed in Maine. Loons that are 
adjusting to climate challenges may be less resilient to those challenges if they are simultaneously 
combatting other signiﬁcant challenges — like lead poisoning. Addressing other major threats to loons 
should be part of the strategy to help Maine’ s wildlife adapt to climate change. 
Despite Maine’s existing lead tackle laws and educational campaigns, lead poisoning continues 
to be a leading cause of death in loons where the ultimate cause of death could be determined. 
As stated, It takes 2-4 weeks for adult loons to die once they consume lead. Loons suffer terribly 
throughout this unusually painful and cruel process. Undoubtedly, there are loons that die from lead 
poisoning that are never recovered and therefore not included in mortality data, so lead poisoning 
could play more of a role in loon mortality than data suggests. Additionally, other ﬁsh-eating birds can 
consume prey with tackle in their bodies, thus this issue likely extends beyond loon mortality. Wildlife 
biologists have shared that in cases where loon carcasses are not recovered, lead can reenter the larger 
ecosystem when the loon decomposes and potentially be picked up by other wildlife, perpetuating a 
cycle of poisoning. Lead can kill more than once. 
Banning the use and sale of painted jigs weighing an ounce or less or measuring 2.5” or less 
sends a clearer message to anglers about Maine’s commitment to preventing avoidable deaths 
of loons and other wildlife from lead tackle and a more clear-cut directive for achieving that 
goal. 
20 Giisland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 ' 
(207) 781-2330 ' maineaudubon.org
MAINEQ 
AUDUBON 
Culture and Health of Recreational Communities 
Hunters and anglers have contributed immensely to conservation efforts. The preventable suffering of 
loons by lead tackle is out of step with the overarching ethic of the hunting and angling community. 
This bill is an opportunity to continue advancing positive perceptions of hunting and ﬁshing 
culture and stewardship across Maine. 
Additionally, no amount of lead is safe for humans. Lead is a pollutant regulated by the U.S. 
Environmental Protect Agency (EPA), which has overseen the removal of lead from gasoline, paint, 
homes, cars, and other products. A growing body of evidence suggests that even low doses of lead 
exposure can lead to physical and cognitive impairments in humans — underestimating the potential 
hazards of handling lead ﬁshing gear is dangerous. Eradicating hazardous gear from our tackle boxes 
and beyond will help protect the health of our anglers — including children who are especially sensitive 
to lead exposure - and our recreational communities. 
Broad Show of Support for Expanding Protections to Common Loom 
Commons Loons are an iconic wildlife species in Maine. Protecting wildlife — especially those that are 
tied to the Pine Tree State - is an essential principle of our state’ s shared vision to conserve priority 
wildlife species and habitats. 
There are more than 1,500 loon conservation volunteers that dedicate time and energy to 
observing and protecting Common Loons all across Maine — these people care deeply about 
this iconic species and are eager to support this initiative. 
Nearly two dozen lake and pond associations signed a letter in support of this bill (see attached). More 
than 1,000 Mainers added their name to a petition in support ofLD 958. Anglers and bait shop 
owners have publicly voiced their support for LD 958 (see attached OpEd). Dozens have submitted 
supportive testimony and more is expected in the coming days 
As you will hear today, Mainers care deeply about this iconic species and are eager to support initiatives 
— like this one — to help protect Common Loons. The continued presence of lead — speciﬁcally lead 
painted jigs — in Maine’s lakes and ponds is negatively impacting the health and survival ofloons in 
Maine. Death by lead poisoning is avoidable. 
Z0 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 " 
(Z07) 781-Z330 - maineaudubonorg
MAINEQ 
AUDUBON 
We have the power to put a stop to these traumatic and miserable endings for this beloved 
Maine species. We urge the Committee to support this bill. Thank you for your time and I am happy 
to answer any questions. 
Sincerely, 
%w»~»6?%~1>» 
Francesca “Ches” Gundrum 
Policy Advocate 
20 Gilslancl Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 ' 
(207) 781-2330 ° maineauclubonorg
P0i»i€dApri|23 
Maine Voices: What would fishing in Maine be 
without the wildlife? 
Lead poisoning from fishing has for years been one of the leading causes of loon deaths. We want to 
change that. 
BYJON LUND. WILL LUND, NICK LUND AND ELLIOTT LUND SPECIAL TO THE TELEGRAM I 
ABOUTTHEAUTHORS u u u A E E E E 
Jon Lund is a resident of Hallowell, Will Lund of Portland and Nick Lund and Elliott Lund are 
residents of Cumberland. 
The most senior of four generations of ﬁshermen in our family, Jon Lund, began ﬁshing 
in Maine in l935. 
In his time he has ﬁshed all over the state, catching just . . 
. . . Elliott (then 4) and h1s great- 
about every kind oi ﬁsh on every kind of r1g. The grandpa Jon (then 93)ﬁshing1aSt 
youngest of us, Elliott, _]LlS'[ ﬁve years old, began ﬁshing summer on Cobbosseecontee 
this past summer but looked every bit the Lak°- Ph°t° °°“"°$Y °fN1°k Lund 
experienced angler as he yanked sunﬁsh 
after sunﬁsh out of the water using a worm 
on a stick rod. In between, Jon’s son Will 
has ﬁshed his whole life and currently runs 
the Maine Sportsman magazine, and 
Will’s son Nick is the advocacy and 
outreach manager for Maine Audubon. 
Of all the things we’ve learned in our 
combined decades of ﬁshing — the knots, 
the lure techniques, the secret spots — the 
most important lesson might be that the 
best part of ﬁshing isn’t catching the ﬁsh, 
it’s being outside in Maine. 
If you’re ﬁshing, you’re not behind your 
desk but are out on the water. Even when 
the ﬁsh aren’t biting (and even young 
Elliott has learned that, sometimes, they 
just don’t bite), you’re still outwith the 
birds and the beavers and the frogs and
other creatures. 
One of the most beloved of those creatures, the Common Loon, is being accidentally 
injured by ﬁshermen across the state. 
Loons lack teeth and can’t chew their food, so they eat small stones that help to grind 
food up in the loon’s gizzard. When anglers lose a ﬁshing lure made of lead, the pieces 
can end up in the gizzards of loons either when they eat a ﬁsh that has swallowed a lead 
ﬁshing lure or when the loon accidentally plucks a lead lure off of the lake bottom for use 
in their gizzard. It takes just one or two pieces of lead to poison a loon, and it most often 
leads to an agonizing death in a matter of weeks. 
Lead poisoning has for years been one of the leading causes of loon mortality. The 
legislature took action in 2017, banning the sale of lead sinkers and jigs under 2.5 inches. 
Problem solved, right‘? Wrong. A loophole was included in the bill before it was passed 
that only banned the sale of unpainted lead tackle; sinkers and jigs covered in paint could 
still be sold. The trouble is, from the loon’s perspective, that paint doesn’t do anything to 
make the tackle any safer. Birds continue to be poisoned. 
A new bill working its way through the legislature seeks to close this deadly loophole. 
Sponsored by Rep. Allison Hepler, LD 958 — An Act to Expand Protections to Maine’s 
Loons from Lead Poisoning by Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs 
— would expand existing Maine law to phase out the sale, and eventually the use, of 
small-sized painted lead ﬁshing tackle and keep these harmful metals out of the water. 
We believe that this is the right change to make to protect one of our most iconic species. 
Non-toxic tackle alternatives are already becoming widely available thanks to laws in 
Maine and other New England states, and there are buy-back programs available through 
the Fish Lead Free group that can help anglers with information and product testing. 
We can do this, and we should. Fishing in Maine just wouldn’t be the same without the 
other wildlife, like loons, that go with it, and we owe it to ourselves and to the creatures 
we ﬁsh alongside to ensure that our activities aren’t harmful. We’re four generations of 
Maine ﬁshermen, but there are many more to come. Those future anglers deserve the 
same enjoyable experience on a Maine lake that we do — whether or not the ﬁsh are 
biting.
W‘ e §‘ 
May 8, 2023 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee 
Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: Expanding Protections for Maine’s Common Loons from Lead Poisoning (LD 958) 
On behalf of our organizations ’ members and supporters, we want to express our support for LD 958, An Act 
to Expand Protections to Maine's Loons from Lead Poisoning by Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain 
Painted Lead jigs. 
Many of the thousands lakes and ponds in Maine support nesting pairs of Common Loons, and their annual 
return is met with great joy. Our members follow the lives of loons with great interest, and work to help count 
loon pairs each year, identify and protect nests, slow our boat speeds near loons, and take other steps to ensure 
their well-being. Common Loons are central to the Maine brand and critical for our tourism and outdoor 
economy. Birdwatchers, anglers, and lake visitors actively search out lakes where loons nest, and support 
community businesses in the process. Renters seek out lakes where Common Loons are nesting, in part because 
they want to witness diligent loon parents feeding and carting their chicks around the lake on their backs and 
hear the wailing cries of loons calling to each other as they drift off to sleep. Yet loons face tremendous obstacles 
throughout the spring and summer months, including from trauma caused by boat strikes, climate change 
impacts, habitat loss, mercury, nest washouts from boat wakes, and more. It' s essential that we do all we can to 
keep Common Loons returning to our lakes and ponds each year. 
But local engagement is not sufficient. We need the help of Maine’s State Legislature to reduce the threat 
of lead poisoning, one of the top threats to loons in Maine. Loons ingest a striking amount of ﬁshing tackle 
that is either lost or left behind, or in ﬁsh that have ingested tackle. When swallowing small pebbles from the 
lakebed to aid their digestion, loons can sometimes accidentally swallow lead tackle that has mixed into the 
lakebed, and become poisoned. Some of this tackle contains hazardous and life threatening chemicals — chief 
among them is lead. 
The problem was partially addressed most recently in 2013, when the state banned the sale of small~sized bare 
lead sinkers and jigs, but a loophole for painted jigs remains. Paint coatings do not prevent the exposure ofa 
lead-content core during the digestive process of the Common Loon, and thus does nothing to reduce the 
danger from lead tackle. Loons remain at risk as long as painted lead tackle continues to ﬁnd its way into our 
lakes and ponds. 
LD 958 closes this regretful loophole and helps ensure that our state’ s beloved loons will be visiting 
Maine lakes and ponds for generations to come. We urge your support. 
Sincerely,
:41 
"' 
Alamoosook Lake Association 
‘G-ENTE:RlFRee 
Wl Alford Lake Lermond Pond Association 
EST. 1986 CAPE NEDDICK, ME 
Avian Haven 
0
E
E                
Center for Wildlife 
Chemo Pond Lake Association 
Franklin Toddy Pond Association 
Friends of Lake Winnecook 
Greater Pushaw Lake Association 
/63:33"' 
!I{|‘ “-31:3,} 
ﬁl 2'? 1' K:§\ 
1"I 
/if ' l" 
.,1 Georges Pond Association
I
1 
| Lakes Environmental Association 
i,;»= 1;" ,-q’ .,_»r' 
¥ r_\,< ,n _.v'I;§§E}I-'/' 
Long Pond Lake Association 
Pond AS$“"Iaﬁ°" Maine Audubon 5. A »/2 
Maine Maine Lakes
E
“ _Z
5 
ta" A» 
. . 
- 
Maine Rivers 
_, Parker Pond Association 
4;, _ t - I 
Three Mile Pond Association 
~. QOQ Q 
Rivers     
"1‘JII,'2 
mation,- - #:=l:;gi1ar§TI\Y €iiar- Audu1 
Francesca "Ches" Gundru ' 
aI: _ ' 
if - mai MAI NE           
Avrﬁiﬁ 4%/;mv WILD BIRD REHABILITATION CENTER 
418 North Palermo Road I 
Freedom, Mame 04941 
LQEQAi
t 
._..;__>a2___, I \~; \1:M\<;;:;;' ,,/;f@3~,g ‘                
~*" 
ii 
ASSO(IIAI'IOI\I 
AUDoN
P 
, 3*"
at
