TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 958 
"An Act to Expand Protections to Maine's Loons from Lead Poisoning" 
SPONSORED BY: Representative HEPLER of Woolwich 
CO-SPONSORED BY: Senator INGWERSEN of York 
Senator: BLACK of Franklin 
Representative DILL of Old Town 
Representative DOUDERA of Camden 
Representative FAY of Raymond 
Representative LANDRY of Farmington 
Representative MASON of Lisbon 
Representative ROEDER of Bangor 
DATE OF HEARING: May 8, Z023 
Good morning Senator l.aFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife Committee. I am Francis Brautigam, Fisheries Director at the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in support of L.D. 958. 
As proposed this bill would amend existing statute adopted in 2013 to place additional 
restrictions on the use and sale of lead fishing tackle to further reduce loon mortalities caused 
by lead ingestion. 
The current law (Title 12, section 12664) precludes the sale and use of lead sinkers and bare 
(unpainted) lead jigs less than 1 ounce and less than 2.5 inches long. The proposed bill would 
extend the ban to include the sale and use of painted lead jigs. This measure would effectively 
eliminate the manufacturing for local distribution, sale, as well as the use of virtually all lead jigs 
used in Maine's inland waters. The current proposed ban was also considered in 2013, when 
only lead weights and unpainted jigs were banned. 
ln 2013 it was recognized that ingested lead causes mortalities in loons which-includes fishing 
sinkers, lead jigs, other lead fishing tackle, and shotgun pellets. Available studies in 2013 
indicated that lead poisoning from lead fishing sinkers and lead-headed fishingjigs was the 
leading cause of death for adult loons and was responsible for at least 28% of loon deaths
between 1987 and 2012. A recent 2021 study revealed that lead poisoning from lead fishing 
sinkers and lead—headed fishing jigs in Maine has declined to as low as 12%. This represents a 
57% decline in loon mortalities due to ingestion of lead fishing tackle since the adoption of the 
2013 ban. Furthermore, lead fishing tackle is no longer the leading cause of adult loon mortality 
in Maine. 
The common loon is not federally listed as Endangered, Threatened, or Special Concern in 
Maine or other states. However, while it is not state-listed in Maine, it is state-listed as 
"Threatened" in Michigan and New Hampshire, and a Species of Concern in seven states 
(Connecticut, Idaho, Massachusetts, Montana, New York, Washington, and Wyoming). 
Maine's loon population is robust with approximately 4,300 adults, representing about 75% of 
the territorial pairs in New England and New York. Thus, Maine is the stronghold for northeast 
breeding population. While the population is secure in Maine, the Department maintains a 
commitment to regional conservation, and as such loons are listed by the Department asa 
species of greatest conservation need. 
Lead poisoning from ingestion of lead fishing tackle is not likely having a population effect on 
loons in Maine; however, we do not know how the combination of multiple threats may affect 
the population in the future. While the 2013 ban on lead fishing tackle (particularly smaller lead 
weights) has significantly reduced this source of mortality, it remains a primary cause of 
mortality. Available information suggests painted coatings on jig heads are likely to dissolve in 
the presence of loon stomach acids, allowing the lead to be absorbed. 
The Department supports the intent of this legislation to further reduce lead in the environment 
and further reduce unintended impacts to loon from lead. However, general information 
provided by anglers, retailers, and the tackle manufacturers suggest there remain concerns 
regarding products to replace larger lead jigs that are a focus of this legislation, including 
reduced availability of lead-free alternatives. Some of the same concerns influenced the scope 
of the lead ban in 2013. 
Lead jigs are very popular and effective, particularly for those targeting bass and several other 
fish during both the open water and ice fishing seasons. As such many anglers have purchased 
an assortment of affordably priced lead jigs that that will no longer be legal under this bill. Also, 
the cost to replace them with non-lead alternatives will be considerably more. Continuing to 
educate the fishing public on Audubon's lead jig exchange program and encouraging a larger, 
more equitable exchange opportunity under this program may reduce the initial financial impact 
to the angling public and incentivize proper recycling of lead jigs while building broader support 
for this bill. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
