 
Loon     Loon Preservation Committee  
P.O. Box            P.O Box 604, Lee’s Mills Road, Moultonborough, NH03254  
603-476             476 -LOON (5666) / Fax 603 -476-5497  www.loon.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF LD 958  
AN ACT TO EXPAND PROTECTIONS TO MAINE’S LOONS FROM LEAD POISONING 
BY PROHIBITING THE SALE AND USE OF CERTAIN PAINTED LEAD JIGS  
 
BEFORE THE INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE COMMITTEE  
 
MONDAY, MAY 8TH, 2023  
 
Dear Chairman LaFount ain and Chairman Landry , 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 958 to prohibit the sale and 
use of certain painted lead jigs.  The Loon Preservation Committee  (LPC)  has been researching 
Common Loon mortality in New Hampshire since 198 9.  Since th en, lead fishing tackle has 
accounted for 39% of documented adult loon mortality in the state, the largest single cause of 
death for adult loons  in New Hampshire .   
 
Mortality from lead fishing tackle primarily affects adult loons, and  the viability of loon 
populations is driven by adult survival.   Loons are long -lived birds, with lifespans that can reach 
25-30 years.  They are also slow to mature, not reaching adulthood until they are 3 years old , and 
they do not start nesting on avera ge until they are 6 -7 years old.  Once they do begin to nest, 
loons on average produce only a single surviving chick every 2 years.  In short, loons are a very 
different type of bird than game birds like ducks or turkeys, and the survival of every adult is  
crucial to the population.  
 
This is why lead tackle mortality is so devastating to loons on a population level.  LPC published 
a paper in the  Journal of Wildlife Management  documenting that mortality from lead fishing 
tackle has had a population -level eff ect on New Hampshire’s loon population, inhibiting the 
recovery of the population and suppressing population growth.   Based on lead tackle mortalities 
and loon population numbers through 2012, we estimated that the state’s loon population would 
have been 4 3% higher had it not been for the loons that died of lead poisoning and the chicks 
they never produced.1 
 
The majority of New Hampshire  lead deaths over the years were caused by lead fishing jigs.  Of 
the 166 archived lead tackle objects removed from loons  that died of lead poisoning over the 
years, 102 ( 61%) of them have been lead jigs.  The evidence that paint does not provide any 
protective barrier to lead poisoning of loons was demonstra ted by an experiment conducted by 
Dr. Mark Pokras and Jillian Hojsa k of Tufts University, in which jigs were placed in a rock 
tumbler with acid simulating the conditions of a loon gizzard.  The paint was almost completely 
eroded from the jigheads within 3 days; and, over the course of 7 days, an average of 13 -25% of 
 
the mass of the jig was lost, depending on the size of the jig.  The majority of this mass would be 
lead available to go into a loon’s bloodstream, resulting in lead poisoning and death for the loon.   
None of the 102 archived jigs removed from New Hampshire loons retained paint on the jighead , 
an expected result consistent with the results of the Pokras and Hojsa k study .  Acids in the 
gizzards of the loons eroded the paint, along with lead from the jighead s, and the loon s all died 
of lead poisoning.    
 
Lead poisoning from fishing tackle is a major cause of adult loon mortality across their range.  A 
study published in 2019 reported that a quarter of documented adult loon mortalities in Maine 
resulted from lead fishing tackle.2 And i t is not only loons impacte d by lead fishing tackle.  The 
same 2019 study reported that 33 species of birds, 3 mammals, and 2 reptiles have been 
documented to have ingested lead fishing tackle.  
 
The Loon Preservation Committee supports LD 958 to prohibit the sale and use of certain 
painted lead jigs.  The evidence does not support the idea that a paint coating provides any 
protection to loons from lead poisoning.  This bill will prevent the needless suffering and death 
of many loons and other wildlife in Maine and protect Maine’s ico nic loon population.  Thank 
you again for the opportunity to submit testimony, and we respectfully ask the Committee to 
support this bill.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Harry Vogel  
Senior Biologist/Executive Director  
 
 
References:  
 
1Grade, T.J., M.A. Pokras, E.M. Laflam me, and H.S. Vogel. 2018. Population -level effects of 
lead fishing tackle on Common Loons. Journal of Wildlife Management  82:155 -164. 
 
2Grade, T., P. Campbell, T. Cooley, M. Kneeland, E. Leslie, B. MacDonald, J. Melotti, J. 
Okoniewski, E.J. Parmley, C. Per ry, H. Vogel, and M. Pokras. 2019. Lead poisoning from 
ingestion of fishing gear: a review. Ambio  48:1023 -1038.  
