 
SINCE 1871    Arts & Sciences    Business Administration    Engineering    Pharmacy    Law    onu.edu
            THE GETTY COLLEGE OF ARTS & 
SCIENCES 
 
                   The School of Science, Technology, and 
Mathematics 
 
 
  
May 7, 2023 
 
To Whom It May Concern, 
 
My name is Jay Mager, and I am a Professor of Biological Sciences at Ohio Northern University.  I 
am writing in support of the State of Maine’s 131st Legislature’s Legislative Document Number 958, 
An Act to Expand Protections to Maine’s Loons from Lead Poisoning by Prohibiting the Sale and 
Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs, presented to the House of Representatives on March 2, 2023. 
 
As a scientist who has spent the last 32 years conducting research to better understand the leading 
threats to loon survivorship and productivity, I have become acutely aware of some of the leading 
causes of Common Loon mortality in North America, including lead toxicity (see review by Paruk et 
al. https://doi.org/10.2173/bow.comloo.02 ).  Thankfully, the overwhelming scientific evidence 
demonstrating the harm that ingestion of lead fishing gear and tackle have had on the short- and 
long-term health of Common Loons in North America have led to actions such as the banning of the 
sale and use of certain types of lead fishing tackle among a number of states, including the Maine in 
2013 (LD 730, S.P. 268).   
 
While I am grateful for such actions, I am sorry to learn that within the State of Maine, the sale of 
painted lead jigs were exempt from such a ban.  As an ornithologist and loon biologist who has an 
understanding of the diet of Common Loons as well as someone who has seen radiographs of 
digested fishing tackle present in the gizzards of Common Loons, I believe that it is more than likely 
that any painting coating a lead object ingested by a Common Loon would be broken down/digested 
by the stones and acids within the gizzard of the Common Loon within a very short time period.  The 
caustic acids within the gizzard are extremely powerful, as they are necessary to digest material such 
as fish scales, fish bones, and crayfish carapaces (and unfortunately lead), and the stones within the 
gizzard, like a rock tumbler, mechanically digest materials such as stainless steel.  I would guess the 
time it takes for the paint covering a jig would be worn to a point to expose the loon to the lead 
beneath to be less than seven days after ingestion, but would defer more precise time estimates to 
experts who have examined this a bit more closely, such as Dr. Mark Pokras at Tufts University.  
Unfortunately, solid items like these jigs do not pass through the digestive tract, but rather remain in 
the gizzard of the Common Loon, and thus expose the bird to the lead that lies beneath.  
Consequently, this exposed lead harms Common Loons in ways that has been documented by many 
(e.g., Pokras and Chafel Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine 23:92-97, Pokras et al. Northeastern 
Naturalist 16:177-182, Sidor et al. Jounal of Wildlife Diseases 39:306-315, Grade et al. Ambio 
48:1023-1028), leading to the initiatives that banned the sale of use of lead fishing tackle stated in 
Maine LD 730 (2013).  As such, it is my opinion that that the paint covering such jigs would not 
prevent a loon that has ingested it from the fatal effects of the lead beneath, and would cause similar 
harm to a loon that has ingested a ‘bare lead jig’. 
 
I appreciate your time and consideration of this testimony in support of piece of legislature.  Please 
do let me know if/how I can be of any further assistance to you. 
 
Sincerely yours,  
 
 
 

Jay Mager 
Professor of Biological Sciences 
