Testimony in SUPPORT  
of LD 958, “An Act to Expand Protections to Maine’s Loons from Lead Poisoning  
by Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs”  
 
Before the Committee on Inland Fisheries & Wildlife  
Presented by  Jayne Winters, South China, ME  
 
May 8, 2023  
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative  Landry , distinguished members of the Inland Fisheries & 
Wildlife  Committee, my name is Jayne Winters. I have lived in Maine all my life and currently 
reside in South China, as well as maintain a summer family home on Sebec Lake . I am 
submitting comments in SUPPORT  of LD 958, “An Act  to Expand Protections to Maine’s Loons 
from Lead Poisoning by Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs.”   
Most l oons that die from lead poisoning do so as a result of eating fish that have ingested lead 
tackle,  by striking at tackle being retrieved through the water , striking at fish  being reeled in , or 
even by  picking up small pieces of lead tackle from the lake bottom while ingesting small 
pebbles as grit . Once swallowed , the lead tackle goes into the loon’s gizzard , where its  acid and 
grinding action breaks down  the lead, which then passes into the bloodstream and organs . A 
loon will die within 2 -4 weeks after ingesting e ven a single small lead split shot sinker.  
Very few loo ns have been successfully treated for lead poisoning and released.  They usually 
don’t show symptoms until the lead is already at toxic levels in their bloodstream.  By then,  the 
only humane option is euthanasia.  
Maine Audubon engages with partners in New Ha mpshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, and New 
York in a “Fish Lead Free Initiative” in an effort  to reduce loon lead poisoning  by increas ing the 
use of lead -free tackle on lakes and ponds throughout the region s. In addition,  Maine Audubon 
sponsors  tackle exchan ges across the state in  a cooperative partnership with the Department of 
Inland Fisheries & Wildlife , US Fish & Wildlife Service, Maine Lakes Society, Maine BASS Nation,  
and the Sportsman’s Alliance of Maine.  
Although lead poisoning has long been the leading cause of loon deaths in Maine, the latest 
studies sadly reveal that boat strikes  are now causing more  deaths than lead poisoning . Nests 
are flooded and eggs subsequently  washed out of the nest by boat wakes.   
 
To protect loons and other wildlife, Maine state law currently bans the use and sale of lead 
sinkers and bare lead jigs that weigh one ounce or less, or measure 2½ ” or less.  I respectfully 
urge you to pass LD 958, which would add “painted jigs” to the l aw in an effort to further 
protect not only loons, but other wildlife . Thank you  for your consideration . 
 
