May 8 , 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries & Wildlife  
 
RE: LD 958 – An Act to Expand Protections to Maine’s Loons from Lead Poisoning by 
Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs  
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Inland Fisheries & Wildlife , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the 
Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine . I appreciate this 
opportunity to submit written co mments in support of LD 958 – An Act to Expand 
Protections to Maine’s Loons from Lead Poisoning by Prohibiting the Sale and Use 
of Certain Painted Lead Jigs . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the  lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.  The Nature 
Conservancy has  been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in  the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate.  
 
LD 958 would help close a loophole in Maine’s lead ta ckle laws that allows for the sale 
and use of small -sized painted lead jigs . This bill would phase out the use and sale of 
painted jigs weighing an ounce or less or measuring 2.5” or less and send  a consistent 
message  about Maine’s commitment to prevent av oidable deaths of loons and other 
wildlife from lead tackle.  
 
Lead poisoning has long been one of the leading causes of death for adult loons in 
Maine. In 2013 the Legislature passed  a bill to address bare lead jigs and lead sinkers. 
Because of that effort , it has been illegal to sell and/or use lead singers and bare, 
“unpainted” jigs weighing an ounce or less or measuring 2.5” or less in Maine since 
2017.  
 
Our state can be proud of this effort and the subsequent education programs that have 
proven effective over the last 10 years. However, c ontinued research and wildlife 
experts agree that the loophole allowing for painted lead jigs continues to negatively 
impact loons.  We must build on our past success and address this loophole to support 
the healt h of Maine’s iconic loon populations.  
 
TNC urges the committee to support LD 958. Thank you for the opportunity to 
comment and I am available to answer questions at any time.  
