 
      230 Main Street, Bridgton ME 04009         207 -647 -8580         www.mainelakes.org           
 
                                                                                                                                    
April 7th , 202 3 
Dear Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the Committee 
on Inland Fi sheries and Wildlife,  
My name is Lauren Pickford  and I am the Planning and Land Use Manager  of the Lakes Environmental 
Association (LEA), which serves the Lake Region of Western Maine and all of Maine’s lakes through the 
Maine Lake Science Center . 
LEA strongly  supports LD 958: " An Act to Expand Protections to Maine's Loons from Lead Poisoning 
by Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs ” 
LD 958 is important  legislation aimed at closing a loophole in Maine’s lead tackle laws that endange rs 
many of the state's beloved species on the lake. Lead poisoning is a major cause of death for adult 
loons and other wildlife, primarily resulting from ingesting small painted lead jigs. Despite current laws 
and education campaigns, lead poisoning remain s a significant problem, and action is necessary. The 
passage of LD 958 would aid in preventing the unnecessary deaths of wildlife from lead tackle.  
This legislation is the next logical step in Maine's ongoing efforts to phase out the use and sale of lead 
tackle, which is already well underway in the state. However, the continued availability of painted lead 
jigs presents a significant obstacle to achieving this goal. The support for LD 958 goes beyond the 
conservation community, with many Mainers recognizi ng the importance of protecting the state's 
natural resources.  
If passed, LD 958 would send a powerful message about the significance of safeguarding Maine's 
natural resources and the role that each of us can play in securing future generations' ability to  
experience the state's beauty and wonder. Ultimately, this legislation would aid in preserving the 
state's diverse wildlife for generations to come.  
Thank you for taking the time to read this letter. I encourage you to vote “ought to pass” on Thank you,   
 
Lauren Pickford  
Planning and Land Use Manager  

