 
      230 Main Street, Bridgton ME 04009         207 -647 -8580         www.mainelakes.org           
 
                                                                                                                                    
May 8 th, 202 3 
Dear Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the Committee 
on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,  
My name is M ary Jewett and I am the Director of Education and Invasives Prevention at the Lakes 
Environmental Association.  
LEA strongly  supports LD 958: " An Act to Expand Protections to Maine's Loons from Lead Poisoning  
by Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs ” 
One of the most rewarding experiences  I have ever had was a summer internship at A vian Haven, the  
bird rehabilitation center in Freedom. Although this  years  ago, I remember vividly the feeling  of 
helplessness  when a loon came into the center behaving abnormally . There was a  sense of dread while 
we waited for the x -rays to show the  tell-tale bright spots,  proof of lead inside the bird. This was 
accompanied by the knowledge that much of the damage was already done, and that removing the 
lead wasn ’t going to magically heal the loon. It wasn ’t like removing a hook, or sewing up  a cut, the 
heavy metal was impacting neurological  processes, showing  that the lead had already leached into the 
body.  
LD 958 takes  us one step closer to eliminating this scene for  wildlife in Maine.  Removing any and all 
lead tackle should be the ultimate goal for anyone who values Maine ’s amazing natural resources . 
Education is critical, but allowing any sale of  this heavy metal sends a mixed message to anglers. If lead 
is so dangerous,  why can one still buy it in any form ? 
Passing this bill would send a clear message that the State of Maine is serious about wildlife 
conservat ion. 
Thank you for taking the time to read this letter. I encourage you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 958.  
Thank you,   
 
Mary Jewett  
Director of Education and Invasives Prev ention  

