 
 
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 958,  
An Act to Expand Protections to Maine's Loons from Lead Poisoning by Prohibiting the Sale 
and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs  
May 8, 2023  
 
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry , and  members of the Joint Standing Committee on Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife , I am Melanie Sturm, the Forests and Wildlife Director at the Natural Resources 
Council of Maine (NRCM) . I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 958. 
 
Loon s are one of Maine ’s iconic species. They are beautiful , and their characteristic call on Maine ’s 
remote lakes is a special and memorable sound  for every person who  spends time in Maine during the 
open water  season. Unfortunately, loons are threatened by some fishing tackle used in Maine lakes . 
Many sinkers and jigs include lead , which is toxic to loons. The loons inadvertently ingest  the lead while  
eating fish that have lead jigs or sinkers in them or when p icking up gravel from the bottom of the lake. 
The toxic lead eventually kills the loons.  
 
Sinkers less than half an ounce are already banned in Maine, and this bill would ban painted lead jigs 
weighing one ounce or less or measuring two-and-a-half inches or less  in length starting in September 
2024 . Starting in September 2026, it would be illegal to use these products.  
 
Lead fishing gear a lternatives made of tin, tungsten, or bismuth are readily available. While they may be 
slightly more expensive than th ose made with lead, the cost of these alternative types of tackle are a 
minor part of the overall expense associated with fishing. Because  alternative, cost -effective products 
exist that are less toxic to people and wildlife, we should shift to the less -toxic products.  
 
Loons are part of Maine ’s tourism brand and economy  as well as a n intrinsically valuable part of the 
ecosystem . This is a small but very important step that we can take  as a state  to protect loons and other 
waterfowl in Maine .  
 
NRCM urges you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 958. Thank you for your consideration.  
