 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT of L.D. 958 –  
An Act to Expand Protections to Maine's Loons from Lead  Poisoning by Prohibiting the Sale 
and Use of Certain Painted Lead  Jigs 
 
May 8 , 2023  
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry , and Members of the Inland Fisheries  and Wildlife  
Committee, I am Reid Anderson, President of the Maine Wilderness Guides Organization and a 
Registered Maine Guide. During the school year, I teach at Nobleboro Central School, and in the 
summertime, I guid e for Northeast Whitewater in the Moosehead Lake region. Thank you for the 
opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 958.  
 
The Maine Wilderness Guides Organization consists of over 90 registered Maine guides, sporting camp 
and lodge owners, and th eir supporters. Our mission is to provide a unified voice for the profession of 
wilderness guiding while maintaining the highest professional, educational, and stewardship standards 
for the conservation of remote woods and waters. We are dedicated to the p rotection of habitat and 
natural resources in the areas we guide in for our livelihoods, our clients, the flora and fauna that reside 
there , and for future generations.  
 
Healthy and abundant wildlife populations support guide busine sses, and the Common l oon in particular 
is important to guiding. Some wilderness guides exclusively lead trips to view wildlife , such as loons 
whose appearance and calls always interests clients . For fishing, kayaking, and other types of guides, 
spotting wildlife is a secondary  but enjoyable  part of trips . In either case , when we take  clients  on the 
water,  they  often ask questions about fish and wildlife . Viewing  them is an essential aspec t of the 
experience  of being outdoors, and the Common loon is a special part of the nature of Maine  that 
residents and visitors to the state alike revel in . As we all know , Maine’s identity is closely tied to  the 
health and sustainability of  our natural resourc es. 
 
LD 958 is needed because loons  inadvertently ingest lead tackle, which causes health problems and 
eventually kills them. There are alternative tackle types that do not cause these lethal  effects. LD 958 
takes a reasonable approach to closing a loophol e in the law and banning the use and sale of painted  
lead  jigs of a certain size . It limits the size range to painted lead jigs that are ingestible by loons, and it 
phases in the ban over time . We believe this is a  fair and common -sense  piece of legislation that  will go a 
long way in protecting loons and other waterfowl.  
 
We respectfully urge the Committee to vote ought to pass on LD 958. Thank you for your time and 
consideration of our views.  
 
