TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN SUPPORT OF   
LD 958 , “An Act to Expand Protections to Maine's Loons from Lead Poisoning by Prohibiting the Sale and Use of 
Certain Painted Lead Jigs ” 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife   
May 8, 202 3 
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry,  and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony in strong support of  L.D. 958 “An Act to Expand Protections to Maine's Loons from 
Lead Poisoning by Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs .”  Closing this loophole that threatens our 
precious loons, and other w ildlife , is long overdue.  
 
Lead i s lead – no matter what the source. Whether it comes from lead fishing tackle  left in our waterways , lead ammuni tion 
left on our land in coyote carcasses  and other carrion, or from industrial waste, this heavy meta l is poisonou s to loons and 
many other species .  In the case of both  human s and animals , it is a widely accepted  fact that lead in any form is extremely  
toxic.  According to the World Health Organization , no level of lead exposure is considered safe for people, domestic 
animals, or wildlife .  
 
Loons are exposed  to lead while consuming fish  that have  ingested or attached  lead tackle, or when mista king lead weights 
for the small stones that they normally ingest to aid in digestion .  Eagles, other scavenger birds and wildlife ingest  lead while 
feeding off  fish in a similar manner , as well as  by consuming carcasses  and gut piles left behind by hunters . 
 
• A recent alert from the Maine Audubon  Society state s: “for decades, lead poisoning has been one of the leading 
causes of loon mortality in Maine .” 
 
• According t o a 2021  article in the Bangor Daily News,  since 2016, Avian Haven has treated 82 eagles with elevated 
levels of lead in their system. Sixty of those  eagles  have died .  The deaths of these eagles draw attention to  a 
widespread lead contamination crisis  in our state.  
 
• As is the case with loons and birds of prey, this toxin also presents a danger to hu mans who eat fish or other 
animals that have been killed with or ingested lead.    
 
• In addition to poisoning our wildlife, the lead contaminates our soil and water, that then is absorbed  by plants that 
are ingested by many animal species, including humans.    
 
• Lead is a potent neurotoxin that disrupts brain development in babies and children, damages kidneys in adults, and 
can cause pregnant women to miscarry. Exposure to lead in childhood can lower IQ.  ALS (Lou Gehrig’s disease) is 
also associated with heightened blood and bone lead levels . 
 
 With  the many alternatives available, there is no longer a reason for our recreational and  sporting activities to 
contribut e any amount  of this long -acting, tenacious  poison to our environment .  We need to get the lead out.  
 
Please help to protect Maine ’s wildlife and citizens  by taking a small step forward to eliminate lead  contamination  from our 
environment .  Vote “Ought to pass ” on L.D. 958 “An Act to Expand Protections to Maine's Loons from Lead Poisoning by 
Prohibiting the Sale and Use of Certain Painted Lead Jigs.”   
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Susanna Richer  
Portland, ME  
