Susan Hayhurst
Falmouth
LD 958
Dear Committee Members,
Thank you for considering my written testimony in support of LD 958. 
I am a veterinarian and former marine science educator, who practices in Brunswick, 
Maine. I treat domestic pets including birds, and I volunteer helping with wildlife. I 
live in Falmouth, and my family and I also have a camp on Kezar Lake.
For the past several years, I've been doing monthly loon necropsies of deceased loons,
as part of a loon necropsy working group made up of wildlife professionals and 
veterinarians. We meet at the Center for Wildlife once a month. There, I have 
witnessed first hand the total devastation that lead poisoning can have on loons - and 
how often it happens. I open up a loon cadaver and find the body cavity just full of 
blood, with forensic evidence the bleeding happened before death. Sometimes these 
were birds were found stranded, acting odd, or weak. And invariably we find lead 
fishing gear in the stomach among the pebbles there. (Loons and many birds ingest 
pebbles to help with digestion, but the problem is that lead fishing gear can look like 
something to eat.) The sad thing is that most of the birds we find dead from lead 
poisoning are in strong healthy condition - with a great weight and muscle, beautiful 
feathers, and no parasites. In other words, acute lead poisoning is taking down 
numerous of Maine's otherwise healthy breeding loons. 
    Loons face many other challenges that are harder to address - mercury, waves and 
strikes from wakeboard and other recreational boats, and more. But lead poisoning is 
likely what I've seen most in otherwise healthy adult birds, and it's something we can 
do something about.  
     I also write, on a less scientific side, as a camp owner from Kezar, where my 
daughters have grown up watching, loving, and of course, listening to loons. My 
13-year-old daughter loves them so much that she asked if she could do a science fair 
project on loon biology this year. In her opening paragraph, she wrote, "Common 
loons are a symbol of Maine - they inhabit almost every lake, and are hard to miss 
with their distinctive black and white coloring and striking red eyes." I couldn't have 
said it better. 
   Please help protect this iconic Maine species by passing LD 958, for now and for 
future generations like my daughter's. 
Sincerely,
Susan E. Hayhurst, MS, DVM
Falmouth, Maine
