Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other esteemed members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee,   
My name is Brian Wardwell and I am an Ed Tech 3 at Sacopee Valley Middle School .  I work in 
the Hawk's Nest, which is a partially self -contained behavior program (depends on the student) 
for those young people who struggle the most, and are seen as not belonging in any of the 
school's other programs. In other words, we are the   "last s top.” Though we try to be minimally -
restrictive , we are ultimately the most restrictive environment in the school , which often 
involves our Safety Care training getting put to use, with kids age 9 - 14. Such practices are the 
best option we currently hav e, but it is seldom disputed the negative and potentially traumatizing 
effect this can have on students and staff . Our program has seen massive turnover of staff , with 
teachers coming and going every year or two, and Ed Techs sometimes not even making it  
through the year due to stressors and lack of incentive. I am not saying a pay raise would 
completely alleviate these problems, but it would very likely help the stability of our departments 
for staff and students' sake.  
I currently live on my parent's la nd, in an 8x10 tiny house I built out of mostly recycled wood 
with funds from my previous job, which was carpentry and boat work . My parents are covering 
the taxes and electrical costs (includes heat) until I am able to improve my income.  
My hourly figure  as of now is $16.43, which after benefits and dispersement becomes 
approximately $300 a week . I wish to stay in the profession, and am hoping that the State of 
Maine can step it up and pay Educational Technicians a livable wage, where a car repair or 
unforeseen medical bill doesn't break us.  
 * In addition, I coach 7th Grade Girls' Basketball and 7th Grade Boys' Baseball , in addition to 
working odd -jobs throughout the year. In short, I am not helpless, but a skilled professional who 
aims to live self -sufficiently with dignity and some basic comforts.  
 
