Senator Ral'l‘ erty, Representative Brennan and other members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee. 
Good afternoon and thank you l' 
or allowing me the time to address your committee. My name is John 
Soiler and l am a fairly recently retired special education teacher from Winslow .lunior High and 
Skowhegan High. I am here today to testify in support ()1‘]._4[) 955. 974. I237 and I?»l4. 
l began my career in education at the age of 45 as an ed tech to a special education program at Winslow 
Junior High. It was a career change I chose in order to help children by teaching alter careers entirely in 
the private sector ol‘ owning and managing small and large businesses. ()ne ol' the major obstacles in 
making the decision was trying to figure out. with my wile, how to support our family of ourselves and 
two boys in 7th and 9th grades on an ed techs salary at that time. 
We made the commitment to my new career while l worked as an ed tech and took the necessary 
education courses to begin teaching as a special education teacher in I995 |' 
or $23.()O(i). Fortunately for 
teachers. as a result ofthe hard work of legislators like yourselves. are doing mtich better today. Now no 
future Maine teacher will need to start with such financial challenges as a result of the statewide base 
salary youi ye supported. 
Sadly. the enormously valuable but ignored/undervalucd ed techs and other essential school personnel 
who work tirelessly to make the educational system work better for Maine students have been taken for 
granted and taken advantage of by the system; Until Now! 
The education system is about people and families. That is why it is so sad and contradictory to what is 
said by the system when support stttfl are paid as poorly as they are. They are either at or barely above 
the poyeity le\cl whether they live with other wage-earners or alone. 
These people are absolutely critical to the positive functioning ol‘ the educational system. The loss ol‘ ed 
techs in the system is another critical piece to retaining all the other educators as well. They are the 
unseen and minimally recognized backbone ol‘ the educational system supporting both regular and special 
educators who rely so critically on their integrity and work. 
Special educators are both teachers and case managers. A littlc known lact is that they often do not 
actually have students on their cascloads in their classrooms. They rely on the ed techs to implement the 
students l.E.P.' s li 
or them and keeping the special education case mangers knowledgeably informed on 
how the students are doing. 
As a system. we ask and expect so much from all these support personnel that help our children grow and 
learn to become strong, healthy and educated adults and positive members ol‘ our communities. However. 
we pay and treat them as disposable employees. You have the opportunity to change that situation now!I 
do understand yottie considering seyeral dillcrent bills to raisc the wages. Please. please. please do 
something substantial and signiﬁcant to help these educators and support personnel and thereby the 
educational system tor Maine' s students and our communities. 
l thank you for your time and sincerely hope and trust you will rectify this wrong to these hard working. 
caring and intelligent people of Maine. 
John Soifer 
South China. Me. 
|' 
oh n soili e r @ gmai I .co|n
