EDUCATE 
MAINE 
Q56 The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Testimony from Kaitlin Young, Policy and Program Manager, Educate Maine 
In Support Of 
L.D. 955: ”An Act to Address Shortages of School Support Staff by 
Increasing the Minimum Hourly Wage for Those Staff” 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: My name is Kaitlin 
Young, Policy and Program Manager of Educate Maine. I represent a 
business-led education advocacy organization. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. #955. Educate 
Maine's mission is to ensure that Maine people are prepared to succeed in 
education and career and that all Maine people reach their highest 
educational potential. As an organization dedicated to increasing the 
educational attainment of Maine people and supporting a robust educator 
workforce, we believe that investing in our education support professionals is 
another important investment in the future success of our students, schools, 
and educational system. 
As an experienced educator and former educational technician, I have seen 
firsthand the indispensable role that dedicated school support staff play in 
ensuring that our schools operate smoothly and effectively, providing essential 
services to students, teachers, and administrators. School support staff 
contribute to a positive learning environment and overall school culture, 
creating a more supportive and welcoming environment for students. They are 
essential in building thriving school communities supporting student learning 
and well-being. 
482 Congress Street, Suite 303, Portland, ME 04101 - 207-347-8638 - info@educatemaine.org
However, many school support staff members who are paid hourly are 
currently earning wages that are not sustainable, contributing to high turnover 
rates, disruptions in school operations, and increased costs for schools. Raising 
the minimum salary for educational support staff can support higher staff 
retention rates, ensuring more consistent and effective support for Maine 
students. Fair and competitive compensation for educational support staff 
improves morale and job satisfaction, reducing financial stress, which creates a 
positive work environment that benefits students and contributes to a more 
supportive school culture. 
Additionally, providing a living wage for educational support staff promotes a 
more stable and diverse workforce, which is essential for building successful 
school communities and supporting student wellness and learning. It also 
aligns with the priorities of the Making Maine Work report published by the 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce, Maine Development Foundation, and 
Educate Maine, which highlights the need to expand our workforce, 
particularly entry-level, trade, and professional workers. 
I urge you to support LD #955 and help ensure l\/laine attracts and retains a 
diverse, talented, and stable educator workforce. investing in the wages and 
benefits of education support staff can help build a more stable and successful 
workforce that can contribute to a stronger and more prosperous economy for 
all. 
l appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today and urge you to take 
action to support our education support staff by increasing the minimum 
wage. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Kaitlin Young 
Educate Maine
