 DATE:  April 20, 2023 
 TO:  Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
 FROM:  Dr. Lauren Stark, Policy Engagement Fellow for the Scholars Strategy Network, 
 Assistant Professor of Education at the University of Maine at Augusta, Advisory Board Member 
 for the Maine Teacher Residency 
 Lauren.Stark@maine.edu 
 RE:  LD 955 - An Act to Address  Shortages of School Support Staff by Increasing 
 the Minimum Hourly Wage for Those Staff 
 Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
 Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs: 
 I am writing to you today in support of LD 955: An Act to Address Shortages of School Support 
 Staff by Increasing the Minimum Hourly Wage for Those Staff. 
 My name is Lauren Stark, and I am a policy engagement fellow for the Scholars Strategy Network 
 and an assistant professor of education at the University of Maine at Augusta. My perspectives do 
 not necessarily represent those of my institutional affiliations. 
 In my previous work as a secondary teacher and my current position as a teacher educator at the 
 University of Maine at Augusta, I have had the honor of working closely with educational 
 technicians and other school support staff. In the high schools where I taught, I saw first-hand the 
 crucial work that educational technicians do in schools. Among their many contributions, they 
 build close relationships with students, offer individual instructional support and accommodations, 
 and make strong connections with families and communities. 
 Similarly, in my current work as a teacher educator, I have had the privilege of learning alongside 
 experienced educational technicians as they work toward their teaching certification. These 
 educators bring tremendous teaching skills and experience to the classroom. They deserve to 
 earn a living wage as they do the vital work necessary to make our schools safe, supportive 
 spaces for all students. And while I have seen that educational technicians excel in the teacher 
 education pathway and as they go into certified teaching roles, they shouldn’t have to move into 
 certified teaching roles to earn a living wage. We need talented, experienced educational 
 technicians within ed tech positions, too, but this isn’t possible for many educators within these 
 positions at the current salary level. 
 I urge members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs to support LD 
 955 and other efforts to raise the minimum wage for educational technicians and other school 
 support staff. 
