Legislative Testimony for Bill No. 955 
Hi my name is Sharon Walsh, and I am a Library Ed Tech Ill at Westbrook Middle 
School. l’m an active member of the Westbrook Education Association as the 
District Support Staff Representative on our Union’s Executive Committee, as 
well as Chief Negotiator and Grievance Chair. 
I’d like to start by thanking you for all your work on Education bills. It is so 
important in the hiring and retaining of quality school staff, and it could also 
provide this dedicated group of workers the financial security they need and 
deserve, both now and later on in their retirement. 
I am testifying neither for nor against this bill as it is currently written. I greatly 
appreciate that it and other bills seek to increase wages for support staff. 
However, as I understand this bill, it will primarily benefit new support staff and/or 
those who hold the lowest responsibility positions. It would not raise the wages 
of long term staff, or of the higher support staff positions. l’m hoping that some 
continued collaboration could lead to perhaps a tiered increase for all support 
staff, recognizing both length of service and job duties. 
I would like to speak specifically regarding the responsibilities of Education 
Technician ’s lll’s who spend a lot of their time filling in for teachers. In their usual 
jobs, they are now teaching larger groups, in some cases planning lessons, and 
often are the adults overseeing the students ’ safety. 
Additionally, Ed tech ll’s and Ed Tech lll’s have higher education requirements 
when hired. Like Teachers, they need to have State Certification. 
o Ed Techs l’s need a hs diploma or GED, Ed Tech l/’s need 60 
college credit hours, and Ed Tech ///’s need 90. Additionally, Ed 
Techs ll’s and lll’s are required to continue their education in order to 
be recertified every 5 years. 
o Bus and Van drivers need either a Class B or C driver's license. 
<> Admin Assistants, Custodians, and Food Sen/ice employees do not 
have any required certiﬁcations, endorsements, or licenses.
Every role in the school system is important, but just like a teacher’s degree 
earns them a higher salary, I feel the large difference in requirements and duties 
performed by ed techs ll’s and lll’s should be reflected in the pay. The education 
of an Ed Tech Ill is much closer to that of a teacher with 4 years of college, but 
pay is about half that of a teacher. As written, this bill would not address that 
problem. 
I appreciate that some of the other bills recognized and considered these 
differences in responsibility and education by citing a higher percentage increase 
for Ed Techs. The 8% more of an increase proposed for Ed Techs in bill no. 974 
does not seem like enough to me because that small difference would only puta 
new ed tech Ill making about $1 more an hour than a new food service helper. 
Currently in our district a new Ed Tech Ill makes $5.61 more per hour than a new 
food service helper. 
I chose to speak about LD 955 as I feel the 125% raise for lowest earners could 
be redistributed to some kind of a tiered system like those set by our school 
districts, and might make for a more proportionate increase that reflects the 
difference in education and duties. I have been researching area school pay 
scales, and I think that a 200% of min wage increase would give most Maine Ed 
Tech Ill’s a raise, even those who have been around a long time. A 125% or 
133% would not accomplish that. 
I’d like to address a common misconception that if you raise the bottom, the rest 
will naturally increase. Having been in salary negotiations for years now, that is 
just not how it works. Especially when the money is not there. I understand that 
our school districts can’t cover these needed increases on their own. We need 
the financial support of our State as well. If we’re given finances to raise the 
bottom but none to raise the rest, it simply won’t happen. 
I want to close by saying that I truly am in support of pay increases for all support 
staff, but I think a different approach is needed to recognize the differences in 
education and positions. 
Thank you!
