» 
L 
MAINE . . wil 
ms SCHOOL 49 Community om/6, Augusta, ME 04330 
ON Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 ...;f§i;;;1,;;;§f 
PUBLIC FDUCATEON ADVOCAIFS Website: www'mSmaWeb'C0m iliwiihiiigi 
Maine School SUP(’l'lnIl‘!1iiL‘I1l$1\\‘S()(’l3llOﬂ 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 955—AN ACT TO ADDRESS SHORTAGES OF SCHOOL SUPPORT STAFF BY 
INCREASING THE MINIMUM HOURLY WAGE FOR THOSE STAFF 
L.D. 974—AN ACT TO ESTABLISH MINIMUM PAY FOR EDUCATIONAL 
TECHNICIANS AND OTHER SCHOOL SUPPORT STAFF 
L.D. l237—AN ACT TO ESTABLISH A MINIMUM HOURLY WAGE FOR SCHOOL SUPPORT STAFF 
L.D. 13 l4~AN ACT TO ESTABLISH A MINIMUM SALARY FOR EDUCATIONAL SPECIALISTS, 
EDUCATIONAL TECHNICIANS AND SCHOOL TEACHING PROFESSIONALS 
L.D. l398—AN ACT TO INCREASE TEACHER SALARIES 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in opposition to the following L.D.s: 955, 974, 1237, 1314 and 1398. These testimonies are 
consistent with our previous testimony in opposition to L.D. 1064. 
MSSA and MSBA are both in support of seeing salaries for teachers and educational support professionals 
increase. Both Associations provided supportive testimony for the last bill that helped raise the minimum 
salary of all teachers in Maine to $40,000. It is true that increases in salary will help recruit and retain quality 
professionals to provide the quality leaming for our students in our classrooms across the state. School 
districts who were in need of still getting to this $40,000 minimum are in the third year of the ramp up to this 
minimum ﬁgure. While some districts were already beyond this ﬁgure within their collective bargaining 
agreements, there were many that were not, even with the state funds to help support this increase within 
districts. Raising the minimum also had the impact of increasing other salaries higher up in salary schedules 
as these collective bargaining agreements have been renegotiated. This has had the impact of raising the entire 
budget in these school districts. 
The design of the bills are well constructed; yet, given the fact that while most districts have recovered from 
the most recent increases, except for pockets of districts here and there, MSSA and MSBA are opposed to 
seeing these L.D.s move forward at this time. Our associations are opposed to these bills because our 
members believe Augusta should not be dictating rates of increase for salaries and wages in schools. That 
needs to be a local decision. 
We know that increased teacher salaries can have a positive impact to attract and retain qualiﬁed teachers 
within our schools. Providing this ﬁnancial support to highlight teaching within Maine’s Public Schools as 
THE job to seek would be a beneﬁt of this type of increase. Our Associations recognize this and would like to 
see these increases be viable. We also know there have been bills proposed to increase the minimum wage of 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Execulivc Director
the educational support professionals Within schools. The Associations see problems with all of these bills 
moving forward. 
MSSA and MSBA need to better understand the funding stream for all of the recommended increases in 
salaries. We understand the level of support that will be provided to reach the minimum salary but what level 
of state support will be provided as contracts are renegotiated to reﬂect and change in the rest of collective 
bargaining agreements? Will state education funding increase to cover those costs, in the near and long term? 
It should not come from one-time funding because when that funding goes away the burden will fall on 
communities. 
With proposed budgets still tight, and many districts still working to provide additional supports for students 
with socio and emotional needs related to leaming during Covid-19, and for those students who still need 
additional assistance to accelerate leaming due to difﬁculties experienced during the pandemic, many districts 
are expecting a funding cliff that potentially will impact them for the immediate future. Districts are 
struggling with budgets right now due to the increase in valuation, where many towns are required to pay 
more towards education, combined with the decrease in economically disadvantaged subsidy. 75-80% of 
school budgets are made up of salaries and beneﬁts. If the increases in salaries fall on the taxpayers, we worry 
that budgets will not pass and that will have a negative impact on the services we need to provide to our 
students. School Boards understand that and it is a major reason why the vast majority of school budgets pass 
in Maine. Boards are in touch with their community and what their local taxpayers can accept in terms of 
budget increases. It would be helpful to have a ﬁnancial analysis of what each of these bills will cost in the 
near and long term. We should not commit to a plan without understanding what impact it will have on school 
budgets in our communities. 
The timing is just not right, according to the two Associations, to support this bill right now. A statewide 
mandate of this magnitude at this time takes away local control. MSSA and MSBA recommend that L.D. 955, 
974, 1237, 1314, and 1398 all ought not to pass.
