TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: February 28, 2023 
LD 51 7 — “An Act to Allow Maine Families to Deduct Vehicle Excise Taxes on 
State Income Tax Returns” 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 51 7, “An Act to Allow 
Maine Families to Deduct Vehicle Excise Taxes on State Income Tax Returns. ” 
This bill proposes, for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2023, an 
income tax deduction equal to the total amount of the Maine motor vehicle excise 
tax paid by a resident individual who claims a dependent child under l8 years of 
age. In addition to automobiles used for personal use, the deduction would apply 
to vehicles used for business use and non-automobile vehicles, for example, 
motorcycles, motorized bicycles, stock race cars, trucks, truck tractors, and buses. 
If the purpose of the bill is to provide tax relief to families with dependents 
under the age of 18, we suggest modifying the current dependent exemption tax 
credit (DETC). The current DETC is a ﬁxed $300 credit for any dependent 
regardless of age. Increasing the credit amount and indexing for inﬂation would be 
simpler and potentially more beneﬁcial for lower income families. 
Under current law, individuals claiming Maine itemized deductions may 
already claim a deduction, subject to certain caps and phaseouts, for their motor
vehicle excise tax payments. In addition, individuals claiming businesses expenses 
may claim a deduction for business related motor vehicle excise tax payments. 
Under the proposed statute, these individuals would be allowed to deduct these 
motor vehicle excise tax payments twice. 
The Department notes that restricting the income subtraction modiﬁcation to 
Maine residents and, in certain circumstances, restricting the modiﬁcation to 
Maine motor vehicle excise taxes, may raise potential U.S. constitutional concerns. 
The Administration also notes the following technical and administrative 
concerns: 
0 The bill should clarify the term “dependent child” and whether a 
dependent child who attains l8 years of age during the taxable year is 
eligible for the deduction. 
0 Additionally, taxpayers claiming the deduction would be required to 
provide information that is currently not required to be provided with 
their Maine income tax return, including the birth dates of eligible 
dependent children and documentation supporting the amount of 
excise tax paid. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is a revenue loss of approximately 
$4 million per year. 
The estimated administrative costs are $104,918 begimiing in ﬁscal year 
2024. A new Tax Examiner position, effective October 1, 2023, would be required 
to audit a portion of the affected returns to verify eligibility for, and the amount of, 
the deductions claimed. One-time administrative costs for computer programing 
are included to add an additional line on Form 1040MB, Schedule IS to 
accommodate the deduction, update check stub messages and notices, make federal 
tape changes, and perform system testing.
2
The Administration looks forward to Working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
TAX LEGISLATION REVIEW WORKSHEET 
Bill Objectives and Tax Policy 
(1) Does the Bill's drafted text and underlying tax policy objective(s) appear 
to align with each other? 
(2) Similar legislation pending or program in place? 
ls there other tax legislation, state spending or other government programs 
that have the same purposes as the tax legislation? 
List: 
Existing business and itemized deductions for motor vehicle excise tax. 
(2) Coordinated? 
Are those additional programs appropriately coordinated with the tax 
legislation and complementary or duplicative? 
(3) Program improvements? 
Are there any opportunities to improve the effectiveness of the tax legislation 
in meeting its purposes? Cl 
III 
El 
El 
El Yes 
Clarify 
Yes 
No 
Complementary 
Duplicative 
lmprovements 
suggested 
Administration and Cmnpliance 
(1) Strong framework? 
Are there adequate mechanisms to ensure that intended beneﬁciaries receive 
any tax benefits and comply with any requirements? 
(2) Cost/intended tax benefits balance for tax administration? 
Are the administrative costs and taxpayer compliance burdens associated with 
the tax legislation proportionate to taxpayer benefit? 
(3) Tax administration improvements? 
Are there any opportunities to reduce the administrative and compliance 
burden of the tax legislation while still meeting its purposes? IX! 
El 
El 
El 
su Yes 
No 
Proportionate 
Disproportionate 
lmprovements 
ggested
