A Housn OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE Housn STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 0433 3-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
"“““‘ rm (207) 287-4469 
David Boyer 
112 Verrill Road 
Poland, ME 04274 
Off1CB2 (207) 287-1440 
Cell: (207) 274-4633 
David Boyer@Iegislature.maine. gov 
April 11, 20023 
Testimony of Representative David Boyer 
Presenting L.D. 1352 An Act to Remove Barriers to Becoming a Lawyer 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Representative David Boyer and I am 
proud to present L.D. 1352, An Act to Remove Barriers to Becoming a 
Lawyer. 
L.D. 1352 would offer an alternative path for Mainers that want to become 
lawyers. My legislation would remove the requirement to complete law 
school before taking the Maine Bar exam. It would not remove the 
requirement to pass the Maine Bar exam to become an attorney. 
As members of this committee well know, Maine is facing a shortage of 
lawyers, especially ones in rural communities. We are failing to provide 
adequate representation to the people that need it most. 
The State of the Judiciary was sobering. State courts estimate that backlogs 
of cases won’t even begin to be addressed until 2028. Mainers havea 
constitutional right to a speedy trial, and unfortunately, for many, that right 
does not exist. Many of whom are languishing in jail Waiting for trial. 
Since introducing this legislation, folks from across Maine have reached out 
in support of the bill. I spoke with a Woman who has been a paralegal for 
over 5 years and would love the opportunity to become a lawyer. However, 
law school is not available virtually, and requires at least 3 days a Week in 
Portland. These requirements rule out hundreds, if not thousands of 
Mainers who live too far from UMaine Law in Portland. 
District 87 Mechanic Falls and Poland (part)
According to my bill, an individual can work under a supervising attorney 
for two years to become eligible to take the bar. There are guardrails and 
report backs due to ensure the supervising attorney is doing a satisfactory 
job. 
If we have decided that the Maine Bar exam is how we measure a potential 
lawyer’s competency, it should not matter if that person went to law school 
or studied as an apprentice. 
We should not lower the bar to becoming a lawyer, just the barriers. 
This committee is tackling the issues that the Maine Commission on 
Indigent Legal Services is experiencing, and my bill is another tool to make 
sure that the Mainers who need representation the most- receive it. 
Perhaps, we could ﬁnd more lawyers to work for $100/hour if they Weren’t 
burdened with crushing student loan debt! 
This isn’t a new idea either. Our 16”‘ President, Abraham Lincoln skipped 
law school, taught himself law and at the age of 25 obtained his law license. 
If Maine made this change, we wouldn’t be alone. States like Vermont, 
California, Washington and Virginia, all allow people to take the bar exam 
without a law school degree. 
I appreciate the committee ’s time and consideration today. Thank you. 
District 87 Mechanic Falls and Poland (part)
