UNWERSITY OF MAINE SCHOOL Of LAW 
LAW 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 13 52, An Act to Remove Barriers to Becoming a Lawyer 
Presented by Vice Dean Dmitry Bam, University of Maine School of Law 
April 11, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonan, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on the Judiciary. My name is Dmitry Bam and I am the Vice Dean and Provost of the 
state’s only law school, the University of Maine School of Law. I speak to you today on behalf of 
Maine Law and the University of Maine System in opposition to LD 1352. 
The Need for More Lawyers in Maine 
To be clear, we all understand that this bill has been presented in support of providing greater 
access to justice in Maine. While we enthusiastically agree with, and are actively working toward, 
this goal, we cannot support this approach. 
I will not belabor the information you have received showing that, particularly in less populated 
counties, there are simply not enough lawyers in Maine to help people with important aspects of 
their lives: Family matters, housing conﬂicts, business start-ups, and significantly, criminal cases. 
We suggest that the answer to those challenges is to attract more lawyers to and throughout Maine, 
to help new lawyers get a good start in our rural communities, and to continue to increase 
appropriations for UMS so the state’s public law school can continue to provide affordable, high- 
quality legal education in the state — an education that is accessible to all Mainers who aspire to be 
attorneys. 
As you Well know, Maine Law is actively working on this challenge along with many others. 
0 The Maine Law Legal Aid Clinic provides an average of 14,000 hours of free legal services 
to Maine people every year; 
0 Our Rural Fellows Program has resulted in new lawyers moving into rural practice in 
greater numbers; 
0 The new Rural Practice Clinic in Fort Kent, a pilot advanced by the 130"‘ Legislature with 
support from the Ofﬁce of the Attomey General, is both providing new legal aid resources 
and exposing students to the potential of legal practice in northermnost Maine; 
¢ At Maine Law, Externships that provide opportunities to work outside of the traditional 
geographic and employment areas have been substantially expanded; and
v Students graduating from Maine Law leave With nearly one-third less debt than their 
counterparts in other similar law schools, in part because of State appropriations for UMS 
($84,000 at Maine Law last year, versus a national average for the non-top-tier schools at 
$118,000). Additionally, Maine Law, our alumni, and students worked with the Legislature 
last session to enact An Access to Justice tax credit to beneﬁt attorneys who commit to 
working in underserved areas of the state (P.L 2021, Ch. 473). 
There are many ways to improve access to legal careers and the services lawyers provide citizens, 
companies, and communities in Maine, but allowing those services to be provided by people who 
have not received sufficient education, supervision and experience will leave Maine people more 
vulnerable, and it will not provide the access to justice that we all seek. 
Current Law School Requirements 
In contrast to the proposal before you, law schools across the country, including Maine Law, 
provide an appropriately rigorous, proven program of education, intense supervision, and 
experiential practice for those individuals who seek to be licensed to practice law. 
First-year program 
The program of legal education at Maine Law begins with rigorous first-year courses that cover 
the foundation of American law and legal practice. 
0 The substantive doctrinal courses include Contracts, Torts, Property, Criminal Law, 
Constitutional Law, and Civil Procedure. 
0 Each of these 4-credit courses meets in classes over thirteen week for 52 hours, fora 
total of 312 hours in a semester. 
0 During the ﬁrst year, students are required to spend, at a minimum, 640 hours per 
semester in class and preparing for class. This equals approximately 50 hours per 
week during each 13-week semester. That is the bare minimum established by the 
American Bar Association (ABA); many students spend signiﬁcantly more time preparing 
for class. 
0 In addition to these six doctrinal courses, students enroll in two Legal Research and Writing 
courses. These classes teach students how to research and write a wide range of documents, 
from client memos to discovery motions to appellate briefs. 
In addition to the study time, students spend hundreds of hours preparing for, and taking, 
midterm and ﬁnal examinations. Those examinations are designed to simulate the problems 
lawyers face and are graded by experts in the ﬁeld. These formative and summative assessments 
are indispensable parts of legal education. 
Upper-level program 
After completing 30 credits in the ﬁrst-year program, students must complete 60 additional 
credits to receive their degree from Maine Law. The hours requirement discussed above applies
here as well: for in class and out-of-class work, students will spend more than 50 hours each 
week of the semester. 
There are a number of required courses and experiences that are critical to the law school 
experience and legal training, all of which are absent from the proposed legislation. 
First, each upper-class student must complete a 3-credit course on professionalism, professional 
responsibility, legal ethics, and the duties of lawyers. This course covers ethical obligations that 
attorneys owe to clients, courts, and the public, and it explores issues from conﬁdentiality to 
conﬂicts of interest to duty of candor. 
Second, every student must complete a clinic or an externship. This is a critical part of legal 
education, allowing the students an opportunity to practice law under the supervision of experts in 
their ﬁeld. Each experience has a classroom component where students leam from faculty, engage 
in self-reﬂection, and learn from their mistakes. Our graduates report that this unique combination 
of both supported coursework and clinical experience well prepares them for real-world practice. 
Third, every student must have an additional writing experience that builds on the ﬁrst-year writing 
program. Because legal writing is one of the most important skills lawyers must develop, students 
spend signiﬁcant time working on their writing. This writing component is rigorous and requires 
numerous drafts that receive individualized feedback from faculty supervisors. 
The proposed legislation 
There are many other key components of law school and legal education that are sacriﬁced by the 
proposed legislation. 
v The proposed legislation would allow the practice of law with only a fraction of the 
education and experience currently required. No practitioner, or even a full law ﬁrm, has 
the depth to provide training and teaching in all of these ﬁelds. 
¢ Practitioners have a duty ﬁrst to their own clients. Teaching an apprentice, and providing 
just 5 hours of actual supervision per week, cannot possible prepare new lawyers for the 
range of issues and complexities their prospective clients will present. I tell our new faculty 
that they should plan to spend approximately 10 hours preparing for each hour of class 
time. Of course, this is not the kind of commitment we can expect of a practicing attorney. 
v Furthennore, most law students engage in critical experiences, including moot court, trial 
team, law joumals, and others, that have for well over a century been viewed as a central 
part of legal education. 
0 Ultimately, setting aside thorny issues with labor laws, there is a good reason why, decades 
ago, states uniformly abandoned the “apprenticeship ” model in favor of requiring legal 
education. Although law school, like medical school, requires more time, and is more 
expensive than an apprenticeship, state legislatures and courts long ago recognized that the 
apprenticeship model was a failure, in no small part because “the practitioner-teachers did 
not teach.” Michele R. Pistone & John J. Hoeffner, N0 Path but One: Law School Survival
in an Age of Disruptive Technology, 59 Wayne L. Rev. 193, 213 (2013). At a time when 
legal practice has become more complex than ever, and Maine lawyers must be able to 
anticipate and address novel problems for their clients, turning back the clock to a failed 
apprenticeship model is not right for Maine. 
Summary 
Today, accredited ABA institutions across the country provide a consistent, high-quality 
experience for law students to prepare them for the practice of law. The ABA standards guarantee 
that students receive a rigorous, well-rounded education and are taught by skilled, qualiﬁed faculty. 
The requirement that attorneys have attended an accredited law school ensures that every Maine 
client will receive competent and ethical representation. 
At Maine Law, we would be honored to work with the Legislature to expand the availability of 
lawyers in Maine, to consider new approaches to paraprofessionals who can assist as navigators 
or provide assistance with court forms, and to think more broadly about encouraging new lawyers 
to practice in our beautiful rural counties. But we urge you not to leave the public vulnerable to 
untrained lawyers through a minimal apprenticeship program. 
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer questions.
