 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
 
in support of  
  
LD 1074 , An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Fund New Affordable Housing fo r Low -income 
Households  
 
April 25, 2023   
 
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , and Honorable Members of the Committee on Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs :  
 
My name is Amy Winston and I live in Edgecomb. I am submitting this testimony  in support of LD 1074, 
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Fund New Affordable Housing fo r Low -income 
Households , on behalf of Coastal Enterprises, Inc. (CEI) . Founded in 1977, CEI is a community 
development corporation (CDC) and community development financial institution (CDFI)  work ing to 
build a ju st, vibrant, and climate resilient future for people in communities in Maine and other rural 
regions . We do this by  integrating financing, business and industry expertise, and policy solutions. CEI 
envision s a world in which communities are economically and environmenta lly healthy, enabling all 
people, especially those with low incomes, to reach their full potential.  
 
CEI has had a long history of eng agement in the affordable housing space. While we no longer manage 
affordable housing properties, we continue to finance projects that create new housing units, catalyze 
economic activity, create jobs, and revitalize downtowns. Affordable workforce housing  is a key 
economic challenge for the businesses we finance, affecting their ability to recruit and retain workers.  
CEI is a member of the Maine Alliance for Smart Growth and of the  Maine Affordable Housing Coalition. 
CEI’s Financial Development Services team provides direct counseling services, focusing on foreclosure 
prevention counseling for distressed borrowers and consumers throughout the state.  
 
On April  14th, 2023,  I submitted testimony in support of LD 226, An Act to Address Maine’s Affordable 
Housing Crisis. This bill, which was  recently tabled during  a work session in the Housing Committee, 
would  appropriate  $200 million in much needed funding to Maine Housing State Housing Authority 
(“Maine Housing”) over a two -year period. Therefore, at this time, Maine is without  the funding that is 
necessary to develop and construct new affordable low -income housing in the state.   
 
The need for affordable housing for low -income individuals and the growing population of people 
currently living in this state is well documented. The Commission to Increase Housing Opportunities in 
Maine by Studying Land Use and Regulations and Short -term Rentals  was established in 2022 to 
continue the work of a 20 21 Commission  created to  address Maine’s housing shortage. The Commission 
has docu mented the humanitarian crisis  of homelessness and the growing number of people who are 
living in Maine unhoused. In testimony to the Commission, the Maine State Housing Authority (Maine 
Housing)  noted t he pre -pandemic disparities that existed and continue to persist, with many lower -
income households facing eviction or foreclosure due to economic pressures and a tight housing market. 
 
Affordable rental av ailability and vacancies have declined and limited inventories continue to drive 
rental prices up. As a result, the average Maine renter, whose median income is nearly half of that of the 
average Maine homeowner, cannot afford a 2 -bedroom  apartment at fair market rates (as established 
by HUD – the Department of Housing and Urban Development) anywhere in Maine. While recent trends 
reflect growing interest in homeownership, the median house price in the State is  unaffordable for the 
median income household in all State counties except in Aroostook County.  
 
Members of essential professions  and occupations making up the backbo ne of Maine ’s communities, 
such as firefighters, teachers, day care providers, and those working in the construction trades and 
natural resource industries,  qualify for Maine Housing -financed affordable housing given the lack of  
adequ ate inventory . And there are persisting disparities between white and Black  homeownership rates 
that urgently need to be addressed. As a st ate, to sustain our communities, to address the pernicious 
workforce shortage, we need to address the chronic shortage of  affordable housing.  
 
Funding for housing development has been identified by the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition as the 
primary bar rier to addressing the housing crisis in Maine. There is a significant need for housing in 
Maine, and there are developers who are ready to build, but Maine Housing currently does not have the 
financial capacity to invest in the development of more afforda ble housing. Affordable units  are typically 
built by non-profit  developers , who finance their developments for people with low  incom es by 
leverag ing federal, state,  and local funds . They are  limited by the available fund ing and the process for 
receiving  those funds and using tax credit  program s is complex . LD 1074 will enable voters to increase 
the financial and technical resources available  to developers through Maine Housing through a voter -
approved $100 million bond that would be used specifically for the construction and development of 
affordable housing . 
 
We urge you to vote Ought -to-Pass on LD 1074  in support of  the creation of affordable housing in 
Maine . Thank you for considering our testimony.  
