      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 25, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1074, An Act to  Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Fund New Affordable Housing 
for Low -Income Households      
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Committee on Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs , my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of 
Community Housing of Maine ( CHOM ).  CHOM  is the largest supportive housing provider 
for homeless populations in Maine .  
 
I am testifying in strong support of LD 1074 An Act to Authorize a General F und Bond Issue 
to Fund New Affordable Housing for Low -income Households .  This bill provides 
$100,000,000 bond issue d to build new affordable housing for low -income households.   We  
really need this kind of major investment in housing.  
 
There is an overall shortage of affordable housing for all populations in Maine:  The aggregate 
waiting list for affordable housing managed by state’s largest apartment association has risen to more than 30,000 households; 26,000 Maine households are on waiting lists for federal 
rental assistance, often waiting five to ten years.  This data is as of 2019 – it has worsened 
since, especially amid the pandemic and the sharp increase in cost of housing.  There is an 
extraordinary unmet demand for affordable, quality housing for all populations, as well as 
supportive housing for people experiencing homelessness with complex issues such as serious 
and persistent mental illness, substance use disorder, and trauma from domestic violence.  
 
In the past few years, resources have o nly allowed for about 180- 220 affordable housing units 
a year to come online, and closer to 12 each year for supportive housing.  Despite MaineHousing and the Legislature increasing resources toward this, the need for affordable 
and supportive housing far exceeds the supply, especially for homeless and special needs 
populations.  Only a small fraction of affordable housing has been targeted toward serving homeless populations. Without creating solutions at a more significant scale, we won't make a 
real diff erence in the lives of people in Maine with low -incomes, and we won’t make a real 
difference in ending homelessness.   The time to invest is now.  
 
Please consider a carve- out to ensure a portion goes to support homeless and special needs 
populations , which  aligns with the Frequent Users System Engagement (FUSE) Collaborative 
recommendations.  Homelessness is solvable.  Housing and services are the key tools we need 
to do so.  Making homelessness rare, brief, and one -time in Maine will require an investment 
in a spectrum of solutions .  LD 1074 is one of those key investments and could greatly assist 
Maine in ending homelessness.  
 
We need sufficient supplies of all types of housing in Maine including affordable and 
supportive housing, to have robust, inclusive  communities where  everyone can live and thrive .  
 
Maine is not alone in facing an affordable housing crisis. Every state is, it is just that Maine is 
quickly falling behind its peers in investing to solve it.  Maine is way behind other New 
England states in its investment in affordable housing since the beginning of the pandemic.  
 
In the chart below, please note the stark difference in investment between Maine and Vermont, 
which with half of Maine’s  population has invested 6 times the amount of funds in to 
affordable housing, much of which is now under development or coming online.    
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro  
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins  
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan  
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell  
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba  
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea 
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon  
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill 
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
    
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
State  Population  ARPA Funds invested  Additional funds considered  Actual investment since 2020  
Maine  1,362,359  $50M  $30M ( proposed by Governor), 80M 
(proposed by Housing Committee ) $50M  
NH 1,388,992  $100M  $99M (already approved by Senate)  $100M  
RI 1,095,610  $250M  unknown  $250M  
MA 6,984,723  $600M  unknown  $600M  
VT    645,570  $205M  $115M  $320M  
(no information from CT at this time ) 
 
 
Please pass LD 1074 to provide Maine with an injection of resources to create affordable and supportive housing at a 
scale that is commensurate with need.  We will all be far better for doing so, and it would greatly assist Maine in 
ending and preventing homelessness.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
Cullen Ryan
Portland
LD 1074
April 25, 2023 
Re: LD 1074, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Fund New 
Affordable Housing for Low-Income Households    
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the 
Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine (CHOM).  CHOM is the largest 
supportive housing provider for homeless populations in Maine. 
I am testifying in strong support of LD 1074 An Act to Authorize a General Fund 
Bond Issue to Fund New Affordable Housing for Low-income Households.  This bill 
provides $100,000,000 bond issued to build new affordable housing for low-income 
households.  We really need this kind of major investment in housing.
There is an overall shortage of affordable housing for all populations in Maine:  The 
aggregate waiting list for affordable housing managed by state’s largest apartment 
association has risen to more than 30,000 households; 26,000 Maine households are 
on waiting lists for federal rental assistance, often waiting five to ten years.  This data 
is as of 2019 – it has worsened since, especially amid the pandemic and the sharp 
increase in cost of housing.  There is an extraordinary unmet demand for affordable, 
quality housing for all populations, as well as supportive housing for people 
experiencing homelessness with complex issues such as serious and persistent mental 
illness, substance use disorder, and trauma from domestic violence.
In the past few years, resources have only allowed for about 180-220 affordable 
housing units a year to come online, and closer to 12 each year for supportive 
housing.  Despite MaineHousing and the Legislature increasing resources toward this,
the need for affordable and supportive housing far exceeds the supply, especially for 
homeless and special needs populations.  Only a small fraction of affordable housing 
has been targeted toward serving homeless populations. Without creating solutions at 
a more significant scale, we won't make a real difference in the lives of people in 
Maine with low-incomes, and we won’t make a real difference in ending 
homelessness.  The time to invest is now. 
Please consider a carve-out to ensure a portion goes to support homeless and special 
needs populations, which aligns with the Frequent Users System Engagement (FUSE)
Collaborative recommendations.  Homelessness is solvable.  Housing and services are
the key tools we need to do so.  Making homelessness rare, brief, and one-time in 
Maine will require an investment in a spectrum of solutions.  LD 1074 is one of those 
key investments and could greatly assist Maine in ending homelessness.
We need sufficient supplies of all types of housing in Maine including affordable and 
supportive housing, to have robust, inclusive communities where everyone can live 
and thrive. 
Maine is not alone in facing an affordable housing crisis. Every state is, it is just that 
Maine is quickly falling behind its peers in investing to solve it.  Maine is way behind
other New England states in its investment in affordable housing since the beginning 
of the pandemic. 
In the chart below, please note the stark difference in investment between Maine and 
Vermont, which with half of Maine’s population has invested 6 times the amount of 
funds into affordable housing, much of which is now under development or coming 
online.  
StatePopulationARPA Funds investedAdditional funds consideredActual 
investment since 2020
Maine1,362,359$50M$30M (proposed by Governor), 80M (proposed by 
Housing Committee)$50M
NH1,388,992$100M$99M (already approved by Senate)$100M
RI1,095,610$250Munknown$250M
MA6,984,723$600Munknown$600M 
VT   645,570$205M$115M$320M 
(no information from CT at this time) 
Please pass LD 1074 to provide Maine with an injection of resources to create 
affordable and supportive housing at a scale that is commensurate with need.  We will
all be far better for doing so, and it would greatly assist Maine in ending and 
preventing homelessness.  
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.  
