MaineHousing“a x ,_ MAINE STATE HOUSiNG AUTHORITY 
Testimony of 
Erik C. jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
Before 
The joint Standing Committee on Appropriations 
In Support of 
LD 1074: An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Fund New Affordable Housing for 
Low-income Households 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the ]oint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, I am Erik jorgensen Senior Director of Government Relations 
and Communications at the Maine State Housing Authority (MaineHousing) and I am submitting 
this testimony in support of LD 1074 An Am‘ t0 A1/2‘/yarige a General F11/id B0/id IJ‘J‘ll8 Z0 Fz1ndNew 
Afar;/ab/e H02/Jingfa/ “Low-i/zcame Home/J0/dr. 
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 1969. 
We are an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to address the problems of 
unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing. We are authorized to issue bonds to 
finance single family mortgages for first time homebuyers and for affordable multifamily housing. 
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, including rental 
subsidies, weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-income housing tax 
credit program, and homeless grant programs. We receive state general fund revenue for homeless 
programs and receive a dedicated portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing 
Qpportunities for Maine (HUME) Fund. 
This bill proposes a $100,000,000 bond issue for funding to create new affordable housing for low- 
income households, through both new construction and adaptive re—use, We applaud its simplicity 
and appreciate the fact that it would provide maximum flexibility to allow MaineHousing to allocate 
any funds authorized in the most efficient and effective way possible, layering them with other 
sources to assure the greatest impact and reach. 
We have to see this bill in the context of the housing proposal from the Governor in the state 
budget, and the very exciting unanimous vote of Housing Cormnittee to more than double that 
proposal to $40,000,000 per year for the biennium through the change package. As you know better 
than anyone else in this building, this is the first time in memory that a general fund appropriation of
1
any size has been proposed for affordable housing production. We also see this proposal in the 
context of Representative Millett’s bill to provide $200,000,000 for the same purpose, along with 
other bills that propose to support speciﬁc housing programs. We support any and all proposals to 
increase the availability of housing subsidy, though recognize that you’ll be making tough decisions 
around allocations of resources around housing and a large number of other very pressing issues. 
The most important issues for MaineHousing are predictability and ﬂexibility. And if the funding in 
the budget could become an ongoing stream of funding in a form that was predictable to the 
development community, we could be sure that there would be a steady pipeline of projects in 
various stages of underwriting. Maine needs more affordable apartments; we need more affordable 
single family housing; we need more rural housing. And all of that, in today’s market, requires 
subsidy. We also need to remain flexible to meet needs and opportunities currently unknown. 
If, on the other hand, it looks that we will get funding in one budget cycle and not beyond, then the 
value of adding additional non-lapsing funding that could be stretched is very clear to us - and this 
bill could provide an answer. There is no doubt that we could use all of the $100,000,000 proposed 
here for housing production. But the beauty of bond proposals is that the funds can be stretched 
across several years, as they were for the successful senior housing bond that the legislature 
authorized and the voters approved a few years ago. 
I know you are going to be sorting through innumerable proposals over the coming days and Weeks and 
that those will total far more than the funding that is available. I also know that there is welcome 
determination from this committee, from the Governor ’s office and from the Housing Committee, to 
move the needle on the housing shortage in Maine. What we applaud about this bill is the fact that it can 
support existing and proven programs, and that means that we could start allocating funds as soon the 
bonds were issued. 
Thank you.
2
