 
19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622 -7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®   
 
 
Testimony in  Support of  LD 1074  (“An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond 
Issue to Fund New Affordable Housing for Low -income Households ”)  
 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  
 
April 25, 2023  
 
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs  and members of the Joint Select  Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs , my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of 
Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a 
professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. 
REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build M aine communities. Our members represent 
buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our 
membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, 
appraisers, building inspector s, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the 
National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  
 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports  LD 1074 . The bill proposes a $100 million 
bond  to build affordable homes for low -income households through new construction and the 
conversion of existing structures. It is a well -reasoned approach to address the affordable 
housing need in our state.  
 
We support t his bill because it focuses on the fundamental cause of the affordable housing 
problem: a lack of supply.  We do not have enough housing in Maine and need to build more 
– either through development or by modifying existing structures.  We have opposed othe r 
bills that would raise taxes  through an increas e in the Real Estate Transfer Tax or by creating 
new “fees” (taxes) on non -primary residential properties.  Ultimately, those proposals do not 
ensure that funding will go directly to housing – much less buil ding new affordable housing.  
LD 1074  does both: it provides bond funds that can only be used to build affordable housin g.  
 
For these reasons, we support  LD 1074  and respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Pass. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
 
