   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Barbara Burt, Vice -chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lucy Van Hook  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Testimony in support of LD 1074, “ An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to 
Fund Ne w Affordable Housing for Low -income Households .” 
Josie Phillips, Policy Fellow  
4/25/2023  
 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Rotundo and Sachs,  and all members of the Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs committee . My name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for 
Economic Policy. I am testifying in favor of LD  1074  because large -scale investment is needed 
to address Maine’s affor dable housing crisis.  
 
Over the past 20 years, the costs of homeownership in Maine and renting in the Northeast 
region have grown more quickly than Mainers’ median household income.iii This indicates that, 
for a majority of Mainers who rent or are looking  for a new home, keeping a roof over their head 
has consistently become more challenging over time.  
 
 
 
 
 
Across the state, the lack of affordable housing is hurting the economy. The state economist 
has acknowledged it as one of the most significant challenges facing Maine’s economy , 

 
   
 particularly in relation to the difficulty it adds to attracting working age adults into the state.iii 
Even when solely considering the residents already in Maine, however, a lack of affordable 
housing can be a serious impediment to the wellbeing of families’ personal finances and the 
prosperity of Maine’s state economy.  
 
For instance, we know that experi encing housing insecurity can jeopardize people’s physical 
and mental healthiv and make them significantly more likely to lose a job .v We also know that 
being in good physical and mental health is foundational to people’s ability to be productive at 
their jobs and provide for themselves and their families. Depression alone costs the U.S. 
economy more than $200 billion per year,vi and experiencing a bout of clinical depression leads 
people to earn 24 percent lower annual wages on average, even decades after  the initial 
depressive episode.vii Similarly, absences and lost productivity due to chronic illnesses and 
injuries cost employers across the country an estimated $530 billion per year,viii and poor 
physical health can also cause severe reductions in personal  lifetime earnings.ix By increasing 
the stock of affordable housing across the state, LD  1074 would improve the health of Mainers, 
which would in turn improve the productivity of the state economy.  
 
While the investment laid out in LD 1074  is necessary and  long overdue, it is important that 
Maine provide ongoing support for urban and rural affordable housing development, prioritizing 
housing as an investment included in future baseline budgets. The affordable housing crisis has 
been decades in the making, a nd it will likely take many years of sustained public and private 
investment to resolve. Once the state has met its housing production goals, ongoing funding will 
help ensure that the previous decades of underinvestment are not repeated, landing us right 
back where we are today.  
 
Mainers’ needs for housing are not going away anytime soon, and the state government’s 
investment in housing should reflect this reality. Until these needs are sustainably met, they will 
present as a significant threat to the healt h and stability of Maine’s families and economy at 
large. The funding included in LD  1074 is  a critical first step in undoing the damage of the past 
two decades, and I urge this committee to vote yes on this bill . I also encourage members to 
consider ways in which we can provide ongoing investment to this crucial component of Maine’s 
economic wellbeing.  
 
 
 
i Federal Reserve Economic Data, “Median Household Income in Maine” and “All -Transactions House Price Index for Maine.” 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=12h7w  
ii Federal Reserve Economic Data, “Median Household Income in Maine” and “Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Rent of 
Primary Residence in Northeast.” https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=12h88  
iii The Courier -Gazette, “State Economist sees challenge s from inflation, housing crisis, work force shortage.” 
https://knox.villagesoup.com/news/state -economist -sees -challenges -from -inflation -housing -crisis -work -force -
shortage/article_794367c9 -2155 -591c -b393 -7d23a191e4ae.html  
iv Health Affairs, “Housing and Hea lth: An Overview of the Literature.” 
https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hpb20180313.396577/  
v National Low Income Housing Coalition, “Housing Instability Increases Likelihood of Job Loss.” https://nlihc.org/resource/hou sing-
instability -increases -likelihood -job-loss 
vi American Psychiatric Association, “The Economic Cost of Depression is Increasing; Direct Costs are Only a Small Part.” 
https://www.psychiatry.org/News -room/APA -Blogs/The -Economic -Cost -of-Depression -is-Increasing  
vii Brookings Institute, “La sting scars: The impact of depression in early adulthood on subsequent labor market outcomes.” 
https://www.brookings.edu/research/lasting -scars -the-impact -of-depression -in-early -adulthood -on-subsequent -labor -market -
outcomes/  
viii John Hopkins Medicine, “The C ost of Employees’ Poor Health.” https://www.johnshopkinssolutions.com/the -cost-of-employees -
poor -health/  
 
   
  
ix National Bureau of Economic Research, “The Lifetime Costs of Bad Health.” 
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w23963/w23963.pdf  
