1 
Genesis COMMUNITY LOAN FUND 
Testimony of Liza Fleming-Ives 
On behalf of the Genesis Community Loan Fund 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
In support of LD 1074, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Fund New 
Affordable Housing for Low-income Househo/ds 
April 25, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is Liza 
Fleming—lves, and I am the executive director of the Genesis Community Loan 
Fund. 
The Genesis Fund is a nonprofit Community Development Financial Institution 
that connects communities with the capital and expertise they need to create 
affordable housing and other essential community resources. We have a 30-year 
track record of providing financing as well as expert project assistance to 
nonprofit organizations and mission-oriented developers throughout Maine and 
Northern New England. 
Today, l am here to speak in support of LD 1074. 
As Genesis works with communities across the state, we hear stories every day 
about people struggling to find affordable housing—and l know many of you have 
heard those stories, too. News outlets regularly report on how rental shortages 
and soaring rents are forcing people into temporary housing situations and even
2 
homelessness. We've even heard reports of working people living in rent-to-own 
storage sheds never intended as housing. 
The only way for Maine communities to survive and thrive is to increase the 
number of places for people to rent affordably. 
And the good news is that we can do that with the right funding resources. 
Earlier this year, the Genesis Fund began working through a contract with 
MaineHousing to assist municipalities, community groups, small scale developers, 
and nonprofit organizations in addressing Maine's housing crisis. 
A Genesis team presented eight workshops in different regions of the state and 
over 120 people participated. 
ln just ten weeks, we identified over a dozen tangible projects that will be ready 
to move forward if funding is available. These projects are in communities like 
Springvale, Sanford, Kittery, Bowdoinham, Thomaston, Rockport, Winslow, 
Ellsworth, Machias, Carrabassett Valley and Houlton. 
And they're not the only projects out there. We continue to hear from new 
communities and project developers every week. 
They know what can work in their communities —it is critical that there is funding 
to support them. 
Maine must build more housing all over the state. Genesis and local groups and 
project developers statewide have plans and solutions ready. What we need is 
funding. That's why we urge you to support LD 1074 and funding to develop new 
affordable housing. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
