                                                                                                                                      
 
Testimony In Support of  LD 1074:  An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Fund New 
Affordable Housing for Low -Income Households  
 
April 25, 2023  
 
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs . My name is Ninette Irabaruta, and I am the Director of Public Policy 
and Advocacy at United Way of Southern Maine (UWSM).  I send this written testimony  today  on behalf 
of UWSM to support LD  1074 : An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Fund New Affordable 
Housing for Low -Income Households . 
 
UWSM is an organization that mobilizes the caring power of community by bringing people , 
organizations , and resources together to address immediate needs and find long -term solutions to the 
challenging problems of our times. And one of our most challenging problems today  and the foreseeable 
future  is the housing shortage  across the State of Maine.  
 
This bill seeks to provid e funding to  increase the affordable housing stock  for low -income households  in 
our State.   
 
The housing crisis was a problem in Maine even before the pandemic , but the  pandemic has shed a 
brighter light on our housing shortage . The price of buying a house rose 25% from April 2021 to April 
20221. Both buyers and renters have found themselves competing for the limited supply of housing. This 
is even more difficult for low -income households, who struggle to find safe and affordable housing . 
 
A study published last year by  Harvard University ’s Joint Center for Housing Studies found 41.1 percent 
of tenants in the State to be c ost-burdened by rent, with almost 20 percent being ‘severely’ cost -
burdened2 and spending more than 30 percent of their gross income on housing.  The study shows that 
rent has become unaffordable for nearly half of all Maine tenants. In Southern Maine alone, more  than 
61,000 households  and 47% of all renters  spend more than 30% of their income on housing costs 
(including rent, home loans, taxes, insurance, homeowners’ association fees, and utilities).  
 
When an individual spends more than 30% of their income on housing, it means they may not be able to 
afford medicine, health care, healthy food, or save for unexpected expenses or retirement. Without these 
necessities, people cannot thrive.  
 
At UWSM, we understand that there are multiple factors as to why there is a shortage of affordable 
housing for lo w-income households . Maine has an aging population, workforce shortages , and supply 
chain issues that are barriers to constructing more affordable housing . Maine also has  few financial  
incentives that encourage the development of affordable homes. Passing this bond will not completely 
solve the housing short age, but it is a critical step that should be taken .  
 
We encourage you to support and pass this bill so that those in much need in our state can thrive, not 
just survive.  
 
Respectfully, thank you for your service  and time.  
 
1 LeClaire, Hannah. "April Home Sales Fell 21% in Maine, but Prices Went through the Roof." Portland Press Herald , 19 May 
2022. https://www.pressherald.com/2022/05/19/april -home -sales -fell-20-in-maine -but-prices -went -through -the-roof/  
2 https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/state -nations -housing -2022   
