207-712-2232  | 3iHoME.org | paul@3ihome.org131st Session of the Maine State Legislature 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
April 25, 2023: Statement of Paul Linet, Founder & CEO, 3i 
Housing of Maine in Support of LD 1074: An Act to Authorize 
A General Bond Fund Issue to Fund New 
Affordable Housing 
Senator Rotundo , Repr esentative Sachs, members of the Select Committee. My  name is Paul 
Linet. I am the Founder and CEO of 3i Housing of Maine (“3i HoME” ), a 501c3 non-profit 
headquartered in Topsham. Thank you for the opportunity to deliver these remarks in strong 
support of LD 1074. 
Along with our partner, Preservation of A ffordable Housing (POAH), 3i HoM E is well 
along in the local permitting process to develop a totally accessible, affordable housing 
project to be located in Scarborough at the site of the former harness race track. Thos e 
plans are to develop 1, 2 and 3 bedroom affordable rental apartments that will be home 
to 51 households  in which at least one member has a mobility impair ment or physical 
disability. Our  3i HoME model is taken from the core tenets  in our name: Independent 
living through Innovative technology  in an Integrated home and c ommunity based 
setting, supported by person-centered coordinated services. 
The national affordable housing c risis is well documented and under stood. What is less 
well known, but also acute, is the need for accessible, supportive housing for people 
with disabilities. Despite the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) being the law of the 
land for more than 30 year s, an antiquated bias still exists that leaves too m any Maine 
people with disabilities homeless or relegated to placement in a diminishing number of 
inadequately staffed long term care institutions. 
There simply is a lack of affordable AND accessible housing in our s tate. The 
consequence for families in Maine is life on the streets, or liv ing in vehicles at the 
Kennebunk rest stop on the Maine Turnpike (like the Cannell family), or finding a 
shelter with an opening and the infras tructure to accomm odate the needs of people 
with disabilities, or breaking up the family unit or  paying for individuals to cycle 
through 

207-712-2232 | 3iHoME.org | paul@3ihome.orgemergency departments and hospitals. This is not the way life should be: not in our state, not in any state. Enactment of LD 1074 will provide a path forward so that the 3i HoME model can be built in southern Maine and then be replicated in other parts of the state. We have received dozens of inquiries from individuals throughout the state and elsewhere wanting to know when the Scarborough project will be ready. And we have received expressions of support from municipal leaders around Maine interested in bringing the 3i HoME model to their communities. In an article entitled “There is a Looming Housing Crisis for People with Disabilities” (The Hill, November 2, 2022) reference was made to the more than 18 million people in the United States eligible for housing assistance but not receiving it. This has been called a “humanitarian crisis”. As in other states, low income people with disabilities in Maine are being excluded from exercising their right to independent living as codified in the ADA because of the absence of accessible housing. Enacting LD 1074 will bring us closer to the time when all people in the State of Maine can move through the world on their own terms. And as we make these investments to meet a basic human need, we move closer to the day when headlines like the one concerning the Cannell family – “Nobody would choose this: A turnpike rest area and a van become home for one Maine family” will no longer be a part of our regular lexicon. I urge your support for innovative affordable housing projects like 3i HoME by enacting LD 1074. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify on this vitally important topic.

