 
Testimony of the Island Institute in Support of LD 1 074: An Act to Authorize a General Fund 
Bond Issue to Fund New Affordable Housing for Low -income Households  
April 25, 2023  
  
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , and members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs , my name is Stephanie Welch , and I offer this testimony on behalf of the Island 
Institute in  support of LD 1 074 and funding for affordable housing in Maine .   
  
The Island Institute is a 40 -year -old nonprofit organization based in Rockland, Maine. We work to 
sustain Maine’s island and coastal communities. The Island Institute’s community development 
work focuses on resilient economies, workforce pathways, strong l eadership, and climate solutions. 
The availability of quality , affordable housing is foundational to the viability of all communities, and 
the issue of housing is even more challenging on islands and in remote coastal areas.   
  
The Island Institute works closely with community leaders and stakeholders to understand the 
challenges they face, and housing consistently emerges as a key issue affecting every aspect of island and coastal life. Thriving communities need places for medical workers, teachers, town 
employees, carpenters, fishermen, emergency responders, small business workers and other 
essential service employees to live. Due to their rem oteness  and limited transportation options, 
critical community members must live o n the islands  or in the r emote c oastal community  where 
they work . 
 The beauty and culture of Maine’s coastline continues to attract new residents, adding pressure to an already stressed housing market, and increasing the need for essential services – and for 
essential service workers – in these communities. Maine Housing’s Affordable Housing Initiative for 
Maine Islands provides some relief, in the form of forgivable loans to finance multi- family rental 
housing on islands.  Prior investments like this have had pos itive impacts in terms of attracting and 
retaining families in some of the smallest communities along our coast. In these communities, one 
family, one teacher, one person , can make a huge diff erence.  
 The existing funding is simply not adequate to address the significant needs in these communities. 
Remote island and coastal areas , like inland communities, face  challenges related to  rising costs of 
materials and land, and a lack of capacity  to manage construction projects. These communities face 
additional financial challenges due to limited land availability and the added  cost o f transporting 
workers and construction materials to remote islands or coastal  areas . Solving these financial 
challenges is a good first step toward ensuring a stock of available, quality, affordable housing.  
 The Island Institute strongly supports  investment  to address  the affordable housing challenges all 
Mainers face, which are particularly magnified on islands and along the coast. We urge you to support LD 1074.
  
 
