DEVELOP ' BUILD ' MA NAGE Testimony in Favor of LD 1074 — Appropriations Committee 
Tim Reinken representing ReinCorp 
We are a real estate development, construction, and property management company based in Sanford, 
Maine 
We have been in business since 1986 and have focused on residential, multi-family, and commercial 
development. 
We are a vertically integrated company that specializes in taking a project from raw land, through the 
design and municipal approval process, into construction as the general contractor, and continuing into 
the operational phase as the property manager. 
We currently manage approximately 50 residential units in York County. 
We are actively involved in the local business community and support economic development efforts. 
York County is currently experiencing a housing crisis unparalleled to anything our company has 
experienced in the past 37 years. We are seeing an overall lack of housing availability, but most 
noticeable is the lack of affordable housing. 
Historically, our business has catered to market rate housing. But today, we are seeing hard working 
individuals like teachers, service workers, and tradespeople who cannot afford market rate housing. 
The lack of affordable housing has led to a lack of workers and is stiﬂing our local economic 
development efforts and forcing businesses to close. 
Our company would like to commend the efforts by MaineHousing to address these issues. We believe 
the Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program is an excellent opportunity to interduce new developers 
into the affordable housing marketplace and to provide housing units across the state in a timely manner. 
Our company has prepared an 18-unit workforce housing development that is shovel ready. We are 
prepared to submit an application to MaineHousing as soon as funding is available and are prepared to 
break ground immediately. Our company, and others throughout the state, have committed extensive 
resources to develop solutions addressing the housing crisis. State funding is the ﬁnal step to make these 
housing units a reality. 
Real estate development and project construction can be a timely endeavor. There is an acute need for 
funding today, but there is also a need for consistent long-term funding to incentivize developers to invest 
in the future. Many companies are hesitant to invest thousands of dollars into preparing a project without 
certainty the target program will l1ave funding at the time of application. 
ReinCorp ~ 469 Main Street - Suite 300 ~ Springvale, Maine 04083 
Phone (207) 490~ 187 8 - Fax (207) 396-4402 ~ ReinCorpDevelopment.com
