 
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United Before the 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
In CONCERN for : LD 1602, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Stakeholder  
Group Convened by the Emergency Medical Services ’ Board on Financial Health of Ambulance 
Services  
 
Public Hearing: Tuesday, May 2 , 2023 at 1 :00 PM , Cross Building, Room 220  
 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry  and distinguished members of the Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:  
 
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse  of nearly 45 years , President of the Maine 
State Nurses Association, Vice- President of National Nurses Unit ed, and a resident of Brewer. I 
am providing testimony in concern regarding LD 1602 on behalf of Maine State Nurses 
Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 nurses and caregivers across the state of Maine . MSNA/NNU requests that  you amend  the bill to clarify that no -
transport calls and community paramedicine do not include caring for hospital -at-home patients. 
Otherwise, w e urge you to vote “No” on LD 1602. 
 MSNA/NNU is concerned that LD 1602’s requirement that carriers  reimburs e no-transport calls 
and community paramedicine could be used to support dangerous hospital -at-home programs. 
Hospital -at-home programs allow hospitals to replace  the inpatient hospital care that acute -level 
patients need, including 24- hour care by a registered nurse and immediate emergency response, 
with two daily visits by nurses or community paramedics and a 30- minute emergency response  
time.
1 Hospital -at-home patients are at serious risk of worsening illness or even death, while 
patients treat ed in a hospital receive regular assessment s by nurses and doctors. Additionally, 
response time is crucial when a patient’s condition deteriorates. Allowing  patients to  wait up to 
30 minutes for an ambulance  could be deadly. In contrast, a patient in a fully operational hospital 
would receive an immediate emergency response.  
 Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United  thanks the committee for accepting 
these comments.  
 Sincerely,  
 
 
Coralie Giles, RN  
President, Maine State Nurses Association  
Vice -President, National Nurses United  
 
1 For an in-depth discussion of Medicare hospital -at-home programs, see National Nurses United’s report at 
https://www.nationalnursesunited.org/sites/default/files/nnu/documents/0922_Medicare_HospitalAtHome_Report.pdf . 

Coralie Giles
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United
LD 1602
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
In CONCERN for: LD 1602, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the 
Stakeholder
Group Convened by the Emergency Medical Services’ Board on Financial Health of 
Ambulance Services
Public Hearing: Tuesday, May 2, 2023 at 1:00 PM, Cross Building, Room 220 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Committee on
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse of nearly 45 years, President of the 
Maine State Nurses Association, Vice-President of National Nurses United, and a 
resident of Brewer. I am providing testimony in concern regarding LD 1602 on behalf
of Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), 
representing 4,000 nurses and caregivers across the state of Maine. MSNA/NNU 
requests that you amend the bill to clarify that no-transport calls and community 
paramedicine do not include caring for hospital-at-home patients. Otherwise, we urge 
you to vote “No” on LD 1602.
MSNA/NNU is concerned that LD 1602’s requirement that carriers reimburse 
no-transport calls and community paramedicine could be used to support dangerous 
hospital-at-home programs. Hospital-at-home programs allow hospitals to replace the 
inpatient hospital care that acute-level patients need, including 24-hour care by a 
registered nurse and immediate emergency response, with two daily visits by nurses 
or community paramedics and a 30-minute emergency response time.1  
Hospital-at-home patients are at serious risk of worsening illness or even death, while 
patients treated in a hospital receive regular assessments by nurses and doctors. 
Additionally, response time is crucial when a patient’s condition deteriorates. 
Allowing patients to wait up to 30 minutes for an ambulance could be deadly. In 
contrast, a patient in a fully operational hospital would receive an immediate 
emergency response.
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United thanks the committee for 
accepting these comments.
Sincerely,
Coralie Giles, RN
President, Maine State Nurses Association
Vice-President, National Nurses United
1  For an in-depth discussion of Medicare hospital-at-home programs, see National 
Nurses United’s report at 
https://www.nationalnursesunited.org/sites/default/files/nnu/documents/0922_Medica
re_HospitalAtHome_Report.pdf.
