Testimony in Support of LD 1602 
An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Stakeholder Group Convened 
by the Emergency Medical Services ’ Board on Financial Heaith of Ambulance 
Services 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Committee 
on Health Coverage, insurance, and Financial Services. My name is Rick Petrie, andl 
am a Paramedic who has worked in the Maine EMS system for 42 years. l am now the 
Chief Operations Officer for North East Mobile Health, a for-profit Ambulance Service 
based in Scarborough Maine and the Program Director for the Jackman Paramedic 
project. 
l was also fortunate to serve as a member of the EMS Blue-Ribbon Committee whose 
work supports the foundation for this, and other, legislation supporting Emergency 
Medical Sen/ices in Maine. 
As the Blue-Ribbon Committee heard very clearly, EMS needs help not only 
strengthening our reimbursement system, but also providing the support that will enable 
us to develop and deliver innovative Community Paramedicine programs that will save 
the health care system in Maine, and Maine Residents, potentially millions of dollars 
annually. This legislation came about as the result of a thoughtful review of the financial 
status of our system and will help accomplish the goals established by that committee. 
We need to make sure that the gains we made in the last Legislative session with 
private insurance carrier reimbursement does not expire and includes all ambulance 
transports. 
We were also able to identify that between 20 — 30% of the calls that we respond to are 
no-transports, meaning that there is either no patient there when we arrive at the scene, 
or the patient is assessed, sometimes treated, but then refuses transport. For each of 
these calls there is an ambulance dispatched with a crew, and they are unavailable 
anywhere from 30 — 60 minutes on average while assessing/treating a patient. Because 
the reimbursement system is set up to generally only provide reimbursement whena 
patient is transported to a hospital, we can't bill for the majority of these calls. Medicare 
and Medicaid will provide some limited reimbursement for some of the calls ata 
reduced rate, but it doesn't come close to covering the actual cost of providing the 
service. 
Community Paramedicine is a growing field within EMS that allows for more efficient 
utilization of EMS providers as well as helping to fill healthcare gaps in Maine 
Communities. The program is developed and delivered in conjunction with local family 
physicians and Home Health Care, and is a supportive program designed to reduce 
hospital visits and re-admissions. Unfortunately, there is no consistent, reliable 
reimbursement system, placing the cost burden directly on the local EMS agency.
The last thing this bill does is put a cost reporting system in place. The EMS system in 
Maine has been loosely organized in Maine, with local communities developing systems 
to meet their needs, and many relying heavily on volunteers. This is no longer sustainable. 
However, to move forward, we need to know exactly how much the system that is in place 
costs, and how much a sustainable response and transfer system will cost in the future. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Rick Petrie, EMT-P 
rpetrie@nemhs.com 
207-754-9109
