 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1602, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Stakeholder Group Convened by the 
Emergency Medical Services’ Board on Financial Health of Ambulance Services 
 
May 2, 2023 
 
Chair Bailey, Chair Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony neither for nor against  LD 1602. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
What does LD 1602 do?  LD 1602 proposes statutory changes based on recommendations included in the 
report of the Stakeholder Group convened by the Emergency Medical Services’ Board on the financial health of 
ambulance services in the State. The bill removes the repeal date related to the rate of reimbursement health 
insurance carriers are required to pay for covered emergency services provided by an ambulance service 
provider, and it removes the limitation that carriers are only required to reimburse for covered emergency 
services provided by an ambulance services provider. Additionally, LD 1602 requires health insurance carriers 
to reimburse ambulance service providers for nontransporting services at the same reimbursement rates for 
covered emergency services and prohibits health insurance carriers from requiring an ambulance services 
provider to obtain prior authorization before transporting an enrollee to, between, or from a hospital to a nursing 
home or other health care facility and requires carriers to reimburse for those services. 
 
Further, this bill requires health insurance carriers to consider the requirements of the federal Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services related to medical necessity when establishing the carrier’s own policies for 
medical necessity and requires carriers to reimburse ambulance services providers for covered services rendered 
through community paramedicine. 
 
Moreover, LD 1602 specifies the cost and performance metrics for the program for collecting and reporting cost 
and performance metrics related to emergency services that must be established by the Emergency Medical 
Services’ Board in rule and proposes to add 2 positions to the Emergency Medical Services’ Board to facilitate 
that program. Finally, the bill proposes to require the Maine Health Data Organization to report information on 
payments for ambulance services on its publicly accessible website. 
 
Discussion.  Ambulance services are an essential service to ensure the health and safety of all Maine people, and 
we appreciated the Stakeholder Group’s discussion around this important issue of access to emergency medical 
services, particularly access among the rural counties and communities of our state. The Stakeholder Group 
made good progress with regard to a number of challenging issues, but there is still more work to be done on this 
issue. 
 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1602 
May 2, 2023 
Page 2 
 
  
As this Committee is aware, ambulance services, along with emergency medical service organizations generally, 
are in danger of failing due to a lack of funding. While our Association does not take a position on the specific 
recommendations of LD 1602, we write to urge that the Stakeholder Group be extended so that discussions on 
this issue may continue.  
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
