 
P.O. Box 202 
Waterville, Maine 04903-0202 
 
 
 
EMS SUSTAINED FUNDING LEGISLATION  
 
The following Bills address the f unding recommendations in the report from the Blue Ribbon 
Commission to Study Emergency Medical Services in the State . This Report found that there is a 
minimum $70 mi llion needed to fully fund EMS services in Maine.  
 
These Bills would provide both short term emergency f unds for EMS providers (LD 526) and 
long term sustained funding (LD 1602, 1751, 1515). The long ter m funding bills would set the 
minimum rates for EMS services paid by health insurance carrier s the same as the Mainecare 
reimbursement rates for EMS providers. The total annual EMS system revenue from these 
bills is estimated at ~ $35 m illion.  The State would fund the remaining need with General Fund 
appropriations.  HEALTH INSURANCE REIMBURSEMENT 
 
LD 1602 An Act To Implement The Recommendations Of The Stakehol der Group 
Convened By The Emergency Medical Services' Board On Financial Health 
Of Ambulance Services 
 
Referred to HCIFS Committee 
Fiscal Note: none  
1. Health insurance carriers must pay at least 200% of Medicare ra te for covered emergency 
services.  
Annual Revenue estimate: $0 (Average Commercial Reimbursement i s currently about 
200% of Medicare for all providers and carriers) 
2. Health insurance carriers must reimburse ambulance service prov iders for non-
transporting services at the same reimbursement rates for cover ed emergency services.  
Annual EMS system revenue estimate: $3.5 mi llion 
3. Health insurance carriers must reimburse ambulance services pro viders for covered 
services rendered through community paramedicine in accordance w i t h  t h e  M a i n e  
Revised Statutes, Title 32, section 84, subsection 4.  
Annual revenue estimate: undetermined 
  
 
 MAINECARE REIMBURSEMENT 
 
LD 1751 An Act To Maximize Federal F unding In Support Of Emergency Medical 
Services 
 
Referred to HHS Committee Fiscal Note: $11.8 m illion 
EMS Assessment: $1.4 million 
Net Fiscal Impact: $10.4 m illion 
Annual EMS system Revenue Estimate: $31 million 
 
This bill establishes an ambulance service assessment fee on am bulance service providers in 
order to maximize federal funding for reimbursement to ambulanc e service providers under the 
MaineCare program. It also increases the reimbursement rates un der the MaineCare program for 
ambulance services, neonatal transport, no-transport calls and community paramedicine. 
 
STATE FUNDING 
 
LD 1515 An Act to F und Delivery of Emergency Medical Services 
 
Referred to CJPS Committee Fiscal Note: $70 m illion minus Main ecare and Insurance increases ~ $35 million 
 This bill provides General Fund appropriations to the Departmen t of Public Safety to support 
existing transportation costs of emergency medical services. Th ese appropriations must be 
reduced to the maximum extent possible through the use of publi c and private Medicaid match 
programs.  
SHORT TERM EMERGENCY FUNDING 
 
LD 526  An Act to Provide F unding to Emergency Medical Services Organizations 
 
Referred to CJPS Committee 
Fiscal note: $25 m illion in FY 24 
 
This bill provides a one-time General F und appropriation of $25,000,000 in fiscal year 2023-24 
to the Department of Public Safety targeting emergency medical services organizations at 
immediate risk of failing and leaving their service areas witho ut access to adequate emergency 
medical services. 
