_ - S-TATE OF MAINE - 
DEPARTMENT or ADMINISTRATIVE & FINANCIAL SERvIcEs
I 
, *;['_:“ 4% BURTON M. Czzoss BUILDING, 3*“ FLOOR I; I,,- 1"""r- _ 5;» , 
5) 78 STATE HOUSE STATION 5/ . '13. '7 
at it AUGusTA, MAINE 04333-0078 
< 
-1st?) I- 
-.f._""* ’ M? .~"' 
. SERVING THE Pusuc AND DELIVERING ESSENTIAL SERVICES To STATE GQVERNMENT 
JANET T. MILLS KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations 
Department of Administrative and Financial Sen/ices 
testifying neither for nor against 
LD 655, An Act to Address Climate Change by Reducing Carbon Emissions from State Vehicles 
Sponsored by Sen. Chipman 
To the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on State 
and Local Government, I am Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations for the 
Department of Administrative and Financial Sen/ices. l am providing testimony neither for nor 
against LD 655.- 
Central Fleet Management ’s current electric vehicle purchase efforts are calibrated to meet the 
goals codify by P.L. 2021, c. 693 of increasing Central Fleet’s annual acquisition of light-duty 
motor vehicles to 50% plug-in hybrid electric (PHEV) and zero-emission (ZEV) vehicles by 2025, 
and 100% by 2030. These are achievable, but intentionally ambitious goals to establish the State 
as a Leader by Example. The 2021 law included critically important language that the goals be 
met “to the extent practicable ” which acknowledges the magnitude of this shift in fleet 
composition and recognizes the challenges posed by unpredictable market factors including the 
ongoing chip shortages and other supply chain issues presently limiting the overall availability 
of electric vehicles, as well as the need for a more reliable charging infrastructure throughout the 
state. 
LD 655 layers upon the existing law in a way that isn’t detrimental but doesn’t necessarily create 
added value, by establishing an explicit preference for battery electric vehicles (BEV) to the 
extent that a battery electric vehicle meets the need for which the vehicle is being purchased 
and is commercially available. The current law is already inclusive of battery electric vehicles 
within zero emission vehicles which are defined as having no tailpipe emissions. 
Central Fleet has created a policy that prioritizes zero emission and plug-in hybrid vehicles while 
acknowledging that market factors or agency needs may preclude selection of a zero emission 
or a plug-in hybrid vehicle. Under Central Fleet’s policy when a zero emission vehicle is not 
available or workable for an agency, a vehicle purchase must follow an established hierarchy 
that requires selection of the vehicle with the least emissions. Plug-in hybrid vehicles are the 
second tier in the hierarchy. The third tier includes hybrid electric vehicles (HEV), alternative fuel 
vehicles, and vehicles with other innovative technologies that reduce vehicle emissions. Lastly, 
PHONE: (207) 624-7800 www.Mainc.g0v FAX: (207)624-7804
the fourth tier allows for internal combustion engine vehicles that are the most fuel efficient in 
class. 7 - -7 
To be exempt from a zero emission or plug-in hybrid vehicle, the agency must file for an 
exemption in one of . five categories. The DAFS Commissioner ’s designee may authorize 
exemptions for: 
- Emergency response vehicles when proof is provided that purchase of an EV would 
obstruct the response;' 
- Vehicles requiring modifications that cannot be accommodated by an EV; 
~ Vehicles whose range needs exceed the EPA estimated range of suitable EV options 
or will be utilized in a territory where charging infrastructure is not in place; 
- Situations where no currently produced EV option meets the agency's needs; or 
- Situations when the vehicle cost is excessive as compared to non-EV models or 
agency funding is not adequate to support the purchase. 
This policy is the mechanism by which Central Fleet is actively steering agencies toward zero 
emission and plug-in hybrid vehicles. It embodies the intent of LD 655 while also identifying the 
least emitting alternatives in those cases when a battery electric vehicle is not available or 
doesn't meet the agency's programmatic needs. 
The need to include alternatives to battery electric vehicles is demonstrated by Central Fleet’s 
frustrating year of cancelled orders. ln 2022, Central Fleet had 70 vehicle orders cancelled by 
the manufacturer —not just for electric vehicles, but for hybrid and gas fueled vehicles as well- 
including 6 model year 2023 Ford F150 Lightning BEVs, 5 model year 2022 Ford F150 Lightning 
BEVs, and 39 model year 2022 Hyundai Sedan Hybrids. If those orders had come through, they 
would have comprised more than 25% of Central Fleet’s 2022 vehicle acquisitions. Instead, 
Central Fleet is one full order cycle behind based on the significantly reduced vehicle production 
across all classes. 
The Department believes that Central Fleet’s approach is the most effective in prioritizing battery 
electric vehicles and plug-in hybrids, and requiring exemptions for other fuel sources, while also 
acknowledging the reality of market availability and agency needs. 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. l am happy to answer any questions. 
PHONE: (207) 624-7800 www.Maine.g0v FAX: (207) 624-7804
