  
 
March 1 3, 202 3 
 
TESTIMONY OF LESLIE ANDERSON                        
President and CEO of the Propane Gas Association of New England  
  
BEFORE THE MAINE  COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GO VERNMENT  
 
In Opposition to LD 655 An  Act to Address C limate Change by Reducing Carbon Emissions from State 
Vehicles.  
 
The Propane Gas Association of New England (PGANE) is pleased to have the opportunity to offer its 
comments regarding LD 655 . 
  
The Propane Gas Association of New England is a regional alternative energy trade association 
representing members of the propane industry in the 6 New England States. We exist to serve the 
propane industry by promoting safety, education,  and public awaren ess of the uses of propane. Our 
membership includes  propane companies and suppliers, including numerous  small companies who are 
often family owned and operated, many for several generations.  
 
We oppose LD 655  as written , because it excludes and limits other clean alternative fuels.  We request 
that you include propane powered alternative fuel vehicles along with battery powered vehicles 
throughout this bill or vote NO on LD 655 .  
 
While I appreciate the intent of the bill is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the transportation 
sector, choosing electric only inst ead of requiring a diverse collection of low - and no -carbon engine 
solutions for vehicles is a bad idea.  Propane Autogas is the most widely used alternative fuel around the 
world and it is a proven technology without the limitations of electric vehicles.  Propane is capable of 
poweri ng large vehicles, and it excels  in the Class 4 -8 vehicle size, the size that is not economically or 
realistically served by electricity.  
 
Please consider that propane vehicles offer significant emissions reductions over traditional gas and 
diesel, providing more vehicle options with significant horsepower advantages over electric engines. 
Further, in times of emergency, low -emission internal  combustion engines do not need to be sidelined for 
recharging. Propane vehicles are not affected by cold weather, starting at -44 degrees in the wintertime, 
unlike battery powered vehicles whose range and efficiency are significantly hampered by cold weat her 
conditions.  
 
Electric cars are only as clean as the electricity that they come from , and if we are still using fossil fuels to 
generate electricity, those electric cars aren't truly zero emissions on a life cycle perspective.  The source 
energy for pro pane is 1 verses 2.52 for ISO New England. Today, propane vehicles are extremely  clean 
when all emissions are calculated , and a s the grid increases in renewable energy sources so will propane.  
When the grid is stressed  as it is every winter, the electricity plants switch from using natural gas to diesel 

or heating oil to generate electricity. For example, on January 16, 2022, 24% of the grid was running on 
oil and 3% was running on coal . 
 
Don't limit our state to only  electric vehicles, but instead allow a variety of low -emiss ion options to give 
the state flexibility and security in times of emergency. Disincentivizing  propane in Maine would put our 
citizens at risk because a strong industry is required if we are to meet the numerous electricity backup 
energy sources that utilize pro pane today.  Propane is the perfect partner for renewals as it provides 
critical backup energy when electricity is out for g enerators in our  homes, hospitals, cell towers, and 
emergency management agencies, it is used to heat water for the homeless  showers , to heat outdoor 
spaces for restaurants,  to warm baby bottles in heating shelters , and numerous other situations. As we 
speak today,  propane is being used on the ground in Ukraine and neighboring countries, serving hot 
meals to victims and refugees of the war. If you don’t support our industry,  we will not be around to meet 
these critical needs.   
 
From an environmental justice perspective, the state can meet the  emission  goal s faster with propane 
powered vehicles for Class 3 -7 at a fraction of the price of electric vehicles in this class.  ME can buy 3-4 
propane buses , verses one electric bus  for an environmental justice comm unity.  Obviously, propane 
buses get us to cleaner emis sions faster when you consider the cost differences.  Instead of 4 electric 
buses in ME we could be purchasing 12-15 propane buses and reducing emissions and protecting health 
3-4 times as fast.  Federal money is also included in the infrastructure bill f or propane buses in addition to 
the electric monies . 
 
The state should also consider the global environmental justice ramifications of the electric batteries it is 
endorsing.  Today, more than ever before, we must be cautious as we  draft a plan to improve the health 
of Maine  families, not only to ensure environmental equity in areas of disparity within Maine , but also to 
prevent environmental detriment to the health of families in other parts of the globe. The atmosphere  
knows no boundaries, so the reduction of emissions in  Maine  should not increase emissions in other parts 
of our planet. Promoting battery technology through the promotion of electricity is currently inflicting 
environmental harm to a much more egreg ious extent amongst the poorest and most disadvantaged 
global communities. Locations such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo have plaintiffs who have 
filed lawsuits against Tesla and other companies that are buying cobalt from these locations to make their 
electric batteries. 1 Non -renewable heavy metals like c obalt and lithium are harmful to the environment 
both when extracted and at end of life.2  
 
Propane is nontoxic, does not contaminate groundwater or surface  water, is portable, and is already 
present across our state supporting local businesses and employees by providing green jobs.  In Maine  we 
have numerous small businesses and family -owned  businesses  that make up our industry.  Most of  our 
members are local Maine  companies employing Maine  citizens  and contributing to their local 
communities.  Utilizing propane contributes to Maine ’s economy and promotes green alternative energy 
usage here in our State.   
 
 
1 https://www.business -humanrights.org/en/latest -news/lawsuit -against -apple -google -tesla -and-others -re-child -labour -
drc/  
2 https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/phs/phs.asp?id=371&tid=64  
https://www.theguardian.com/global -development/2019/dec/18/how -the-race-for-cobalt -risks -turning -it-from -miracle -
metal -to-deadly -chemical  
Unlike electricity, there are no ozone depleting chemicals used in the transportation of propane.  Electricity 
transmission releases s ulfur hexafluoride , which is used as an electrical insulator  gas. According to the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, SF6 is the most potent greenhouse gas that it has evaluated, 
with a global warming potential of 23,900[25] times that of CO2 . Increasing our reliance on electricity will 
only add to more releases of SF6.  European countries are banning the use of SF6  in all but high voltage 
switchgear , because its lifespan is 800 -900 years in the high atmosphere . Why are we prom oting an energy 
source that contributes the most potent greenhouse gas to our environment?  
 
Using propane furthers the fundamental environmental goal to Reduce, Reuse, and Recycle as promoted 
by EPA and DEP. Most people do not realize that propane is a bip roduct of natural gas processing.  About 
5% of natural gas processing produces propane.  If propane is not captured and beneficially used to offset 
another energy source, it is simply burned off.  Propane is a partner with renewable energy as it is the 
perfec t backup for solar installations and wind turbines.  It is a recognized clean alternative fuel by EPA 
under the 1990 Clean Air Act, and it is an essential backup for our ever -increasing use of the electric grid.  
Renewable propane is also a viable innovation  and under development from renewable sources.   
  
Our industry is concerned about the environment and is actively working to reduce carbon emissions. 
Across the globe, propane is being used to solve the world’s greatest health threat, indoor air pollution 
caused primarily by burning wood for cooking and heating.  Over 3.5 million people die annually from 
cooking with solid fuels. This leads to deforestation at an alarming rate in many developing countries and 
causes enormous carbon dioxide emissions.  In addi tion, moving 100 families to propane from wood saves 
an acre of rainforest land.  Across the globe propane is being used improve human health, reduce carbon 
emissions, and reduce deforestation.  3 Maine  needs to join in this effort recognized by many countries 
around the globe, and partner with propane as a solution for reducing carbon dioxide emissions!  
 
I thank you for the opportunit y to comment before the committee  and ask you to include propane 
power ed vehicles along with battery powered vehicles throughout this bill or to vote NO on LD 655 . 
 
3https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=2ahUKEwi8r_CkxKrgAhVxTd8KHRHKDVsQFjAAegQICRAC
&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.wlpga.org%2Fwp -content%2Fuploads%2F2018%2F10%2FSubstituing -LPG-for-Wood -Carbon -and-
Deforestation -Impacts.pdf&usg=AOvVaw0tDVhcCRzteoCRO2sxX8jc  
 
