 
 
Committee on Housing  
℅ Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
May 8 , 2023  
 
RE: LD 1 787, Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry to Convene a Stakeholder Group Tasked with a Comprehensive Overhaul 
and Modernization of the State Subdivision Statutes  
 
Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere,  and Members of the Committee:  
 
 Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of  LD 1 787, “Resolve, 
Directing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to Convene a Stakeholder 
Group Tasked with a Comprehensive Overhaul and Modernization of the State Subdivision 
Statu tes”, on behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 members, supporters, and volunteers. 
Since 1843, Maine Audubon has worked to conserve Maine’s wildlife and wildlife habitat by 
engaging people in education, conservation, and action. The oldest and largest Ma ine-based 
conservation organization, Maine Audubon has eight public centers and sanctuaries across the 
state, seven chapters, and connects with more than 250,000 people annually.  
 
 Maine Audubon recognizes the incredible importance of land use law for creating 
thriving communities , and for conserving valuable habitats and natural resources. We also 
recognize the importance of re -evaluating existing statutes when they no longer adequately 
address the issues for which they were developed.  
 
Maine Audubon  participated in a policy group  discussion  that convened in response to 
the passage of LD 2003 by the 130th Legislature to review  current subdivision law , the housing 
crunch, and the needs of today ’s municipalities . As a group , we determined there were lots of 
places where existing  subdivision law could be changed and improved to more closely align with  
the goals of  LD 2003, encourage more multi -purpose town centers and residential areas, allow  
higher density housing in growth areas, and also better protect the  precious waters , farms, 
forests, wildlife, and habitat that support all life and contribute to local economies  in Maine .  
However, the group also  agreed there was simply not enough time to do a thorough and 
meaningful review of all the issues in the few months we had last fall.   
 
By convening a  stakeholder group with various interests and perspectives to evaluate and 
modernize the state subdivision statutes, such as proposed in LD 1787, Maine can provide better  
 
 
support for municipalities, landowners, and homeowners in their quest for a bright er future.  We 
stand ready to offer our expertise to the group once convened.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Eliza Donoghue, Esq.  
Director of Advocacy  

