 
 
mainehousingcoalition.org                              info@mainehousingcoalition.org 307 Cumberland Street, Portland, ME 04101  
 
131st Legislature 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Testimony of Laura Mitchell, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition   
May 9, 2023 
In favor of 1787 - An Act to Clarify Statewide Laws Regarding Affordable Housing and Accessory Dwelling Units  
Hello Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name 
is Laura Mitchell, I serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition. 
The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) is a nonprofit membership organization of more than 140 Maine 
housing development, architecture, construction, design, engineering, shelter, and housing services organizations. We 
work to address Maine’s housing crisis by advocating for the creation and preservation of housing for all people in 
Maine.  
MAHC is sharing this testimony today in favor of LD 1787 , a Resolve, Directing the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry to Convene a Stakeholder Group Tasked with a Comprehensive Overhaul and Modernization 
of the State Subdivision Statutes sponsored by Rep. Jack Ducharme. 
Maine is in a housing crisis that is impacting all towns. Maine needs more housing to accommodate our workforce 
needs, our young people, and older Mainers. 
Maine’s current state subdivision statute has a unique role in making it more difficult to build housing to address the 
crisis. The statute requires subdivision review of multi-family housing unit divisions even when land isn’t being 
subdivided. This adds time, expense, and great uncertainly for developers to engage in developing this housing. This is 
further exacerbated because the statute kicks in at 3 subdivisions (or units), which is a very low threshold for the 
extensive review and approvals process that it initiates.  
A thorough review of the subdivision statute is needed to examine how it applies to multifamily housing. There are 
other tools to regulate multifamily housing if the goal is to have some municipal review. The goals of subdivision review 
and its application in Maine need to be defined and clarified through LD1787’s work.  
MAHC supports LD 1787 to reduce barriers to ensuring all Maine people have a place to call home. This work is a long-
term strategy that fits well into a comprehensive strategic approach Maine can take in addressing the housing crisis. 
Laura Mitchell
Maine Affordable Housing Coalition
LD 1787
131st Legislature - Joint Select Committee on Housing
Testimony of Laura Mitchell, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing 
Coalition - May 9, 2023
In favor of 1787 - An Act to Clarify Statewide Laws Regarding Affordable Housing 
and Accessory Dwelling Units 
Hello Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing, my name is Laura Mitchell, I serve as the Executive Director 
of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition.
The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) is a nonprofit membership 
organization of more than 140 Maine housing development, architecture, 
construction, design, engineering, shelter, and housing services organizations. We 
work to address Maine’s housing crisis by advocating for the creation and 
preservation of housing for all people in Maine. 
MAHC is sharing this testimony today in favor of LD 1787, a Resolve, Directing the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to Convene a Stakeholder 
Group Tasked with a Comprehensive Overhaul and Modernization of the State 
Subdivision Statutes sponsored by Rep. Jack Ducharme.
Maine is in a housing crisis that is impacting all towns. Maine needs more housing to 
accommodate our workforce needs, our young people, and older Mainers.
Maine’s current state subdivision statute has a unique role in making it more difficult 
to build housing to address the crisis. The statute requires subdivision review of 
multi-family housing unit divisions even when land isn’t being subdivided. This adds 
time, expense, and great uncertainly for developers to engage in developing this 
housing. This is further exacerbated because the statute kicks in at 3 subdivisions (or 
units), which is a very low threshold for the extensive review and approvals process 
that it initiates. 
A thorough review of the subdivision statute is needed to examine how it applies to 
multifamily housing. There are other tools to regulate multifamily housing if the goal 
is to have some municipal review. The goals of subdivision review and its application 
in Maine need to be defined and clarified through LD1787’s work. 
MAHC supports LD 1787 to reduce barriers to ensuring all Maine people have a 
place to call home. This work is a long-term strategy that fits well into a 
comprehensive strategic approach Maine can take in addressing the housing crisis.

