r' HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
it 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Daniel J_ Ankeles TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
7 Beech Drive 
Brunswick, ME 04011 
Daniel.Ankeles@legislature.maine.gov 
Cell Phone: (207) 756-3793 
April 12, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Dan Ankeles 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Presenting LD 842, An Act to Strengthen the Northern New England Passenger Rail 
Authority by Inviting Participation on the Board of Directors by and Negotiating for 
Funding from the State of New Hampshire and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and honorable colleagues on the Transportation 
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I am Representative Dan Ankeles, and 
I serve House District 100, a central slice of Brunswick that includes our downtown, Bowdoin 
College, the former naval airbase and Mere Point. It’s an honor to be with you to present LD 
842, An Act to Strengthen the Northern New England Passenger Rail Authority by Inviting 
Participation on the Board of Directors by and Negotiating for Funding from the State of 
New Hampshire and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
This was a bill I submitted on behalf of Maine’s rail advocates. The title of the bill effectively 
explains the entirety of what this bill does. The goal is to deepen our relationship with the other 
Downeaster host states and eventually secure additional policy and ﬁnancial commitments from 
them - the idea being that this might free up additional resources here in Maine for future capital 
needs. 
In the interest of transparency, I want to let the committee know that I did share the text of this 
bill ahead of time with the Northern New England Passenger Rail Authority. Their board 
discussed the bill at one of its meetings earlier this year and opted to oppose it. I’ll leave it to 
NNEPRA to walk the committee through the deliberations that led to that decision. 
I am happy to answer questions, but I would prefer you direct them to either rail advocates or 
NNEPRA later in the hearing. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
District I00: Brunswick (part)
