Crystal Nicholas
Greene
LD 1209
Dear Legislators,
I write to beg you to remove the onerous mandates of vaccinations/immunizations 
from our lives and vote to support LD 1209.  Vaccines have severely sickened and 
injured not only myself, but both of my children as well.  Although we supposedly 
have access to "medical exemptions", these are not functionally available except 
where injury is severe, and even then these exemptions are dictated not only by 
vaccine manufacturer's scanty "safety trials", but also limited to a doctor's fear of risk 
to their medical license should they issue one.   A child must be injured and damaged 
before an exemption will even be considered, and only for that particular 
vaccine--they must still receive every other shot.  Any attempt to recover losses from 
severe injury and/or the death of a beloved child involves taking on the lawyers of the
Department of Justice; this is an agonizingly slow, not to mention cruel path for any 
parent to have to follow in the wake of loss of their child's health due to "public 
health" mandates.  Pharmaceutical manufacturers are essentially free of liability and 
there is little oversight into their conduct.
Parents of vaccine-injured children are continuously harassed and ridiculed as per 
pressure put in place by the medical-industrial complex.  Doctors receive little to no 
training in recognizing and diagnosing vaccine injury, and are recipients of hefty 
bonuses should children take the entire CDC Vaccination Schedule on time. Forced 
immunizations are devoid of compassion for the individual; they are a 
"one-size-fits-all" approach to pharmaceutical use that should be a personal choice.  
Mandates care not about bio-individuality, genetic predispositions, genetic mutations, 
nor a child's sensitivity as per environmental exposures, or that all of these interact to 
uniquely influence each child's health.
Vaccine mandates violate our rights in every way.  They violate our parental rights 
under Common Law, so that we may not superintend the health of our children. They 
violate our Constitutional rights, where our liberties are removed in exchange for a 
promise of safety backed by dubious trials.  They violate International law, 
specifically the Nuremberg Code and the International Covenant of Civil and Political
Rights, born of the sacrifices of our forefathers in foreign wars so that we may be free
of the horrors they witnessed.  Mandated vaccinations violate our right to Informed 
Consent, where the free consent of the patient is absolutely essential in order to 
receive treatment. And these compulsory medications violate our civil rights; without 
medical freedom, we are nothing more than slaves, for if we have no control over our 
health, we have no control over our lives.
Peer-reviewed studies have been conducted and released show that unvaccinated 
children are healthier than vaccinated children.  Not only do they show far lower rates
of autism, ADHD, allergies, and asthma, they also fall ill far less frequently, and are 
not as severely ill.
Compulsory vaccinations have been the Russian Roulette of childhood health since 
their inception.  Please free us from this repugnant, unlawful requirement by 
supporting LD 1209.
Respectfully, Crystal Nicholas
