Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee: 
 
Nearly nine years ago, my wife and I drove to Maine, from our home in Central Virginia, to 
enjoy an outdoor recreation-oriented family vacation. Though the journey—with a two-year-
old, five-year-old, and elderly Golden Retriever in tow—felt tedious at times, it certainly was 
worthwhile. Following two glorious weeks of adventure, mostly hiking and swimming, we found 
ourselves hungry for more of "the way life should be." Apart from the significant benefit of 
having lots of open space in which to exercise and explore, foremost among our concerns about 
relocation was the quality of upbringing it would afford our two kids. 
 
In light of life-altering personal experiences with vaccination, the first variable about which I 
inquired was equal access to educational opportunities. Suffice it to say, we have come to 
appreciate that no medical intervention should be a one-size-fits-all proposition; to quote the 
first principle under Article 6 - Consent from the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human 
Rights adopted by UNESCO's General Conference on October 19, 2005:  
 
Any preventive, diagnostic and therapeutic medical intervention is only to be carried out 
with the prior, free and informed consent of the person concerned, based on adequate 
information. The consent should, where appropriate, be express and may be withdrawn 
by the person concerned at any time and for any reason without disadvantage or 
prejudice. 
 
In late 2014, I was heartened to learn that Maine law allowed for both religious and 
philosophical exemptions from school vaccination requirements; in early 2015, just prior to our 
move to Falmouth, I reconfirmed this policy. Soon after we got settled, I was fortunate enough 
to enroll my son at a private school where teachers nurtured his talents and he thrived for 
several academic years; during a portion of this period, my daughter attended a similarly first-
rate preschool program. Nearly three years ago, our children made the transition to public 
school, where each adjusted well, both academically and socially. My wife and I were especially 
pleased to see them bond and form close friendships with classmates. So, naturally, we were 
disappointed by the successful initiative to remove personal belief exemptions. 
 
As written, Public Law, Ch. 154 is both coercive and punitive. Not only does it exclude children 
like ours from any classroom, including those in private schools, it eliminates their access even 
to virtual public charter schools. Between late June 2019 and September 13, 2019, a group of 
volunteers, most of whom were parents and grandparents of children affected by the new law, 
engaged in a signature-gathering campaign  to put this issue to voters; in hindsight, our initiative 
was doomed from the start. Soon after we hand-delivered petition sheets, with over 93,000 
signatures, to Secretary of State Matt Dunlap, his office advised our leadership team that the 
campaign was successful and that our referendum question likely would appear on the Maine 
State Primary Ballot in June 2020. Instead, perhaps after consultation with Governor Janet Mills, 
he decided to assign said question to a March 2020 special election — when only the 
Democratic Party held its presidential primary and no Republican candidates appeared on the 
ballot; aside from Republicans for whom health freedom was a priority, there was no incentive 
for non-Democrats to show up at the polls. My understanding is that successful citizen 
initiatives (i.e., referendum questions) are required to appear on a statewide ballot; our 
campaign contends that this March 2020 special election did not qualify as such. Naturally, the 
turnout consisted mostly of registered Democrats since the Maine Democratic Party pushed LD 
798 and backed the No on 1 position. Our opponents also received $500,000 from two Big 
Pharma corporations and blanketed the airwaves with deceitful ads. 
 
LD 51, LD 1098, and LD 1209 are sensible bills that seek to redress a legitimate grievance shared 
by thousands of Maine students and their families: either LD 51 or LD 1098 would restore 
religious and philosophical exemptions, while LD 1209 would permit exemptions in educational 
settings that do not receive public funds. If Maine lawmakers are unable to deliver on at least 
one of these three bills, the families of those impacted will feel compelled to homeschool, on a 
full-time basis, with just one conventional alternative: virtual private schools. As occurred three 
years ago, more Maine residents will find paths to move to states where those who set public 
policy understand health choice is a basic human right. By federal law, every child should have 
access to a free and appropriate public education; your support for LD 51, LD 1098, and/or LD 
1209 is both reasonable and warranted. 
 
