Letter in support o f LD51, LD1098, LD1209  by Gary Hazard
  Page 1 Chair, Joint Committee on Education and Cultural  Affairs 
LD51 , “An act to Restore Religious and Phi losophical Exemptions to Immunization 
requirements”  and LD1098 and LD 1209 . 
Sunday April 9, 2023  
Email testimony  
In Support  
 
 
To: Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint  
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 
From:  Gary Hazard, PE   
 
Personal Experience  
My wife, Jonny Hazar d, was a highly respected Regi stered Nurse  at Maine Health  for 13 years.  
She specialized  in both Cardiac and Urology medicine and had won three  awards for 
outstanding service from Maine Health during her tenure there.   In th e fall of 2021, she was 
terminated by Maine Health  because she would not submit to receiving the experimental, 
unapproved, mRN A Covid -19 injection for reasons based on her faith in Jesus.  Her religious an d 
philosophical righ ts were trampled.  
 
Although I too am a Christian and agreed with h er decision , I was stunned  that such a valuable  
member of the Ma ine Health team would be fired for living according to her convi ctions.   In 45 
years of engineering technical management I had never seen such a poor decision , in terms of 
organizational effectiveness,  and I ha d never witnessed implementation of policy in such a 
tyrannical manner!  This didn ’t make sense.  It woke me up!  
 
Confusion about what to believe!   
All my life I had confidence in the policies  of our public health agencies :  CDC, NIH and the FDA .  
Yet I was con fused by Maine Health ’s action with my wife  that I knew had been influenced by 
the insistent messaging of the CDC on the ne cessity of the experimental , mRNA Covid jab.  
Several important questions wouldn ’t leave my mind.  
• How could they have so much confidence  in a “medication ” that came to market under EUA 
in seven months rath er than fi ve years ?  
• How could they be sure that the mRNA jab was “safe and effective ” when short cuts had t o 
have been taken to shorten the delivery time by 3 .4 years ?   
• What test s were skipp ed to achieve the 7 month goal?  
• Why were public  health a gencies insistent on a “one size fits all solution ”  when  America i s 
known for innovation ?   
• Why the rigidity of thought and concerted effort to stamp out innovation with Covid -19 
solutions?     
 
My years a s a Project Manager informed me that something  didn’t  add up!   I began to do ubt 
the guidance of the p ublic health  agencies on the Covid -19 solution.  
Letter in support o f LD51, LD1098, LD1209  by Gary Hazard
  Page 2  
Looking For R easons  
I decided to follow the money and see what this revealed.  He re’s what I found:  
 
1. At this link is an FDA Fact Sheet , https://w ww.fda.gov/about -fda/fda -basics/fact -sheet -fda-
glanc e that is entitled  “Program Funding .”  It says  FDA’s budget for Fiscal Year 2021 is : 
• approximately $6.1 billion.  
• Provided  by feder al budget authorization (54%, or $3.3 billion) and user  industry fees 
(46%, or $2.8 billion)   
 
So this means that big pharma is providing 46% of the FDA ’s operating budget.  This is a 
program funding conflic t of interest between the FDA and the  pharmaceuti cal industry t hey 
regulate . This is unethic al, immoral  and puts into sus picion all mes saging and policies from t his 
agency ! 
 
2. Government scientists  in our publi c health agencies  have been receiving  royalty pa yments 
for medications they have been overseeing to protect the public from harm.   These two 
links attest to the reality of this unethical poli cy. 
Royalty payments to staff researchers cause new NIH troubles - PMC  
Report: Researchers mumon financial interests (nbcnews.com)  
 
Once again, this is evidence of seve re conflict of interest and should  be acknowledged  for what 
it is and then  corrected.  Policies f rom the CDC mus t be seen in the light of th e corruption  that 
exists within these agencies.  
 
3. At this link is an article from the National Library of Medicine  speaking about Direct To 
Consumer Advertising (DTCA) by big pharma.  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2690298/#:~:text=In%20contrast%2C%20t
he%20goal%20of,of%20consumer%20rights%20had%20begun.    
 
It says, “The goal of the patients' rights movem ent in the 1970s was to require health 
professionals to provide information to patients about their treatment options. In contrast, 
the goal of the consumers' rights movement in the 1990s was to require health insurance 
companies to provide information abo ut benefits and policies . The first DTCA  campaigns 
were launched in the early 1980s after the patients' rights movement had taken hold but 
before the era of consumer rights had begun .”  
 
Legislation in the 198 0s that permitt ed DTCA caused the focus of media outlets of all kinds , 
radio, TV, newspaper  and now social media and internet venues to be on the large advertising 
spends o f big pharma rather than on their readership/viewership of their content.   The media 
has become captured .  Objective trut h can no longer be reported when it conflicts with the 
interests of its advertiser s.   This severely cripples the ability of you and me to know the 
Letter in support o f LD51, LD1098, LD1209  by Gary Hazard
  Page 3 unbiased truth .   The once “free press ” is no longer so .  This fact needs consider ation when 
interpreting messages from mainline, legacy and new technology media sources .    
 
 
God Given Rights – Not Government  
On this Easter Sunday I write you t oday in support of LD 51 because no government can remove  
right s given by God and pro tected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution  
which reads, “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion  or prohibiting 
the free exercise thereof; or abridging the fre edom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the 
people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances .” 
 
Further to this point,  Article 1 , Section 3  of the Constitution of the State of Maine  also offers 
similar pro tection (shown below).   
Religious freedom; sects equal; religious tests prohibited; religious teachers.   All individuals 
have a natural and unalienable right to worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their 
own consciences, and no person shall be hurt, moles ted or restrained in that person's liberty or 
estate for worshipping God in the manner and season most agreeable to the dictates of that 
person's own conscience , nor for that person's religious professions or sentiments, provided 
that that person does not disturb the public peace, nor obstruct others in their religious 
worship; -- and all persons demeaning themselves peaceably, as good members of the State, 
shall be equally under the protection of the laws, and no subordination nor preference of any 
one sec t or denomination to another shall ever be established by law, nor shall any religious 
test be required as a qualification for any office or trust, under this State; and all religious 
societies in this State, whether incorporate or unincorporate, shall at all times have the 
exclusive right of electing their public teachers, and contracting with them for their support and 
maintenance . 
 
Closing  
I thank the members of the Joint Committee on Education and Cultural  Affairs for your effort s 
in this process and your deliberations  on LD51, LD1098  and LD1209 which I support.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Gary Ha zard, PE  
Thorndike, Maine  
Email:  enfantidea@gmail.com  
Tel:  207 -751-8600  
