 
 
 
 
 
 
State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Immunization Coalition  
April 3 , 2023  
 
In Opposition To:  
LD 1209 , An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine Exemptions for 
Private and Virtual Public Charter Schools   
 
Sponsored By:  Representative Boyer  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, I am Hannah Hudson, a member of the 
Maine Immunization Coalition and the Policy and Communications Manager at Ma ine 
Primary Care Association (MPCA). MPCA serves as the administrative home of the MIC.  
 
The MIC is a network of associations, health care systems, and providers working to 
protect Maine people across their lifespan against vaccine -preventable diseases, by  
increasing immunization rates through information sharing and collaboration. As a 
statewide group, we undertake collaborative advocacy on immunization. Our efforts to 
promote evidence -based policies that result in improved immunization rates for 
children and adults in the State of Maine.  
  
We are strongly opposed to LD 1209 . Maine’s childhood vaccine law (LD 798/PL 154) 
passed in 2019 after a referendum effort and a statewide vote. 73% of voters, a wide 
majority in every county, chose to protect public health by eliminating loopholes in our 
school -ready vaccine laws. Prior to this, Maine had the 4th highest rate of non -medical 
opt-outs, which put our community immunity below the safe thresholds for disease 
outbreak .  
 
We have already seen the posi tive results in our state from the passage of the law. 
According to  data from the annual Annie E. Casey Foundation Kids Count survey shows 
that exemptions have decreased from 6.2% in 2018 to 1.8% in 2021.1  
 
All 50 states have policies requiring immunizat ion for school and childcare, and all states 
allow for medical exemptions . A medical exemption is allowed when a child has a 
medical condition that prevents them from receiving a vaccine .2 Maine’s vaccine law 
protects these children that need to rely on community immunity in order to be able to 
safely attend school.  
 
 
 
1 https://www.aecf.org/resources/2022 -kids-count -data -book   
2 https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/imz -managers/coverage/schoolvaxview/requirements/index.html   

 
 
 
 
Strong vaccine laws are not new. In past centuries,  laws helped to eliminate smallpox. Pro -vaccine public 
policy has also h elped to make measles, mumps, rubella, and polio relatively rare.  
 
LD 1209 seeks to bring back a debate that has already been settled numerous times through both 
evidence -based research and public opinion. We urge the committee to maintain the commonsense  
laws that have been put in place to protect the children in communities across our state.  
 
MIC is happy to be available for the work session. Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at 
hhudson@mepca.org  if I can answer any questions.  
 
Hannah A. Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager, MPCA  
 
 
