 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 
In Opposition to LD 1209  An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine 
Exemptions for Private Schools and Virtual Public Charter Schools  
 
Sponsored by:  Representative David Boyer   
Hearing Date:  Monday, April 3, 2023   
 
Senator  Rafferty , Representative  Brennan , and members, Joint Standing Committee on, my name 
is Jessica Shiminski and I am the senior health program  manager  of the Maine Immunization 
Progra m. I am here today to provide testimony on behalf of the Maine Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention  and will be speaking  against LD 1209, An Act to Reinstate the Religious 
and Philosophical Vaccine Exemptions for Private Schools and Virtual Public Cha rter Schools .  
 
Public Law 2019, chapter 154 removed the exemption from immunization requirements based on 
religious or philosophical beliefs for students in elementary, secondary and postsecondary 
schools and employees of nursery schools and certain healt h care facilities. This bill reinstates 
the religious and philosophical exemptions for students enrolled in private schools or virtual 
public charter schools.  The Maine CDC opposes this bill and offers the following comments for 
your consideration.  
PL 201 9, chapter 154 was enacted for three reasons: keeping our children safe and healthy from 
unnecessary disease, ensuring safe schools and childcare centers, and protecting vulnerable 
people against serious disease  in communities . The rem oval of religious and philosophical 
exemptions was decided through legislative process and upheld by a referendum vote in 2020 
with 72% of Mainers in favor of this decision. The Maine State Legislature has designated rule 
changes to specific diseases for w hich immunization is required as major substantive, requiring 
public comment and legislative approval. (20 -A MRS §6358(1).)    
Pursuant to statute, non -medical exemptions were removed effective September 1, 2021. Data 
obtained through the Maine Immunization  Program’s annual School Immunization Assessment 
Survey shows a significant increase of immunization rates from the 2020 -21 school year to the 
2021 -22 school year. MMR rates increase from 94.3% to 96.7%. DTaP increased from 94% to 
96.3%. Polio increased fr om 94.2% to 96.5%. Additionally, non -medical exemptions decreased 
from 4.1% to 0.3% and medical exemptions increased from 0.5% to 1.5%, disproving the 
argument that medical exemptions are difficult to obtain in the State of Maine.     
  
 
 Prior to September 1 , 2021, most of Maine’s school age exemptions were non -medical, with the 
highest rates of non -medical exemptions being reported in Hancock and Waldo counties. These 
two counties also represented two of the four counties with the highest reported rates of p ertussis 
cases in 2018. Not only did high exemption rates likely contribute to higher rates of pertussis 
disease in these two counties, but also in the entire State, as Maine reported the highest rate of 
pertussis disease in the country for 2018. More rece ntly states across the country are facing 
outbreaks of both polio and measles. These vaccines are all required for kindergarten entry in 
Maine’s public and private schools. Reinstating these exemptions would threaten the public 
health of Mainers.   
Students  attending private schools  should not be exempt from this requirement. Diseases cannot 
differentiate from private and public institutions and there is no less risk for individuals on a 
private campus.  In fact, the risk is higher  in those attending secondar y schools that offer housing 
for students on campus.  
Virtual charter school and/or home schooled students who do not attend in-person  classes , but 
choose to participate in traditional school activities ( i.e. band, gym, sports, etc.) , must “enroll” 
into their local public school for these activities. This enrollment then triggers the requirement 
for immunization records at that local school , in accor dance with Maine immunization rules for 
school -age childre n (10-144 CMR Chapter 261, a joint rule with the Department of Education  
(05-071  CMR chapter 126 )). The Maine CDC supports rules requiring immunization in s chool -
based s etting s where student s congr egate for in-person class room learning  or for school 
sanctioned extracurricular activities  or events .    
When someone chooses not to vaccinate, that decision can jeopardize the health and safety of 
entire communities, especially the weakest and most vulnerable among us. Evidence shows that 
states that have more stringent exemption laws have higher immunizatio n rate, and less disease.   
In summary, the Maine CDC opposes the proposed legislation. Good public health policy is data -
driven and evidence -based. Maine’s immunization requirements are to ensure full protection of 
all Maine children and adults from vaccin e-preventable disease. Reinstating exemptions will 
increase rates of vaccine -preventable diseases, statewide. The evidence is overwhelming, sound, 
and supported by the professional medical community and majority of Maine voters; 
vaccinations are proven to be safe and effective for preventing the spread of disease.     
Thank you for your consideration of this matter  and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from Committee and I will be available to participate in the work 
session.  
 
 
 
