70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Maine Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs, I am Mike McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The 
Christian Civic League of Maine envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom 
flourishes, families thrive, and life is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including 
in governance. 
I am here to testify in favor of LD 1209 An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine 
Exemptions for Private Schools and Virtual Public Charter Schools - Rep. David Boyer of Poland 
Public Law 2019, chapter 154 removed the exemption from immunization requirements based on 
religious or philosophical beliefs for students in elementary, secondary and postsecondary schools and 
employees of nursery schools and certain health care facilities. This bill reinstates the religious and 
philosophical exemptions for students enrolled in private schools or virtual public charter schools. 
 
The Christian Civic League of Maine believes that if a person has a religious or philosophical conviction 
regarding the use of a certain vaccine, or all vaccines, they should have the right to exercise that 
conviction and refuse a vaccine without being deprived of other rights and liberties enjoyed by 
Mainers. We value and acknowledge medical treatments and immunizations but we believe an 
individual must have the right to decide. The system worked throughout our country’s history, please 
vote to return us there. We are sure today you will hear many examples that show the birth of this 
country and the focus on religious freedom, the minority and how we started as a Constitutional 
Republic to ensure individual rights against the threat of government mandates. It worked (mostly) then 
and is still imperative today. 
 
Please support with an Ought To Pass, LD 1209. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration today. Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are 
praying for you and your families. God bless, 
Mike    
 
Mike McClellan 
Policy Director 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 Christian Civic League Maine 
 
 
 
 
 
