 
 
Administrative Services Center 
103 Maine Ave, Bangor, Maine 04401 
207.992.9200  •  Fax 207.907.7077 
 
April 3, 2023  
 
Senator Raf ferty, Repr esentative Bre nnan and me mber s of the  Comm ittee on Educ ation and C ultural Aff airs: 
 
Penobsc ot Comm unity Health Care (PCHC), Maine’s largest Federally Qua lified He alth Center, whi ch pro vides 
care to m ore than 57,000 patients, i ncluding more  than 15,000 c hildren, and whic h has consistently e ndeavored 
to maintain high ra tes of  vaccination fo r our  patients of all ages and fo r the greater comm unity in t he interests of 
disea se prevention and pr otection of  the most  vulner able among us , oppose s any efforts to re verse the importa nt 
gains m ade whe n 72% of Mainers vot ed in 2020  to elim inate  loophol es in o ur sc hool-ready va ccine laws.  LD 
798/P L 154 ha s already had an importa nt impac t, with exe mptions d ecreasing fr om 6.2% in 2018 (a  level that 
increased the r isk of outb reaks of highly conta gious diseases, like mea sles and whooping c ough)  to 1.8% in 
2021.  All m ajor religious  grou ps agree that va ccines align with t he mora l and ethical princ iples of their 
theologies.  V accines are koshe r, halal and approv ed by the V atican. 
 
Therefore, PCHC st rongly oppose s LD 81, L D 10 98 and LD  1209.  The se bills woul d unde rmine  the importa nt 
individual a nd publi c health gains m ade unde r our  current law and would pu t vulnerable c hildren and adults at 
risk f or life -threatening d isease, as well as risk ha rmful out breaks in our  Maine c omm unities.   
 
We at PCHC a lso op pose LD 1228 , LD 1148, and LD  869, whic h would r estrict r equire ments fo r Covid 
vaccine.  St udents of all ages shoul d be able to le arn in an e nvironm ent that they know is saf e and will not 
unne cessarily put  them a t risk for  serious or  even life-threatening il lness.  More  than ¾ of  all Mainers have been 
safely va ccinate d against Covid, which ha s resulted in Maine  having one of  the lowe st death rates from C ovid 
in the US, despit e having one of  the olde st pop ulations.  Covid vac cines a re safe and highl y effective at 
preventing hospi taliza tion and de ath from Covi d.  Unva ccinated Ma iners are 8 times more  likely to be 
hospi talize d than those  who are vaccinated.  Eme rgency Use  Author izations are impleme nted after very careful 
evaluation of the  available science and are a vital tool in respondi ng in a tim ely manner to a  virus t hat is 
unde rgoing c onstant ch ange.  Unde rmini ng the st ate’s or our  schools’ ability to prote ct students, fa culty and 
staff will cause unnecessary harm. 
 
We urge  you to reject all of the se bills.  Eac h of th em would under mine individual and public he alth, incr ease 
suffering a nd add cost to our Ma ine c omm unities.  Pl ease uphold M aine’s great tradition of le ading i n this realm 
of pu blic health.   
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Lori Dwye r, President a nd CEO 
 
 
Susan Cheff, MD, FAAFP         
Executive Clinical Director for Primary Care     Noah Ne sin, M D, FAAFP  
Innov ation Advisor f or Primary Care 
 
 

