122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
        
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association in Opposition to:  
LD 51: An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements  
LD 1098: An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions Regarding Immunization 
Requirements  
LD 1209: An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine Exemptions for Private Schools 
and Virtual Public Charter Schools  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Room 208, Cross State Office Buildi ng 
Monday, April 3 , 2023 
 Good morning, Senator Rafferty , Representative Brenner , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and  most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent 
more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health pr omotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical 
public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously.  These bills  would restore religious and philosophical exemptions to immunizations required for elementary,  
secondary and postsecondary schools and employees of nursery schools and certain health care facilities . 
 
We are only as healthy as the world around us, which is  why strong  immunization laws are one of the most 
effective ways to improve the health of our communities. Data from immunization surveys indicate that 
states with stronger immunization laws have higher immunization rates and sufficient herd immunity to 
prevent outbreaks. The safety, efficacy, and cost -effectiveness of routine childhood vaccines has been well -
established and is supported by sound, scientific studies. The legality and constitutionality of school and 
daycare immunization requirements held in all 50 states has been vigorously upheld in courts, and these laws 
have led to increased immunization rates  and a reduction in U.S. morbidity and mortality associated with 
infectious diseases. When voters were asked if they wanted to repeal the provisions outlined in LD 79 8/PL 
154, 73% of voters said no –  in other words, a resounding majority of Maine voters support requiring 
vaccinations for schoolchildren and professionals in health care settings.  
 
There are many different policy options for imp roving immunization rates, such as improving access to 
vaccines, implementing immunization registries, requiring provider and parent education, improving 
reporting requirements, and increasing funding for vaccine research and development. Maine has expande d 
vaccine access for all Maine children by eliminating financial barriers, and our healthcare providers follow 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  recommendations to engage families in conversations about the benefits of vaccines. Furthermore , if a 
patient has a valid medical exemption for a  required vaccine, health care providers issue such an exemption.  
 
Other states that have eliminated philosophical exemptions, only to see their religious exemptions increase, 
and states that have mandated parent -provider education did not see a significant reduction in opt -out rates. 
These approaches simply aren’t enough  to protect our communities . In fact, vaccine hesitancy due to false 
information and myths has grown so large, that the World Health Organization listed vaccine hesitancy as one 
of the top ten threats to global health in 2019. 
 
All major medical and public  health organizations have issued policy statements in support of eliminating 
non-medical exemptions,1 and other states and Congress are discussing ways to strengthen immunization 
laws to protect and uphold the rights of all – to keep everyone safe, inclu ding those who cannot protect 
themselves. Maintaining  our strong, existing immunization laws is the fastest, most cost -effective way to 
increase and maintain high immunization rates in schools now and for generations to come. Maine cannot 
afford to go back in time and allow non -medical exemptions.  
 
We respectfully request  you to vote LD 51, LD 1098, and LD 1209 “Ought Not to Pass.” Thank you for 
considering our testimony.  
 
1 Immuniz e.org. State Laws and Mandates by Vaccine . 
