Tessa Burpee
Brewer
LD 1209
Testimony in Support of LD 51, LD 1098, and LD 1209
Tessa Burpee, Brewer
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:
My name is Tessa Burpee. I live in Brewer. I request that you please support LD 51, 
LD 1098, and LD 1209
As a born-again believer in the Lord Jesus Christ, I believe the Bible teaches that our 
bodies are the temple of the Holy Spirit. Decisions about what to eat, what to drink, 
what to use for medicine or medical treatments, are a matter of choice and prayerful 
consideration so as not to pollute or defile His temple. Many vaccines contain 
human-diploid fibroblast cell cultures. I am pro-life and the use of these cells directly 
opposes my view on the value and sanctity of human life. 
Our country’s founders recognized that we are born with certain unalienable rights 
and that we are endowed by our Creator with these rights, which include life, liberty 
and the pursuit of happiness. Unalienable means that they are impossible to take away
or give up. Life and liberty exist because we are free people and have sovereignty 
over our bodies and our choices. The US Constitution and the Maine Constitution 
reflect this belief and protect religious freedom. Further, the Maine Human Rights Act
prohibits discrimination because of race, color, sex, sexual orientation, age, physical 
or mental disability, genetic information, religion, ancestry or national origin. This is 
further protection to ensure that all people with religious convictions have freedom of 
access to education, employment and other public services.
Under the current law however, my daughter will not be able to attend college in 
Maine because of our religious beliefs. As a parent, it is disheartening to think that her
only option for her will be to leave our home state in order to pursue higher education.
Don’t we want our children to have options here in Maine, to learn and pursue careers
here? 
Please restore religious and philosophical exemptions so that all Maine children have 
the option to go to school and pursue higher education and medical careers without 
discrimination based on their sincerely held religious beliefs. We cannot afford to turn
away any of the next generation - we need young people to stay here and invest in 
Maine’s future. 
Please support  LD 51, LD 1098, and LD 1209
