Dv’ 101 Western Ave. 
- P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2074303334 
Testimony of Francine Stark and Andrea Mancuso on behalf of the 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
In SUPPORT of LD 1461: "An Act To Prevent Dating Partner Abuse by Including Dating 
Partners in the Scope of Domestic Violence Crimes.” 
Tuesday, April 11, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, 1 am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)‘ to offer support for LD 1461, “An Act to Prevent Dating Partner Abuse by 
Including Dating Partners in the Scope of Domestic Violence Crimes.” 
LD 1461 does not create new crimes or criminalize new conduct. It does not change 
the class of any crimes. It merely appropriately labels the criminal behavior. lf a person 
assaults their dating partner now, current law would have them charged with a ClassD 
crime of assault under Title 17-A, Section 207. This bill would propose that person instead be 
more transparently charged with the Class D crime of domestic violence assault, under Title 
17-A, Section 207-A. If a person stalks their dating partner now, current law would have them 
charged with a Class D crime of stalking under Title 17-A, Section 210-A. This bill would 
propose that person instead be more transparently charged with the class D crime of 
domestic violence stalking, under Title 17-A, Section 210-C. That carries through for all of the 
crimes in Maine's criminal code that are set out as being explicitly noted as related to 
domestic violence. 
Transparent charging that provides clarity when a crime is domestic violence will 
ensure that appropriate interventions and restrictions are in place for these offenders and 
supports are made available for those they have harmed. Where the sentence includes 
incarceration, this will make it clearer for corrections staff who may need to apply their own 
response policies around domestic violence. Additionally, it will provide important clarity in 
our crime data reports to help the state recognize trends and the impact of efforts to 
increase both accountability for offenders and reduce overall domestic violence crime rates. 
Our systems are currently able to pull data around the frequency that domestic violence 
assault is charged in our State (as compared to “regular” assault). Ensuring dating violence 
is accounted for in that data will provide a more accurate picture. 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
l\/ICEDV Page 2 of2 
Most importantly, this bill aligns our laws with the experience of victims. When 
domestic abuse and violence is perpetrated against a victim by someone that they are 
dating, it is no less domestic abuse and violence merely because those partners are not 
married or are not living together. The beliefs held by the person causing the harm, that they 
are privileged to act in this way, are not different or less problematic. The risks posed to the 
victim by this set of beliefs being acted upon raises similar public safety concerns. When 
domestic abuse and violence occurs, our laws should be consistent in recognizing it for what 
it is. There's a gap in that consistency currently, and LD 1461 appropriately closes it. 
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this important conversation. MCEDV 
is happy to be a resource to the Committee as you continue to discuss this proposal. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 430-8334, Email: andrea@mcedv.org
