TESTIMONY in favor of LD382 by David Ross 
First, I'd like to thank Knox County Sheriff Patrick Polky, Representative Ann Matlack and Senator Pinny 
Beebe-Center for their efforts in creating and sponsoring this legislation and thank you all for being 
here. 
l am David Ross, son of Deputy Frank Edward Ross, Jr. l was five years old on Sept 4, 1959, my Dad's 
‘End of Watch‘ . My memories of my father, while still quite vivid, are memories of him in a family role 
and not as a law enforcement officer, therefore I had to rely on some of the articles in the Sept 6, 1959 
EXTRA edition of the Courier-Gazette for background (some of the following are direct quotes). 
Deputies Frank Ross, Jr., and Frank Buzynski were the first two uniformed sheriff's patrolmen in the 
State of Maine. The patrol system was instituted by Sheriff Willard Pease on July 1, 1956. 
Subsequently, all other counties in the state adopted it. The patrolmen and Sheriff Pease were 
recognized by the Governor ‘s Highway Safety Committee for their accomplishments in cutting down 
traffic mishaps on Knox County's rural highways. The system also gained attention of sheriffs 
departments nationwide. These two deputies may not have written the book on rural Maine county-wide 
patrols, but they most certainly penned the first few chapters. 
Aside from his on duty hours (which were evening into night) my father spent countless off duty hours in 
what was the sheriff's department storage area in the basement of the Knox County courthouse setting 
up areas for photography and identification in an effort to improve the functions of the department and 
decrease reliance on the state police. (l do have memories those activities since my brother and l were 
often allowed to tag along with him). 
That's what this is about, isn't it - Memories. Honoring the men who served the county and propagating 
their memory. Afew years ago a sign went up on a section of route 1 in Thomaston that read, "MSP 
Trooper Drew Griffith Memorial Highway" . l had to research who Trooper Griffith was and what his life 
and death were about. That is the result that l would like to see from a dedication of a section of 
highway to my father and Deputy Buzynski. That younger people read a sign and become curious 
enough to research and learn about their lives - that older people read a sign and remember two 
deputies who served their county.
