. g _ KNOX COUNTY 
E SHERIFF’S OFFICE Patrick W. Polky. 
Curt R. Andrick 
Sheriff Chief 
Deputy 
' 
Testimony of Sheriff Patrick W. Polky 
In Support to LD 382 
An Act Naming Portions of a Highway in St. George 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distinguished Member of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation. My name is Patrick Polky and I am the current Sheriff of Knox 
County. I am here today to testify in support of LD 382. 
I grew up in St. George and, following in my family's footsteps, have been involved with public 
safety groups for most of my life; firefighting, emergency medical services, law enforcement, 
corrections, and military. While participating in the various activities of these professions, I 
would hear accounts of a motor vehicle crash that occurred in St. George, in September of 
1959, that involved the deaths of two Knox County Sheriff's Deputies. In July of 2014, I joined 
the ranks of the Knox County Sheriff's Office and, while going through my initial training, 
learned the names of the fallen Deputies and the circumstances of their deaths. 
On the evening of September 4, 1959, Deputies Frank J. Buzynski, 43, of Thomaston, and Frank 
E. Ross Jr., 30, of Owls Head, were chasing a fleeing motor vehicle south on Rt. 131 from South 
Thomaston into St. George. The Deputies lost sight of the vehicle near a hill. As they crested the 
hill, they saw the vehicle they were chasing crashed in the roadway. They attempted to avoid 
the crash but crashed themselves; both passed away at the scene. 
In all of my public safety jobs, I have been taught to remember our fallen and to share those 
memories with others, especially the families of the fallen; honor the sacrifice that was made 
by the fallen as they served their communities; and to teach others about the value of serving 
their communities. 
I stand before you now, in remembrance of Deputies Buzynski and Ross, and ask you to honor 
their sacrifice by voting "Ought To Pass” on LD 382. 
On behalf of the Knox County Sheriff's Office and the families of Deputies Buzynski and Ross,I 
thank you for your time and would be happy to try and answer any questions that you might 
have.' 
Main Office 
Correctional Facility Airport 
Security 
301 Park St. 327 Park 
St. 23 Terminal Ln. 
Rockland, ME 04841 
Rockland, ME 04841 Owls 
Head, ME 04854 
lofl
