                                                          TESTIMONY OF ANDRE LEVESQUE. 
 
                                                                       In favor of LD 1404 
An Act Requiring Insurance Companies to Cover the Care of Expectant Mothers in Adoption Cases and  
                                  ..  provide Notice of That Coverage to Pregnant Women.   
                                Before the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee 
                                                                Sponsored by : Rep. Joshua Morris of Turner 
                                                                         Public Hearing May 8, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee.  
My name is Andy Levesque I’m a resident of Gorham, a faithful Catholic, a member of the Knights of 
Columbus, and a board member of Maine Right to Life. 
On Monday May 1st, this Capital experienced a historic show of pro-life Mainers gathered here 
opposing LD1619 which would terminate the life of a baby even at the moment of birth. 
I hope and pray that our sheer numbers will give you affirmation that the majority of Mainers do not 
support the Governor’s Bill to kill our newborns. 
Today I am testifying in support of LD1404 
I had originally planned to testify in person, but today I will be working with many of my peers feeding 
the homeless and immigrants in Portland. 
This bill requires health insurance carriers to provide coverage under an individual or group health 
insurance policy of an adoptive parent for the person giving birth to the child, including maternity and 
postpartum coverage. 
for the duration of the pregnancy and through the 12 months following a birth.  
The bill clarifies that an adoptive parent may pay for the health insurance coverage for the person 
giving birth to the child as part of an adoption proceeding. 
I urge you to vote for LD 1404 
Thank You, 
 
Andy Levesque  
200 Ossipee Trail 
Gorham, Maine 
