Testimony in Support of LD1404 
Charlotte A. Paolini, D.O. 
American Association of Medical Ethics 
May 8, 2023 
 
Honorable Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee: 
 
My name is Dr. Charlotte Paolini.  I am a physician trained in family medicine and geriatrics.  I am a 
resident of the state of Maine and reside in the town of Biddeford.  I represent the American Association 
of Medical Ethics. I am writing this testimony in support of LD1404. 
 
The majority of my medical training and practice have taken place in Maine, which I consider my home. 
As a primary care physician for the citizens of this state, I consider it a privilege and an obligation to 
provide care that is safe, accessible, and in the best interest of my patients. For these reasons, I support 
LD1404 which requires health insurance carriers to provide coverage under an individual or group health 
insurance policy of an adoptive parent for the person giving birth to the child, including maternity and 
postpartum coverage, for the duration of the pregnancy and through the 12 months following a birth.  
In addition, the bill clarifies that an adoptive parent may pay for the health insurance coverage for the 
woman giving birth to the child as part of an adoption proceeding. 
 
LD1404 is a bill that is a win-win for everyone involved. It provides health care coverage for a pregnant 
woman during and after her pregnancy.  Many post abortive women that I have known, felt that 
abortion was their only option due to a lack of healthcare insurance.  This bill provides a pro-life option 
for a woman experiencing an unplanned pregnancy. It is also pro-life in that it covers the cost of care for 
the baby in the womb and encourages adoption. This is especially beautiful as this bill also fosters a pro-
family perspective, giving the new adoptive parents the opportunity to ensure their new baby has the 
best access to care from the beginning. Studies have shown that these types of adoptions, where the 
adoptive parents actively support and engage with the birth mom, have more positive outcomes for the 
birth mom and the adopted baby. Life-long relationships are often created between everyone involved 
and the adopted child can grow up not having to wonder who his/her ‘real’ parents are.  
 
Therefore, I urge the Committee to vote ought to pass on LD1404. LD1404 is a thoughtful and generous 
bill that provides healthy, life-giving options to all involved. 
 
Thank you for your kind time and consideration of this important matter. 
 
Respectfully, 
Charlotte A. Paolini, D.O. 
May 8, 2023 
 
 
 
 
