l\/I/nun Assrocinrion 
t P 
GP 
I~Ii:Ai;;t?1~1 Pmws 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt 5/8/23 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
In Opposition to LD 1404 
An Act Requiring Insurance Companies to Cover the Care of Expectant 
Mothers in Adoption Cases and Provide Notice of That Coverage to Pregnant Women 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our private and non-proﬁt insurance carriers provide or administer health insurance 
coverage to about 600,000 Maine people. Our mission as an association is to improve the health 
of Maine people by promoting affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
The members of the Maine Association of Health Plans oppose LD 1404 because it creates a 
complicated new health insurance mandate tied to a speciﬁc life event. 
Enrollees in fully insured health plans generally have the option to extend coverage to spouses 
and domestic partners, dependents up to the age of 26, and adult children who remain dependent 
due to a disability regardless of age. 
LD 1404 proposes a new mandate requiring carriers to extend a policyholder ’s coverage to an 
unrelated person pursuant to proof of pregnancy that is “unplanned ” or “unexpected ” and proof 
that the policyholder will have a legal obligation for the child being placed for adoption. The 
coverage would remain in effect for the duration of the pregnancy and the year following birth. 
This mandate for coverage to an unrelated person is an unprecedented extension of health care 
insurance beyond the member’s immediate family, including domestic partners. It also creates an 
administratively challenging process for pregnant women, policyholders, providers, and health 
plans to navigate regarding veriﬁcations and legal obligations related to adoption. 
In addition to the complexities of offering such coverage, it is unnecessary to impose sucha 
requirement--individual policies are available for purchase to cover the pregnant woman. 
We urge a vote of Ought Not to Pass. If the committee does move forward with LD 1404, it 
would be subject to a mandate study by the Bureau of Insurance and potentially trigger defrayal 
obligations for state taxpayers as part of the Affordable Care Act. 
P.O. Box I93, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
