1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 4/4/23 
  
LD 1202 – An Act to Increase the Homestead Exemption to $50,000 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD 1202 – 
An Act to Increase the Homestead Exemption to $50,000. 
This bill raises the property tax exemption for homesteads from $25,000 to 
$50,000 for property tax years beginning on or after April 1, 2024, and changes the 
State reimbursement formula.  As we have commented in testimony on other bills 
this Session, we recommend that property tax relief proposals be considered 
together rather than isolated from the complete set of property tax relief programs 
available.  Further, we have commented to the Committee at public hearing that 
increasing the homestead exemption amount has certain benefits as an approach for 
property tax relief compared to the complexity of the property tax stabilization 
program, although not as targeted as an expansion of the Property Tax Fairness 
Credit.    
With respect to the change in reimbursement formula, I wish to raise one important 
technical concern with the language of the proposal.  Section 6 of the bill sets a 
fixed rate of 85% State reimbursement for property tax years beginning on or after 
April 1, 2024, but leaves in Section 5 of the bill addressing property tax year 
2 
 beginning on April 1, 2023, current law language providing annual 3% increases in 
the reimbursement rate until reimbursement reaches 100%.  This mix of language 
in the two sections raises question of legislative intent and could result in 
confusion.   
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is $120 million in FY25. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
