 
 
 
April 26 , 202 3 
 
 
Honorable Stacy Brenner  
Chair, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
Cross, Building Room 216  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: LD 1214  - An Act to Clarify the Laws Related to PFAS Contamination & LD 1537 - An Act to 
Amend the Laws Relating to the Prevention of Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
Pollution and to Provide Additional Funding  
 
Dear Chair Brenner : 
On behalf of the American Apparel & Footwear Association (AAFA) , I am writing to provide 
comments on  LD 1214  and LD 1527, bills  that would provide clarification to Public Law 2021 Chapter 
477 which requires reporting of products with intentionally added PFAS and would ban products with 
intentionally added PFAS as of Ja nuary 1st 2023 .  
AAFA is the national trade association representing apparel, footwear and other sewn products 
companies, and their suppliers, which compete in the global market. Representing more than 1,000 
world famous name brands, AAFA is the trusted public policy and p olitical voice of the apparel and 
footwear industry, its management and shareholders, its more than three million U.S. workers, and 
its contribution of $470 billion in annual U.S. retail sales. AAFA approaches all of its work through the 
lens of purpose -driven leadership in a manner that supports each member’s ability to build and 
sustain inclusive and diverse cultures, meet and advance ESG goals, and draw upon the latest 
technology.  
We deploy our association’s extensive expertise in trade, brand protection , supply chain 
management, and manufacturing to help our members navigate the complex regulatory 
environment, lower costs, and grow their sustainability and product safety efforts. With our 
members engaged in the production and sale of clothing and footwea r, we are on the front lines of 
product safety. It is our members who design and execute the quality and compliance programs that 
stitch product safety into every garment and shoe we make. To support our members in this effort, 
AAFA has taken the lead in e ducating our industry through alerts, webinars, and conferences on the 
development, interpretation, and implementation of product safety standards and regulations.   
AAFA  recognizes Maine’s interest in managing PFAS contamination to protect the health of the 
state’s citizens and the environment.  AAFA and our members are proud advocates for regulatory 
requirements that meet ou r THREADS Protocol  and effectively protect human health and the 
environmen t. In February 2023, we added the entire class of PFAS chemicals to our open -industry 
Restricted Substances List  and our members  are in the process of phasing out the use of intentionally 
added PFAS .  
 
 
 
 
Reporting requirements should be practical, enforceable, and science based.  We support LD 1214  as 
it would make  necessary changes to current law that would address  several  concerns with  the 
reporting requirements in  Public Law 2021 Chapter 477 .  We are also supportive of changes included 
in Section 1 of LD 1537 that facilitate reporting of PFAS in consumer goods.  
LD 1214 makes  important  definitional changes  that clarify  the scope of chemicals covered by 
reporting requirements.  LD 1214  would also enable greater compliance with the law by  extending 
the deadline for reporting of products containing intentionally added PFAS. Although the reporting 
requirement went into  effect on January 1, 2023, the D epartment of Environmental Protection (DEP)  
granted thousands of extension s in recognition of rulemaking  delays , along with companies’  difficulty 
in obtaining and protecting confidential business information protected by intellectual property laws, 
disruptions in the global supply chain, and lack of laboratory testing capacity. A n extension  until 2024  
would allow manufacturers and the DE P to continue to  work through these issues . Finally,  LD 1214  
removes the ban on any products with PFAS by January 1, 2030 unless DEP identifies it as an 
unavoidable use. For our sector, t his provision is unnecessary and duplicative  given that laws in 
Calif ornia and New York already establish harmonized timelines for the phase out of intentionally -
added PFAS in apparel  and footwear . 
Section 1 of LD 1537 makes a crucial change  to the reporting requirements to allow for reporting by 
national sales volumes and Total Organic  Fluorine  (TOF)  in the event CAS numbers are unavailable or 
unknown. Currently, the law requires reporting by CAS # of individual PFAS, despite the fact that not 
all PFAS have assigned CAS #s. The current law  also does not reflect that t esting for PFAS in consumer 
goods is still very much in development  and that individual tests for the 12,000 -some PFAS (as 
currently defined) are not available.  Our members are gravely concerned that they will be unable to 
fully co mply with the current law, as written.  In many cases, downstream suppliers of components 
and materials are unwilling to disclose exact chemistr ies by CAS#  (if they e ven exist) , claiming such 
information is confidential business information. However, the industry is familiar wi th TOF testing , 
and would be able to furnish TOF results. Allowing for reporting by TOF would also enable the DEP to 
set a TOF threshold that differentiates intentional addition of PFAS from environmental 
contamination.  
In conclusion, we support LD 1214 a nd would encourage the Committee to incorporate  the changes 
to the reporting requirements in LD 1527  Section 1 (A) & (C) into LD 1214.  
We look forward to continuing to work with Maine on the regulation of substances in consumer 
products for the benefit of  consumer product safety and public health. In the meantime, our 
members continue to design and execute the quality and compliance programs that emphasize 
product safety for every individual who steps into our apparel and footwear products.  
Thank you for y our consideration of this request.  Please  contact  Chelsea Murtha  of my staff  at 
cmurtha@aafaglobal.org  if you have any questions or would like additional information.  
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Nate Herman  
Senior Vice President, Policy  
American Apparel & Footwear Association  
 

