 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
 
 
  
 
IN SUPPORT – LD 217  ‘An Act to Support Manufacturers Whose Products Contain Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances’ 
(as amended)  
IN SUPPORT – LD 1214  ‘An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination’  
IN SUPPORT  – LD 1273 ‘An Act to Exempt Some Businesses from Certain Laws Relating to Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances in Accordance with the Size of the Business’  
IN OPPOSITION – LD 1537  ‘An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Prevention of Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances Pollution and to Provide Additional Funding’  
 
Dear Senator Brenner - Chair , Representative Gramlich  - Chair , and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural 
Resources,   
 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association  (MGFPA) .  
Unfortunately, I’m unable to be here in person today as we’re hosting our association’s annual meeting and professional 
development conference but please do not misconstrue my absence as a lack of interest in this important issue. The Maine 
Grocers & Food Producers Association is a business trade association representing Maine’s food community; Main Street 
businesses , including independently owned and operated grocery stores and supermarkets, food and beverage producers and 
processors, manufacturers, wholes alers, distributors, and supportive service companies.  
 
We stand united in the front to combat PFAS while understanding it’s a complex issue. While we support the phase out of PFAS 
chemicals where there are safer alternatives, we have expressed significan t concerns for the business community specific to the 
January 1, 2023 reporting deadline.  Challenges to comply were exacerbated by the ongoing supply chain and labor issues, lack 
of available testing for the scale of the program, and complex program rules that have yet to be finalized – evident by the 
thousands of extension requests. We appreciate the Department’s willingness to offer extension requests for businesses  to 
begin to fully understand how to comply with Maine’s PFAS in Products law.  
 
We agree that focusing on intentionally added substances is the correct action. PFAS contamination will be an issue across 
many different products, however, we recognize the challenge that exists for both the regulator and the regulated parties to 
comply with  this new law.  
 
MGFPA has been actively engaged through the passage of the PFAS in Products law (38 MRSA s. 1614) including as recently as 
last Thursday’s draft rule making. We value  the Board of Environmental Protection’s understanding of this complex iss ue, 
specific to the draft rules, in place effective date, and that  businesses are looking for guidance to comply while there are  
simultaneously efforts to modify the policy to address feasibility concerns.   
 
While not specific to any legislation heard tod ay, we do want to reiterate our support for the draft rules packaging exemption 
(packaging other than packaging that is recognized as a product). This is a helpful designation as it relate s to the Title 32 
exemption explicit within the current statute. Specific to food packaging, we anticipating addressing PFAS and other chemicals 
of high concern in the designated section of statute.  It is important to note that the food manufacturers themselves are the 
furthest removed from PFAS manufacturing, they are si mply customers of packaging suppliers. Food packaging must meet food 
safety requirements, ensure quality and consistency, safeguard the goods during distribution, resist tampering, and guarantee  a 
sustainable shelf life.  Food safety is of the utmost priority.  
 
 April 26 , 2023 
   
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  04330    |    207-622-4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  
 IN SUPPORT – LD 217 ‘An Act to Support Manufacturers Whose Products Contain Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances’ 
(as amended)  
 
An a mendment to allow additional reporting time is a supported approach  and it will ideally provide  the necessary  time for the 
details of the policy to develop to ensure compliance. Extending the requirement also addresses  the strain on the bottleneck of 
the testing facilities ’ capacity . Additional time allows for further collabora tion amongst manufacturers to streamline the 
information available to their customers, our members.  
IN SUPPORT – LD 1214  ‘An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination’  
 
We stand  in support of this bill as the most comprehensive approach to adjusting Maine’s first in the nation reporting and 
registration PFAS in Products law. There is a balance within  LD 1214 which addresses the PFAS effecting our natural resources 
without being detr imental our economy.  
 
While LD 1214 extends the timeline, similar to other proposals, it also adjusts the definition of "Perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances" or "PFAS" to ‘at least 2 sequential fully fluorinated carbon atoms, excluding polymers,  gases and 
volatile liquids.’ Together the extended reporting deadline and definition update make the  testing capacities more feasible.  
 
Lastly, by removing the ‘intentionally added PFAS’ requirement it sets the policy up for further success by narrowing the scope 
without degrading the policy because PFAS can be addressed by future actions of the DEP and rulemaking. We have seen the 
effort to -date as collaborative while recognizing concerns from stakeholders on both sides of the issue.  
IN SUPPORT – LD 1273  ‘An Act to Exempt Some Businesses from Certain Laws Relating to Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances in Accordance with the Size of the Bu siness’  
 
We value these exemptions which explicitly clarifies  ‘a product o r business ’ and retains the federally governing  element  and 
exemption s specific to Title 32, chapter 26 -A or 26 -B. The language goes further to provide additional small business 
exem ption s for those with  10 or less employees  and those businesses with less than $1M in annual revenue. The arbitrary 
thresholds are challenging and it may warrant referenc ing other sections of Maine law such as the EPR program for gross 
revenue thresholds.  We also want to express our reservations for exemptions and acknowledge that businesses of all sizes 
should potentially  also be considered responsible in a relevant scaled a pproach. We ask the Committee to find a balance for 
Mainers that is feasible, clear and achievable with measur able  progress.  
IN OPPOSITION – LD 1537  ‘An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Prevention of Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances Poll ution and to Provide Additional Funding’  
 
While we are appreciative of the interest to extend the deadline that this bill proposes , it is  the shortest reporting deadline 
extension and we do not believe the capacity constraints will be addressed within the next five months. We are opposed to 
reintroducing the estimated annual sales volume component specific to address source reduction.  Whil e we appreciate the 
$20M national sales threshold the exemption is specific to the reporting requirement and not the sales prohibition. This would 
still lead to complicated policy in which retailers and other manufacturers would be unclear as to whether or not the goods they 
sell would need to be in compliance  to be sold.  Plus, t he frequency in which the department would create rules identifying 
additional product categories is aggressive.  
 
In conclusion, m any companies have corporate commitments to elimin ate the use of PFAS and it’s important to focus on 
assisting companies with meeting their reduction goals opposed to the complexities of the reporting requirement.  We 
appreciate the Committee’s review of the proposals and encourage changes that align the policy with other states addressing 
PFAS  to create uniformity for compliance and ultimately further effectiveness.  MGFPA and our members offer a commitment 
to supporting the PFAS reporting and reduction efforts with adequate time and details essential to comply.  Thank you for the 
opportunity to share our concerns with you. Please feel free to contact MGFPA with any questions.  
 
 
Christine Cummings   
Executive Director  

