  Page 1  
  Town of  Kennebunk, M aine  
 
LD 1693 –  An Act to Amend the Kennebunk Sewer District Charter  
   
Supporting Testimony of Christopher J. Osterrieder, P.E. – Town of Kennebunk Director of 
Community Development// Town Engineer    
   
My name is Christopher J. Osterrieder, P.E., and I am the Director of Community Development and 
Town Engineer for the Town of Kennebunk.  I have held the position since 2012 and in this capacity I oversee and manage the Community Development Department, which includes the Code Enforcement, Engineering, Planning and Social Services divisions.  The work of the department focuses on 
community and development related issues including climate, housing, transportation, economic 
development, social services and building construction.    
   
In 2015, the Town of Kennebunk undertook the process of updating its Comprehensive Plan and along 
the way the initiative became a full rewrite of the plan. In 2021 this was submitted to the State for 
review and was found complete and consistent in 2022. The voters adopted the Plan in June of 2022.    
   
The Comprehensive Plan identified deficiencies in housing stock and a lack of housing diversity.  This 
condition has been amplified due to the heightened activity of the real estate market over the past several 
years and much of the new growth has been single family homes at prices 40 – 50% higher than pre -
pandemic levels.  Inflation coupled with access to funding has accelerated the housing costs upward 
and created a void on t he lower end.  Housing prices have become skewed and there is very limited 
access to transitional housing and work force housing.  The market is not developing in a diverse 
manner and this is having community and economic impacts.    
   
When the State adopt ed LD 2003 in 2022, Kennebunk recognized that this was just a start towards 
filling the tremendous void in housing needs.  The goal of the law was to provide tools to increase 
housing opportunity.  Many of the new components within the law will rely upon i ncreases in density 
and infrastructure efficiencies to mitigate the high cost of development.    
   
I support LD 1693 as it will seek to align the Kennebunk Sewer District service area with the growth 
area approved as part of the Kennebunk Comprehensive Pla n and further provide opportunities for 
more cost -effective development. Current efforts to focus on meeting the needs through single -family 
dwellings are falling short. Expansion of sewer service will provide more opportunities for various housing types. Any efforts we can make to increase opportunities for housing will have a multiplier 
effect in addressing this crisis.     Chris topher J.  Osterrieder , P.E.  
Director of Community Development // Town 
Engineer  
  
Karen A. Winton  
Deputy Director of Community Development  
  
