Kennebunk Sewer District 
44 Water Street - P.O. Box 648 
Kennebunk, ME 04043-0648 
Office: 207.985.4741 ~ Fax: 207.985.4743 
EST. 1955 Website: ksdistrictorg 
Legislative Document Number 1693: An Act to Amend the Kennebunk Sewer District Charter 
April 26, 2023 
10:00am Public Hearing 
Cross Building, Room 211 
My name is Chris Gallant. lam the District Manager for the Kennebunk Sewer District located in Kennebunk, Maine. I want to first 
thank you for your time and service to the State of Maine. Also thank you for hearing this bill presented by Senator Rafferty. I am 
here today in support of LD 1693. 
Kennebunk Sewer District was established in 1955 with the purpose of preserving and protecting the public health and welfare of the 
citizens of Kennebunk, as well as protecting the waterways of Kennebunk, specifically the Mousam River. Our District is made up of 
approximately 40 miles of piping in the collection system and 28 pump stations. We treat around three-quarters ofa million gallons 
of wastewater every day at our wastewater treatment facility. 
As the Town of Kennebunk continues to see major development of virgin land; the District, the Town, and local developers have 
taken a look at the territorial boundaries of the Kennebunk Sewer District. With recent proposals for land development beginning to 
grow outside of the current District territorial boundaries, the need to update the territorial boundaries of the District has become 
apparent. In order for the Kennebunk Sewer District to service these new areas, we must include the territory within our District 
boundaries to stay in accordance with our charter. 
The original boundaries of the District encompassed all of Kennebunk to the east of the Maine Turnpike, approximately 10,000 acres. 
A recent charter change was done to add additional lots on the west side of the Maine Turnpike; which included a major industrial 
user, a hotel, two public schools, and other smaller lots. The charter change used induvial map and lot numbers, limiting neighboring 
lots from being part of the District. 
The proposed boundaries presented within this bill would align the territorial boundaries on the west side of the Maine Turnpike 
with the Town of Kennebunk ’s future growth area within their Comprehensive Plan and Future Land Use Plan. District staff and Town 
officials worked closely together to come up with the proposed territorial description. 
The new territorial boundaries would encompass approximately 1,800 acres west of the Maine Turnpike, while leaving the existing 
boundaries east of the Turnpike as is. This would allow the Town and developers the opportunity to utilize public sewer in any 
proposed land development project within the boundaries. These boundaries set up realistic future use for the remaining capacity 
available for treatment at our wastewater treatment facility. The wastewater treatment facility is currently operating at 57% of our 
permitted flow. 
The changing of the District boundaries will have no ill-effect on our current or future rate payers. In fact, additional properties 
within these new District boundaries would produce additional revenue that can help offset current rates. 
Thank you for hearing this bill and for your time. On behalf of the Kennebunk Sewer District, we are in favor of passing this bill. 
Christopher Gallant, P.E. 
Kennebunk Sewer District 
District Manager 
(207)985-4741
