 
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 957, 
An Act Requiring Water Bottle Filling Stations in New and Renovated Public Schools  
 
Vanessa Berry , NRCM Sustainable Maine Outreach Coordinator  
March 30 , 2023 
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Vanessa Berry. I am the Sustainable Maine Outreach 
Coordinator for the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). I apprecia te this opportunity to 
testify in support of LD 957. 
 
The Nat ural Resources Council of Maine is a nonprofit membership organization protecting, 
restoring, and conserving Maine’s environment, now and for future generations. In my role at 
NRCM, I provide tec hnical and funding support to schools , businesses, and commun ity groups 
along  their journey to become more resilient and address everyday environmental challenges . 
Much of my work is directly focused on reducing unnecessary waste . Waste disposal  is a growi ng 
concern for Maine communities as local landfills reach the ir capacity and we run out of places for 
our trash to be thrown “away.” Schools are one of my favorite places to do this work because not 
only are students a great source of hope for the future, but they also are a key stakeholder on 
environmental  issue s. The waste we create and how we manage it today will impact our children 
tomorrow  and for decades into the future.  
 
During the construction of new schools and renovation of existing school buildings, school 
leadership has a n exclusive opportunity to integra te sustainable equipment and features into the 
design of the building, rather than retrofitting new technology into an existing space.  NRCM 
supports the installation of water bottle filling stations during this window because the additio n of 
these stations  in schools ensure s that students will have ongoing access to clean drinking water 
throughout the school day without spending money on bottled water  and creating unnecessary 
plastic waste . When installed withi n schools, these water bottl e filling stations benefit not only 
students, but also teachers,  school a dministrators, other essential school  staff, and even members 
of the community who might visit the building  after school hours.   
 
As NRCM continue s our work with Maine  schools to enco urage sustainable p ractices and waste 
reduction strategies, we  are pleased to offer our support for LD 957 . Thank you for the 
opportunity , and please reach out with any questions you may have.  
 
