January 24th, 2023
To:
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Honorable
Members of the
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
From:
Alex McMahan
Lewiston, Maine 04240
Subject: Support of LD 83
I’m here today to provide
support for LD 83.
In October of 2022, OCP issued a guidance document stating that a long list of cannabis
products would be considered tobacco products, and that selling these cannabis products while
adhering to the cannabis laws and not the tobacco laws would face criminal charges, fines, and
imprisonment. This caused an uproar in the industry, as many companies had been selling
these products for many years without issue.
Of course, considering a cannabis product to be a tobacco product because it is contained
within something that can also contain tobacco, is like considering a Sprite to be an alcohol
product because bottles also sometimes contain alcohol.
Not only is this requirement completely nonsensical, it actually raises additional unnecessary
public health risks.
Allow me to walk you through a scenario: Under OCP’s interpretation of the tobacco rules, a  20
year old medical cannabis card holder is allowed to walk into my store and purchase up to two
and a half ounces of cannabis flower, and has to leave with no way to consume it. According to
the October 7th guidance from OCP, they would be able to buy the flower, but no glass bowl, no
vaporizer, or no papers. They would not even be allowed to buy a pre-roll, as the pre-roll
contains paper.
The only way for them to legally partake in the cannabis flower that they are legally allowed to
buy, posses, and consume, would be for them to walk across the street, buy a can of Coke,
crush it and poke it full of holes, then smoke the cannabis out of the aluminum can, which also
happens to contain a cocktail of toxic chemicals including BPA. The resourceful 20 year old can
utilize an apple if they want to avoid the carcinogens in a can, but what are we really doing
here? What public health or safety issue are we addressing here?

The reality is that there isn’t a 20 year old on the planet who would buy a pre-roll and dump out
the cannabis to fill it with tobacco. Same goes for cartridges. There isn’t a 20 year old out there
who would buy a cannabis vape cartridge to dump out the cannabis concentrate and fill it with
nicotine liquid. Keep in mind, even in this ridiculous scenario, they aren’t getting the actual
tobacco product from the cannabis industry (by this I mean a product that actually contains
tobacco or nicotine), so even if they had the emptied cannabis pre-roll or the emptied cannabis
cartridge, they would still need to illicitly procure the tobacco or nicotine. If they have to do this
anyway, they will obviously just procure cigarettes and nicotine vapes that require no further
processing.
I understand that this is a pretty common sense issue here, considering we all know tobacco
and cannabis are different and are regulated by different sets of rules. It is unfortunate that OCP
initially interpreted this the way they did, however OCP did issue additional guidance on
November 17th which essentially rescinded the erroneously issued October 7th guidance. This
guidance included an attached memo from the Attorney General that said that the existing law is
ambiguous and unenforceable, and urged the legislature to clarify this matter during the
upcoming session. H
ere we are, at the direction of
the Attorney General.
There is another component to this issue, which is delivery, both medical and adult use. Delivery
of tobacco products is prohibited in Maine. Maine just launched its adult use delivery problem
(albeit with some major flaws that have set the program up to fail, but we’ll get into that another
day). Cannabis cartridges and pre-rolls are among the fastest growing categories in the industry.
Maine can’t deliver them because of tobacco rules. LD 83 fixes that.
The underlying question here, that I believe we all already know the answer to, is this: Is a
cannabis product that contains no tobacco or nicotine, a tobacco product? If we can all agree
that a cannabis product that contains zero nicotine or tobacco is not a tobacco product, then we
should regulate them as two separate categories, as we mostly already do.
Please allow medical operators to sell all forms of cannabis products to qualifying patients, and
please allow medical and adult use operators to deliver all forms of cannabis products to
qualifying consumers.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Respectfully,
Alex McMahan
The Healing Community MEDCo

Maine Cannabis Industry Association
