Arleigh Kraus
warren
LD 83
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Arleigh Kraus.  It is 
great to meet everyone and I am happy to be an expert cannabis resource to this 
committee as needed. I am a registered cannabis caregiver with a B.S. in 
biochemistry, an organic farmer, and business owner in Warren.  I am a founding 
member of the Maine Craft Cannabis Association, a member of Seed2Health 
Learning Health Alliance, the Chair of the Adult and Medical Cannabis Committee 
for the Town of Warren, I am on the State of Maine Cannabis Advisory Commission 
as a caregiver representative, and I am a founding member of the Cannabis Council of
Maine.  I have been a caregiver in Maine for over 10 years.
I am testifying today in support of LD 83 An Act to Clarify State Policy Regarding 
Cannabis Paraphernalia and Tobacco Products
Since 1999 when the Maine medical use of cannabis program was passed, patients of 
the program have been consuming cannabis by the delivery method which best suits 
them.  Patients of the medical cannabis program are not discriminated against by age 
as conditions from seizures to cancer affect all ages.  Delivery methods of cannabis 
medicine range from sublingual tinctures, edibles, vaporizers, inhaled cannabis 
smoke, to topicals.  There is no one size fits all consumption method.  
 Recently how medical cannabis caregivers (such as myself), can assist patients of all 
ages with cannabis has been changed out of nowhere.  The guidance which was issued
by former director of OCP, Erik Gunderson in October of 2022 did not take into 
account the needs of patients of the program or of the caregivers who care for these 
patients.  By re-defining that cannabis paraphernalia such as pre-rolled cannabis, 
electronic smoking devices, vaporizers, rolling papers, pipes, etc are now considered 
tobacco products, the state has taken away the availability of these necessary products
for the patients of the medical cannabis program by requiring a tobacco license to 
provide these items and only if one has a retail location from which to dispense.
Not only does cannabis not belong being categorized as tobacco as it is not of the 
same genus or species, cannabis is a recognized plant of medicinal value and in order 
to be utilized it must have some means of entering the body.  This method is and 
should continue to solely be up to the patient, with the guidance if requested of a 
medical practitioner or caregiver. 
Tobacco has substantial negative ramifications for those who smoke it as well as 
enormous addictive qualities.  Tobacco smoke consists of thousands of chemicals and 
includes at least 70 which have been discovered to cause cancer.  According to the 
CDC over 480,000 deaths annually in the US can be attributed to cigarette smoke.  
The genotoxic effects of oxidized hydrocarbons such as polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAH’s)  which are produced by tobacco smoke have been identified as
the most likely source of genetic changes which lead to the cancer causing changes to 
cells.
While cannabis smoke has been shown to have some respiratory implications it has 
not been linked to tobacco related cancers or addiction.  Numerous research studies 
have been unable to find a connection between cannabis smoke and lung cancer.  
Compounds found in cannabis have been shown to inhibit and kill multiple types of 
cancers including breast, prostate, lung, leukemia, glioma and others.  
Smoking cannabis is very often the best route of intake by medical cannabis patients 
because it allows for rapid absorption.  For example cannabis smoke has been 
demonstrated to stop epileptic seizure events during acute onsets.    
As the OCP guidance stands currently, in order to obtain a retail tobacco license one 
must have a physical storefront which many licensed caregivers such as myself do not
have.  This is discrimination against me as a caregiver and the patients I have served 
for over 10 years.  For my patients who use medical cannabis I have been unable to 
provide them with pre rolled cannabis, or vaporizer cartridges without the fear of 
fines and violations. I am prohibited from providing my patients who come to my 
farm with the necessary “paraphernalia” with which to consume their medical 
cannabis. It has impacted not only the patients who I work everyday to help but also 
me and my ability to earn a living. The ability for me to provide pre rolled cannabis 
and other products which fall under this new definition have also been impacted as 
the delivery of the products to wholesale accounts is prohibited even with a tobacco 
license if I were to have one per the new guidance.  This is a glaring catch 22.  Also, 
colleagues with retail locations who have been forced to obtain a tobacco license are 
restricted from delivering any newly defined cannabis products which fall under the 
new tobacco product definition to medical patients.  
In closing I maintain that there is no justification or precedent for placing tobacco 
guidance in the medical cannabis program.  The intention of the medical cannabis 
program is to provide medical cannabis for patients in any such desired form that they
require whether this be by suppository or by inhalation.  A state agency should not 
interfere with the right of a patient to choose that delivery method by the imposition 
of fines, violations, threats of legal action, and restrictive regulations on the caregivers
who provide this medicine.  
References: 
Melamede, R. Cannabis and tobacco smoke are not equally carcinogenic. Harm Reduct J 2, 
21 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-7517-2-21
Huntsman RJ, Tang-Wai R, Acton B, Alcorn J, Lyon AW, Mousseau DD, Seifert B, 
Laprairie R, Prosser-Loose E, Hanuš LO. Cannabis for the treatment of paediatric 
epilepsy? An update for Canadian paediatricians. Paediatr Child Health. 2018 
Sep;23(6):368-373. doi: 10.1093/pch/pxy036. Epub 2018 Apr 5. PMID: 30455572; 
PMCID: PMC6234422.
https://www.drugscience.org.uk/why-doctors-have-a-moral-imperative-to-prescribe-and-suppo
rt-medical-cannabis-an-essay-by-david-nutt/

