Becky Dixon
Pittston
LD 83
To members of the Committees or whom it may concern,
Thank you for allowing me to share my testimony. My name is Becky Dixon, and I 
have been working for Hive Medicinal for the past three and a half years. We are a 
veteran-owned medical cannabis storefront with the pleasure of serving patients from 
all over Maine and beyond. 
My written testimony today will be in regards to 2023 Maine LD83, AN ACT to 
Clarify State Policy Regarding the Use of Cannabis Paraphernalia in the Maine 
Medical Use of Cannabis Act. My written testimony includes recommendations on 
revising the rules and regulations surrounding cannabis paraphernalia and the 
definition thereof. 
For the most part I have no issues with the laws in place, with the exception being the 
uncertainty regarding pre rolls and cartridges and if they are legal to sell to patients 
18-20. When OCP selected our store to walkthrough and give OCP members an 
opportunity to see what a compliant dispensary looks like back in November 2022, 
Vern Malloch, Director of Operations of OCP (formerly Director of Compliance) 
stated that the classification of pre rolls, cartridges and other paraphernalia associated 
with smoking cannabis was linked to tobacco, based on the similarities involved in 
consumption of both products. 
To operate under a rule that is inherited from a completely unrelated industry, without
credible scientific data or studies demonstrating evidence of long-term consequences 
in 18-20 year old cannabis patients is a concern. The diseases and health issues 
associated with tobacco are not comparable to the possible consequences of smoking 
cannabis. The benefits from cannabis have been embraced by medical professionals 
with years of experience and a wealth of scientific knowledge. We allow 18-20 year 
olds to access cannabis with the approval of their medical professional, but they have 
no legal way to consume it. This pushes those individuals to seek unconventional or 
black market alternatives. It makes no sense to put medicine in the hands of someone 
in need without any means of consuming it. 
Cannabis paraphernalia must be made accessible to all patients. Until this issue is 
addressed, our state is doing a disservice to its citizens. On behalf of these patients, I 
encourage the State of Maine to modify the definition of cannabis paraphernalia and 
remove its association with the tobacco industry. 
Thank you for your consideration.
Becky Dixon
