Benjamin Zaremba
Cannabis Unlimited
LD 83
Hello,
My name is Benjamin Zaremba, I am a medical caregiver and have been for the past 3
years. I am also a patient of 10 years, having put Crohn’s disease into a deep 
remission using cannabis. I give credit to the Maine Medical Cannabis system and 
community for helping me make that dream a reality. I was told by doctors I would 
never have the quality of life that I now have. I strive to help others achieve relief 
through cannabis.
I have made it my goal to give others the quality of life that I was told by the top 
doctors in the world that I would not have. I opened a small scale medical delivery 
company called Cannabis Unlimited to help others. We serve patients from 
Scarborough to Waterville and all the coastline between. I do not have a storefront, I 
am a home based caregiver and do all I can to provide convenient and affordable 
medical cannabis to patients in need. I fully support LD 83 and the definition of 
"Cannabis Paraphernalia" brought forth today. 
In October of 2022, all cannabis stakeholders received a letter informing us that that 
many forms of cannabis, such as preroll joints and cannabis vape cartridges, are not 
allowed to be sold without a Tobacco Resale License. We were told that these are 
defined as “Tobacco Products” instead of “Cannabis Paraphernalia” as we have 
always interpreted. We were also told that to get a Tobacco Resale License, a 
caregiver must operate a brick and mortar store front, and we were threatened with 
penalty and fines if we did not comply. This is an unjust action by the Office of 
Cannabis Policy. 
This action by the state directly affects patients access to the medicine they need. 
Certain patients are unable to roll a joint or to do more than press a button of a 
vaporizer in order to consume cannabis due to their conditions. Furthermore, disabled 
patients are who need these forms of medicine the most, and many disabled patients 
rely on medical delivery caregivers specifically. I would also like to remind everyone 
that during the Covid pandemic, medical cannabis delivery was made an essential 
business. Caregivers who provide a delivery service are needed, this definition must 
be changed to protect some of the most debilitated medical patients throughout the 
state so they can continue to receive care.
I took time away from these patients when I tried to apply for a Tobacco Resale 
License. I was denied for not having a brick and mortar storefront/signage. I spent 
hours for weeks trying to contact or get in touch with anyone from the Department of 
Agriculture, no one ever called or emailed me back. 
Stakeholders later received a letter stating that these tobacco definitions need to be 
clarified and the previous threat will not be enforced for the time being.
I am jumping through all hoops and doing everything to be state compliant, yet the 
state still threatens to shut down my business. I have patients who have contacted me 
very distressed and upset that they can no longer receive the medicine they are 
accustomed to and rely on. 
This misguidance goes against the authorized conduct for medical use of cannabis, 
where it clearly states that patients are allowed to possess and caregivers are allowed 
to sell these cannabis products. Not allowing delivery services or home-based 
caregivers to sell joints or vape cartridges, directly hurts Maine’s cannabis patients. 
Furthermore, from a business standpoint, the state is telling small businesses that they 
are now unable to sell some of the most sought after methods of medicating for 
medical cannabis. These products also happen to have a large profit margin which 
means without them, small business owners will suffer which jeopardizes the ability 
to provide for the patients at all. 
Before the state told me I could not sell joints or cartridges, over 50% of my sales 
were for these items. After I removed these items from my menu, I lost over 60% of 
the patients and sales that were coming to me for medicine because my menu now 
was not diverse with these products that are in high demand. I will not be able to 
operate and help patients if these definitions are not changed. It is unjust to the 
citizens of Maine to allow these products to be further mis-categorized as something 
they are not. 
The state is also giving an unfair advantage to large storefronts. They have funneled 
patients away from small caregivers who innately struggle to cover the monthly 
expenses. They have pushed these patients to large stores that have lots of funding, 
many even have a corporate structure. Many patients do not want to go to these large 
stores or are unable to. This gives the patients less access to their medicine. By not 
allowing delivery-only caregivers, the state is not allowing access to medicine for 
many patients who are disabled or unable to leave their home. 
The fact is that Cannabis should not logically or scientifically should never be defined
the same as tobacco. It is naturally a completely different plant, with no relation in 
DNA. It is apples to oranges, and cannot be regulated the as the same species. This is 
especially true for medical cannabis which is not used for recreational use, like 
tobacco is. 
The definition of Cannabis Paraphernalia presented today in LD 83, directly clears the
confusion between medical caregivers and the Department of Agriculture's definition 
of a Tobacco Product. It is clear to me, and I hope everyone else that this new 
definition is necessary to allow patients to receive the medicine they need, as well as 
allowing caregivers to provide these forms of cannabis. Maine has always been at the 
forefront of wholistic medicine and medical cannabis in our country, I hope we all can
agree that preserving this system that has taken decades to build is in the best interest 
for the residents of Maine and it’s patients. 
I strongly urge everyone to understand the deep impact this confusion has caused, and
see the benefit this definition of “Cannabis Paraphernalia” brings to the patients and 
medical system. Thank you for taking the time to listen to my testimony. This 
decision doesn’t only effect currently sick medical patients, but also effects future 
patients from the access they may need. I hope it is abundantly clear that the right 
decision is for the state to adopt this definition of “Cannabis Paraphernalia” presented 
in LD 83.
Sincerely, 
Benjamin Zaremba
Cannabis Unlimited
