LD 83 Testimony 1/25/23 Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee    Good afternoon VLA Committee members.  For those of you who don’t know me, I’m Brett Messer, and I reside in Biddeford.  I’ve been a cannabis patient for 15 years, a cannabis business owner 12 years, and for the last two years I have been studying Medical Cannabis Science in a master’s degree program at the University of Maryland, School of Pharmacy.  A program which I will complete this May.    I’ve focused my areas of study on becoming an expert in many of the relevant issues within cannabis program regulations, and specifically the one put forth today.  Many people you’ve heard from today are speaking from a place of emotion, not fact.  Perhaps, operating on outdated notions of policy and science which have been updated in the scientific community, and continue to be updated daily.  I will provide citations and sources to current published scientific articles which back all the arguments I will form hereafter.   It’s disappointing that we are in this place today, and really highlights a failure of the executive branch and its agencies.  The current medical cannabis law is quite clear that cannabis patients have protected access to these items, yet they’ve opted to define and regulate otherwise.  It was quite a slap in the face to be required to obtain tobacco licenses for our stores, when we sell no tobacco.  Why would we?  We are here to help folks become healthier through the use of our products.  Firstly, I would like to address the elephant in the room.  Cannabis is not Tobacco.  They are not related in any way aside from the fact they grow from the ground, and they can both be smoked and vaped.   Tobacco cultivation, processing and storage requires an immense amount of chemicals which are proven to be harmful to the human body, and additionally carries a high abuse liability due to its highly addictive nature.  Tobacco smoke includes 43 known carcinogens and other toxins. 1  Cannabis on the other hand is free of harmful chemicals thanks to our state law.  This is just the beginning.   Let’s talk about lung function.  Lung function is measured in two ways FEV1 and FVC.  FEV or Forced Expiratory Volume is how much air someone can forcibly exhale in one second, and FVC or Forced Vital Capacity is total amount of air over the full duration of the exhale.  “The CARDIA study found that tobacco smoking was associated with lower levels of FVC and FEV1 while for cannabis use FVC and FEV1 increased.”  While cannabis plant material does contain carcinogens, Tobacco is consumed regularly throughout the day, every day, while cannabis is used episodically.2  This is also why our industry supports and utilizes products like edibles, vaporizers, capsules, inhalers and other delivery devices to avoid some of the harmful sides of cannabis smoke.  With that said, many medical cannabis patients rely on the rapid onset of inhaled cannabis as a way of treating their symptoms.  
The other major issue at hand of the use of single use vaporizers which have been incorrectly tied to the teen vaping crisis in tobacco.  I won’t restate what I’ve previously said regarding Tobacco VS. Cannabis, but the same holds true here, with additional considerations to pay attention to.  The most important and paramount reason patients MUST have access to vaporized cannabis products is because depending on the condition of the patient they may NOT be able to consume cannabis in another way.3    Additionally, dosing with smoked cannabis can be unreliable for several reasons, the largest being that there too many variables regarding technique and devices across different patients.  The best way we solve that problem is with metered dosing.  There are several types of metered dosing, the most common is a cannabis concentrate vaporizer.  In a typical .5g or 500mL cartridge there is approximately 400mg of active cannabinoids.  A typical cartridge will provide a patient with 100 inhales of 8 seconds in duration.  This means for an 8 second inhale the patient can reliably expect to consume 4mg of cannabinoids.  The patient may also adjust the duration of their inhale reliably to adjust dosing.  For example, a 2 second inhale would equate to consuming 1mg of cannabinoids.  For this reason, it is an absolute requirement that medical patients have access to all types of cannabis vaporizers including cartridges and disposables.  You may be thinking to yourself why the patient can’t just eat edibles.  Here’s the underlying issue for some people.  Delta-9-THC when eaten undergoes first pass metabolism in the liver and is converted to 11-Hydroxy-THC.  11-Hydroxy-THC is FOUR times as potent as Delta-9-THC, and it takes four to five times as long for the body to expel.  Additionally, because this process happens in the liver there is a large concern with drug-drug interaction.  This means that a patient may not be able to consume cannabis and other pharmaceutical drugs in conjunction with each other as they compete in the liver for limited CYP enzymes.4  Therefore, vaporizing allows the avoidance of first pass metabolism and directly into the central nervous system.  This again, is a key feature of having safe access for medical patients.   As you can see, I have spent a considerable amount of time with these topics recently, and I would be happy to be an ongoing resource for the committee as it works on this bill.  Thank you for your time and consideration.     References  1 - Baumeister, S.-E. et al. (2021) ‘Cannabis Use, Pulmonary Function, and Lung Cancer Susceptibility: A Mendelian Randomization Study’, Journal of Thoracic Oncology, 16(7), pp. 1127–1135. doi:10.1016/j.jtho.2021.03.025.  2 - Najman, J.M. et al. (2023) ‘Do tobacco and cannabis use and co-use predict lung function: A longitudinal study’, Respiratory medicine, p. 107124. doi:10.1016/j.rmed.2023.107124.  
3 - Christensen, C. et al. (2023) ‘Clinical Research Evidence Supporting Administration and Dosing Recommendations of Medicinal Cannabis as Analgesic in Cancer Patients’, Journal of Clinical Medicine, 12(1), p. 307. doi:10.3390/jcm12010307.  4 - Peralt, A., Ke, P. and Castaneto, M.S. (2022) ‘Impact of cannabis-infused edibles on public safety and regulation’, Journal of Forensic Sciences, 67(6), pp. 2387–2393. doi:10.1111/1556-4029.15135. 
