" ‘ ' 
ADMINISTRATIVE & FINANCIAL SERVICES 
STATE OF MAINE 
OFFICE or CANNABIS POLICY KIRSTEN Lc FIGUEROA 
162 STATE HOUSE STATION COWSSWR 
,‘.,;,_.r1gr_ 19 UNION STREET 
FIRST FLOOR OFFICE OF CANNABIS POLICY 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0162 
JANET T. MILLS JOHN HUDAK 
GOVERNOR DIRECTOR 
January 25, 2023 
Re: LD 83 - An Act to Clarify State Policy Regarding the Use of Cannabis Paraphernalia in the 
Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Act 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs: 
I am Gabrielle Bérubé Pierce, Policy Director for the Office of Cannabis Policy (OCP) and I am 
providing the following information on behalf of our office regarding LD 83. 
This bill addresses the state’s deﬁnition of a “tobacco product” 1 
in relation to regulated cannabis 
products and paraphernalia, as well as the statutory prohibition on the sale of tobacco products to 
individuals under the age of 21. 
Although OCP is not responsible for the issuance or oversight of retail tobacco sales licenses, 
what is and is not a tobacco product is an issue of concern to our medical and adult use cannabis 
program participants, and a topic that we have received countless questions about. As regulators, 
we Welcome clarity from the Legislature about whether our program participants need a retail 
tobacco sales license in order to sell cannabis products to qualifying patients or adult use 
consumers. 
To assist the committee, we are providing the following information regarding the impact of the 
tobacco products deﬁnition on the two programs our office administers. 
In the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Program, qualifying patients may purchase or receive 
medical cannabis and medical cannabis products from a registered caregiver, caregiver retail 
store, or dispensary. There are no restrictions in the medical cannabis law regarding the kinds of 
cannabis or cannabis products that may be transferred to qualifying patients who are 18 years of 
age or older. Minor qualifying patients under the age of 18, however, are not pennitted to smoke 
medical cannabisz and require access to other medical cannabis products. In the Adult Use 
1 
22 IVRS § 1551(3) deﬁnes “tobacco product” as “any product that is made from or derived from tobacco, or that 
contains nicotine, that is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, 
chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a 
cigar, a hookah, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff or snus. "Tobacco product" also means an electronic smoking 
device and any component or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as ﬁlters, rolling papers, 
pipes and liquids used in electronic smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. "Tobacco product" does 
not include drugs, devices or combination products authorized for sale by the United States Food and Drug 
Administration, as those terms are deﬁned in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.” 
2 22 MRS 2423-A(1)(M). 
Phone: (207) 287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
www.maine.gov/dafs/ocp/
Cannabis Program, consumers must be 21 years of age or older and may only purchase cannabis 
and cannabis products from an adult use cannabis retail store. 
At present, OCP requires all registered caregivers and dispensaries making sales to qualifying 
patients, and all adult use cannabis stores making sales to consumers, to demonstrate that they 
have an active retail tobacco sales license issued by the Department of Health and Human 
Services (DHHS), Health Inspection Program and enforced by the Ofﬁce of the Attorney 
General (OAG).3 
It is OCP’s understanding, informed by our colleagues at DHHS and OAG, that a retail tobacco 
sales license prohibits the sale of tobacco products to individuals under the age of 21. OCP 
further understands that retail tobacco sales licenses are tied to a single, ﬁxed location and thata 
retail tobacco sales licensee may not conduct sales of tobacco products by delivery. 
The programmatic differences between the registration and licensure requirements of Maine’s 
medical and adult use cannabis programs, and the requirements of a retail tobacco sales license, 
have led to confusion among the participants in the programs OCP administers. Speciﬁcally, 
questions from our medical program registrants include: 
l. What cannabis products and paraphernalia are considered “tobacco products ”? Are pre- 
rolled cannabis cigarettes (pre-rolls) or vaporizer cartridges ﬁlled with cannabis oil (vape 
cartridges) considered “tobacco products ”? What about rolling papers or cannabis 
concentrates ‘? 
2. Can a registered caregiver or dispensary sell items like pre-rolls or vape cartridges to 
qualifying patients between the ages of 18 and 20? 
3. Can a registered caregiver sell such items out of their home, without a brick-and-mortar 
storefront? 
Participants in both the medical and adult use cannabis programs would also like to know: 
1. Is a retail tobacco sales license needed to sell cannabis products and paraphemalia ‘? 
2. Can such items be sold via delivery? 
We are hopeful that the committee ’s work on this bill will resolve some of these questions and 
provide greater clarity to OCP and our program participants about the intersection of the tobacco 
laws with the regulated cannabis economy.’ 
We thank the committee for its careﬁil consideration of this bill, and we are happy to answer any 
questions you may have. 
3 
This demonstration is like other license and registration application requirements administered by OCP. For 
instance, all caregivers, dispensaries, and adult use products manufacturing facilities creating edible cannabis 
products must demonstrate that they possess food establishment licenses from the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry, and any caregiver, dispensary, or adult use cultivation facility using pesticides in the 
cultivation of cannabis is required to obtain a pesticides applicator license from the Board of Pesticides Control. 
Phone: (207) 287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
www.mainc.gov/dafs/ocp/
