 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
January 26, 2023  
 
Senator  Craig Hickman , Chair  
Representative  Laura Supica,  Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 83 - An Act to Clarify State Policy Regarding the Use of Cannabis Paraphernalia in the 
Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Act  
 
Dear Senator  Hickman , Representative Supica , and Members of the Committee on Veterans and 
Legal Affairs : 
 
This letter is to provide information about LD 83 - An Act to Clarify State Policy Regarding the 
Use of Cannabis Paraphernalia in the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Act , and the potential 
impact of the proposed emergency legislation , if enacted.  
 
LD 83 seeks to  define the term "cannabis paraphernalia" for purposes of the Maine Medical Use 
of Cannabis Act. The proposed definition clarifies that cannabis paraphernalia is not a tobacco 
product under the laws governing the retail sale of tobacc o and that i t may be sold or provided to 
a qualifying patient for the patient's medical use of cannabis.  The Maine Center of Disease 
Control and Prevention (Maine CDC) has discussed the proposed legislation with Maine’s 
Department of Administrative and Finan cial Services (DAFS) – Office of Cannabis P olicy  and, 
in addition to testimony submitted by DAFS, offers the following information for consideration .  
 
Maine’s Office of Cannabis P olicy  (OCP) is charged with ensur ing an e fficient, responsible and 
legal  medical-use cannabis program . The Maine CDC Health Inspection Program  (HIP) issues 
retail  tobacco licenses to applicants , including  medical use cannabis caregivers  and dispensaries , 
in accordance with 22 MRS chapter 262. Inspections for tobacco licensees are conducted  by 
Tobacco Enforcement through the Consumer Protection Division of the Office of the Maine 
Attorney General  (OAG) .  
 
There has been ongoing confusion related to the ne ed for caregivers to obtain a retail tobacco 
license to sell those products included  in the definition of a tobacco product  as found in 22 MRS 
§ 1551 , when  they do not sell tobacco/nicotine and only provide for qualifying patients use. The 
36 MRS chapter 704 -Tobacco Products Tax definition of a tobacco product updated in 2019 
differs from the same term’s definition found in Title 22 ; it specifically excludes , for tax 
purposes,  any product that contains cannabis or cannabis products subject to  control under Title 
22, chapter 558‑C . Chapter 558 -C authorizes a caregiver to provide a qualifying patient or a 
caregiver with cannabis paraphernalia for purposes of the qualifying patient's medical use of 
 
 cannabis , but, currently,  the statute does not d efine paraphernalia . Some products define d as 
tobacco pr oduc ts are also found in OCP rules listed as paraphernalia  for Maine’s medical -use 
cannabis pro grams . Additionally , under 22 MRS chapter 558-C, smoking  cannabis, with 
exception of a nebulizer, is prohibited until the qualifying patient is age 18 compared to tobacco 
laws that prohibit smoking by anyone under the age of 21. Caregivers are not required to operate  
their cannabis bu siness  from brick and mortar store s; however , as a tobacco licensee,  home -
based sales  of products  are prohibited  and tobacco licensees also must have required signage  
displayed in store fronts . Maine CDC and OCP  agree  that clarification and resolution of 
inconsistencies  in laws and rules  governing Maine’s cannabis programs and tobacco use  are due.   
 
HIP has experienced a significant increase in applications , emails and phone calls  from 
registered caregivers confused and frustrated with being subject to Maine’s tobacco laws a nd 
required to have a tobacco license  when  they are providing ‘cannabis paraphernalia for purposes 
of the qualifying patient's medical use of cannabis ’ (22 MRS § 2423 -C), and not selling 
tobacco/nic otine. The HIP processes about  10,000 licenses each y ear and  does not have the 
resource capacity  to absorb the anticipated volume that is expected to  expand each year as 
Maine’s cannabis  program  registrants increase  should they continue to require  a tobacco license . 
The recent  increase  in tobacco retail license application s delayed the program ’s follow -up with 
applicants/licensees and timeliness  in processing applications, renewals and  issuance of licenses  
for tobacco license es and also impacted HIP licensing activities for oth er businesses, including 
restaurants , lodging establishments , campgrounds, youth camps, public pools and spas and body 
artists .  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter  and your work to provide clarity in the law . The 
Maine CDC is available to provide additional details for the Committee’s consideration  and to 
participate in future work session for LD 83  should that be of help .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Deputy  Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

