122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Opposition to : 
LD 83: An Act to Clarify State Policy Regarding the Use of Cannabis Paraphernalia in the Maine 
Medical Use of Cannabis Act  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
State House, Room 437 Wednesday , January 25, 2023 
 Good afternoon, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs . My name is Rebecca Boulos . I am a resident of South Portland and 
executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual m embers and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve 
and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit associ ation, we advocate, act, and advise on critical 
public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities – but  which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied 
to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities , and we take that 
responsibility seriously.  MPHA is in opposition to LD 83: “ An Act to Clarify State Policy Regarding the Use of Cannabis Paraphernalia 
in the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Act .” Section 1 of the proposed legislation changes the section of Maine 
statute that governs retail sales of tobacco products; these are evidence -based provisions that clarify types of 
tobacco products . The bill also adds a new definition  of “cannabis paraphernalia.”  
 The same types of products that are used to smoke  tobacco are also used to smoke  cannabis, and we believe that 
is the issue this legislation is trying to resolve . There is a challenge to that effort because tobacco products (and 
recreational cannabis products) can only be sold to individuals who are 21 years of age and older. Y oung adults 
ages 18 years and older can use medical cannabis  (as can minors
 – individuals under 18 years of age) . Further  
complicating this is that there are products on the market that contain both cannabis and nicotine.  
 There are extenuating circumstances and contexts that impact this propos ed legislation , and they underscore our 
opposition:  
 
• At a fundamental level, we have concerns about the health impacts of smoking cannabis and second-hand cannabis smoke exposure. Indeed, th ere are carcinogens in cannabis  smoke ; these pose health risks 
to the person smoking and to others in proximity. According to the U.S. CDC
, “smoked m arijuana 
delivers THC and other cannabinoids to the body, but it also delivers harmful substances, including many of the same toxins and carcinogens (cancer -causing chemicals) found in tobacco smoke, which are 
harmful to the lungs and cardiovascular system .” These toxins include mercury, ammonia, cyanide, lead , 
and formaldehyde , as well as hazardous fine particles . 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  • There is a lack of  research to support the need for smoking cannabis to alleviate  health concerns. 
According to the U.S. CDC , “Studies of the chemicals (or cannabinoids) found in the marijuana plant 
suggest that certain cannabinoids can be helpful in treating nausea and vomiting from cancer 
chemotherapy,1  as well as in treating neuropathic pain (pain caused by damaged nerves).1 The U.S Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved two specific drugs  (dronabinol [name brands Marinol and 
Syndros] and nabilone [name brand Cesamet]) that are synthetic ( [hu]man-made) forms of specific 
cannabinoids for use in cancer patients with chemotherapy -associated nausea and vomiting.”  Thus, in 
instances where cannabis is helpful for managing pain or nausea  – and epilepsy  – FDA -approved drugs 
can be used.  
• There is emerging evidence about adverse interactive effects between cannabis and other drugs. For example, 
new recommendations and guidelines from the American Society of  Regional Anesthesia  and 
Pain Medi cine (ASRA) state that all patients who undergo procedures that require regional or  general 
anesthesia should be asked if, how often, and in what forms they use because data show patients who regularly use cannabis may ex perience worse pain and nausea after surgery and may require more opioid 
analgesia.  
• 18-year-olds that use medical cannabis are likely to still be  in high school . We are concerned about the 
sharing of these devices – particularly e -cigarettes – with their p eers who may use them  to vape nicotine . 
Because of this increased accessibility , we are concerned that the bill, as written, is a rollback of 
Maine’s strong tobacco laws ; it also poses difficulty for enforcement ( since it’s impossible to know  what 
the product contains without lab testing) and encourages smoking.  
• The criteria to receive a Maine medical c annabis c ard are very broad , and indeed, are marketed that way 
by medical cannabis retailers . As one example, on Grass Monkey’s website : 
 
 
 
• Youth cannabis use is increasing. A ccording to the Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey  (MIYHS), 
past 30- day cannabis consumption among Maine high school students was declining between 2011 and 
2017. However, in 2019, Maine began to see an increase in cannabis consumption among this population: 36.4% of high schoolers reported using cannabis, compared with 32.6% in 2017. 
• Existing r egulations do not prohibit the marketing of tobacco products (like pipes) from being attractive 
to youth and young adults  (see examples below) . 
• There are problems associated with cannabis use in Maine. For example, i n 2020, in Maine, there were 
5,625 cannabis -related emer gency department visits, a 21% increase from 2019.2 Rates were 
disproportionately higher for males and for people ages 18 to 25 years old. 
 

122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  We are concerned that this bill will have many unintended negative consequences for public health, including 
increased smoking of cannabis and other substances among youth. W hile we do not support the smoking of any 
product, we  propose the following for your consideration:  
 
1. Please d o not change the tobacco product s definition to exempt products  that are also used to smoke 
cannabis.  The definition of cannabis paraphernalia is very broad and could include products that are also 
used in the consumption or ingestion of products that contain tobacco/nicotine. 
2. Instead, pl ease consider e xempt ing m edical cannabis retailers (i.e., medical cannabis dispensaries – not 
recreational cannabis retailers ) to the age requirements under T obacco 21 – if these retailers  are 
prohibited from selling products that contain tobacco, nicotine, or synthetic nicotine . 
 
We would also ask for your  consideration of  these other requests:  
1. Support for e nforcemen t: According to a 2022 report  published by the Office of Cannabis Policy, more 
than half (54%) of consumers who purchase from home -based caregivers do not have a medical card. 
Similarly, approximately 1 in 3 consumers who purchase at medical dispensaries or from caregivers 
with retail storefronts do not have a medical card (33%).  
2. Support for data collection: It would be helpful to understand more about the  public health impact s of 
these changes , including sales data , adverse event  data,  and the number of individuals under age 21 who 
have a medical cannabis card . 
3. Support for funding educational materials , including for retailers to not sell – even medical cannabis  – to 
non-U.S. citizens , and information for providers about the latest research on interactions between 
cannabis and other drugs.  
4. Prohibit coupons and free samples of cannabis . Research shows  the provision of free electronic smoking 
devices or e- liquid samples i s associated with tobacco and electronic smoking device -use among youth 
and adults . Free samples of tobacco are prohibited in Maine law ; the cannabis program should follow 
suit. 
 
I am happy to provide more information about the health effects of cannabis use or to  answer other questions 
from the committee . Thank you for your consideration of our testimony. 
 
  
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  Product examples  (from Portland Smoke & Vape Instagram ) – please note the dual marketing of tobacco and 
cannabis  in the hashtags : 
 
 
 
 
 
 

122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org   
 
 
 

122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org   
 
 
1 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. The health effects of cannabis and cannabinoids: T he current state of 
evidence and recommendations for research. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2017.  
2 Marijuana Use Dashboard . Maine State Epidemiological Outcomes Workgroup.  

