Robyn Lawler
Augusta
LD 83
To members of the Committees or whom it may concern,
First and foremost, I’d like to formally thank you for allowing cannabis industry 
professionals the opportunity to testify today. My name is Robyn Lawler, and I am 
involved in compliance and administrative services at Hive Medicinal. Hive 
Medicinal is a veteran-owned medical cannabis storefront that serves patients all over 
Maine and beyond. Our number one focus is the well being of our patients.
Today, my testimony will focus on 2023 Maine LD83, An Act to Clarify State Policy 
Regarding the Use of Cannabis Paraphernalia in the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis 
Act. My written testimony includes recommendations on revising the rules and 
regulations surrounding cannabis paraphernalia and the definition thereof.
I have to applaud the hard work and intentionality that went into medical cannabis 
legalization and the state as well as OCP’s continued efforts to refine and improve the
existing medical cannabis rules. As a compliance officer, I have directly experienced 
the impact of these changes, which more often than not, have proven to be beneficial 
to industry professionals and patients alike.
In November 2022, Vern Malloch, Director of Operations of OCP (formerly Director 
of Compliance) selected our dispensary for a walkthrough to give other OCP 
members an opportunity to witness what a compliant dispensary looked like. Among 
the board members was Erik Gundersen, who was at that time, the Executive Director
of OCP. Erik spearheaded the conversation after the walkthrough and invited us to 
express ideas, frustrations, and concerns about the existing medical cannabis policies.
For the most part, we had relatively no issue with the laws in place, the exception 
being the uncertainty regarding pre rolls and cartridges and whether they were legal to
sell to patients aged 18-20. Vern explained that OCP does not regulate the sale of 
tobacco products, instead they are regulated by statute. As such, items defined as a 
“tobacco product” by the statute must adhere to the laws regulating tobacco product 
sales, including but not limited to verifying the purchaser is 21+.
Vern went on to state that the classification of pre rolls, cartridges, and the 
paraphernalia associated with orally smoking cannabis was linked to tobacco, based 
on the similarities involved in consumption of both products. To operate under a rule 
that is inherited from a completely unrelated industry, without credible scientific data 
or studies demonstrating evidence of long-term consequences in 18-20 year old 
cannabis patients, was a concern worth mentioning.
The fact that tobacco rules exist, in theory, with the interest of protecting young 
adults’ health, make sense. There are numerous studies that show evidence of less 
cancer and tobacco-related morbidities if adults aged 18-20 cannot easily access 
cigarettes. The diseases and health issues associated with tobacco are by no means 
comparable to possible consequences of smoking cannabis. The benefits from 
cannabis have been embraced by medical professionals with years of experience and a
wealth of scientific knowledge.
At present, 18, 19, and 20 year old patients are allowed access to cannabis, per their 
medical professional’s guidance, but no legal way to consume it. This conundrum 
introduces a situation that ultimately strongarms young individuals to seek 
unconventional or black-market solutions. To put medicine in the hands of someone 
in need, without any means of consuming it, is a glaringly obvious catch 22 (or catch 
21+) that needs to be addressed to protect the health and legal status of young adults 
in Maine.
It should be noted that after OCP’s visit to Hive, the board underwent several staff 
changes. Erik Gundersen made a valiant effort to collect feedback and address 
industry professionals’ concerns. It was evident that by the end of his tenure, Erik was
frustrated with the lack of responsiveness from the state regarding issues like this. 
Shortly after a series of three 2-hour webinars, Erik stepped down from his position, 
only to open his own cannabis consulting business. Erik now serves as an advocate 
for patient rights and an ally for cannabis professionals.
Though we are not lawyers, politicians, or doctors, we know that we too, must 
advocate for the best interest of our patients. We hope that taking the time to voice 
our concerns will help our Maine Legislators understand the importance of addressing
the definition of cannabis paraphernalia.
Cannabis paraphernalia must be made accessible to patients that are given permission 
to consume from their doctor. Until this situation is addressed, our state is doing a 
disservice to tax paying, young adults. On behalf of these individuals, I implore the 
State of Maine to modify the definition of cannabis paraphernalia and remove its 
association with the tobacco industry.  
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. I am happy to answer any questions 
and can be contacted at robyn@hivemedicinal.com.
 
Robyn Lawler
Compliance & Administration
Hive Medicinal
