Senate president Troy Jackson, senator Craig 
Hickman, speaker Rachel Talbot Ross and 
other distinguished members of the committee 
on veterans and legal affairs. 
I am speaking in support of LD83 
My Name is Roxy Kai, i am both a medical 
cannabis patient as well as a caregivers 
assistant at West Paris Provisions a medical 
dispensary in Oxford county. 
Without rehashing details in Qctober 2022 
OCP and DHHS made a very poor “guidance ” 
choice. Since then, l'm sure everyone at this 
point has had the chance to read the frame 
worthy letter that Senator Craig Hickman 
wrote in response: thank you, senator 
Hickman for your direct and honest words. 
The actions around this guidance taken by 
OCP, as Senator Hickman pointed out in his
letter, they admittedly and in writing broke the 
law. No wonder there was such a “swift” 
response to hold off on this guidance in 
November until the 2023 legislative session. 
However, despite the short time that 
illegitimate guidance was enacted the damage 
had already scarred the Maine medical 
cannabis program. 
It caused severe damage to caregivers 
livelihoods and their dispensaries despite the 
statement made on November 16 by Attorney 
General Aaron Frey stating medical 
dispensaries and caregivers can resume 
providing paraphernalia to all qualifying 
medical patients without legal repercussions. 
The fear OCP puts into caregivers and the 
existing insane prejudice based laws 
regarding cannabis that still exist are 
responsible for creating an environment of 
distrust, anger, and confusion throughout the
medical cannabis program. 
lt caused confusion and anger among the 
patient community as well and it has left many 
qualified patients without access to popular 
and effective methods and tools to use their 
medication. And caused a unstable 
relationship between dispensaries and 
patients under 21. 
People. Maine people. Your constituents, in all 
tiers of the medical cannabis program have 
been hurt by this. And if LD83 does not pass 
with support then it will be the death of the 
Maine medical cannabis program.t 
This guidance issue may mean nothing buta 
mild annoyance to OCP but it means life to 
caregivers and patients. 
Without access to provide qualified patient 
certain forms of medication and the toolsin
which to use it it's like chopping the legs off of 
caregivers with a blunt instrument and telling 
them to put their own turnicate on while they 
bleed out and like holding a glass of water toa 
patient suffering from severe dehydration; but, 
holding that glass of water just out of reach. it 
is cruel and gross overreach. There was and is 
no legitimate or logical argument that can be 
made against supporting LD83. This whole 
guidance was illigitamate and Asinine. 
The truth is cannabis patients use 
paraphernalia for surprise: cannabis, very 
rarely are you going find someone who's 
buying cannabis paraphernalia simply to swap 
it out the cannabis to use tobacco in it instead. 
Putting restrictions on cannabis paraphernalia 
thinking that citizens under 21 years of age 
who are seeking tobacco paraphernalia won't 
find a way around the restrictions that you put 
in place is an obvious overlook. Because, 
another hard truth is: if someone wantsto
smoke tobacco they will find a way to smoke it 
without wasting money of getting a medical 
card buying cannabis products, dumping out 
said cannabis from a pre-roll or dumping out 
pricey concentrate from the Vape pen to refill it 
with tobacco juice, get real. 
Where there is a will there is away and this 
guidance doesn't stop that will or that way, it 
only hurts cannabis caregivers and patients. 
We were all wild teens once are we really 
going to pretend that the will and the way of 
getting tobacco products is going to be solved 
by bullying caregivers and restrictions to 
cannabis paraphernalia? are we going to ban 
apples or soda cans next? how about the 
Bible? Bible paper is a close match and 
replacement for rolling paper. Are we going to 
put bans And restrictions on the Bible now 
simple because it’s been used and has the 
potential to be used to smoke both tobacco or 
cannabis from? You see, banning caregivers
ability to provide papers and other 
paraphernalia won't solve your problem of 
underage smoking it will only make those who 
don't care about the law more creative and 
resourceful to finding a way, the illegal 
guidance is simply ridiculous, and harmful to 
those patients who need access to 
paraphernalia. 
Need the point be driven further, we allow 18 
year olds to fight and die for their country but 
God forbid allow them access and tools to use 
their medication to combat their PTSD or 
chronic pain caused from putting their lives on 
the line for this country. God forbid an 
18-year-old who suffers from a severe anxiety 
or depression disorder have the right to 
purchase the paraphernalia to be able to take 
their medication so they can function as active 
members in society. God forbid caregivers 
provide these tools and these forms of 
medication and make a living and contribute
to the economy that many of those in 
governmental offices find themselves sitting 
mighty pretty in while those of us suffering 
have our rights, medication and medical tools 
stripped away. r 
l'll wrap this up with a few fun facts to highlight 
the cannabis hypocrisy we face: at least 9 US 
presidents were cannabis users including our 
founding father George Washington. The US 
relationship with cannabis states back to our 
colonial era and was even sold in pharmacies 
for a variety of ailments. starting ln 1910 after 
the Mexican revolution, the US started to fear 
and negatively stigmatize cannabis because of 
its racial prejudice, and throughout the late 
1900s multiple unconstitutional acts have left 
us where we are today. Despite the science, 
despite Even Nixon's administration admission 
to lying about the “dangers” of cannabis 
because he wanted to win and knew that 
making it a felony charge for those who are
users in the highest demographics of hippies 
and people of color, he knew making them 
felons would make them lose their voice and 
ability to vote giving him an advantage. Yet, 
How ironic it is as our very own US declaration 
of independence was drafted and wrote on 
hemp paper. How much we’ve hurt the 
progress of our nation over greed and 
corruption and stigmatization over a medicinal 
plant. 
“those who cannot remember the past are 
condemned to repeat it.” This is whyl 
strongly urge you to vote ought to pass on 
LD83. Don't keep making the same mistakes 
we have in our nations past and progress 
backwards by allowing these ironic, 
hypocritical, and unconstitutional “guidances ” 
DGCOITIG |aW. Thank you for your time.
