cYoALii*}§ré 
Maine Cannabis Coalition, uniteolcannabisoatientsandcaregiversofmaine ﬁggmail.com 
Good morning Chairperson Hickman and Chairperson Supica and honorable members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee. Welcome to the 131st Maine Legislature! My name is Susan Meehan, and I ama 
registered caregiver in Maine, and l am a Board member of the Maine Cannabis Coalition and the Cannabis 
Council of Maine. Today I testify in favor of LD83, “An Act to Clarify State Policy Regarding the Use of 
Cannabis Paraphernalia in the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Act." 
On October 7, 2022, a Guidance Document detailing handling of cannabis paraphernalia including prerolls, 
cannabis rolling papers, cannabis vape cartridges, glass-ware, etc. used to consume cannabis and cannabis 
vape concentrates was emailed to participants in the program. lt was like a grenade was tossed into the 
program management as caregivers, manufacturers and patients were confused and scrambling to stay 
compliant within program guidelines. Typically our program is managed by statute and rules that are supposed 
to stem from statute. On October 7th, the program was suddenly being terribly mis-managed by a “Guidance 
Document. ” This Guidance Document was an atrocious misuse of OCP email distribution and a misuse of 
perceived power. Our many responses to OCP fell on deaf ears. 
This document directly impacted many caregiver ’s revenue to the tune of 20% to 50% of total sales for some. lt 
once again created the fear of for criminal prosecution and extensive fines related to this plant. To my 
experience and knowledge being a caregiver in the program since 2013 and a registered caregiver since 2017, 
the program is not typically managed by “Guidance Documents, ” (issued by a resigning director), but rather by 
rules, specifically since 2021 by, “major substantive rules” for which“ ...the department shall consult with 
caregivers, registered caregivers, patients and medical providers with significant knowledge and experience 
certifying patients under this chapter. The department...shall report any subsequent changes to that process to 
the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over medical use of cannabis matters." The 
Office of Cannabis Policy failed to follow proper rulemaking procedure to roll out this "Guidance Document ” 
resulting in mass confusion and the loss of tens of thousands of dollars industry-wide. Please remedy this error 
and put into place whatever is needed to prevent such mass confusion and lack of proper and safe access to 
our patients. 
As always, as a member of the Maine Cannabis Coalition and the Cannabis Council of Maine, I remain 
available and willing to work with the Office of Cannabis Policy and the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
to improve the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Program. My phone number and my email are included below. 
In closing, thank you for hosting this hearing, and thank you to the bill sponsors for their action to remedy this 
problem. Please send LD83 out of Committee with an Ought to Pass designation. Thank you for sen/ing the 
citizens of Maine. 
Susan Meehan 
Maine Cannabis Coalition and the Cannabis Council of Maine 
207-861-1945 
golclenwolf458@qmail.com
