Testimony in Support of LD 1215, “An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco 
Products” 
Maine Legislature - Health & Human Services Committee 
Tuesday April 25, 2023 
 
 
Good afternoon Members of the Health & Human Services Committee, my name is Alexadria 
Gauthier and I live in Washburn where I work for the Aroostook Council on Healthy Families. I 
am here today in strong support of LD 1215, “An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco 
Products''. As a public health worker in rural Maine who works with families and children aged 0-
5, I fully support this legislation to redefine our state’s relationship with harmful flavored tobacco 
products. I have seen firsthand the devastating effects that these products can have on our 
communities 
 
Flavored tobacco products, such as menthol cigarettes and fruit-flavored e-cigarettes, are often 
marketed towards young people, making them more likely to try them. Once they start using 
these highly concentrated products, it can be difficult for them to quit. This leads to a lifetime of 
chronic health problems such as severe lung damage (reduced lung function and structure)  and 
cardiopulmonary issues (high blood pressure, increased arterial stiffness, reduced blood flow to 
the heart, weakened immune function) Teens who vape are more likely to begin smoking 
cigarettes. Nicotine addiction during teen years correlates with increased risk of subsequent 
addiction, depression, anxiety, and hyperactivity. Lung development continues into the early 
20s, and adolescents who vape are at risk for stunting or altering their lung development such 
that they never reach their full lung function potential.  
 
Not only are these products addictive, but they also pose serious health risks. Tobacco use is 
the leading cause of preventable death in the United States, and flavored products are no 
exception. They have been linked to new health conditions unique to flavored tobacco. 
Emerging health literature demonstrates specific conditions only seen since the sale of flavored 
tobacco products. “Popcorn lung” is another name for bronchiolitis obliterans (BO), a rare 
condition that results from damage of the lungs’ small airways.The culprit is diacetyl, a food 
additive used to simulate butter flavor in microwave popcorn. Diacetyl is frequently added to 
flavored e-liquid to enhance the taste. Vaping-Related Lipoid Pneumonia, unlike the classic 
pneumonia caused by infection, lipoid pneumonia develops when fatty acids (the building blocks 
of fat) enter the lungs. Vaping-related lipoid pneumonia is the result of inhaling oily substances 
found in e-liquid, which sparks an inflammatory response in the lungs. 
 
As someone who works with young children and families, I am particularly concerned about the 
impact that flavored tobacco products can have on developing brains. Accidental exposure to 
liquid from e-cigarettes has caused acute nicotine poisoning in children and adults. Some even 
require emergency department visits with nausea and vomiting being the most significant 
symptoms. As of March 31, poison centers nationally have managed 1,974 exposure cases 
about e-cigarette devices and liquid nicotine in 2023. A child or infant can not accidentally ingest 
a traditional cigarette (besides chewing it, even lighters have safety to ignite).  Accidental 
ingestion is limited by the mechanism of the device. For flavored tobacco products the devices 
have zero safety features. An infant (less than 12 months) has the physical capacity, (strength, 
mobility, range) to grasp and inhale an average e-cigarette device sold in stores. The sweet 
smell makes it more enticing whereas traditional cigarette smell was a deterrent for accidental 
ingestion. In child development we say “monkey see monkey do” it is very common for infants 
and toddlers to mimic the physical actions of caregivers, leading to accidental ingestion or 
hospitalization.  
 
By passing this legislation, we can protect our community from the harmful effects of flavored 
tobacco products. We can ensure that our children are not targeted by Big Tobacco and that 
they have the opportunity to grow up healthy and free from addiction. 
 
I urge our lawmakers to support this important public health measure and help us create a safe, 
healthy future for generations to come . 
