Allison Pratt
Brunswick
LD 1215
To Whom it May Concern:
I am writing today to add my support for the proposal to end the sale of flavored 
tobacco products in Maine. It is a crucial step in protecting the youth of our 
communities, especially during this time when the use of these products may be 
adding to the risk of spreading Covid and its subsequent respiratory issues.
Tobacco use remains one of the leading causes of preventable death in the United 
States. As a health care professional, I have seen the detrimental effects of tobacco 
use time and time again. From working on a cardiopulmonary floor at Duke Medical 
Center to the remote hospitals of Appalachia and Down East Maine, I have witnessed 
the addiction and after effects of years of nicotine usage. Addiction often so severe 
that patients risk using these products while on oxygen or when they are barely able to
catch their breath just sitting at rest. I have seen fear in their eyes as they realize that 
they can no longer perform their normal activities of daily living or walk down the 
hall of their home. Sadly, too many times, I have observed those with lifelong 
nicotine addiction lose the capability to independently care for themselves. It is likely 
that these individuals could not have imagined that those first few cigarettes, smoked 
in their youth, would lead to years of disability, and too often, take away the later 
years of their lives.
In Maine, this problem has been growing far more rapidly than most realize. 
According to the National Youth Tobacco Survey in 2021, 20% of high school 
students still reported using e-cigarettes. Though there has been a slight decline in 
usage since the beginning of the pandemic, the rate had increased from 15.8% to 
30.2% from 2017-2019. This uptick had been bolstered by the addition of over 15,000
flavored tobacco products on the market. Many children feel these flavored products 
are harmless, but they have been shown to be even more addictive. Four out of five 
children start their nicotine use with flavored products. Unfortunately, most of these 
users are already hooked before the age of 21.
We need to find a solution to break this cycle in order to preserve the health of our 
Maine youth. Please consider how much ending the sale of these products will 
contribute towards healthier Maine communities.
