 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward**  
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, 
NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Rep s 
**Medical Student 
Representatives  
 
Staff  
 Dee Kerry, BS Ed  
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinat or 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207- 480- 4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony for LD 1215: AN ACT TO END THE SALE OF FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCTS  
 
Thank you to Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the Health and Human 
Services Committee for allowing me to share my written testimony. My name is Amy Buczkowski, 
MD, and I am a hospital -based pediatrician that lives in Freeport, Maine. I write on behalf of the 
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics, an organization of pediatricians across Maine focused on promoting policies that improve the health and well -being of Maine’s children. 
We stand in support of LD 1215 as an effective public  health strategy to prevent childhood use of 
flavored tobacco products.  
 As pediatricians, we care deeply about promoting the health and safety of Maine’s 
children, so that they can grow and develop to reach their full adult potential. Tobacco is incredibl y 
addictive, and chronic use has known negative impacts on long- term health, including effects on 
lung growth and function, immune function, and decreased overall health
1. Among adults who 
have ever smoked daily, 87% tried their first tobacco product by the time they were 18 years old, and 95% tried tobacco by the age of 21
2. This highlights how adolescents and young adults live at 
a vulnerable intersection of increased susceptibility to addiction and decreased insight into long-
term impacts of harmful subs tance use. This intersection is what drives tobacco companies to 
target youths, and flavored tobacco products are a prime example of how companies attract 
adolescents and young adults to try tobacco products through manipulative practices. See the 
attached  picture (at the end of this testimony) that illustrates examples of how flavored tobacco 
products are marketed towards children (Figure 1).  
 It is not only long -term impacts of tobacco use that are worrisome. As a hospital -based 
pediatrician, I have seen adolescent patients admitted to the hospital with lung injury in the setting of significant e- cigarette use. Unfortunately, this is becoming a more commonly described and 
scary phenomenon in adolescents and young adults within the medical literature
3, and it is our 
responsibility to combat this phenomenon through public health policy.  
 Prohibiting flavored tobacco products sales has been implemented successfully in other 
states, and preliminary data shows resultant declines in youth tobacco and e- cigarette use. For 
example, in Massachusetts, youth tobacco use declined from 4.3% to 2.9%, and youth e- cigarette 
use declined from 32% to 17.6% from before to after prohibiting flavored tobacco sales
4. This 
decrease in youth tobacco and e- cigarette use saves healthc are dollars down the road. For 
example, in Massachusetts, they are projected to save approximately $477 million in long term health care costs due to the implementation of flavored tobacco restrictions
5-6.  
 
With policies prohibiting sales of flavored tobac co being instituted in municipalities across 
Maine, including Portland, South Portland, Brunswick, Bangor, and Bar Harbor, this is a concerning set -up for health inequity across our state. This impact would widen an already existing 
gap in tobacco use rates and health outcomes between Maine’s urban and rural populations. All 
children deserve the same opportunity to live a healthy life, and LD 1215 is an important needed 
step to balance the tobacco field for Maine’s children.  
 LD 1215 is an important piece of legislation for Maine’s children to prevent nicotine 
addiction and save downstream healthcare costs, deter tobacco companies from targeting children with their products, and to achieve health equity. Please join Maine’s pediatricians in supporting 
this b ill.  
 
 Thank you!  
 
 
Figure 1. Examples of tobacco advertising that targets children (borrowed from the Ohio 
Department of Natural Resources).  
 
  
References  
1) U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Young People: A Report of  the 
Surgeon General, 1994. https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr4304.pdf 
2) Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2014. Analysis 
by the American Lung Association Epidemiology and Statistics Unit Using SPSS Software. 
https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/web/NAHDAP/studies/36361  
3) Edmonds et al. Vaping- induced diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, 2020. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2213007119303594 
4) Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Evaluation of An Act Modernizing Tobacco Control: Overview and 
Preliminary Results, 2022. https://www.mass.gov/doc/illegal -tobacco- task- force -public -meeting- fifty-one-
minutes/download  
5) Asare et al. Association of Comprehensive Menthol Flavor Ban With Current Cigarette Smoking in Massachusetts from 2017 to 2021. JAMA Internal Medicine, 2023. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36848121/   
6) Projected Smoking- Related Deaths Among Youth -  United States. MMWR, 1996. 
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00044348.htm   
 
 

