 
 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 1550 
 
 
An Act To End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products 
 
   
 
 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee:  April 
25, 2023 
 
 
Good Morning, Senator Joseph Baldacci, Representative 
Meyer, and Members of the Committee.  My name is 
Angela Okafor. I am a parent of three children. And  
business owner. 
Let me tell you a short story. 
 
 
Fire erupted in a deserted area of a community and 
everyone believed someone else whom it affects will put 
off the fire. And no one ever bothered because nobody 
was somebody. 
 
But the fire grew wild. It did not ravish somebody. The wild 
fire ravished everybody. 
 
I am proud of my community for being the first to take a 
stand against this wild fire threatening the future of our 
children. And economic wealth. 
 
 
We cannot say that this is a federal issue. We need to 
contribute our best in ensuring that this wild fire doesn't 
consume us by passing this bill to ban flavored tobacco in 
oir state.  
 
Health is the purest form of wealth. That is why, as a 
mother, I voted in Bangor to protect my childrens future.  
 
Data shows that these flavored tobacco is deceptively 
pushed more into communities of color,  eating even 
deeper into the already struggling communities of color. 
This is my and my children's community.   
 
Addiction leads to so many other societal vices in the 
quest to feed the addiction.  As a community leader, I 
have seen first hand, a young black girl who, due to early 
tobacco addiction, led to her break up from family, ended 
up homeless and graduated to drugs. That is the 
culminating effect of addiction generally. Then amplify that 
for early addiction. Even more for early addiction for a 
person of color.  
Then crime to feed the addiction. 
And loss of jobs 
Desperation,  
Homelessness 
And taxpayer dollars to try pulling people who have fallen 
into this river of destruction. 
 
Passing this bill will take us steps ahead by fixing the 
reason why people keep falling into this fast flowing river 
that sweeps our loved ones into destruction in the first 
place. 
 
 
 
And as a business owner, all hands need to be on deck. 
That is part of the reason my Bangor business colleagues 
need a level playing field for all our businesses especially 
small businesses.  
 
 
Please pass this bill to protect our children, our economy 
and general wellbeing 
 
 
Thank you for your attention.   I would be pleased to 
answer any questions you might have. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Show quoted text 
