April 23 , 2023  
 
Re: LD 1215: An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Product s 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
I am Anita Ruff, and I  am a resident of Brunswick  and a longtime public health professional. I urge you to 
vote to support LD 1215, An Act To End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Product s.   
 
I wear multipl e hats today: as parent of two teenagers, as the executive director of one of Maine ’s free 
clinics, and as a daughter who lost both parents to lung cancer. Tobacco use has affected my life and those 
around me – profoundly.   
 
I came to Maine as a field assignee  for the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Division of 
Can cer Prevention and Control.  My job was to help d evelop the state’s cancer plan, its cancer partnership, 
and to programs that reduce  the toll of cancer in our state. I have spent a significant portion of my career 
thinking about cancer . The human and economic cost of this disease is devastating.  
 
How many of you, when you go to dentist to get your teeth cleaned, are asked what flavor of toothpaste  
you’d like? How many of you choose grape, bubblegum,  strawberry, or  cherry? Probably not many. Those 
flavors are available not for the adults – but for the kids.  
 
The same is true with flavored tobacco. Cotton candy, Froot Loops, watermelon, and gummi bea rs – these 
are the tastes of childhood.  You and I know this, and tobacco companies know this, too.  
 
When you sell a product known to cause a deadly disease for your users, I guess you have to get creative. 
That’s why there is such resistance . Selling flavored tobacco is critical in developing new smokers, and we 
know that 95% of smokers start before they are 21.  
 
Both of my parents were smokers. They both died with lung cancer s pread throughout their bodies. If they 
could , they would tell you that they wished they had never started smoking. And they would implore you 
and me to take every step we can to protect our children from that first puff.   
 
Please vote yes to support LD 1215. T hank you.  
