In favor of LD 1215, An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco 
Ann Tikkanen 
Bar Harbor 
 
To Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services:  
 
My name is Ann Tikkanen, I am the CEO of the Mount Desert Island YMCA in Bar Harbor, and I 
am writing today in favor of LD 1215, An Act To End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products. I 
am proud to have been part of a group of individuals and organizations who spoke in favor of 
the municipal ban in Bar Harbor last month. 
 
I was hired 16 months ago to provide senior leadership to the MDI YMCA. We employ a highly-
trained cohort of caring professionals who work in concert with teachers, educators, and the 
medical community.  The Y team comprises health, wellness and childcare professionals all 
here to support the well-being of every member of the community, and to help give the children 
of our community a fair shake at a healthy and productive future. This means teaching them 
healthy habits and helping to give them the tools to create futures free from addiction.  
  
I have personal experience with addiction in my family, as do so many families in our community 
and across our state.  I have seen lifelong changes to loved ones, addiction with cravings and 
obsessive use that is incredibly difficult to stop.  For all family members (parents, grandparents, 
sisters and brothers) it is difficult and emotionally and financially draining to be a part of this, 
sometimes for decades. 
  
So here and now we have a chance to stop one cycle of addiction before it begins, by 
supporting a ban on flavored tobacco products. We CAN do our very best, as responsible and 
caring adults, to ensure our children are not preyed upon with the extremely addictive drug 
found in these products, including flavored tobacco products, namely nicotine.   
 
I believe that the compassion needed to protect our children and to stop at least this cycle of 
addiction still has a place in government to make it stop. 
  
The data is in. The reckless formulation of and marketing of massive-dose e-cigarettes using 
juvenile flavors of candy and fruits to lure and addict our children must be called out.  The 
cynical and manipulative marketing practices of Big Tobacco continue. No one has been 
properly informed by the tobacco industry and our children are the targets.     
  
Isn’t it simply common sense to protect the health and long-term well-being of our children?  
Don’t we know enough about the addictive power of nicotine to eliminate this new marketing 
scheme now in operation against our children? There is no future that is made better for our 
young people by allowing tobacco companies to addict them to nicotine: helping to keep 
flavored tobacco out of the hands of our youth has no downsides for them. 
  
To the Committee members and all legislators- you have a moment! You have THIS moment to 
be a compassionate government on behalf of our children. The State of Maine can be a part of 
leading the way. We can take a strong position, guided by ethics and data, to help stop the 
initiation of youth into tobacco use, with your vote to ban flavored tobacco products across the 
state. Please vote YES to LD 1215, An Act to Ban Flavored Tobacco Products. 
Ann Tikkanen
MDI YMCA
LD 1215
In favor of LD 1215, An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco
Ann Tikkanen
Bar Harbor
To Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: 
My name is Ann Tikkanen, I am the CEO of the Mount Desert Island YMCA in Bar 
Harbor, and I am writing today in favor of LD 1215, An Act To End the Sale of 
Flavored Tobacco Products. I am proud to have been part of a group of individuals 
and organizations who spoke in favor of the municipal ban in Bar Harbor last month.
I was hired 16 months ago to provide senior leadership to the MDI YMCA. We 
employ a highly-trained cohort of caring professionals who work in concert with 
teachers, educators, and the medical community.  The Y team comprises health, 
wellness and childcare professionals all here to support the well-being of every 
member of the community, and to help give the children of our community a fair 
shake at a healthy and productive future. This means teaching them healthy habits and
helping to give them the tools to create futures free from addiction. 
 
I have personal experience with addiction in my family, as do so many families in our
community and across our state.  I have seen lifelong changes to loved ones, addiction
with cravings and obsessive use that is incredibly difficult to stop.  For all family 
members (parents, grandparents, sisters and brothers) it is difficult and emotionally 
and financially draining to be a part of this, sometimes for decades.
 
So here and now we have a chance to stop one cycle of addiction before it begins, by 
supporting a ban on flavored tobacco products. We CAN do our very best, as 
responsible and caring adults, to ensure our children are not preyed upon with the 
extremely addictive drug found in these products, including flavored tobacco 
products, namely nicotine.  
I believe that the compassion needed to protect our children and to stop at least this 
cycle of addiction still has a place in government to make it stop.
 
The data is in. The reckless formulation of and marketing of massive-dose e-cigarettes
using juvenile flavors of candy and fruits to lure and addict our children must be 
called out.  The cynical and manipulative marketing practices of Big Tobacco 
continue. No one has been properly informed by the tobacco industry and our children
are the targets.    
 
Isn’t it simply common sense to protect the health and long-term well-being of our 
children?  Don’t we know enough about the addictive power of nicotine to eliminate 
this new marketing scheme now in operation against our children? There is no future 
that is made better for our young people by allowing tobacco companies to addict 
them to nicotine: helping to keep flavored tobacco out of the hands of our youth has 
no downsides for them.
 
To the Committee members and all legislators- you have a moment! You have THIS 
moment to be a compassionate government on behalf of our children. The State of 
Maine can be a part of leading the way. We can take a strong position, guided by 
ethics and data, to help stop the initiation of youth into tobacco use, with your vote to 
ban flavored tobacco products across the state. Please vote YES to LD 1215, An Act 
to Ban Flavored Tobacco Products.

