 
 
Testimony of Dr. Annie Coates, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 1215, “An Act to End the Sale of Flavored 
Tobacco Products” 
Tuesday, April 24, 2023 
Thank you very much for this opportunity to speak with you all today. My 
name is Dr. Annie Coates, I am a pediatric pulmonologist at Maine 
Medical Center, board member of the Maine Chapter of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics and I am passionate about educating our young and 
communities about the harmful effects of flavored tobacco products. 
The focus of today’s testimony is specifically on menthol flavored tobacco 
products. Menthol is a commonly used chemical primarily derived from 
peppermint or corn mint plants. It has multiple different medicinal 
properties, the vast majority of which are not why tobacco companies add 
it to their products. Instead, they are capitalizing on its local anesthetic 
properties which effectively numb or cool the respiratory tract, especially 
the nose, mouth and throat. Menthol also suppresses the cough reflex and 
possibly dilates the bronchi (or small airways within the chest) and enable 
deeper inhalation and tolerability of inhaled smoke. 
Furthermore, studies have shown menthol cigarette smoking resulted in 
slower nicotine metabolism or breakdown and lower total nicotine 
clearance in the body. Ultimately, this leads to higher nicotine dependence 
and therefore greater difficulty in quitting. 
Approximately 90% of all African American smokers use menthol 
cigarettes. Menthol also appears to alter cell membranes throughout the 
body resulting in greater potential for tobacco related deaths from heart 
disease, cancer and stroke which are the 3 leading causes of death for 
African Americans in the USA. 
This is entirely preventable. 
Lastly, not long ago, I was consulted on a previously healthy adolescent 
who was admitted to the Barbara Bush Children’s Hospital Pediatric 
Intensive Care Unit in respiratory failure. Over the prior year, he started 
smoking flavored (including menthol) e-cigarettes (supplied by “friends”) 
daily. His impression at the time was that he was inhaling “just flavored 
water” and that they “wouldn’t get him addicted, like his parents were to 
cigarettes.” What he didn’t understand was the extend of the harmful 
effects of e-cigarettes and that they did likely have nicotine in them, which 
he had since become addicted to, and directly contributes to his critical  
health condition. But the damage didn’t just stop there for him. He had gone from being a “good 
student” to skipping school to smoke, which resulted in failing multiple classes. Furthermore, he 
developed a multitude of other daily symptoms (headaches, difficulty concentrating, and 
abdominal pain) all that can be attributed to nicotine addiction. 
As a pediatric pulmonologist, as a mother, as a resident of Maine who has dedicated my career to 
the health of our communities, please your voice and support this critical legislation. The 
wellbeing of our youth, the African American community and other minority populations depend 
on it. 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.  
