 
           April 25, 2023 
 
The Penobscot Nation Youth Council came together to share our voice about commercial 
tobacco prevention focusing on flavored tobacco products that aim to hook kids. Jayden Love 
and Eben Francis testified on LD 1550: An Act To End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products 
on May 7, 2021. Here are pieces of our testimonies: 
 
 “Our Traditional tobacco has been used by Penobscot's and Indigenous people since 
time immemorial as a medicine with cultural and spiritual importance. But traditional 
tobacco has been tainted by the tobacco industry. Chemicals are poured into the 
tobacco to make it more addicting and flavorful.”  
 
“In today's world Nicotine and tobacco products are everywhere. According to 
truthiniative.org 16.1% of American Indian and Alaska Native middle schoolers use e-
cigarettes. As if that statistic wasn’t large enough 40.4% of American Indian and Alaska 
native high school students use e-cigarettes.” 
 
As teens and young adults of the Penobscot Nation, we’ve grown up learning tobacco is used 
as a way to give thanks. It hurts to see something of cultural significance being used to exploit 
other young people, like ourselves. We see our peers, as young as 13, using commercial 
tobacco products such as e-cigarettes. Commercial tobacco companies use enticing flavors and 
fun names in e-cigarettes to attract and hook kids. This is scary for many reasons: the likelihood 
of nicotine addiction, the risks of nicotine on the adolescent brain and body, and the many other 
unknown health affects around using commercial tobacco products.  
 
Many teens use e-cigarettes without knowing there is nicotine even in it, adding to the growing 
popularity of use in teen culture. Some of us can recall when vape products hit the market and it 
seemed like every high schooler had one in their hand. Bathrooms were referred to as the “vape 
room” or “Juul room”. As more flavors hit the market like mint, cucumber, mango, and many 
more—these flavors became more appealing to youth. Big commercial tobacco companies 
continue to target youth with flavors, new products, appealing advertising, fancy packaging and 
smoke shops that look like candy shops from the outside.  
 
The health and wellbeing of the next seven generations is our future, but flavored tobacco 
products are luring and hooking another generation. It’s time to end the sale of flavored tobacco, 
keep tobacco sacred. Our voices need to be heard.  
 
Woliwon,  
Penobscot Nation Youth Counci 
