April 25, 2023 
TO:  Chair Baldacci, Chair Meyer, and memb ers of the Joint Committee on Health and 
Human Services 
FROM:   Dr. Brian E. Erkkila, Director of Regulatory Science, Swedis h Match North America 
Swedish Match North America is providing the following testimony on Legislative Document 
1215, “An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products”: 
At Swedish Match our vision is “A world without cigarettes”. To the end, we 
manufacture products which help adults who smoke, move to products which reduce their risks. 
It was with this vision in mind that we deve loped our General Snus products, which the FDA 
Center for Tobacco Products determined were ap propriate for public health and allowed us to 
inform consumers that switchi ng to our products can reduce th e risk of cancer, heart and 
respiratory disease1. The FDA evaluation of General Snus products by dozens of the Center’s 
experienced scientists no ted that the General snus products, in cluding flavored pr oducts, not only 
were less harmful than ci garettes, but also  were  not likely to entice non- users, including youth, 
to initiate use of the products. This decision wa s in line with the FDA’s position that there is a 
“continuum of risk” across tobacco products, with cigarettes being the most harmful and smoke-
free products (e.g., electronic-cigarettes, smokel ess tobacco, nicotine pou ches) being much less 
harmful. If LD 1215 were to be enacted, thes e federally vetted products would no longer be 
available to people who smoke in Maine, pot entially sending many adult Mainers back to 
smoking. This is despite the fact  that rates of youth use of smok eless tobacco in Maine are lower 
than the rates of youth use of alcohol, ca nnabis, and unprescribed prescription drugs23. 
In the United States there are ~31 million pe ople who smoke and this  ultimately leads to 
the death of ~480,000 Americans each year45. Maine has made great strides in reducing the 
impact of cigarette smoking with a record low prevalence of smoking, however, over 2,300 
Mainers still lose their lives each year. For the more than 200,000 adults who smoke in Maine, 
LD 1215 would eliminate a majority of reduced risk alterna tives available, leaving them at 
elevated risk for death and disease through c ontinued smoking. Among adults who want to stop 
using combusted products, the flavor and sensory experience of non-tobacco flavored alternative 
products are one of the main char acteristics which make them an  appealing product to switch to, 
allowing them to leave behind the taste and smell of combusted tobacco. This says nothing of the 
more 80,000 of adult Mainers who have already switched to less harmful smoke-free products 
and could reinitiate combusted use. LD 1215 ignor es countless peer-reviewed  scientific articles 
1 https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-grants -first-ever-modified-risk-order s-eight-smokeless-tobacco-
products 
2 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 1991-2019 Hi gh School Youth Risk Behavior Survey Data. Available 
at http://yrbs-explorer.services.cdc.gov/ . Accessed on April 19, 2023 
3 2021 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey. Ma ine Department of Health and Human Services 
4 Cornelius ME, Loretan CG, Wang TW, Jamal A, Homa DM. Tobacco Product Use Among Adults — United States, 2020. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2022; 71:397–405. 
5 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Smoking—50 Years of Progress. A Report of the 
Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National 
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Of fice on Smoking and Health, 2014 [accessed 2015 Aug 17].  
 
 
demonstrating this continuum of risk, trea ting much less harmful smokefree products and 
combusted cigarettes as equally harmful in  a clear affront to available evidence6. Additionally, 
LD 1215 does not take into account that youth to bacco use peaked decades ago when flavored 
products were not readily available7. 
  
Since 2019, the FDA Center for Tobacco Produc ts has been reviewing millions of pre-
market tobacco applications and has denied ma rketing to ~99%, drastic ally reducing the number 
of tobacco harm reduction products on the market. Also during this time, the federal age limit for 
purchasing tobacco was raised to 21, and FDA/CD C data indicate that us e of tobacco products 
by youth was reduced by >50% and reached record lows8. In order to accelerate reductions in 
tobacco-related disease the focus should be on not only providing people who smoke acceptable 
alternatives, but to ensure that  adults are appropriately inform ed about the continuum of risk. 
This can be done in concert with marketing and ag e verification policies, to  minimize the risk of 
youth using these products.  
  
Maine is a national leader when it comes to harm reduction. Harm reduction is a public 
health approach which minimizes judgment and puts people first, refe rring to “people who 
smoke” rather than “smokers.” It not only notes the disproportionate rate s of combusted tobacco 
use by race, ethnicity, mental heal th status, sexual orientation, so cial class or intersections of 
these communities, identities, a nd circumstances, but provides an  equitable way to move away 
from harm. It is difficul t to understand how LD 1215, which el iminates a vast majority of the 
tobacco harm reduction products adu lts use to reduce their risk a nd leaves adult consumers with 
only the most harmful product, co mbusted cigarettes, would be in  line with the compassionate 
spirit of harm reduction.   
In an environment where FDA review permits marketing of only products deemed appropriate 
for the protection of public health (users AND non-users), where youth tobacco use rates are in 
precipitous decline, and hundreds of thousands  of Mainers continue to smoke combusted 
products, we strongly urge you to reject LD 1215.  Sincerely,    Brian E. Erkkila, PhD Brian.erkkila@swedishmatch.com  
(804) 614-8278    
 
6 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Preven tion and Health Promotion, Division of 
Population Health. BRFSS Prevalence & Trends Data [online]. 2015. [accessed Apr 19, 2023]. 
URL: https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/brfssprevalence/ . 
7 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 1991-2019 High  School Youth Risk Behavior  Survey Data. Available at 
http://yrbs-explorer.services.cdc .gov/. Accessed on 3/20/2023. 
8 Park-Lee E, Ren C, Cooper M, Corneliu s M, Jamal A, Cullen KA. Tobacco Product Use Among Middle and High School 
Students — United States, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2022;71:1429–1435.  

