Testimony of Courtney Vannah, Program Manager, Oral Health Initiatives, MCD Global Health 
for LD 1215: An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products  
Before the  Health and Human Services Committee   
Public Hearing: Wednesday April 25, 202 3 
 
Senator  Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and esteemed  members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, I  am pleased to offer testimony in support of LD 1215 . I am the Program 
Manager of Oral Health Initiatives at MCD Global Health , a dental hygienist, and a lifelong 
resident of rural Maine. I am submitting testimony to encourage the Committee  to support this 
Bill to end the sale of flavored tobacco products .  
From a professional standpoint, the research connecting t obacco use to negative oral health  and 
overall health outcomes is well -established. I have spent my career counse ling patients to end 
their use of tobacco products to improve their health.  
From a personal standpoint, I have observed that when youth begin experimenting w ith tobacco 
use, they do so with flavored products. Even more than two decades ago, when I was coming of 
age in a time where tobacco use was far more commonplace, the products I recall my peers 
using were flavored. To this day, I still do not know any adult tobacco user who prefers flavored 
products ; they are targeted to and enjoyed by younger users.  This leads me to anecdotally assert  
that flavore d products provide an enjoyable  entry point for vulnerable youth only to become 
trapped by nicotine addiction . 
As such, I could not do anything other than support this bill to end the sale of flavored tobacco 
products and protect our vulnerable youth from what could become a lifelong struggle that will 
undoubtedly  lead to negative health outcomes. I urge you to support  LD 1 215: An Act to End 
the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products. I thank  you for your consideration of my testimony on 
this important issue.  
Sincerely,  
Courtney E. Vannah, IPDH, MS, MPH  
Program Manager, Oral Health Initiatives  
MCD Global Health  
