Cynthia Stremba
Parents Against Vaping e-cigarettes
LD 1215
Re: Bill LD 1215
Good afternoon,
My name is Cynthia Stremba. I’m representing Parents Against Vaping e-cigarettes or
PAVe.  We are a national organization of parent volunteers including here in Maine. 
Flavored e-cigarettes and other flavored tobacco products including menthol 
cigarettes pose serious risks to the health and safety of children.  We urge you to 
support ending the sale of flavored e-cigarettes, menthol cigarettes and all other 
flavored tobacco products in Maine.
As a grassroots non-profit, we have spoken to hundreds of parents who are very 
involved in their children’s lives. 
Because vape products were created to fly under the radar of adults (the devices look 
like everyday school supplies and they smell good), parents are often unaware that 
their children are vaping until they’re already addicted. E-cigarettes are just too easy 
to use and flavors mask the fact that they are so highly addictive. They taste good and 
look cool and fun and they are promoted all over youth oriented social media and 
marketed next to candy in stores. 
Children spend almost a third of their waking hours in school where vaping has 
become a social activity and where the peer pressure to try the different vape flavors 
is intense.  
Vapes offer an opportunity for kids to fit in.  An opportunity among kids to share and 
try the many different flavors (over 15,000!) available. Flavors like cotton candy and 
menthol. The latter  includes “iced” and “cool” flavors, which have become the most 
popular among youth due to the easy smoking and highly addictive qualities.
The nicotine salt technology used is itself highly addictive, and adolescents are 
particularly vulnerable to its effects. Symptoms of addiction can appear within weeks 
or days after occasional smoking begins. 
Vaping increases inflammation throughout the body raising the risk of negative lung 
and brain affects along with cardiovascular issues and the recent discovery of serious 
negative impact on oral health. Children who vape  are 4-5 times more likely to 
migrate to combustible cigarettes - most often, menthol cigarettes.  
Vapes are relatively new products, and time will continue to reveal just how serious 
the long term health impacts will be on our children - our future leaders - as they 
move into adulthood. The tobacco industry is very aware that 90% of tobacco use 
begins by the age of 18 and spends millions in Maine to attract teens.  Sadly, use can 
seriously damage a child’s health before they reach adulthood. 
As a state, we are all bearing the burden of the current and future health care costs 
associated with keeping flavored vape products on the market. Children who have 
only been on this earth for 10, 12, 15 or 18 years cannot be expected to think of the 
long term consequences of what they generally think are harmless products.  We ask 
that Lawmakers think about how kids look at the world and support parents who are 
doing their best to protect their kids in light of the many current day temptations 
seducing all of our children. 
In the words of one parent, “We need help! The nightmare of my older son’s nicotine 
vaping addiction began when he was in middle school and he was approx. 12 years 
old. 
Over the past five years, we have punished, confiscated, discussed, shown empathy 
and tried everything in our power to help our son to quit and yet we have still been 
unsuccessful in getting our now 19 year old to quit vaping!”
Eliminating the sales of flavored e-cigarettes and menthol cigarettes is an opportunity 
for Maine to protect the health and safety of children.  And to acknowledge the 
devastating effects and costs of nicotine addiction. Addiction that is brought on by the
tobacco and vape industry and their targeting of children with flavors - including 
menthol - all to ensure they have life long customers.  
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Cynthia Stremba
Director of Volunteers and
State and Local Advocacy
Parentsagainstvaping.org

