District  100: Brunswick  (part)  
 Tuesday,  April  25, 2023  
 
 
Testimony  of Rep.  Dan Ankeles  
Before  the Joint  Standing  Committee  on Health  and Human  Services  
In support  of LD 1215,  An Act To End The Sale Of Flavored  Tobacco  Products  
  
Senator  Baldacci,  Representative  Meyer  and honorable  members  of the Health  and Huma n 
Services  Committee,  thank  you for the opportunity  to testify  on this bill. I am Representative  
Dan Ankeles,  and I serve  House  District  100, a central  slice of Brunswick  that includes  our 
downtown,  Bowdoin  College,  Mere  Point,  Maquoit  Bay and the former  naval air station.  It’s an 
honor  to provide  brief  written  testimony  in support  of LD 1215,  An Act To End The Sale Of 
Flavored  Tobacco  Products .  
 
I would  have  been  before  you in person,  but I have  my own bill to present  today  and also feel 
that these  larger  hearings  should  be more  about  the public  than about  hearing  from  your 
colleagues.  That said, it is important  that you hear from  communities  like Brunswick  that have  
already  made  the leap by enacting  the local  version  of this bill.  
 
Let me just give you a couple  of quick , big-picture  takeaways  roughly  one year later:  
 
First,  the sky did not fall. The businesses  who opposed  this are still very much  open,  even  though  
people  who want  flavored  tobacco  products  need  to go to one of our neighbors  to buy them.   
 
Second,  administrators  in our school  system  are saying  that they see a decrease  in the use of 
tobacco  products  among  students.  Students  haven’t  made  the extra  effort  to get the products  in 
other  towns.  They  didn’t  substitute  cigarettes  or other  conventiona l tobacco  products.  No, 
without  the flavored  products  right  at their fingertips,  fewer  students  made  the choice  to consume  
any tobacco  product  at all.  
 
The positive  ripple  effects  on their physical  health  are clear.  Imagine  through  a health  care lens 
one timeline  where  someone  becomes  a lifelong  consumer  and one where  they don’t.  It’s not 
hard to do the math.  
 
But what  might  be less obvious  is that we also heard  that students  themselves  began  to 
experience  a less hostile  daily  student  culture  as vaping  began to become  a less dominant  
behavior.  In other  words,  the entire  student  body  is benefiting  from  this positive  change.  And we  
Daniel  J. Ankeles  
7 Beech  Drive  
Brunswick,  ME 04011  
Daniel.Ankeles@legislature.maine.gov  
Cell Phone:  (207)  756-3793  HOUSE  OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE  HOUSE  STATION  
AUGUSTA,  MAINE   04333 -0002  
(207)  287-1400  
TTY:  MAINE  RELAY  711 
 

District  100: Brunswick  (part)  
 know  now more  than ever that the quality  of the environment  in which  a child  comes  of age truly  
matters.   
 
We live in a time where  kids are managing  incredible  amounts  of stress  and strains  on their 
mental  health1, even  if it isn’t always  easy to see right  on the surface.  Tobacco  companies  use 
flavored  products  to take an already -impressionable  population  and exploit  their fears  and 
insecurities.  If we pass LD 1215,  we stop helping  them  do it. 
 
Thank  you again  for the chance  to share  our experience  with you.  
                                                 
1 https://www. cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/yrbs/pdf/YRBS_Data -Summary -Trends_Report2023_508.pdf  
