Testimony in Support of LD 1215: An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products  
April 25, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Claxton, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services ,  
 
My name is Danielle Doctor. I am a pediatrician in Portland and a member of the Maine Chapter 
of the American Academy of Pediatrics. I am speaking to you today to testify in favor of the  LD 
1215 , An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products .  
 
Prior  to my medical training, I worked as a health coach in addiction medicine. I experienced the 
losses of jobs, relationships, and health detriments alongside my clients. I shared with them the 
frustrations and harsh realities that come with addiction. Unfort unately, addiction is not 
something someone can predict - it can happen to anyone . Our children are no exception, but the 
tobacco industry is making it harder and harder for them to resist .  
 
I think we have all walked down city or neighborhood streets and gotten a whiff of something 
fruity like apple pie only  to realize the person in front of you is vaping. Imagine if you are a child 
and do not know any better.  
 
I have had patients both using these products inside schools. I can tell you about a 5th grader  who 
stole his mother’s  flavored e -cigarette and brought it to school to show his friends. Another 
middle schooler, much like other kids, was offered it in the school bathroom and took the 
opportunity in order to be seen as “cool”.  
 
E-cigarette pods conta in a much higher concentration of nicotine. One pod is the equivalent of a 
pack of cigarettes.  It is no secret that nicotine is an addictive substance - we have decades of 
research confirming its harmful effects and shortening of lifespan.  
 
Our most vulner able populations have bec ome targets of the tobacco companies. It started with 
menthol cigarettes being marketed to African American communities. Flavored e-cigarette ads 
are colorful, fun, and sexy to attract the  youth and adolescent population. These flavored 
products hook consumers  with something that tastes good . 81% of youth who have ever used 
tobacco started with a flavored product1. In the latest 2021 National Youth Tobacco Survey, 
84.7% of youth using e -cigarettes  are using flavored products. 1 in 4  high schoolers using e -cigs 
are using them daily2. This is the start of addiction.  
 
In banning the tempting candy, fruity or minty flavors, we can halt this vicious cycle. Please 
stand with me in banning flavo red tobacco products in Portland and protecting our youth from 
their harmful effects.  
 
1 Ambrose, BK, et al., “Flavored Tobacco Product Use Among US Youth Aged 12 -17 Years, 2013 -2014,” Journal 
of the American Medical Association, published online October 26, 2015  
 
2 Park-Lee E, Ren C, Sawdey MD, et al.  Notes from the Field:  E-Cigarette Use Am ong Middle and High School 
Students — National Youth Tobacco Survey, United States, 2021. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2021;70:1387 –
1389.   
 
