DD Allen 
OTTO pizza 
LD 1215
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. Thank you for the opportunity to
speak. 
My name is Dd Allen, and I’m co-owner of OTTO’s Pizza, which has more than 300 
employees across several Maine locations. We are also a partner of the Tobacco-Free 
Maine Works business coalition. Between Taxes, rents, product, services and payroll, 
OTTO contributes over $20M into the Maine economy each year. We pride ourselves 
on selling products and operating our business in a way that not only contributes to 
the economy, but also supports the long term health and well-being of communities. 
I’m testifying in favor of LD 1215 because reducing youth tobacco use is key to 
promoting healthy communities where businesses like mine can succeed.
Like other businesses, maintaining reliable staff across our locations is a top priority 
and a challenge for OTTOS. Tobacco use among employees makes that even harder 
because they tend to be less healthy and call out sick more often. Having staff outside 
the entryways smoking or smelling of smoke when they interact with customers also 
doesn’t fit with OTTO’s values as a community and family oriented brand. 
This problem isn’t unique to Otto; it cuts across the food service industry, childcare 
businesses, construction, and more. According to the Maine CDC, smoking costs the 
state nearly $1.5 billion a year in associated health care costs and lost productivity. 
Tobacco addiction is a scourge on peoples’ health, and its consequences present one 
more challenge to employers who are working hard to build their businesses. 
We need to get current tobacco users the resources and support they need to quit. But 
we also need to address the root of the problem—most tobacco users start young. 1 in 
5 Maine high schoolers are currently using a tobacco product, and young people 
overwhelmingly start with flavored products. Ending the sale of flavored tobacco 
products like cherry e-cigarettes, Rocky Road flavored cigars and menthol cigarettes 
will make tobacco less appealing to kids and reduce youth use. 
This isn’t just a business issue for me, it’s also personal. All three of my children tried
flavored tobacco for the first time as teenagers. Several years later, all three of them 
still struggle with tobacco addiction, despite several attempts at quitting. If we can do 
something to keep kids from ever starting to use these highly addictive products, let’s 
do it. 
I urge this committee, for our businesses, our families, and our young people, please 
vote yes on LD 1215 to end the sale of all flavored tobacco products. 
Dd Allen
OTTO Pizza 

