 
Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
 
Staff 
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org  Testimony of Deborah Hagler MD, MPH,  FAAP on Behalf of the Maine Chapter of The 
AAP in Favor of LD 1215 An act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci and Representative Meyer  and esteemed members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee. My name is Dr. Deborah Hagler; I live in Harpswell; 
I have practiced pediatrics in Brunswick for the past 26 years. I am the immediate past 
president of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics and am testifying in 
favor of LD1215 An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products. 
 
The first time I ever saw an e-cigarette was about 15 years ago. I had no idea what it was.  A 
very bright patient brought it in to show me and asked questions about it. They  had researched 
it on the internet and ordered one. It was a long plastic looking thing, and they  understood it 
was a way to smoke that was less harmful . They  knew smoking was bad but  wanted to try 
it and thought this might be the way to go. It seemed like it could be safer. All I could offer 
them  at the time was it seems like a bad  idea if there is nicotine involved - Ultimately, they 
went on to smoke combustible cigarettes as they were more easily procured at the 
time….They already had been sold and confused by the ideas of harm reduction and I had no 
idea at the time how to really council them.  
 
In the United States the ideas of harm reduction really matured in the 1980s with the discovery 
of AIDS, but they had been adopted much earlier in Europe.1 The recognition that Aids could 
be spread by people who injected  drugs  sharing needles led to campaigns to distribute sterile 
syringes to control the spread of the virus. . As a by-product of these efforts to provide care 
it was noted that more people who participated in these programs participated in substance 
use  treatments and reduced high risk behaviors such as injectable drug use  and rates of 
infections like HIV, Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C decreased.2 These programs were not about 
initiating high risk behaviors- such as the introduction of addictive substances.  
 
For an adolescent with a maturing brain that is uniquely primed for addiction, introduction of 
a highly addictive substance  such as nicotine that can prime the brain for future addictions is 
not harm reduction.   
 
The pivot of the vaping companies away from the flashy cool marketing that peddled their  
flavored  devices to teens  to “harm reduction” devices clearly is a real game of smoke and 
mirrors. It is intent on confusing a population that the tobacco companies need to groom as 
new customers - less than one percent of the population will initiate tobacco product use after 
the age of 26.3  However, teens that  hear harm reduction  may not understand the risk that 
comes with these devices  that they contain carcinogens, that they can explode and cause 
severe injury,  they prime the brain for future substance use, they are linked to the 
development of mood disorders like depression and anxiety, or they  are 3-3.5 times more 
likely to transition to combustible cigarette use and additionally have a greater risk of 
marijuana and alcohol use. 4  Four out Five teens initiate tobacco product use because of 
flavors. Mixing the ideas of harm reduction into marketing schemes is another ploy to 
cultivate customers by falsely signaling to our youth these products are safe. Please  vote to 
remove the flavors from tobacco products to protect our youth. Please vote Ought to Pass on 
LD1215. 
 
1.Des Jarlais, D.C. Harm reduction in the USA: the research perspective and an archive to David Purchase. Harm 
Reduct J 14, 51 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12954-017-0178-6 
2.van Santen DK, Coutinho RA, van den Hoek A, van Brussel G, Buster M, Prins M. Lessons learned from the 
Amsterdam Cohort Studies among people who use drugs: a historical perspective. Harm Reduct J. 2021 Jan 
6;18(1):2. doi: 10.1186/s12954-020-00444-6. PMID: 33407562; PMCID: PMC7789277. 
3.Tobacco Initiation Youth-CDC  
4.AAP- E Cigarettes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
