Denise Tepler
Topsham
LD 1215
Honorable Denise Tepler
13 Homeplace
Topsham, ME 04086
(207)729-4018
April 25, 2023
Health and Human Services Committee
Cross Building, Room 209
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee:
I write today in strong support of L.D. 1215, An Act to End the Sale of Flavored 
Tobacco Products.  I will not reiterate the statistics and data that make clear how 
important eliminating flavored tobacco products is to the health and well-being of our 
youth — I know many others will be sharing this with you.  
Instead, I will share my story of teenage addiction to nicotine and how tough it is to 
stop even as you get older and wiser.  Born in 1956, I grew up in the 1960s when 
tobacco advertising was everywhere and while we kind of knew it wasn’t good for 
you, there were few restrictions.  My parents were both smokers, my dad enjoyed 
pipes, cigars, and unfiltered Pall Mall cigarettes.  My mother smoked Kents.  The 
brands were important because they were targeted by the industry to certain 
audiences.  My dad went for the tough, masculine brand and my mom for the clean, 
all white (feminine) look of her cigarettes.  I was often sent to the gas station a 10 
minute walk away, with a quarter, to buy Mom a new pack.
I first tried a cigarette (I think stolen from Mom’s purse) on my walk to middle school
at 14.  I was fully hooked by 15.  My high school permitted students to smoke on the 
grounds outdoors during free time.  My lunch was often a lemonade, a chocolate chip 
cookie, and a cigarette — all consumed outdoors on a heated vent regardless of the 
weather.  My brand was Parliment — another all white cigarette advertised to women.
It had a recessed filter, which seemed cleaner and somehow “healthier.”  
I smoked all through college and graduate school and by the time I was married at 25,
I regularly consumed more than a pack a day.  At 26, living and working in Little 
Rock, Arkansas, I began to develop a morning cough.  That scared me.  And I was 
very, very fortunate that the University of Arkansas at Little Rock, my employer, had 
a smoking cessation program, run by a charismatic man who understood addiction.  
Giving up smoking regularly was one of the hardest things I have ever done.  It 
required sleeping medication and I gained about 20 lbs.  Suddenly waiting (for 
anything — restaurant seating, a bus, to enter an event) became almost impossible.  A
glass of wine or a cup of coffee was a trigger.  My quitting journey continued for 
almost 10 years as I occasionally gave in the cigarette urge over that time.   I have not
had a single cigarette now for more than 25 years, but still occasionally feel the pull 
of that addiction.
All of this is shared to help illustrate how the tobacco/e-cigarette industry targets 
certain demographics and how effective that targeting is.  And once they’ve got you, 
you are hooked for a good long time.  Nicotine addiction is very hard to beat.
My youngest daughter is a science teacher at Lewiston Middle School.  She tells me 
that many of her students vape nicotine products regularly.  They are hooked by an 
industry that makes e-cigs look “cool” and makes flavors that not only make them 
attractive to kids but make the products seem innocent — like candy.  In addition, 
vape pods clearly hold much more nicotine than traditional tobacco products.  My 
daughter tells me, no, it is not “Reefer Madness” to see these products as changing 
behavior and increasing anxiety in middle schoolers — it is very real.
Nicotine is a horribly addictive substance, let’s end the targeting of children as a 
market for these products.
Thank you for all your work in the HHS Committee.
