 100 Cummings Center , Suite 207-P  
 Beverly, Massachusetts 01915  
 4/24/2023 
 RE: LD 1215 
 Position: Oppose 
 Dear Distinguished Members of the Committee on Health and Human Services, 
 I am a retired police lieutenant and the executive director of the Law Enforcement Action Partnership (LEAP), a nonprofit 
 group of police, prosecutors, judges, and other criminal justice professionals who speak out about best law enforcement 
 practices. LEAP’s mission is to unite and mobilize the voice of law enforcement in support of drug policy and criminal 
 justice reforms that will make communities safer by focusing law enforcement resources on the greatest threats to public 
 safety, promoting alternatives to arrest and incarceration, addressing the root causes of crime, and working toward healing 
 police-community relations. 
 I am writing to you today because of the proposed flavored tobacco ban now being considered in Maine.  I know the toll 
 on policing that menthol bans have taken elsewhere, and I want to urge you not to go down the same path.  I suspect that, 
 like I do, all members of the committee want to reduce the prevalence of smoking, a deadly habit that takes the lives of 
 nearly a million Americans each year. This is a worthy cause deserving our attention, but prohibiting menthol and other 
 flavors does not end their sale; it creates an underground market. 
 Bans on flavored tobacco put police in the position of dealing with yet another public health problem we cannot fix at the 
 expense of our ability to fight crime. Prohibition impacts a safe and legal supply but does not end the demand for a 
 product. Even if law enforcement focuses on businesses that violate tobacco laws — and not individual sellers — we 
 know that police still end up interacting with individuals over tobacco violations. These interactions destroy 
 police-community trust and make our difficult jobs that much harder. People who do not trust us do not report crimes, 
 even when they themselves are the victim. People are more than mistrusting: they are afraid. What this says about our 
 laws is that we have to think deliberately about what we ask the police to enforce. Police should only be sent to enforce 
 laws that make our neighborhoods safer places to live, and tobacco bans do not make us safer. 
 The Maine illegal tobacco task force report calls for a new criminal code that would be applicable to individuals.  Incidents 
 of violence between the police and citizens that are related to illegal cigarettes or tobacco have already occurred in the 
 United States in communities of color. A menthol ban in  Maine will disproportionately affect communities of color, just as 
 the rest of the drug war already has. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) states that 1 in 7 (around 
 14%) of non-Hispanic Black adults smoke cigarettes and, as of 2019, approximately 85% of non-Hispanic Black adults 
 who smoked used menthol cigarettes. 
 The evidence for this everywhere: Eric Garner was allegedly selling loose cigarettes when he was choked and killed by a 
 police officer. In 2020, there was an incident in Rancho Cordova where a police officer used excessive force on a 14 year 
 old during a tobacco product investigation. And this past June, police officers tackled, kicked, and tasered teens when 
 enforcing a vaping ban on a boardwalk in Maryland. LEAP understands that these are not isolated incidents but rather 
 examples of the further challenges facing policing in America. Prohibiting — and consequently criminalizing — the sale 
 of menthol cigarettes will only make it worse. 
 Instead of a ban, Maine  should prioritize public education on the health risks of tobacco use. Much of the coverage of 
 tobacco control has centered on the problem of youth use and the impact on their health. However, vaping rates among 
 middle-schoolers and high-schoolers significantly declined in 2021, as they have been over the past few years. 
 LawEnforcementActionPartnership.org 
 Formerly known as Law Enforcement Against Prohibition 

 Additionally, the flavor bans that have been instituted in countless towns, cities, and states throughout the country are poor 
 policy: A study published in  JAMA Pediatrics  , for example, has suggested that a flavor ban in San Francisco actually 
 increased smoking rates among high-schoolers when compared to other school districts throughout the country. Another 
 study, published in Nicotine & Tobacco Research in July 2021, showed that if “vape product sales were restricted to 
 tobacco flavors,” one-third of US vapers aged 18 to 34 said that they would switch to smoking. And perhaps even more 
 elucidating, a study that also appeared in Nicotine & Tobacco Research suggested that teens who vape would probably be 
 smoking cigarettes instead if vapes had never become available. These three peer-reviewed articles support the thesis that 
 bans, at the very least, do not achieve their politically desired outcomes. Furthermore, the  surgeon general  in 2020 stated 
 there is not enough evidence to claim a ban on menthol cigarettes is an effective way to encourage cessation. 
 Other states have enacted bans and not seen the hoped for results.  Massachusetts  passed a statewide ban on flavored 
 tobacco products in 2020, and cigarette purchases subsequently declined in-state while increasing substantially in 
 bordering states. There’s no evidence that banning flavored tobacco has reduced smoking in Massachusetts, but there is 
 plenty of evidence showing that people still found a way to get flavored tobacco products regardless of the law, shuttling 
 millions in tax revenue out of the area. Recently Massachusetts lawmakers announced that they are considering a repeal of 
 the ban on menthol cigarettes and flavored tobacco. 
 This ban would keep us on the wrong side of history as we once again put reactionary, unscientific policies ahead of 
 reason, strategy, and community safety. Reducing smoking requires a public health approach: honest educational 
 campaigns about the risks; access to harm reduction resources; access to smoking cessation tools; and curbing predatory 
 advertising that targets youth, Black smokers, low-income communities, and other vulnerable populations. 
 As one of many stakeholders, the police have a crucial role in designing policy that mitigates harmful criminal justice 
 interventions on their constituencies. To that end, we strongly encourage  Maine’s lawmakers to reject LD 1215, a 
 prohibition of flavored tobacco products as such a prohibition will foster the establishment of illegal cigarette markets, 
 contribute to already elevated levels of violence in our communities, further exacerbate the division and distrust that exists 
 between our communities—especially our communities of color—and policing in America, and have little to no effect on 
 the health of residents. 
 Please reject this bill  and instead focus on expanding anti-smoking education, and prevention and cessation resources for 
 those who need it most. Thank you for your time. 
 Respectfully, 
 Diane Goldstein 
 Lieutenant Diane M. Goldstein (Ret.) 
 Executive Director 
 (725) 724-1037 c 
 LawEnforcementActionPartnership.org 
 Formerly known as Law Enforcement Against Prohibition 

