From:  
Dilav Patel  
Owner of  
Martini Lane, Westbrook, ME 
Potvin’s Quick Stop, Old Orchard Beach, ME 
 
 
 
Why I Oppose a Total Flavored Tobacco Product Sales Ban:  
 
• Our store sells a wide variety of goods, and an important part of our business model is the sale 
of tobacco and vapor products.  If LD1215 were to pass, many of the brands my adult consumers 
enjoy would be removed from our store shelves.   
 
• A further decline in store sales from a ban on flavored products would lead to job losses and 
eventually store closures in our state. I will not be able to replace the lost sales of flavored 
tobacco products with other products, leading to the demise of my own store. 
 
• The legislation would also promote an illegal market in flavored tobacco products.  Criminals are 
not concerned about who buys their illegal products, opening the door to more ready access to 
smuggled tobacco products by underage individuals.  
 
• Maine will incur a significant loss of both excise tax and sales tax revenue because flavored 
tobacco products could not be legally sold. Let’s look at Massachusetts.  Since their ban of 
flavored tobacco products went into effect in 2020, Massachusetts has lost approximately $337 
million in revenues. 
• No one wants any adult-only tobacco product falling into the hands of youth, and retailers are the 
best line of defense to prevent that. We check all tobacco consumers ID’s. 
  
• Let the federal government do its job 
o Current PMTA process has denied millions of vapor products from returning to the 
market, and the FDA now has authority over synthetic nicotine.  
o FDA is taking action to determine which products are appropriate for the protection of 
public health. 
 
• In short, prohibitions on products have never worked before and simply make way for an illegal 
& illicit market.  
 
• Retailers in New Hampshire will see greater sales if Maine bans all flavored tobacco & nicotine 
products, meaning a statewide ban will not help lessen overall tobacco use.  
 
• Not only is this proposal bad policy, but it also just won’t work. Banning flavored tobacco 
products will drive customers to purchase products from illegal sellers on the streets, online, or 
across state lines in New Hampshire. This will inevitably cause small businesses like mine to 
close.  
 
• I am a responsible retailer, and I do my part to keep tobacco out of the hands of Maine’s youth. 
Please do not punish me by prohibiting sales to my store's most popular good.  
