 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward**  
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, 
NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Rep s 
**Medical Student 
Representatives  
 
Staff  
 Dee Kerry, BS Ed  
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinat or 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207- 480- 4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony for LD 1215: AN ACT TO END THE SALE OF FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCTS  
 
Thank you to Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the Health and Human Services Committee for allowing 
me to share my written testimony. My name is Emily  Jacobs, DO , and I am a pediatrician living and working in 
Franklin County. I am also a member of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics, an organization 
of pediatricians across Maine focused on promoting policies that improve the health and well -being of Maine’s 
children. We stand in support of LD 1215 as an effective public health strategy to prevent childhood use of flavored 
tobacco products and resulting illness and addiction as a result of tob acco product use .  
As someone who has grown up in Maine, the effects of tobacco products have influenced nearly every aspect of 
my life. Growing u p, I never knew my grandfather, who died from small cell lung cancer from his tobacco addiction 
incurred from his time in the US Navy. While I was fortunate to live in a smoke- free house, many friends’  houses 
and my grandmother’s house  were  filled with smoke and I would  come home noticing the smell on my clothing. As 
an athlete in high school, I was petrified of anything that may ruin my lungs and carefully avoided any peers 
engaged in smoking. This continued through my athletics in  college, then through medical school and  still today 
where I try to practice  what I preach as a pediatrician. What pains me, though, is remembering the fresh air I 
breathed as a high schooler at Leavitt and thinking how today  that air is filled with the emissions of e -cigarettes. I 
also admit to myself that given all of the enticing flavors, colorful wrappers and targeted marketing; I probably would 
have tried them if I were a teenager today.  
Starting i n 2017, adolescent vaping virtually exploded increasing by 78% to 20.8% use, or 1 in every 5 students 
reporting  use1. I think anyone would be kidding  themselves to think they would  not have either  known  someone who 
vaped  or vaped  themselves  if they were growing up in Maine right now (where  the statistic is actually even higher –  
almost 1 in 3 having used an e- cigarette2). As a Pediatrician, I have quoted  these statistics to colleagues who have 
children in middle  school  or high school and they,  to a tee, state  that their children are  absolutely not vaping. Which 
means the  shoe has to fall somewhere –  if it’s not their kids, it’s yours.  
Who cares? Isn’t the flavoring in nicotine products the “only reason” some adults claim they can stop smoking  
cigarettes and use vapes?  Shouldn’t children  and teens be strong  enough  to deny  themselves “I Love Donuts 
Strawberry”, or other donut, custard, cheesecake, pie, cookie or ice cream flavors?   Caramel, cotton candy, or sour 
blue razz?3 Shouldn’t they ignore  ads that promise to a vape experience to be fun, adventurous, and make them 
more popular, sexier?4  
But what’s the harm, really, if even 11- or 12-year -olds are starting to use nicotine5 hidden beneath tempting 
flavors? Well, we saw firsthand around 2019 when young adults and adole scents developed severe lung disease 
resulting from e -cigarette or vaping product use-associated lung injury (EVALI)6. So that can be damage done just 
from vaping alone. However, adolescents and young adults who use e- cigarettes are 3.6 times more likely to 
report using good old combustible cigarettes at a follow up 30 days later7. Which  might mean  that, like my 
grandfather  who started smoking at age 16, these kids may never meet their grandchildren due to the health 
consequences of their nicotine addiction.  
It’s a lot of data, but I take the time to outline  it because  I really  care. I care about Maine, I care about Maine’s kids, 
and I care about Maine’s future as a free, open, clear -aired place for healthy kids and families to thrive. Please vote 
“yes” on LD 1215  to end the sale of flavored tobacco products  and keep Maine healthy.  
 
1 Cullen KA, Ambrose BK, Gentzke A, Apelberg BJ, Jamal A, King B. Notes from the field: use of electronic cigarettes and any tobacco 
product among middle and high school students –  United States, 2011- 2018. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2018;67(45):1276- 1277  
2 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey, 2019. Maine CDC Press Release, Dec 13, 2019. Available: 
https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/press -release.shtml?id=1874903  
3 “Best E -Juice Flavors 2021”. February 2, 2021. Vaping360.com Available: https://vaping360.com/ best-e-liquids/e-  juice-flavors/#desserts  
4 Stanford University Research Into the Impact of Tobacco Advertising. Available: http://tobacco.stanford.edu/tobacco_main/index.php  
5 Evans -Polce R, Veliz P, Boyd CJ, McCabe V, McCabe S. Trends in e- cigarette, cigarette, cigar and smokeless tobacco use among 
US adolescent cohorts, 2014- 2018. Am J Public Health. 2020;110(2):163- 165 
6 Hamberger ES, Halpbern- Felsher B. Vaping in adolescents: epidemiology and respiratory harm. Curr Opin Pediatr.  2020;32(3):378- 383 
7 Soneji S, Barrington- Trimis J, Wills, T, et al. Association between initial use of e- cigarettes and subsequent cigarette smoking among 
adolescents and young adults. JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(8):788- 79 
 
