In Support of  
LD 1215, An Act To End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products  
Testimony of Florence S. Edwards  DDS  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services. My name is Florence Edwards and I am a general dentist at Catholic Charities of Maine . I 
live in Portland, and I am testifying in favor of LD 1215, An Act To End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products.  
 
Before I was a dentist, I was a child who often spent her time reading Jet Magazine. Jet was the pop culture magazine 
geared towards descendants of American slavery - the majority of Black Americans. In every issue, there were full -page 
ads of beautiful Black people smoking menthol cigarettes. From taking out advertisements in Black media to sponsoring 
Black community events to selling cheaper -priced cigarettes in Black ne ighborhoods, the tobacco industry’s targeting of 
Black Americans with predatory marketing of menthol cigarettes is well -documented.  
 
Equally well -documented are the devastating  results. Today, more than 8 out of 10  Black Ame rican adults who smoke 
use menthol cigarettes. And Black Americans die at higher rates  than any other racial or ethnic group in the U.S. from 
tobacco -related diseases such as c ancer, heart disease, and stroke.  
 
Why menthol? Menthol numbs the mouth and throat, masking the harsh taste and making it easier to start using 
tobacco. Menthol also makes the smoke easier to inhale more deeply and people who use menthol cigarettes show 
greater signs of nicotine addiction and are less likely to successfully quit .  
 
The tobacco industry’s legacy of aggressive marketing to marginal ized populations is not limited to the Black community. 
Tobacco companies have preyed upon people with mental illness, people with low incomes, and in all cases, kids and 
young adults. Because human brains continue to develop until age 26,  young people are  extremely susceptible to 
nicotine addiction. Following this tried -and-true playbook, the tobacco industry has also preyed upon people who are 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and queer.  
 
The LGBTQ community’s high rate of smoking can’t be explained without a ccounting for the cynical and aggressive 
marketing by tobacco companies. In California in the 1990s, the industry’s strategy was to push cigarettes to 
communities that their executives held obvious disdain for, particularly gay men and homeless people. The ir campaign 
was called subculture urban marketing , abbreviated by no coincidence as SCUM . They sponsored Pride Month events 
and took out ads in Out magazine. They manufactured the narrative that to be young and gay or trans was to also be a 
smoker.  
 
When the CDC released new information  on the unequal impact of COVID -19, their fi ndings confirmed what I and other 
members of the LGBTQ community had thought. LGBTQ people were more likely to contract and suffer severe 
symptoms of COVID -19. We suffer disproportionately from asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
strokes,  heart disease, and hypertension - conditions all associated with severe COVID -19. Tobacco industry targeting 
puts us at greater risk for other dangerous health conditions. It’s unconscionable.  
 
Knowing that the younger generation overwhelmingly chooses f lavors ( 4 out of 5 kids  who have used tobacco started 
with a flavored product), the industry pushes everything from menthol to cotton candy to crème brûlée flavored 
tobacco to addict the next generation. There are now over 15,000 flavored tobacco products on the market.  
 
Tobacco smoke destroys cells at the microscopic level and damages our DNA. This leads to greater instances of severe 
complications that, as a dentist, I’m unfortunatel y very familiar with - infections, gum disease, tooth loss, and oral 
cancer. The surge in youth tobacco consumption will make these health problems more common. And that surge is 
being driven overwhelmingly by menthol, mint, and candy flavored tobacco prod ucts that the industry markets to 
teenagers.  
  
The professional consensus on the harms posed by menthol and other flavored cigarettes is unambiguous. The American 
Medical Association  and the American Dental Association  recommend ending the sale of all flavored tobacco products 
because of their well -documented harm to public health.  
 
LD 1215 will finally end the sale of flavored tobacco products in Maine. It takes a giant step toward eliminating health 
disparities among  Black and brown, indigenous, LGBTQ, and other marginalized communities. Getting flavored tobacco 
off the store shelves will give all Maine kids a fair shot at a healthy, productive future, free from tobacco addiction.  
 
Please vote ‘yes’ on LD 1215.  
 
Respectfully,  
Florence S. Edwards  
 
 

