 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 13 1st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
April 25, 202 3 
 
Supporting : 
LD 1215 , “An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products ” 
Sponsored by Senator Duson  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, I am Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager at Maine Primary Care 
Association (MPCA) .  
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
We support  LD 1215 and thank Senator Duson and the other co -sponsors for bringing this bill forward. 
Passing legislation to prohibit the sale and distribution of flavored tobacco products, including flavored 
cigars and electronic smoking devices, would be a t remendous step forward for public health in our 
state. Today i n Maine, 33.8% of cancer deaths are attributed  to smoking ; providing care for those with 
medical issues directly cause d by smoking cost s Maine $942 million  every year.1  
 
Flavored tobacco products  are specifically designed  to reduce the harshness of products, making them 
more appealing to new users .2 In Maine,  4 out of 5 kids who have used tobacco started with a flavored 
product. Despite action by the Food & Drug Administration (FDA), flavored e -cigarettes —especially 
menthol e -cigarettes and sweet -flavored disposables —remain widely available. Our state has rates well 
above the national average for high school students using tobacco .3 Overall, 4,300 high school students 
in Maine smoke  and 30.2% of high school students in our state  use e -cigarettes.4   
 
Tobacco use puts our kids  at risk. 27,000 kids under 18 and now currently alive in Maine will ultimately 
die prematurely from smoking.5 Prohibit ing the sale and distribution of flavored tobacco products  is the 
right choice to make to ensure a healthier future for our state .  
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, we urge you to support this legislation. T hank you for 
considering our comments. Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with 
any follow up questions.  
Hannah A. Hudson, MA  
Policy and  Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
 
1 Tobacco Free Kids. Accessed here: https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/problem/toll -us/maine   
2 Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults. A report of the Surgeon General. CDC 2012. A ccessed here: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK99237/   
3 Flavors Hook Kids Maine. Accessed here: https://fla vorshookkidsmaine.org/   
4 Tobacco Free Kids. Accessed here: https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/problem/toll -us/maine   
5 Tobacco Free Kids. Accessed here: https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/problem/toll -us/maine   
