Monday, April 24, 2023 Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: My name is Heather Drake. I am a resident of Cape Elizabeth and public health professional. I have a Master of Public Health degree from The George Washington University and have worked for 12 years in public health, including in substance use and cancer prevention. I am writing in support of LD 1215: “An Act To End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products.” A 2011 review conducted a comprehensive assessment of tobacco industry marketing of menthol products. 1Here is what they found: •Menthol cigarettes were marketed as, and are perceived by consumers to be, healthier than non-menthol cigarettes. •The tobacco industry marketed menthol cigarettes to specific social and demographic groups, including African–Americans, young people and women, and are perceived by consumers to signal social group belonging. •The tobacco industry knew consumers perceived menthol as healthier than non-menthol cigarettes, and this was the intent behind their marketing. •Marketing emphasizing menthol attracts consumers who may not otherwise progress to regular smoking, including young, inexperienced users and those who find ‘regular’ cigarettes undesirable. These findings mirror a similar strategy to what is happening today with e-cigarettes, which are marketed as a “harm reduction” strategy to traditional cigarettes and are perceived to be “safer” and “cleaner” by youth.2 In fact, most youth don’t view e-cigarettes as tobacco products: 76% believe they are less addictive. More than 85% of e-cigarette users ages 12-17 use flavored e-cigarettes, and flavors 2are the leading reason for youth use: More than 90% of young adult e-cigarette users use ones flavored to taste like menthol, alcohol, fruit, chocolate, or other sweets. 3Women and girls are another important consumer for the tobacco industry. With campaigns and slogans like: “Reach for a lucky instead of a sweet.” “You’ve come a long way, baby.” “We make Virginia Slims especially for women because they are biologically superior to men.” the tobacco industry strived to entice women to smoke by using mainstream beauty and fashion standards to portray smoking as feminine, and associated smoking with “women’s freedom, emancipation, and empowerment” as the 2001 U.S. Surgeon General’s report on women and smoking put it. To see examples from the early to late 20th century, here is The Truth Initiative’s catalogue of ads. These campaigns worked. Research has shown that in addition to a higher prevalence of menthol use among African–American men and women, female smokers of all races used mentholated cigarettes at a higher rate than male smokers.,,  I have included at the end of my testimony some example ads that use menthol to target 456women. 
I believe passing this bill will prevent youth from starting to use tobacco and will prevent the industry from marketing another product as a healthful alternative to combustible cigarettes – when that’s actually not true. Please support LD 1215. Thank you. 
 
Anderson SJ. Marketing of menthol cigarettes and consumer perceptions: a review of tobacco industry documents. Tob Control. 12011;20 Suppl 2(Suppl_2):ii20-ii28.Hawkins KB, Johnson AC, Denzel M, Tercyak KP, Mays D. Adolescents’ awareness and perceptions of e-cigarettes: Implications for 2intervention and tobacco regulation. Pediatrics Sep 2017, 140 (1 Meeting Abstract)132. US Department of Health and Human Services. E-Cigarette Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. 3Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health;2016.Lawrence D, Rose A, Fagan P, et al. National patterns and correlates of mentholated cigarette use in the United States. Addiction 42010;105(Suppl 1):13–31.Cubbin C, Soobader MJ, LeClere FB. The intersection of gender and race/ethnicity in smoking behaviors in menthol and non-5menthol smokers in the United States. Addiction 2010;105(Suppl 1):32–8.Fernander A, Rayens MK, Zhang M, et al. Are age of smoking initiation and purchasing patterns associated with menthol smoking? 6Addiction 2010;105(Suppl 1):39–45.
