 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on  Health and Human Services   
In Support of LD 1215 , An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products  
 
Hearing Date:  April 25, 2023  
 
Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and members, Joint Standing Committee on  Health and 
Human Services , my name is Jamie Cotnoir  and I am the Associate Director of the Division of 
Disease Prevention  with the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention . I am here today 
to provide testimony on behalf of the Maine C DC and will be speaking  in support of LD 1215, 
An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products.  
 
This bill prohibits the sale and distribution of flavored tobacco products, including flavored 
cigars and electronic smoking devices. This bill includes a revised definition for ‘electronic 
smoking device, adds a definition for term ‘flavored tobacco product ,’ how these products are 
marketed, and outlines financial penalties that may be imposed for violations. The following 
comments are offered for your consideration.  
 
Cigarette s moking is the number one modifiable cause of death and disease in the United States. 
In Maine, 2,400 adults die annually from smoking, and 27,000 Maine youth currently under the 
age of 18 will die prematurely from smoking -related illness.  
  
Nationally, cig arette smoking is linked to between 80% and 90% of lung cancer deaths. 
According to the Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids, in 2019, tobacco use was estimated to cost 
$811,120,557 in direct health care expenditures in Maine. Flavored tobacco products, no matte r 
the type, appeal to youth. In 2021, nearly 8 in 10 youth who reported using tobacco products 
used flavored varieties.  
  
Cigarettes are prohibited from containing flavors except for tobacco or menthol. Other tobacco 
products including cigars and e -cigare ttes are available in myriad of fruit, candy, and other 
flavors that mask the harshness and are appealing to young people. The vast majority of adult 
smokers first start before the age of 18 are more likely to start with flavored products. Menthol 
has anal gesic properties making it even easier to inhale, increases the likelihood of nicotine 
dependence, decreases the likelihood of quitting, and contributes to disparity in use in certain 
vulnerable populations. Young people, racial and ethnic minority groups,  LGBTQ+ people, 
women, people with a low income, people with mental health conditions, and members of the 
BIPOC community also are more likely to use flavored tobacco products than other population 
groups.  
  
 
 Flavored tobacco products also disproportionate ly impact African Americans. It is estimated that 
approximately 40% of excess deaths due to menthol cigarette smoking in the U.S. between 1980 
- 2018 were those of African Americans, despite African Americans making up only about 12% 
of the U.S. population . 
  
Many states and communities, including a growing number  in Maine, have restricted the sale of 
flavored tobacco products . This decision made in the interest of public health has  resulted in loss 
of tax revenue. The Legislature will need to identify fund ing to offset this loss of revenue.  
  
Federal courts have found that federal law does not limit the authority of these jurisdictions to 
prohibit the sale of tobacco products in accordance with the Family Smoking Prevention and 
Tobacco Control Act passed in 2009. Research has also found that la ws that do not include 
menthol cigarettes or that do not apply to all tobacco retailers, may reinforce health disparities.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends LD 1215  ought to pass as evidence shows 
that flavored tobacco products, including menthol cigarettes, increase the risk of youth initiation, 
undermine tobacco treatment efforts, and contribute to health disparities. Additionally, as this 
Committee considers this bill, the Maine CDC suggests that the proposed language defining 
‘electronic smoking device ’ be reviewed for potential impact on regulations governing Maine’s 
cannabis program s, specifically, the legislation recently passed  (Public Law 2023 c. 6, 
introduce d as LD 83 , enacted as amended)  clarifying licensing requirements to sell cannabis 
paraphernalia.  
  
Thank you for your consideration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from the Committee,  and I will b e available to participate in the 
work session.  
 
 
 
 
