Dear Distinguished Member s of the Standing Health and Human Se rvices Committee,  
 
Jason Davenport  
Warmings Market, Brunswick  
Resident, Portland , Maine  
 
 
As the owner of Warmings Market in Brunswick, I am hopeful and optimistic that  our state 
Legislature will vote to end the sale of flavored tobacco products in Maine.  
 
 
I purchased Warmings Market about f ive years ago. Just  before purchasing the market, the 
decision was made to stop selling all tobacco products. This includes cigarettes, pipes, cigars, 
vapes, e -cigarettes, Juuls, and chewing tobacco.   
 
 
Warmings Market is located within a couple of miles of Brunswick High Sc hool and about a half 
mile from Brunswick Middle School. While we would card anyone who would purchase anything 
that requires the buyer to be a certain age, we also understand how frequently people purchase 
things for younger people, despite the detriment to their health and safety. In addition to being 
close to middle and high schools, we are also close to a college campus. People can purchase 
things legally for younger friends. We know this can - and does - happen all the time.  
 
 
Packaging of tobacco prod ucts - and in the case of flavored tobacco, the products themselves - 
are designed to appeal to younger people . With people  starting to smoke or vape as young as 
13-15 years old , we don’t need to be giving them the temptation when kids come into our store 
to buy snacks, drinks, or lunch.   
 
 
As a member of this community,  our younger customers weighed heavily on our decision not to  
sell tobacco. Tobacco products are easily transportable. The use of flavored tobacco products 
can be masked more easily because the smell doesn’t stick to clothing as much as traditional 
cigaret tes, even though both are addictive and potentially harmful.  
 
 
Our customers are overwhelmingly supportive of our decision not to  sell tobacco products. That 
doesn’t surprise me. It also doesn’t surprise me that  about two -thirds of likely voters in Maine 
support a law to end the sale of flavored tobacco products statewide . Flavored tobacco products 
like Peppermint Moch a, Orange Soda, and Banana Blast are being  sold for e -cigarettes to hook 
younger people . It’s obvious. It’s simple. And it’s disgusting.   
 
 
The people of Brunswick agree. The Town Council  received  public testimony that 
overwhelmingly favored ending the sale of flavored tobacco products in town. Councilors heard 
from students and public health representatives, school officials and m edical professionals, 
substance abuse counselors and more. It is imperative that Maine ends the sale of flavored 
tobacco products when it comes to a vote. Maine lawmakers have the chance to do what is right 
and protect our k ids. 
 
 
The tobacco companies have tried telling us that vaping is a harmless alternative to smoking. 
We now know that is not  true. Please do the right thing and listen  to pediatricians, parents , 
teachers , and our kids. The next logical step is to expand this policy statewide. Please vote yes 
on LD 1215 , which would end the sale of flavored tobacco products throughout the state. It is a 
good policy for Bangor. It’s good policy for Portland. It’s good po licy for Brunswick.  It is a good 
policy for South P ortland .  It is a good policy for Bar Harbor.  And it’s good policy for Maine.   
 
 
I’m hopeful that you will do the right thing and vote ye s and advocate for L D 1215 , to end the 
sale of flavored tobacco products in Maine.  
 
Thank you.  
 
 
 
