 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward**  
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, 
NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Rep s 
**Medical Student 
Representatives  
 
Staff  
 Dee Kerry, BS Ed  
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinat or 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207- 480- 4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony in favor of LD 1215: An Act to End the Sale of 
Flavored Tobacco Products  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Committee 
on Health and Human Services , I am a Portland resident, a pediatrician, and a member 
of the Board of Directors of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  
 
We can all agree that tobacco inhalation is harmful to the users and to anyone exposed 
to tobacco products, including traditional cigarettes a nd electronic smoking devices.  
 As the child of a smoker, I know the destruction that smoking has.  My father began 
smoking menthol cigarettes at eleven years of age.  He stopped when he experienced his first bout of laryngeal cancer in 1974.  I was three years old  at the time.   
 When I traveled home  to visit my parents in late December 1996, my dad informed me 
that he had a cancer recurrence and that was the reason for his increasingly hoarse voice the past few months.  When he told me that his voice box wa s being removed 
less than two weeks later, I was glad that the cancer recurrence was diagnosed promptly, surgery was not delayed, and that the prognosis was favorable.  This was not the case five years later when his advanced pancreatic cancer had few trea tment 
options.   
 
Both of these cancers were directly related to smoking and, likely, made worse because 
my dad was addicted to cigarettes before he was a teenager.  
 The single reason tobacco companies add flavoring to their products is to entice 
individuals  to begin smoking without the unpleasurable taste of the native product.  The 
harshness and bitterness of tobacco is disguised with sweet and minty flavors, which 
are most appealing to children and adolescents.  We know that the majority of adult 
smokers s tart before their eighteenth birthdays, at a time when one’s brain is prone to 
poor decision -making, miscalculation of risks, and under -estimation of long -term 
consequences.  None of us should be fooled by the tobacco company claims otherwise.  These flavored products are manufactured, advertised, and sold because companies 
know that the earlier and longer people use their products, the more profitable the 
companies become.  I am here to remind you that early smokers cost the health care 
system, impact individual health, and disrupt families with illness and untimely deaths.  
 
In retrospect, I am fortunate that my father was cancer -free for 22 years and that I do 
not recall his first battle with laryngeal cancer.  However, my family was victim to the 
effects of tobacco.  My dad had 3 episodes of cancer, and despite stopping tobacco at 
the age of 34 years, he  ultimately died from smoking cigarettes  – an addiction that 
began before his adolescence.  
 
 Flavored tobacco products , including menthol,  are meant to hook children like my dad 
and turn them into life -long smokers  to benefit tobacco companies by creating addiction 
and physical dependence.  Endin g the sale and distribution of flavored tobacco 
products is sure to curb the initiation and persistence of tobacco use in children.  Without question.  
 
Please  end the sale of f lavored tobacco products in Maine!  
 Jennifer A. Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
 
 
