Health & Human Services Committee 
Testimony in Support of LD 1215 
An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products 
April 25, 2023 
 
Good afternoon members of the Health & Human Services Committee. My name is Jordyn 
Rossignol and I am here today in support of LD 1215. As a mother of two, I am deeply 
concerned by the widespread availability of flavored tobacco products that are marketed to 
young people. Despite my best efforts to raise my children to make healthy choices, I worry 
about the frequent exposure they have to these products, which are designed to appeal to their 
developing taste buds and sense of curiosity. 
 
The tobacco industry has a long history of targeting young people with flavored products, from 
bubblegum and cotton candy to mint and menthol. These products make it easier for children 
and teens to experiment with tobacco, and studies have shown that flavored tobacco products 
are more attractive to young people than their non-flavored counterparts. 
 
As a mother, I find it incredibly frustrating that my efforts to promote a healthy lifestyle for my 
children are being undermined by the availability of these products. I am constantly having to 
explain to my children why they see advertisements for bubblegum-flavored e-cigarettes or why 
older kids are using flavored tobacco products. It is a constant battle to keep them on track and 
to help them make informed decisions about their health. 
 
That's why I strongly support the bill to end the sale of flavored tobacco products in Maine. This 
legislation will help to protect our children from the harmful effects of tobacco and will make it 
harder for the tobacco industry to market to young people. It will also send a clear message that 
we value the health and well-being of our children and will not allow them to be targeted by 
companies whose only concern is their bottom line. 
 
We owe it to our children to do everything we can to promote a healthy lifestyle and to protect 
them from the harmful effects of tobacco. By supporting this bill, we can take an important step 
towards achieving these goals and creating a healthier future for our children. Thank you. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Jordyn Rossignol 
Caribou 
