 
                                                   
105 2nd St Suite 2A  
Hallowell, ME 04347  
MOHC@mcdph.org  
www.maineoralhealthcoal ition.org  
 
Testimony of the Maine Oral Health Coalition  
Submitted by Judith Feinstein, Coordinator   
In Support of  LD 1215,  
An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products  
April 25, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative  Meyer and distinguis hed members of the  Health and Human Services  
Committee , this testimony is submitted on behal f of the Maine Oral Health Coalition  (MOHC)  in support 
of LD 12 15. Founded 25 years ago as the Maine Dental Access Coalition, we continue to function  as a 
broad network , and maintain a close interest in policy and systems changes that can improve access to 
services and oral health status in Maine.  
 
Others testifying in support of LD 1215 wi ll have noted the effects of tobacco use on overall health , and 
why and how ending the s ale and distribution of flavored tobacco products, including flavored cigars and 
electronic smoking devices , makes sense for Maine and particula rly our young people. Our testimony 
focuses on oral health. A first step in improving oral health status is to engage in upstream behaviors and 
imple ment  policies that prevent dental disease.  For example, a ccording to a 2020 systematic review1 of 
the oral health effects of e -cigarette use, vaping increases the ri sk for de teriorating periodontal, dental, 
and gingival health, and c an cause changes to the oral microbiome. E -cigarette explosions can also cause 
extensive dental damage.  
 
As you probably know, access to regular oral health care in many parts of Maine continues to be 
challenging in many ways, not  the least of which is that paying for needed care is often a significant 
financial barrier, especially for people with lower incomes. As you have heard, t his population has been 
targeted by the tobacco industry  – resulting in a clear relationship that as income decreases, tobacco  use 
increases . There is a greater density of tobacco retailers in low -income neighborhoods, including more 
that are near schools. The tobacco industry has targeted women with low -income through distribu tion 
of discount coupons, point -of-sale discounts, direct -mail coupons, and development of targeted 
branding. Flavored tobacco products are intentionally marketed to appeal to young people, including 
teenagers who are not legally old enough to purchase them. Adolescents are particularly susceptible to 
tobacco’s addictive properties, not only because of peer pressu re but also because of the characteristics 
of the developing adolescent brain.  
 
The relationship between income, tobacco use, and oral health care is consequential . The cost of 
regular, ongoing preventive care can present a significant  financial barrier for many  families, and the 
cost of restorative care can be prohibitive. Dental disease is a chronic and progressive disease, but it is 
almost completely preventable. Tobacco use  has a n adverse impact on the oral environment  and an 
individual ’s ability to maintain good oral health. The connections between dental disease and limited  
emplo yment opportunities, low educational achievement, and decreased social mobility are well known 
and well documented. Adults with poor oral health are also more likely to have other health problems 
that poor oral health makes worse. Tobacco use is also preventable. Policies that discourage tobacco use 
– particularly among youth – are likely to improve oral health and have p ositive effects on overall health 
and well -being.  
 
We urge the Committee to support  LD 1215 and its potential to improve overall  health , including  oral 
health , for all population groups in Maine , and particularly our young people.  Thank you.  
 
 
Judith Feinstein, MSPH, Coordinator  
 jafme52@gmail.com  
 
1 Yang I, Sandeep S, Rodriguez J. The oral health impact of electronic cigarette use: a systematic review. Crit Rev Toxicol. 20 20 
Feb;50(2):97 -127.  doi: 10.1080/10408444.2020.1713726 . MOHC Steering 
Committee  
 
Wendy Alpaugh, DMD  
General Practice 
Dentist, Stonington  
 
Kalie Hess, MPH  
Children’s Oral Health 
Network of Maine  
 
Beth Pearce  
Maine Primary Care 
Association  
 
Bonnie Vaughan,  
IPDH, MEd, MBA  
Kennebec Valley 
Family Dentistry 
Center and Maine 
Dental Hygienists’ 
Association  
 
Judith Feinstein, MSPH  
Coordinator  
 
 
The Maine Oral Health 
Coalition  represents a 
statewide group of 
organizations and 
individuals who work 
together as a network 
to support each other 
in raising awareness 
and promoting oral 
health and dental 
disease prevention 
activities, through 
community education 
and advocacy, with 
the vision that oral 
health is valued as a 
vital element of 
wellness for all Maine 
residents.  
 
