Keiffer Cantara
Old Orchard Beach
LD 1215
I am a Maine voter and a taxpayer writing in opposition to LD1215 and LD1174 
which would ban the sale of flavored nicotine or tobacco products -- including those 
that are demonstrably safer than smoking according to the FDA. It should now be 
clear that such drastic action would cause irreparable harm to the same people it is 
intended to protect. Moreover, forcing legitimate specialty retailers to close will 
expose consumers to unnecessary risks including shopping on an unregulated market 
and even returning to smoking. Data from other states and municipalities where flavor
bans have been imposed confirm that this policy is creating new problems while 
failing to address the issue of youth substance use.
Recent research reveals that young people aren’t benefiting from heavy regulation of 
vapor products. Instead, policies like what LD1215 and LD1174 are proposing are 
more likely to send teenagers to smoking rather than prevent them from 
experimenting with nicotine. According to research published in the journal Nicotine 
and Tobacco Research (Posner H., et. al., 2021), 33% of respondents were likely to 
switch to smoking cigarettes in response to a flavor ban on vaping. Outcomes like this
are counterproductive to achieving genuine public health goals like reducing smoking 
prevalence in Maine and the rest of the country.
Legal, regulated businesses play a vital role in ensuring that consumers have access to
well-made products and keeping adult products out of the hands of young people. If 
these products are pushed into an underground market where there is no oversight and
no motivation to comply with regulations, purchasing and consuming nicotine will be 
unnecessarily more risky.
I, along with my fellow members of Maine Vapers Association, want to thank you for
considering my comments on this issue. Please know that the vaping community are 
your allies in addressing concerns about youth use and we are open to working toward
a positive way forward. I look forward to your response on this issue and I am 
available for any questions you might have.

