Kyle Feldman  
Executive Vice President Government Affairs  
National Convenience Distributors  
21 Banfi Plaza  
Farmingdale, NY 11735  
 
Maine Legislature  
Committee On Health and Human Services  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
April 25, 2023  
 
Dear Chair Baldacci, Chair Meyer , and Members of the Committee on Health and Human Services,  
 
I am writing today to provide testimony in opposition to LD 1215, An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products . 
My testi mony will focus on three key reasons this legislation will not work as intended. First, prohibition at the state and 
local level are ineffective at yielding the desired results. Second, the budget implications of this legislation will be 
detrimental to the  state of Maine. Third, this legislature is attempting to restrict a product based on inaccurate 
information. As Executive Vice President of Government Affairs for National Convenience Distributors, a grocery, 
sundries, and tobacco supplier, for more than 18,000 retail stores in the northeast, I am very familiar with each of the 
reasons listed above.  
 
1.) Prohibition at the state and local level are ineffective at yielding the desired results.  
 
On June 1, 2020, the state of Massachusetts implemented the first c ategorical flavor ban on the sale of flavored tobacco 
products. The results are disastrous. According to tax stamp records Massachusetts lost 23.9% of cigarette sales 
statewide. At the same time, sales of cigarettes grew in New Hampshire by 22.1%, Rhode Is land by 18.0%, and Vermont 
by 6%. Also, a t the same time sales nationwide declined by 1.6%. This is as clear of a picture of cross -border sales and 
smuggling as you will ever see.  
 
In total, Massachusetts lost 33 million packs simultaneously  the surroundin g states mentioned above grew sales by 30 
million packs. Nearly all of Massachusetts’s losses were picked up by bordering states. Even more astounding is the fact 
that the counties closest to Massachusetts – Cheshire, Hillsborough, and Rockingham saw cigar ette sales  jump 133%, 
82%, and 123%, respectively. Those in favor of the bill will simply point to the 24% loss of cigarette sales in 
Massachusetts while ignoring sales in all other states.  
 
In fact, this is such a problem the Massachusetts Multi -Agency I llegal Tobacco Task Force stated the following, “the Task 
Force identifies the cross -border smuggling of untaxed flavored ENDS products, cigars, and menthol cigarettes a s the 
primary challenge for tobacco enforcement in the commonwealth.”  
 
Most importantly , the bill did nothing to benefit public health. CDC data shows smoking rates in Massachusetts declined 
by 4.5% compared to 7.1% nationwide  after Massachusetts implemented this bill . New Hampshire, despite selling 22.1% 
more products than in previous years  saw an 11.5% reduction in smoking prevalence over the same period. This law 
simply forced consumers across borders without yielding any public health benefit.  
 
2.) The budget implications of this legislation will be detrimental to the state of Maine  
 
The Maine Department of Administrative and Financial Services budgeted cigarette and tobacco taxes in the state of 
Maine to be $ 151,740,000.00 for  FY 202 3 representing 3.19% of the undedicated revenues of the general fund. Passing 
LD 1215 puts a large amount o f these funds at risk. Following Massachusetts’s implementation of its flavor ban, the state 
lost $137 million in cigarette excise tax and sales tax revenue in the twelve months after the ban.  This is compared to tax 
revenue of $557 million in the previous  year before implementation or a 24.5% decline in revenue. Applying the same 
logic to Maine the state is looking at losses of $ 37,176,300  annually, just from the excise tax. This number does not 
factor in the loss of sales tax, motor fuels tax, income tax,  property tax, etc. which will also be impacted due to an 
increase in cross -border sales. When consumers stop in New Hampshire to purchase their  tobacco  products they will 
also purchase other items like gas, food, lottery, and snacks.  
 
This behavior was s o obvious that in May 2020, the state of Rhode Island accounted for cross -border sales and raised its 
tobacco revenue estimates from $130.6 million to $155 million despite declining industry sales.  Additionally , LD 1215 
will increase expenditures for the s tate of Maine. When a similar ban was proposed in Maryland the Maryland Alcohol 
and Tobacco Commission said the following, “ The agency would likely see increased expenditures in four areas: (1)  
Enforcement Agents; and (2) Equipment and Vehicles; ( 3) Secure  Storage; and (4) Contractual Services.”  
 
Outside of government revenue, Massachusetts’s ban also resulted in lost retail sales of cigarettes of $338 million. This 
results in gross profit losses of nearly $70 million. These dollars are used to pay employees, property taxes, overhead 
expenditures, philanthropic efforts, and more. The facts are simple. P assing LD 1215 will not stop adults from using their 
preferred products while at the same time requiring a drastic cut to Maine tax revenue and a massive loss for local small 
businesses.  
 
3.) This legislature is attempting to restrict a product based on inacc urate information.  
 
The only reason  this legislature is considering this bill is due to the exponential rise in teen vaping that occurred from 
2019 -2020. According to the Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey  (MIYHS) , vaping rates among  students were  at an 
all-time  high in 2019 when 28.7% of high school students indicated they had used an electronic vapor product at least 
once in the last 30 days. The 2021 number dropped by nearly 40% in two years to 17.4%. Concurrently , the 2019 CDC 
Youth Risk Behavior Stud y found the following: only 1.8% of Maine high school students smoked cigarettes frequently .  
 
The broad strokes LD 1215 paints are inaccurate and unfair. If this legislature was serious about fixing the “problem” at 
hand they would dedicate all their effo rt to stopping the illegal use of vapor products by high school students. Menthol 
cigarettes, wintergreen /mint dip, and flavored pipe tobacco do not appeal to youth and are innocent bystanders in the 
war on youth vaping. Most importantly, as demonstrated a bove, the biggest losers in this legislation are the local 
businesses that legally sell these products to adults. The same CDC study above found that only 4.7% of Maine high 
school students obtained vapor products by buying them at a store. When asked the same question, t he 2021 MIYHS 
showed that of illegal youth vapor users, 93 % of them received the product from a friend or family member, took them 
from a store, purchased them online, or got them in another way. You’re penalizing an entire retail sector de spite at 
least 93% of illegal users saying we are not the problem.  
 
In conclusion, the facts I have provided show a clear picture. If you enact this legislation tobacco users will cross state 
lines or go to the black market to buy their preferred products. Doing so will cost the state  millions in lost revenue 
without any reduction in the healthcare costs affiliated with tobacco use.  You will restrict the freedom of Mainers to 
choose what products they use under the guise of protecting you th. They w on’t be fooled.  
 
I implore you to reject LD 1215. Rather, focus your efforts on teen use of vaping products, marijuana, and alcohol. For 
once, stand with the businesses that directly pay 3.19% of the undedicated general fund. Reject the lies and inaccurate  
information being fed to you by D.C. lobbyists. These businesses are in your backyards . Instead of shutting them down, 
get to know them and you’ll see that they are just as concerned about keeping tobacco products out of the hands of 
youth as you are. The solution to this problem lies not in prohibition, but in hearing the voices of local business owners 
who are on the front lines of age verification every day.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 

