 
 
Dear Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services, 
  
I am writing as a substance use prevention specialist in support of LD 1215, “An Act to End the 
Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products”. I work closely with youth in Maine and my concern is for 
those who started vaping flavored tobacco products back in seventh grade, during COVID and 
now are in high school and are not able to stop using. When a person becomes addicted to 
nicotine, their brain craves it every twenty to thirty minutes. Youth are struggling during the 
school day and are experiencing withdrawal symptoms such as agitation, anxiousness, and lack 
of concentration. Nicotine addiction can prime the brain and can be incredibly difficult to quit. If 
a person begins using other substances after becoming addicted to nicotine, they are more likely 
to develop addiction to those other substances. The brain is best for learning without much effort 
between the ages of thirteen and twenty. If a person learns healthy coping skills and activities 
during that time period, those are more likely to stick and continue. However, ninety percent of 
addiction begins before the age of eighteen. According to the 2019 Maine Integrated Youth 
Health Survey , there was a near doubling in youth e-cigarette use since 2017 (28.7% vs. 15.3%).  
  
There are more than 15,000 flavored tobacco products with candy and fruit flavors which appeal 
to youth. When youth started using these products they did not know that they contained nicotine 
and thought that it was just water vapor. We now know there are many harmful chemicals in the 
devices….and the most harmful is nicotine. The tobacco industry purposefully targets high-risk 
populations such as those who are LGBTQ and those who are from Black and Brown 
communities. In those communities, the tobacco industry uses manipulative strategies: increased 
availability, marketing, and lower prices.  
  
 LD 1215 is critical in preventing substance use addiction and by keeping these appealing 
products out of the hands of young people we will see less addiction and more healthy youth  
development. Many people ask me “What are you doing to prevent the opioid epidemic?” and 
my reply is “People don’t typically start with opioids….they start with nicotine, alcohol, and or 
cannabis”. Please support this important legislation. Thank you. 
 
Lee Anne Dodge 
Dresden, ME 
 
Lee Anne Dodge
Dresden
LD 1215
Dear Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human 
Services,
 
I am writing as a substance use prevention specialist in support of LD 1215, “An Act 
to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products”. I work closely with youth in Maine 
and my concern is for those who started vaping flavored tobacco products back in 
seventh grade, during COVID and now are in high school and are not able to stop 
using. When a person becomes addicted to nicotine, their brain craves it every twenty 
to thirty minutes. Youth are struggling during the school day and are experiencing 
withdrawal symptoms such as agitation, anxiousness, and lack of concentration. 
Nicotine addiction can prime the brain and can be incredibly difficult to quit. If a 
person begins using other substances after becoming addicted to nicotine, they are 
more likely to develop addiction to those other substances. The brain is best for 
learning without much effort between the ages of thirteen and twenty. If a person 
learns healthy coping skills and activities during that time period, those are more 
likely to stick and continue. However, ninety percent of addiction begins before the 
age of eighteen. According to the 2019 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey, there 
was a near doubling in youth e-cigarette use since 2017 (28.7% vs. 15.3%). 
 
There are more than 15,000 flavored tobacco products with candy and fruit flavors 
which appeal to youth. When youth started using these products they did not know 
that they contained nicotine and thought that it was just water vapor. We now know 
there are many harmful chemicals in the devices….and the most harmful is nicotine. 
The tobacco industry purposefully targets high-risk populations such as those who are
LGBTQ and those who are from Black and Brown communities. In those 
communities, the tobacco industry uses manipulative strategies: increased availability,
marketing, and lower prices. 
 
 LD 1215 is critical in preventing substance use addiction and by keeping these 
appealing products out of the hands of young people we will see less addiction and 
more healthy youth  development. Many people ask me “What are you doing to 
prevent the opioid epidemic?” and my reply is “People don’t typically start with 
opioids….they start with nicotine, alcohol, and or cannabis”. Please support this 
important legislation. Thank you.
