 Monday, April 2 4, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services:  
 
My name is Leo Waterston . I am a resident of South Portland and  currently serve as Vice-
President of Maine Public Health Association ’s Board of Directors.  I am writing to you as a 
public health professional  and parent  in support of  LD 1215: “An Act To End the Sale of 
Flavored Tobacco Products .”  
 
Did you know there are more than 15,000 flavored tobacco product s on the market? These 
flavors include everything from Rocky Road- flavored cigars  to Dr. Pepper -flavored dissolvables 
to Unicorn Frappe on Ice nicotine juice (flavored to taste like raspberrie s, mangoes, fresh cream, 
cotton candy, and menthol) . Findings
 published in The New England Journal of Medicine  show 
that the same chemicals used in “cherry,” “grape,” “apple,” “peach,” and “berry” Jolly Rancher candies, Life Savers, and Kool -Aid drink mixes  are also used in similarly flavored tobacco 
products. The tobacco industry is literally selling candy -flavored tobacco.  
 In addition to nicotine, these flavored tobacco products contain other harmful ingredients, including ultrafine particles that can be inhaled deep into the lungs. There is evidence to suggest that these particles lead to cardiovascular injury, with links to negative effects on re sting heart 
rate, blood pressure and the cells that line the blood vessels. Bystanders can breathe in this aerosol. E -cigarettes also contain flavorants such as diacetyl, a chemical linked to serious lung 
disease; volatile organic compounds; and heavy meta ls, such as nickel, tin, and lead.  
 Because of the tobacco industry’s tactics  to target kids and teens , as parents, community 
members, and health professionals, we  are faced with another generation that will die 
prematurely from tobacco use.  Please d on’t let the tobacco industry win. Don’t let them use flavors to turn Maine kids into 
“replacement smokers
” (the tobacco indust ry’s term), stepping in as new customers for those 
who have died from tobacco use. Rates of tobacco use and lung cancer in Maine remain higher than the national average, putting a tremendous societal and financial burden on our state.  
 I want to end with a  quote  from 
Brian King, Deputy Director for Research Translation at the US 
CDC Office on Smoking and Health:  “The advertising will lead a horse to water, the flavors will 
get them to drink, and the nicotine keeps them coming back for more. That’s the trifecta of 
factors that have influenced youth use in this country.”  
 
Preventi ng tobacco use is good public health, economic , and social  policy. With this bill, you 
have the opportunity to protect Maine kids from tobacco addiction, advance health equity, and save lives. LD 1215 promotes public health, and I respectfully request the committee to vote LD 
1215 “Ought to Pass.” Thank you for your consideration.  
  
