 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
102 Bishop Street, 
Portland, ME 04103 
207.553.2575 
info@portlandrecovery.org 
 
www.portlandrecovery.org 
 
Testimony for Portland Recovery Community Center by Leslie Clark, Executive Director 
In Favor of LD 1215: An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products 
 
 
Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: LD 1215 
 
April 24, 2023 
 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services,  
 
My name is Leslie Clark. I am a person in long-term recovery and serve as the Executive 
Director of Portland Recovery Community Center (PRCC.) I am writing to you today in favor of 
LD 1215: An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products. The Board of the Portland 
Recovery Community Center has unanimously supported this legislation. 
 
Portland Recovery Community Center is a recovery community organization. Our mission is to 
provide support, education and resources for people recovering from and affected by addiction 
and to spread the message of hope throughout the state of Maine. We serve as the recovery hub 
in Maine, building a statewide network of recovery community centers and supports. We are 
people in recovery, and we care about the issue of addiction. We know what it is like to be 
addicted to substances – and we know what it takes to recover. As a recovery community 
organization, we advocate to help Maine communities understand the science of addiction and 
dispel the misconception that there is any choice or freedom once becoming dependent on a 
substance. In fact, addiction is a chronic and progressive illness that robs an individual of 
personal choice and freedom. 
 
PRCC supports the ban of flavored tobacco products as an important intervention for the 
prevention of youth access to these products, which are extremely addictive and set the stage for 
addiction to other drugs and substances. Nearly one in three Maine children are using tobacco 
products. Based on national studies, the overwhelming majority of tobacco use starts with 
flavored products. The tobacco industry has targeted our youth and vulnerable populations to 
create a market fed by addiction, just as the pharmaceutical industry marketed “safe narcotics” 
and created the opioid crisis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
A cornerstone of preventing addiction is preventing early use of tobacco products, because 
addiction as a brain disease develops early and evolves on a continuum. 75% of adults with a 
substance use disorder also have a history of cigarette smoking. That is why our organization is 
speaking out on this issue. 
 
We recognize that many individuals in recovery use these flavored products and that not 
everyone agrees with this position. But this legislation is about our state’s youth and preventing 
as many as possible from becoming addicted to a dangerous product. The tobacco industry has a 
long and lethal history of targeting Black Americans, marginalized youth and young adults, 
people with mental illness, LGBTQ+, people with low incomes, and other marginalized and 
vulnerable populations.  
 
This legislation is not about prohibition; people will still be able to buy unflavored tobacco. Nor 
are these products about harm reduction. Flavored e-cigarettes do not help people free 
themselves of nicotine addiction; in fact, they are more addictive. You will hear some opponents 
say that people will be arrested for using flavored tobacco products. There are no criminal 
penalties proposed by this legislation for individuals or for shops that sell tobacco products.  
 
We have the opportunity to give Maine youth and young adults a fair shot at a healthy and 
productive future, free from tobacco addiction. It’s time to end the sale of flavored tobacco 
products. We urge you to prioritize the health, hope and productivity of Maine kids to live a life 
free from tobacco addiction and the increased potential for addiction to other substances. 
 
At the heart of the recovery culture is a desire to give back and help others find freedom from 
addiction, offering the hope and example of our own experiences of recovery. Anyone who has 
watched a loved one suffer and die from addiction, whether it’s from a heroin overdose or a slow 
and painful death by tobacco induced lung cancer or heart disease, knows that we would give 
anything to have prevented the ravages of addiction on our loved ones and our families.   
 
Please help prevent and turn back the tide of destruction on young lives, families, and 
communities. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Leslie M. Clark, MSW 
Executive Director 
 
Leslie Clark
Portland REcovery Community Center
LD 1215
Testimony for Portland Recovery Community Center by Leslie Clark, Executive 
Director
In Favor of LD 1215: An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products
Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: LD 1215
April 24, 2023
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, 
My name is Leslie Clark. I am a person in long-term recovery and serve as the 
Executive Director of Portland Recovery Community Center (PRCC.) I am writing to 
you today in favor of LD 1215: An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco 
Products. The Board of the Portland Recovery Community Center has unanimously 
supported this legislation.
Portland Recovery Community Center is a recovery community organization. Our 
mission is to provide support, education and resources for people recovering from and
affected by addiction and to spread the message of hope throughout the state of 
Maine. We serve as the recovery hub in Maine, building a statewide network of 
recovery community centers and supports. We are people in recovery, and we care 
about the issue of addiction. We know what it is like to be addicted to substances – 
and we know what it takes to recover. As a recovery community organization, we 
advocate to help Maine communities understand the science of addiction and dispel 
the misconception that there is any choice or freedom once becoming dependent on a 
substance. In fact, addiction is a chronic and progressive illness that robs an 
individual of personal choice and freedom.
PRCC supports the ban of flavored tobacco products as an important intervention for 
the prevention of youth access to these products, which are extremely addictive and 
set the stage for addiction to other drugs and substances. Nearly one in three Maine 
children are using tobacco products. Based on national studies, the overwhelming 
majority of tobacco use starts with flavored products. The tobacco industry has 
targeted our youth and vulnerable populations to create a market fed by addiction, just
as the pharmaceutical industry marketed “safe narcotics” and created the opioid crisis.
A cornerstone of preventing addiction is preventing early use of tobacco products, 
because addiction as a brain disease develops early and evolves on a continuum. 75% 
of adults with a substance use disorder also have a history of cigarette smoking. That 
is why our organization is speaking out on this issue.
We recognize that many individuals in recovery use these flavored products and that 
not everyone agrees with this position. But this legislation is about our state’s youth 
and preventing as many as possible from becoming addicted to a dangerous product. 
The tobacco industry has a long and lethal history of targeting Black Americans, 
marginalized youth and young adults, people with mental illness, LGBTQ+, people 
with low incomes, and other marginalized and vulnerable populations. 
This legislation is not about prohibition; people will still be able to buy unflavored 
tobacco. Nor are these products about harm reduction. Flavored e-cigarettes do not 
help people free themselves of nicotine addiction; in fact, they are more addictive. 
You will hear some opponents say that people will be arrested for using flavored 
tobacco products. There are no criminal penalties proposed by this legislation for 
individuals or for shops that sell tobacco products. 
We have the opportunity to give Maine youth and young adults a fair shot at a healthy
and productive future, free from tobacco addiction. It’s time to end the sale of 
flavored tobacco products. We urge you to prioritize the health, hope and productivity
of Maine kids to live a life free from tobacco addiction and the increased potential for 
addiction to other substances.
At the heart of the recovery culture is a desire to give back and help others find 
freedom from addiction, offering the hope and example of our own experiences of 
recovery. Anyone who has watched a loved one suffer and die from addiction, 
whether it’s from a heroin overdose or a slow and painful death by tobacco induced 
lung cancer or heart disease, knows that we would give anything to have prevented 
the ravages of addiction on our loved ones and our families.  
Please help prevent and turn back the tide of destruction on young lives, families, and 
communities.
Sincerely,
Leslie M. Clark, MSW
Executive Director
 

