northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1215 An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products 
 
Testimony in Support 
April 24, 2023 
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN,  I am providing testimony 
on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member organizations in support of the bills 
before you today.  Northern Light Health member organizations include 10 hospitals 
located in southern, central, eastern and northern Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and 
ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, primary and 
specialty care practices and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  Ninety three 
percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern Light Health service area.  Northern 
Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s largest employers with over 10,000 
employees statewide.   
 
Every day Northern Light Health clinicians and member organizations work to improve 
the health of the people of Maine.  All too often we must focus on the long-term 
negative health effects of tobacco and tobacco related products consumed since youth 
by many of our patients. In 2019 the Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey reported 
that: 
 
• The percentage of Maine High School students reporting any tobacco use 
(including vaping products) in the past 30 days increased from 23.5% (2015), to 
29.6% in 2019 
• The percentage of Maine middle school students reporting any tobacco use 
(including vaping products) in the past 30 days increased from 6.3% (2015) to 
7.6% in 2019 
 
Medical leaders in Maine and nationally are in agreement, flavored tobacco and 
electronic cigarettes are harming the health of our children by creating a pathway 
forward to a lifelong addiction to tobacco.   
 
In February 2019 the Journal of American Medical Association Network published a 
youth tobacco study – “Association of Electronic Cigarette Use With Subsequent 
Initiation of Tobacco Cigarettes in US Youths”  The study reports that youths whose first 
tobacco product was an e-cigarette were more likely to initiate cigarettes over 2 years. . 
At the population level, approximately 180 000 new ever smokers and 45 000 current 
smokers in the United States over 2 years may have started smoking combustible 
cigarettes after initiating e-cigarette use Youths whose first tobacco product was an e-
cigarette were more likely to initiate cigarettes over 2 years. At the population level, 
approximately 180 000 new ever smokers and 45 000 current smokers in the United 
States over 2 years may have started smoking combustible cigarettes after initiating e-
cigarette use. 
  
In 2019, the American Academy of Pediatrics also published an article – “A Public Health 
Crisis: Electronic Cigarettes, Vape, and JUUL”  The article states that electronic cigarettes 
(e-cigarettes) and vape devices have rapidly become the most common tobacco 
products used by youth, driven in large part by marketing and advertising by e-cigarette 
companies. There is substantial evidence that adolescent e-cigarette use leads to use of 
combustible tobacco products.  Most e-liquid (vaping products) contains a variety of 
chemical ingredients and flavoring, helping to make vaping an appealing activity to 
youth. More than 80% of the nation’s youth reported the availability and variety of 
flavors are their primary reason for using e-cigarettes. 
 
In 2018, Scott Gottlieb MD, FDA Commissioner also reported that menthol flavored 
products represent one of the most common routes by which kids initiate on 
combustible cigarettes, the menthol serves as a mask of the unattractive features of 
smoking that otherwise might discourage a child.   
 
Tobacco related health care costs in Maine are real and they are significant.  In March of 
2021 Maine CDC reported that $118 million dollars was spent on health care costs due 
to smoking.  The bills before you today  will reduce tobacco-related health disparities 
and make it less likely that Maine children will try their first tobacco product.   
 
We ask that you support this important legislation. 
 
Thank you.   
 
 
 
 
 
