In favor of LD1214, An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco 
Madonna Soctomah 
Pleasant Point/Sipayik 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: my name is Madonna 
Soctomah and I live at Pleasant Point/Sipayik, in Washington County. I am here today 
as a parent, grandparent, former lawmaker, and Washington County community 
member to testify in favor of LD 1215, An Act To End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco 
Products. 
 
This is an issue that has the potential to impact the lives of our young people for a long 
time- for the rest of their lives, as a matter of fact. Nicotine exposure in youth has so 
many harmful effects- it creates addiction pathways, impairs brain development and 
sets youth up for mental health struggles.1  These are potential life-long struggles.  
 
The flavored tobacco products are the leading reason for their experimentation with it,2 
and youth who begin vaping are more likely to move onto to cigarettes than those who 
never tried the electronic devices.3 
 
As a former menthol cigarette user, I can say that even if I were still smoking menthol 
cigarettes, I would be here in front of you, this afternoon, to tell you that we need to 
keep these products out of the hands of our youth. Once addicted, it’s extremely difficult 
to quit- especially menthol products.4,5 There’s a reason why tobacco companies market 
flavored tobacco products more heavily to the most vulnerable populations, which 
include youth- because they are more vulnerable to the addiction.6 
 
By working together to end the sale of flavored tobacco products, we have the potential 
to create positive health changes around an issue that everyone cares about, no matter 
what political party they belong to- prioritizing the health and well-being of our youth. 
Don’t listen to voices telling you that this is about “personal choice for adults”- adults 
have the choice to use a different product. Our youth and their developing brains are 
being exploited by tobacco companies who are only interested in grooming a new 
generation of addicted customers; this industry lies to all of us, including small, 
struggling, rural Maine business owners, with sophisticated marketing and 
advertisments about how, basically, harmless tobacco is.  
 
Focusing on ending the sale of flavored tobacco will benefit everyone in our 
communities. Please vote in favor of LD 1214, An Act to End the Sale of Flavored 
Tobacco. Thank you. 
 
 
 
1 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3543069/  
2 US Department of Health and Human Services. 2016. E-Cigarette use among youth and young adults: A report of the surgeon general. Atlanta, GA: 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health 
3 Berry KM, Fetterman JL, Benjamin EJ, et al. 2019. Association of electronic cigarette use with subsequent initiation of tobacco cigarettes in US 
youth. JAMA Netw Open;2(2):e187794 
4 Truth Initiative. 2018. What is menthol? https://truthinitiative.org/research-resources/traditional-tobacco-products/menthol-facts-stats-and-regulations.  
5 CTFK. 2020. Tobacco use among African Americans. https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/assets/factsheets/0006.pdf . 
6 https://truthinitiative.org/research-resources/tobacco-industry-marketing/young-adults-living-vulnerable-dc-communities-
see#:~:text=The%20tobacco%20industry%20has%20a,residents%20and%20low%2Dsocioeconomic%20individuals. 
Madonna Soctomah
Pleasant Point
LD 1215
In favor of LD1214, An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco
Madonna Soctomah
Pleasant Point/Sipayik
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: my name is Madonna 
Soctomah and I live at Pleasant Point/Sipayik, in Washington County. I am here today
as a parent, grandparent, former lawmaker, and Washington County community 
member to testify in favor of LD 1215, An Act To End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco 
Products.
This is an issue that has the potential to impact the lives of our young people for a 
long time- for the rest of their lives, as a matter of fact. Nicotine exposure in youth 
has so many harmful effects- it creates addiction pathways, impairs brain 
development and sets youth up for mental health struggles.1  These are potential 
life-long struggles. 
The flavored tobacco products are the leading reason for their experimentation with 
it,2 and youth who begin vaping are more likely to move onto to cigarettes than those 
who never tried the electronic devices.3
As a former menthol cigarette user, I can say that even if I were still smoking menthol
cigarettes, I would be here in front of you, this afternoon, to tell you that we need to 
keep these products out of the hands of our youth. Once addicted, it’s extremely 
difficult to quit- especially menthol products.4,5 There’s a reason why tobacco 
companies market flavored tobacco products more heavily to the most vulnerable 
populations, which include youth- because they are more vulnerable to the addiction.6
By working together to end the sale of flavored tobacco products, we have the 
potential to create positive health changes around an issue that everyone cares about, 
no matter what political party they belong to- prioritizing the health and well-being of
our youth. Don’t listen to voices telling you that this is about “personal choice for 
adults”- adults have the choice to use a different product. Our youth and their 
developing brains are being exploited by tobacco companies who are only interested 
in grooming a new generation of addicted customers; this industry lies to all of us, 
including small, struggling, rural Maine business owners, with sophisticated 
marketing and advertisements about how, basically, harmless tobacco is. 
Focusing on ending the sale of flavored tobacco will benefit everyone in our 
communities. Please vote in favor of LD 1214, An Act to End the Sale of Flavored 
Tobacco. Thank you.
1 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3543069/
2 US Department of Health and Human Services. 2016. E-Cigarette use among youth 
and young adults: A report of the surgeon general. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health 
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health
3 Berry KM, Fetterman JL, Benjamin EJ, et al. 2019. Association of electronic 
cigarette use with subsequent initiation of tobacco cigarettes in US youth. JAMA 
Netw Open;2(2):e187794
4 Truth Initiative. 2018. What is menthol? 
https://truthinitiative.org/research-resources/traditional-tobacco-products/menthol-fact
s-stats-and-regulations. 
5 CTFK. 2020. Tobacco use among African Americans. 
https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/assets/factsheets/0006.pdf.
6 
https://truthinitiative.org/research-resources/tobacco-industry-marketing/young-adults
-living-vulnerable-dc-communities-see#:~:text=The%20tobacco%20industry%20has
%20a,residents%20and%20low%2Dsocioeconomic%20individuals.

