295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1215  
“An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products ” 
Sponsored by Senator Jill Duson  
April 25 , 2023  
 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the 
Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy and I am 
the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The 
Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s 
community -based  mental health and substance use treatment providers , providing 
services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance advocates 
for the implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices that serve to 
enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am h ere today to speak in support of LD 1215 , “An Act to 
End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products .” You might be asking yourself right now, 
why is the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services weighing in on a ban on 
flavored tobacco? And the answer i s that this proposal is connected to our mission. 
The Alliance believes strongly in the need for a robust prevention system in Maine.  
This proposal is about more than preventing tobacco use by youth, this bill is also a 
part of our state’s need for sound substance use disorder and alcohol use disorder 
prevention strategies . The connection comes from research on brain development.  
 
There is evidence that the effect of nicotine on developing brains may also prime 
greater vulnerability to addiction to other drugs .1  In 2016, the U.S. Surgeon 
General released a report on e -cigarette use among youth and young adults. The 
report comprehensively reviewed the public health issue of electronic cigarettes and 
their impact on our nation's young people. Evidence was gathered from studies that 
included three age groups:  (11–14 years);  (15–17 years); and (18 –25).2  
 
“Until about age 25, the brain is still growing. Each time a new memory is created  or 
a new skill is learned, stronger connections – or synapses – are built  between brain 
cells. Young people's brains build synapses faster than adult brains. Because 
addiction is a form of learning, adolescents can get addicted more easily than adults. 
The nicotine in e -cigarettes and other tobacco products can also prime the 
adolescent brain for addiction to other drugs …”3 
 
Reducing tobacco use by Maine’s young people is an important public health 
initiative in its own regard  because w e all already know the dangers of tobacco use. 
This committee regularly grapples with  the cost s associated with caring for those 
who are suffering the repercussions of long -term tobacco use. However, brain 
development research connecting youth tobacco use and substance/alcohol use 
disorder makes this proposal even more important. I urge all members  of this 
committee to vote ought to pass on this important proposal. Thank you.    
                                                           
1 Menglu  Yuan, Sarah J Cross, Sandra E Loughlin, and Frances M Leslie. Nicotine and the adolescent brain. The Journal of Physiology. 2 015 Aug 
15; 593(Pt 16): 3397 –3412.  Published online 2015 May 27. doi: 10.1113/JP270492  
2,3 The US Surgeon General. Know the Risks.  2016. Accessed online: https://e -cigarettes.surgeongeneral.gov/about.html  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

