 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward**  
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, 
NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Rep s 
**Medical Student 
Representatives  
 
Staff  
 Dee Kerry, BS Ed  
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinat or 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207- 480- 4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
 
Testimony in favor of LD 1215: An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products  
 Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am an Orono resident, a pediatrician, and a member of the 
Board of Directors of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  
 
As a pediatrician in Bangor , I talk with teenagers  every day .  They tell me that about a third 
of the kids in their schools are vaping.   V aping is so prevalent that local high schools have 
had to periodically close bathrooms and monitor bathroom entrances and with security 
cameras .  Kids  get around this by vaping in cars, in hallways, and sometimes even in class.  
Without flavors, this would not be happening.   
 Big Tobacco claims that vapes and e-cigarettes are produced to help adult smokers quit 
smoking combustible cigarettes.  But flavors like Cotton Candy , Kool -Aid, and Fruit -Loops 
are clearly designed to appeal  only to kids. The number of Maine kids using tobacco 
products is rising again.  This is due to flavored vapes, not traditional cigarettes.  Of the kids using any tobacco products , 85%  use flavored products .    
 Flavored tobacco products are marketed and packaged deceptively.  Most teens  are 
unaware that the flavored products they use contain nicotine.  Almost all  vapes  do contain 
this highly addictive drug.  Some products  have significantly higher  nicotine content  than a 
traditional cigarette.    Flavored vapes are marketed to appeal to a wide range of teens, including kids who would 
not smoke combustible cigarettes.  
 Flavors Hook Kids . Why should Maine continue  to allow the sale of these deceptive and 
addict ive products ?  
 As a pediatrician, I hope to see a generation of kids  grow up without  the burden of 
increased heart disease and stroke due to nicotine addiction.   Protect your own kids and all 
Maine youth with a vote FOR LD 1215.  
 Melissa Burch , MD 
Orono 04473  
  
 
 
