 
 
  
 
 
April 22, 2023  
 
Dear Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services : 
 
My name is Neil Korsen. I  am a resident of West Bath , family physician, and chair of the Maine Lung 
Cancer Coalition (MLCC), a statewide grant -funded lung cancer prevention and screening program . I am 
writing to express  our strong support for the proposed legislation, LD 1215,  to end the sale of flavored 
tobacco products in Maine . Thank y ou for considering our comments.  
 
The MLCC is a multidisciplinary, cross organizational effort to: 1) Engage and educate the public, patients, health care providers, health care payers, and policymakers about evidence -based lung cancer 
prevention and scree ning practices; and 2) Develop, implement, and evaluate innovative programs to 
increase access to evidence -based lung cancer prevention, screening, and treatment services to the 
entire Maine population, including residents of rural underserved areas.  
 Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality in  the United States, leading to more than 150,000 
deaths per year. In Maine, our lung cancer rates are 30% higher than the national average. There are disparities in the incidence and treatment of lung canc er: Maine men have a 30% higher lung cancer rate 
than Maine women; and 75% of lung cancer cases in Maine are detected late and are often not treated. While lung cancer has many causes , research shows that tobacco use is the most important risk factor 
for lung cancer: 80 -90% of lung cancer deaths in the U.S. are caused by tobacco use . The impact 
extends to people who don’t smoke  as well: research shows that people who don’t smoke but live 
with someone who does have a 20 -30% increase d risk of lung cancer  due to secondhand smoke, 
compared to someone who doesn’t smoke and doesn’t have that exposure . 
 Through its work,  the MLCC raises the profiles of lung cancer risk  factors , as well as evidence -based 
policy solutions and health care syst em changes to reduce lung cancer incidence and mortality . We 
know that tobacco addiction is a pediatric epidemic. If youth don’t start using tobacco before the age of 
21, they are unlikely to ever do so. We also know the tobacco industry is laser- focused o n youth and 
young adults, even calling them their “replacement smokers”. Tobacco companies have developed an array of candy and fruit -flavored products in colorful packaging to attract youth and mask the harsh 
taste of tobacco. Menthol is the most dangerou s flavor of all because it makes it easier to start smoking 
and harder to quit.  
 Preventing youth tobacco use is essential for reducing the burden of lung cancer in Maine . Please 
support the proposed ordinance to end the sale of flavored tobacco products.  Thank you . 
 Sincerely,  
  Neil Korsen, MD, MSc  
Chair, Maine Lung Cancer Coalition  
