April 25, 2023  
To Members of the Health and Human Services Committee:  
My name is Noah Nesin, and I am a family physician, immediate past board president of the 
Maine Public Health Association, and Innovation Advisor forPenobscot Community Health 
Care, Maine’s largest federally qualified health center.  I am writing in suppor t of LD 1215, “An 
Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products” and appreciate the opportunity to share my 
thoughts with you on this critical question of public health and wellbeing.  
Maine and the nation are facing a tsunami of youth vaping and smoking  of flavored nicotine and 
tobacco products, which inevitably results in accelerating rates of tobacco addiction and its 
attendant costs in human suffering, lost productivity, and lifelong healthcare expenses.   The high 
costs of chronic illness burden not j ust individuals and families, but our entire healthcare system; 
and in the case of tobacco use and nicotine addiction, are entirely preventable. Flavored tobacco 
products are the most recent invention in the industry’s long history of targeting children in  order 
to create habit and then addiction, which sustain their market and profits. We have a 
responsibility to Maine kids and our communities to stand up to the tobacco industry and get 
these deadly products off store shelves.  
1 in 3 Maine high school stud ents have used e -cigarettes; 1 in 5 are currently using a tobacco 
product. These rates are well above the national average.  Meanwhile, 1 in 6 middle school 
students have done the same, and in all 97% of children who vape use flavored products.  In my 
professional experience I see the impacts of this, including children with breathing problems who 
find their physical activity limited and children who are unable to stop the use of nicotine even 
though they would like to quit.  
I hope that Maine will make the right decision for the health and safety of our children and lead 
on a critical public health matter by ending the sale of flavored tobacco products.  Our children 
need our protection so that they can thrive and enjoy long, healthy, and productive lives.    
 
Sincerely,  
 
Noah Nesin, MD, FAAFP  
23 Dunston Dr.  
Glenburn, ME 04401  

