Dear Distinguished Member s of the Standing Health and Human Se rvices Committee,  
 
 
Please vote  yes on LD 1215 in support of Ending the Sale of Flavored Tobacco 
Products in Maine to protect our youth.   Additional information on why I support a vote 
to ban flavored tobacco can be found below:  
Thank you for your consideration.   
 
Sheila Nappi  
Bow Street Market  
Freeport, Maine  
(207)865 -6631  
 
My business is a small business. Like many small businesses, we are rooted in 
community. We are invested in their health  and safety and supportive of the locals 
because without them, we couldn’t do what we do.  
 
 
This is why Bow Street Market in Freeport operates the way that it does. Our team is 
committed to making a positive impact on the health, safety,  and environment in the 
communities that we serve. In the Spring of 2014 we received Manomet  Grocery 
Stewardship Certification, and we were recognized by the Freeport Chamber of 
Commerce for our sustainability pra ctices. We also encourage and promote local 
farmers, fishermen, bakers, restaurants, and food producers. We use over 200 local 
vendors, making more than 500 local products available in our store.   
 
 
One thing we don’t offer at Bow Street Market is tobacco products.   
 
 
In 2014, we made the decision to stop selling tobacco products and we never looked 
back. While there was a little bit of resistance initially from long time patrons, it died 
down quickly. As a company, the decision to stop tobacco sales allowe d us to clearly 
define our mission and strategy as a local community focused market. Many  have been 
appreciative that we are taking steps to look out for our friends, neighbors, customers,  
and community.   
 
 
The decision to stop carrying tobacco products was mostly for health reasons. At the 
time, it seemed like the tobacco companies were flailing, trying to attract the younger 
generation. Unfortunately, they keep coming up with newer and more egregious flavors 
to addict our youth to tobacco produ cts.  
 
 
Flavors like Peppermint Mocha, Cherry Crush, and Banana Blast are being used by e -
cigarette companies to hook younger people on this dangerous and addictive product. 
Tobacco companies did their best to convince us that these products weren’t 
danger ous, but we later found that not to be true. Juul, for example, is high -tech, it’s 
extra enticing for kids. That, combined with the colorful packaging and younger -leaning 
flavors means one thing: tobacco companies have found another recipe that works to 
hook kids.   
 
 
That’s simply not okay.   
 
 
We operate another store in Portland. We took great interest in the Portland City 
Council voting to end the sale of flavored tobacco products in the city by a vote of 9 -0. 
And based on the comments ahead of the vote, they did it for all the right reasons.   
 
 
Bangor,  Bar Harbor, Brunswick , Portland , and South Portland, have  voted to set the 
right example, pleas e vote “yes”  to move forward,  and enact this policy statewide . 
According to news accounts, about two -thirds of likely voters in Maine support making 
this a law throughout the state, so why not?   
 
 
Our kids have their entire lives ahead of them to learn, grow and contribute to society. 
It’s our responsibility not only to set the right example for them in doing the right thing, 
but also to give them the greatest opportunity for success. I am asking  you to do the 
right thing by voting yes to end the sale of flavored tobacco products in Maine . 
 
Maine’s motto is Dirigo, which means “ We lead.” Let’s lead on this and end the sale of 
flavored tobacco products.   
 
Thank you.  
