 
Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
 
Staff 
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org  Testimony in favor of LD 1215, which would eliminate the sale of flavored 
tobacco products in Maine  --  Sydney R. Sewall, MD   Hallowell 
 
Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyer and members of the HHS committee: 
 
I am writing as a representative of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of 
Pediatrics, an organization of over 300 health care practitioners distributed 
throughout the state who focus on the care of infants, children, teens, and young 
adults.    
 
Stealing a line from Star Trek, our “Prime Directive” is prevention.   To that end, 
we monitor physical and neurological development, and promote early intervention 
for delays, give immunizations, and provide nutrition counseling.   As kids get 
toward the teen years, we deliver strong anti-tobacco messages.   
 
Our efforts, however, have been successfully countered by the tobacco industry, 
and the disturbing state and national data on youth vaping illustrates their success.   
A new generation of citizens are emerging into adulthood addicted to nicotine.   
Chronic use of this psychoactive substance, whether delivered through vaping or 
through conventional tobacco smoking, increases the risk of chronic cardiovascular 
disease and shortens the lifespan.   Use in pregnancy has multiple negative effects 
on the next generation.   It is, in essence, a toxin.    
 
We all agree that the nation is not ready for a complete prohibition of tobacco 
products -- it’s too late for the scores of millions of citizens already addicted.  This 
bill targets those products aimed at non-smokers – in particular our patients – by 
appealing to youth culture with specific flavorings, and by lessening the irritative 
sensations associated with those first inhalations.    
 
The arguments against this bill bring back memories of the arguments used against 
restrictions on other toxins presented in past legislative sessions.   When Fire 
Marshalls testified against the need for flame retardants in furniture -- minimally 
effective and releasing carcinogens when burned -- industry representatives argued 
against the science.   When the “Child Safe Products Act” was debated, industry 
argued that the cost of using alternatives would be unacceptable, and that 
alternative products would be just as harmful.  When stricter water quality 
standards are proposed, you hear how municipal budgets will suffer and that public 
health recommendations need “further study.”     
 
LD 1215 sends a message to our kids that vaping and smoking are equivalent, and 
DON’T START.    The long-term effects of LD 1215 will include greater 
productivity, decreased health costs, and improved quality of life.   Don’t be fooled 
by the short-sighted manner that fiscal notes get calculated – the benefit will exceed 
the cost.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Sydney R. Sewall, MD MPH 
Instructor in Pediatrics-- Maine-Dartmouth Family Medicine Residency 
 
 
