Tara Kay Peletier DO
South Portland 
LD 1215
Dear All, 
I am writing to you today in favor of LD 1215 as a physician and most importantly as 
a mom of 2 sons ages 11 and 15, and like all parents, I want to make sure my kids 
have a chance to be healthy, happy, and productive in the short and long term. Many 
of us writing to you and providing live or Zoom testimony are parents, grandparents, 
and concerned community members. The reality is all of us have family, friends, and 
neighbors who we care about and want the best for.
The same can’t be said for the tobacco industry which doesn’t care about people – it 
cares about profits. Period. Their only concern is, and has always been, to lure and 
hook new users – with targeted advertising and marketing campaigns,  clever devices 
(like USB-type drives), and with menthol, fruit, and candy flavors (over 15,000). 
Their business model solely depends on people starting and becoming addicted to 
nicotine.  
LD 1215 is about the health of our youth – giving all of our kids and the next 
generation of kids a fair shot at growing up without addiction that takes such a heavy 
toll on our families and communities.
LD 1215 is also about justice and fairness, because the tobacco industry has been 
targeting African Americans, the LGBTQ+ community, and other marginalized 
groups for decades with flavored products – particularly menthol products.  For 
anyone thinking about creating a loophole for menthol, I ask you to please think about
Black Americans and the extreme disparities in menthol use, addiction, and 
tobacco-related illness they experience. Indeed, 85% of African American adults who 
smoke use menthol cigarettes, compared with 29% of white adults. Turning a blind 
eye to those disparities and allowing the injustice to continue is frankly, 
unconscionable, and unacceptable – it’s certainly not what we’re teaching our kids at 
home, in our schools, in our communities across this amazing State of Maine.
As a family medicine physician, I can also say that promoting healthy choices is a 
foundational pillar of personal health at all ages. By avoiding and actively preventing 
long-term substance use, the prevention of nicotine addiction is incredibly important. 
We know from research that early exposure and continued use of tobacco is linked to 
higher chances of any substance use/abuse.
In addition, our health care community as a whole, should be doing better to care for 
those in recovery. By never addressing their continued nicotine addiction on their 
recovery journey, we are leaving them with the potential higher risk for relapse due to
the physiologic and neurologic wiring patterns that nicotine causes in the brain. Not to
mention the continued financial burden and the risk of numerous preventable chronic 
health issues we have known for decades results directly from tobacco use including  
cardiovascular disease, lung disease, and cancer. They deserve better. 
The conversations I have had during this campaign over the last 7 months with Maine 
residents, both kids and adults of all ages, business owners and their personal stories 
of their experiences in our public schools, their peer and friend groups, at their jobs, 
and within their families and neighborhoods has been powerful and moving… but 
also frustrating and enraging that the tobacco companies have so much access to and 
influence on our youth. But rather than being discouraged I feel hopeful that We DO 
have communities and leaders that care.  They care about all of our youth, their health
and our collective future as a thriving community and state. 
The decision to support LD 1215 and end the sale of flavored tobacco product sales, 
including menthol, is an investment, and a statement to our youth and our 
marginalized populations that we do care about them. All of them, because we are 
them. 
I am grateful for this opportunity to get involved with something I deeply believe in 
and positively impacts all of us. I am hopeful that the Legislature will pass LD 1215 
in favor of ending the sale of menthol and all flavored tobacco products and become a
leader joining California and Massachusetts.
Thank you for your time and dedication.
Dr Tara Kay Pelletier DO
South Portland

