Tracy Tischler
Scarborough
LD 1215
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: my name is Tracy 
Tischler, because I am a parent of young children and I am here today to testify in 
favor of LD 1215, An Act To End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products.
I am writing today because I am concerned about the future of my own children as 
well as the the children in the community we belong to.  Tobacco use has taken over 
our schools and our students’ health and ability to learn, flavored tobacco has created 
an addiction in children who otherwise would have not tried nicotine and tobacco 
containing products.
Companies that produce tobacco products are aware that 95% of adults that smoke 
have started prior to the age of 21.  To attract new adult tobacco users, companies 
have developed attractive flavored products (such as lemonade, bubble gum and 
cotton candy) to entice our children to begin using their products.  Four out of five 
kids who have used tobacco have started with a flavored product. Many children 
report that they think these products are ‘harmless flavoring’ and are not aware of the 
product being detrimental to physical health, and are not aware of the addictive nature
of the products because of the nicotine component. 
It is well known that smoking causes disease and disability, harming nearly every 
organ of the body. U.S surgeon general has issued a statement “No matter how it’s 
delivered, nicotine is harmful for youth and young adults.’
These products have decreased the effectiveness of Maine’s efforts to reduce youth 
tobacco use. It’s time to end the sale of all flavored tobacco products in Maine.  It’s 
time to give our kids the chance to learn and grow, without threat from thousands of 
candy, mint, and dessert-flavored tobacco products.
Ending the sale of flavored tobacco products will help keep a generation of kids 
healthier and happier. Please do your part to prevent youth tobacco addiction. Vote 
yes on LD 1215.

