Veerle Van Der Vekens
East Orland
LD 1215
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee. 
My name is Veerle Van Der Vekens. I’m a volunteer with Parents Against Vaping 
e-cigarettes and I’m from East Orland. I am testifying today in support of LD 1215 to 
end the sale of all flavored tobacco products. I’d like to tell you my story. 
My son was first introduced to vaping when he was about 15. During a bathroom  
break at his local high school, a friend offered him some “flavored fruit  juice” to 
vape. He said it was just some “fruit juice”, nothing harmful,  nothing to worry about. 
My son innocently took a hit. His addiction to nicotine was swift. That was 8 years 
ago! 
Since that day, “that harmless fruit juice” became the driving force  in my son’s life. 
He needs it to wake up in the morning, to feel better, to deal with his anxiety, to calm 
down, to get an appetite, to  focus - to get through the day.
Vaping  makes  him cough incessantly, and leaves him struggling to breathe with the 
slightest exertion. He needs an inhaler and his lungs hurt-  a lot. The little money he 
makes has gone to buying vapes. 
What makes all of this much worse is that my son is a cancer survivor. At the  young 
age of 6, he was diagnosed with leukemia. The suffering he went through is truly  
unimaginable! Our family barely survived through it all. Not a day goes by that his 
father and  I take him for granted. 
Addiction to vaping changed the course of his life again.This time he is facing a  
different kind of battle - a war against addiction and against a powerful tobacco and 
vaping industry. The same  industry that floods  my son’s social media platforms with
continuous images  of the “ultimate vaping lifestyle” - Flashy commercials depicting 
how cool vaping  is, catchy ads that keep introducing him to “the latest new flavors”,  
messaging falsely claiming how harmless vaping is and how much healthier it is  than
smoking cigarettes. It’s an industry that succeeds in recruiting new and innocent 
victims every day. 
Everyone  who knows my son is worried. At 23, he is grown now.  We  realize that he
is the only one who can face his addiction and the only one  who can change his life. 
He vapes every day  and struggles to breathe. He has tried to quit many times and 
failed. He feels horrible about himself. His self-esteem is low, he is often  depressed 
and feels so much shame about it all. 
Now, finally, after 8 years, my son is about 65 days nicotine free - the longest time 
yet. He continues to struggle. While he feels better that he is off nicotine, he says that 
he realizes that it's the flavors  that got him hooked in the first place. He craves fruit 
and minty menthol. He says missing the flavors will  be the biggest impediment to his
success. 
I am angry. He is a good kid who already suffered way too much in his young life.  
He hasn’t deserved any of this. I feel his pain, I see his many struggles. Why on earth 
would we not ban all flavored tobacco???!!! It's the flavors that seduce our kids and 
it's the flavors that keep them hooked! 
Thank you for this time. 

