Testimony of Dr. Wendy Alpaugh in support of LD 1215: 
 An Act to End the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products 
 
Honorable Joe Baldacci, chair and the honorable Michele Meyer, chair 
and members of the Health and Human Services Committee, this 
testimony is to express my support for LD 1215: 
 
As I hold my 4 month old granddaughter my thoughts drift to hoping the 
world she grows up in will offer only health promoting products. Our 
corporations, rather than focusing solely on the profit margins, will be 
motivated by societal pressures to reduce our enormous healthcare 
budget by creating profitable healthful products that will benefit our 
youth and adults. Luring future customers with products harmful to their 
health would be unconscionable.   
 
Heating chemicals that flavor tobacco products leads to many 
potentially even more harmful chemicals that may damage lungs and 
the oral cavity. Do the youth of Maine need to be the “guinea pigs” that 
suffer the ill effects from these unknown byproducts  - which we later 
trace back to the use of flavored tobacco products? Our pattern of 
(often unknowingly) allowing the use of harmful products, then suing 
the manufacturers when it is too late for those afflicted with resulting 
health problems, is tragic. And sadly, when companies intentionally 
seduce youth into trying a substance that does not promote health, they 
succeed financially and the individual suffers and society overall is 
impacted negatively.  
 
Research has shown that most tobacco users begin the habit in their 
youth. Allowing these products on the market that are attractive to 
children - when companies own internal messaging shows their intent 
to captivate a vulnerable audience – is not fair to the public at large. 
Unfortunately at this time we need laws protect the public. It is in the 
best interest of our Maine residents to ban the sale of flavored tobacco 
products.  Corporations need to hear the message from Maine 
governance that we care about the health of our residents. Maine 
youth’s and adult’s, as well as Maine’s future financial, wellbeing 
depend on Maine residents making healthy choices.  Please help 
Mainers make good decisions for their health. Be proactive and protect 
our youth rather than having to be reactive years after the damage is 
done.  
 
Thank you so much for all you do! Our state’s wellbeing depends on 
your choices. We trust you will choose to save our children from 
temptations that are likely to lead to poor health outcomes for them 
in their adulthood.  It impacts all of us indirectly! 
 
Wendy Alpaugh, D.M.D. 
218 Sand Beach Road 
Stonington, ME  04681 
     
