{fr 
STATE OF MAINE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES - 
HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE iii 
AUGUSTA. MAINE O4333—OOOZ iff‘ ‘(F "R71 U ice: (_ /)_<‘ - -H0 
AMY B.ARATA cm; (207)333-1817 
~\5\l§T1\NT HOUSE REPUBLIC.-\l\ ’ LEADER Fu.\: (Z0 7 ) I $4 7- I -1-19 
E - M ni I : .Axr1}' ..A1‘nta<'{1 legislature mam: gm 
February 9, 2023 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 45 
"An Act to Prevent Retaliatory Evictions" 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the Judiciary Committee: 
My name is Amy Arata and I represent House District 104, which includes part of Gray and my 
_ home town of New Gloucester. I have also managed residential rental property in Maine for l6 
years. Based on this experience, I’m here to testify in opposition to LD 45, "An Act to Prevent 
Retaliatory Evictions." 
Although well-intended, by making it more difficult to evict tenants, LD 45 could actually harm 
more renters than it would help. Renters who share a building with a neighbor who intimidates 
them are unlikely to show up to court to testify to the bad behavior, such as smoking, drug 
dealing, violence, or threats. Without their physical presence in the courtroom, a landl0rd ’s 
testimony will be merely hearsay. 
LD 45 would also require a violation of a lease provision for eviction. I’ve found over the years 
that it’s impossible to predict every behavior that a tenant may have. I have several examples 
~ A tenant of a 12 unit building who spent time outside wearing only his white briefs, 
causing distress for female tenants. 
0 A tenant put feces in the community washing machines, resulting in other tenants getting 
human feces on their clothing. She saw nothing wrong With this behavior. 
0 Tenants who allowed dogs to urinate and defecate on the ﬂoor until the odor spread to 
other tenants’ units. Urine saturated the framing and the thresholds were coated witha 
46 9 99 
layer of feces. When confronted, they said, I don t smell anything, show me the smell 
0 Tenants who thought using an oxyacetylene torch and storing canisters of explosive gas 
in their apartment was reasonable. 
¢ A tenant who soldiered electronics, resulting in a coating of soot on every surface of the 
apartment. 
1 A tenant who, after a vulgar tirade, quietly quoted my address to me. This caused me 
extreme concern for the safety of myself and my family. He later spent time in jail fora 
violent crime.
As you can see, a landlord needs to have the power to evict tenants for behavior that’s 
dangerous or disrupts the quiet enjoyment of the property by other tenants, and it’s 
impossible to predict exact scenarios. At the end of the day, the landlord usually gets to go 
home, but the tenants have to live with the stress of a bad neighbor for 24 hours a day. I’ve 
never seen a tenant who was willing to take a day off from work to attend court to testify 
against a neighbor, especially since the eviction process takes many weeks and they’d still 
have to live next to each other during that time. They would rather go through the expense of 
moving to a new apartment. ,; '' 
Most landlords want to comply with the law. Most value their tenants, as I do, and want 
them to be safe and happy. LD 45 would make this difficult job even more difﬁcult for good 
landlords, and harm good tenants. Let’s support good landlords rather than punish them for 
the misdeeds of a few. Thank you and I welcome any questions.r
