/ J 3 e 
z 5 Senator/inne Carney /30 
3 State House Station 
‘ye/late 4/ Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
Qﬂice (207) 287-1515 
Senate Zena-1 Z9 
Testimony of Senator Anne Carney introducing 
LD 45, An Act to Prevent Retaliatory Evictions 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
February 9, 2023 
Representative Moonen and Esteemed colleagues on the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
as you know, I am Anne Carney, proudly representing Senate District 29, which includes South 
Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough. Today I am pleased to introduce LD 45, “An 
Act to Prevent Retaliatory Evictions. ” 
We are all familiar with Maine’s housing crisis. Our constituents, and likely our friends and 
family members, are not able to ﬁnd housing. They may need to move to take a new job, because 
their family is growing, or because their current housing is in such poor shape that it’s 
uncomfortable or unsafe. Regardless of the reason, new housing is just not available or is 
unaffordable. 
Senate District 29 has been hit hard by the housing crisis this year, when a company from Los 
Angeles bought Redbank Village, a neighborhood of 250 duplexes that provides housing that is 
affordable to families with low and moderate income. Redbank Village is special because it 
surrounds a community center with a gym and basketball court, a teen center where high school 
students can gather to do homework, and a sports ﬁeld used by soccer teams of all ages. 
In the spring of 2022, many tenants received unusual rent increase notices. They had a couple of 
weeks to agree to a rent increase; if they didn’t accept quickly, at the end of the 45 day notice 
required by law the increase would be hundreds of dollars more per month. Even though the 45 
day notice law says “A written or oral waiver of this requirement is against public policy and is 
void,” there is no protection for tenants who assert their right to notice. 14 MRS §6Ol 5. 
LD 45 would protect tenants when a landlord tries to raise rent in violation of Maine’s 45 day 
notice law or a municipal notice ordinance, or in violation of the law prohibiting landlords from 
increasing rent when housing is uninhabitable. It does this by expanding the existing protections 
against retaliation found in Maine law. 
Maine’s forcible entry and detainer laws are found in Title 14, Chapter 709. A“no cause” 
eviction requires 30 days notice; a “for cause” eviction requires 7 days notice. If a landlord 
successfully gets a judgment in an eviction case, a writ of possession is issued seven days later. 
A tenant who does not move out within three days of service of the writ of possession, “is
l
deemed a trespasser without right and the defendant's goods and property are considered by law 
to be abandoned. ” 14 MRS $6005. 
This law sounds harsh, and in many cases it is. Eviction often has longterm and devastating 
consequences for Maine families. When a family loses a home due to eviction, the family 
typically loses furniture, clothing, toys, because there is no place to put them. And oncea 
judgment of eviction is entered, it appears on a tenant's rental history report and limits or 
eliminates their options for renting a safe and secure home in the future. 
The existing law, 14 MRS §600l (3), protects tenants from “no cause” evictions if they have 
complained about a violation of the law — for example a building, housing, sanitary or other 
code, ordinance, or statute. It speciﬁcally protects tenants who have asserted a violation of L4 
MRS §6021, the warranty that a dwelling unit is ﬁt for human habitation, which is implied in 
every residential lease. It also speciﬁcally protects tenants who are not notiﬁed of the presence of 
radon in a dwelling unit or who are given false radon test results. l4 MRS §603 0-D. 
LD 45 adds three additional protections for tenants who face no cause eviction if they have 
asserted their rights under: 
0 14 MRS §6()l5, which requires a landlord to provide at least 45 days’ written notice ofa 
rent increase; 
0 14 MRS §6Ol 6, which forbids a landlord from increasing rent if the dwelling unit is in 
violation of the warranty of habitability; or 
0 A municipal ordinance limiting a rent increase. 
These protections last for only 6 months following tenants’ assertion of their legal rights. 
The existing law protects tenants by creating a “rebuttable presumption ” of retaliation. 14 MRS 
§600l(3). I’ll explain how this works. If a tenant receives a “no cause” eviction notice within6 
months of asserting legal rights under one of these existing statutes, the law ‘presumes ’ that 
retaliation is a factor in the decision to evict the tenant. The landlord can overcome this 
presumption by showing that a “for cause” reason exists and is a substantial reason for the 
eviction. If that is the case, the court can enter a judgment of eviction against the tenant. 
The “rebuttable presumption ” is re-worded to describe how a landlord overcomes the 
presumption and incorporates the standard burden of proof in civil cases. This gives landlords, 
tenants, and the court system clear direction for determining cases in which a claim of retaliation 
has been raised. 
Thank you for your consideration and time. I am happy to answer your questions about the bill. 
dawn. Anne Carney 
State Senator, Senate District 29 
South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough
2
