Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Cheryl Harkins. I reside in South Portland. I’m an Advocate with both Homeless Voices for 
Justice and Homeless Advocacy for All. I’m also on the boards of the Statewide Homeless Council and 
Maine’s Continuum of Care. I am also a renter. Rental prices have skyrocketed. Many landlords have 
unfortunately changed attitudes toward what their tenants need in order to safely live in their structure. 
We all suffered during the pandemic, but tenants should have a right to communicate with their 
landlords without fearing constant retaliation or threats of eviction when you’ve done nothing other 
than point out your needs to the owner of the property. 
I’m a 100% physically disabled person who shares a duplex with her son who is also 100% disabled. We 
live in a community called Redbank. It was recently purchased by a company called JRK Holdings from 
Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles, California. This person laid a new set of rules we are forced to agree 
to in order to be allowed to sign our 58-page lease; including losing many rights we are guaranteed 
under state and federal law. We get no repairs, no safety guarantees, and no responses from the office. 
There’s a list of people who this happens to. The only change I have seen the company make is to build a 
new “center” near our rental office complete with a boxing ring and pool tables. It’s gotten so out of 
hand that the South Portland City Council help workshops and decided there can be a rental increase 
cap of 10% yearly for landlords who have more than 12 units. My son and I exist on SSI payments and 
Section 8 Housing. Landlords are slowly catching onto the idea that if you don’t care for a person’s 
request or need for something truly important to be fixed you can be simply told to go away. The 
problems can be covered until the next tenant complains and is told to “move along”. Large 
corporations from out of state have been increasingly buying communities and outpricing the tenants to 
further gentrify out areas. I’m paying over 1,700 a month plus utilities and my home isn’t safe. I am 
constantly cleaning black mold only to be told that it is not there. 
When JRK Holdings bought Redbank Village, they immediately tried to raise all rent by $1,500 per unit. 
They initiated extra fees whether they were in the lease or not. There is a rental portal that mysteriously 
works for some and not for others. There is a fee for paying your rent and if you aren’t able to access the 
rental portal, you have to acquire a cashier’s check, as they will no longer accept a money order. When 
all of these changes started taking place, I attended a tenant’s informational at the Redbank Community 
Center and later spoke of the trouble our community has had to face. I was due to re-sign my lease. It 
was removed from the online portal after I spoke out. I was unable to sign my lease and Redbank would 
not communicate with South Portland Housing. I was issued an eviction notice for non-payment of rent. 
JRK Holdings tried to evict me for the government’s portion of my rent. My portion, including the new 
amount, has been paid every month, including during the government shutdowns. I went to court and 
explained this to the judge. JRK’s landlord maintained I had paid my rent. The eviction was dismissed. I 
know when my lease is up again they’ll most likely want me “on my way” because I have spoken out. I’m 
too old to live outside again, and my son’s health wouldn’t allow such a thing. Please protect renters 
from having a spiteful landlord or corporation put them out on the street needlessly. Please vote to pass 
LD45. Thank you. 
 
