Committee on Judiciary,  
 
RE:  LD 45: An Act to Prevent Retaliatory Evictions  
I’m opposed  to LD 45 for the following reason s: 
• I’m unsure how a landlord can be retaliating  about a tenant  asserting their rights, if the tenant 
cannot  show proof that they asserted their rights about a concern at the property in the first place  
BEFORE the eviction notice .  
• This law put the presumption of guilt on the landlord be fore they have their day in court .  
• Tenants  have been known  to start retaliation claims against landlords to retaliate against them for 
starting an eviction. For example, a friend of mine had a tenant well past due on rent and started 
the eviction process. Suddenly , the tenant called code enforcement and th e State Fire Marshall 
about an issue with the furnace . He hired an oil burner professional who found nothing  wrong 
with the unit.  The Fire Marshall kept calling the local code enforcement officer for updates. The 
local code enforcement officer went to inve stigate  found no issues with the house  and told the 
Fire Marshall that the tenant was retaliating against the landlord.  
• We currently have a tenant who is not keeping up with their full payments  on time . If retaliation 
laws were not on the books , we would h ave given them more time to get into good standing , but 
instead we served them with an early non -renewal notice  (7 months’ notice)  in case they wanted 
to play the  baseless  retaliation game. This is not the intention of the original retaliation  law, but 
it’s outcome  forces us into a defensive posture.  
• It is not unreasonable to require a copy of an email or proof of mailing to prove that the tenant 
asserted their rights .  
• There are laws in place already that detail retaliatory evictions protections. They are  sufficient.  
• Problematic  tenants can already make a complaint and get protection . This bill is over the line. If 
a tenant is getting evicted, there is likely a good reason, like they are not paying rent or disturbing 
the neighbors . This law undermines  the serious nature of the issue at hand that caused  the eviction 
in the first place.  
• This law limits the judge’s discretion to hear the evidence provided by both parties during the 
eviction and when considering if a relation claim is genuine.  
• The law also wil l make drafting rental agreements difficult because they will have to cover every 
possible issue that could occur whereas right now we can have more broad polices banning things 
like creating fire hazards or disturbing the peace of the neighbors.  
Regards  
Justin Giroux  
Manager  
Habitat For ME LLC  
 
 
