Kenneth LaVoie
Winslow
LD 45
LD 45: An Act to Prevent Retaliatory Evictions 
https://www.facebook.com/groups/637861706387540/user/582558144
We are Deb and Ken LaVoie, owners of Southern Angel Properties which owns and 
operates  22 rental units in Waterville, Maine. My wife and I have been landlords in 
this community since 2009. We are the preferred rental agency for two local 
universities and enjoy one of the most favorable reputations of any housing provider 
in this area. I believe these “credentials”, albeit anecdotal, lend above average 
credibility to our testimony and I thank you in advance for your consideration. 
We are entirely opposed to this bill for several reasons. First, I don't think it's an 
exaggeration to claim that this proposal undermines basic property rights. As small 
“mom and pop” landlords, we assume a very hands on approach to our buildings and 
tenants. We manage our four properties, and to continue to have the motivation and 
tools to provide a safe, harmonious environment for our residents, (and an operation 
we can be proud of), we need to have the ability, without constraint, to refuse to do 
business with anyone we deem an unfit “client”.  To be “shackled” into a continued 
disharmonious business relationship, by virtue of someone claiming to have asserted 
their rights in a certain way, is tantamount to surrendering our basic property rights. 
Though I acknowledge that there may be unscrupulous landlords who would evict 
someone for “putting up a stink” about an inappropriate rent increase, I can’t imagine 
that they’re more than a tiny minority. It is almost never in a landlord’s best interest to
do so. I see this as a tool that will be used most often by otherwise undesirable tenants
to delay necessary evictions or terminations of lease. In short, it’s a solution to a 
problem that “barely exists” if it exists at all, and that will victimize twenty ethical, 
hard working landlords for every unscrupulous one it inconveniences. Additionally, 
very few communities have the restrictions referenced in the bill (rent control, etc.) 
which leaves only the proper notice of 45 days for rent increases. And what landlord 
in their right mind would terminate a lease simply because a tenant asserted their right
for the correct 45 days notice?
Landlord Tenant law is already adequately balanced in Maine, especially among the 
more rural, smaller landlords, which comprise the overwhelming majority of rental 
units in Maine. 
