1 
 LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.  
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333  
(207) 621- 0087  •  Fax (207)  621-0742    
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle  
• • • 
LSE Helpline  1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)  
www.mainelse.org  
Februa ry 9, 2023 
 
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D. 45 An Act to Prevent Retaliatory Evictions  
before the  Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 Senator  Carney , Representative  Moonen  and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee s on Judiciary 
 Legal Services for the Elderly is a non-profit legal services organization that 
was established in Maine following the passage of the Older American’s Act 
in 1974.  Since then, we have provided free legal assistance to our 
disadvantaged older  adults when their basic human needs are at stake. Our 
clients are all aged sixty or  older and most have very low incomes. Some are 
the most physically and financially compromised people in our 
communities.  
  
The financial challenges experienced during the pandemic continue for most Maine people . In fact, some have become worse. Over 33 ,000 Maine 
households received  rental assistance payments through the Federal 
Emergency  Rental Ass istance Program . Unfortunately,  that program has 
ended  and additional State general funds , though welcome d and appreciated 
will not replace the level of help delivered  by the federal program .  
 Sadly, t he need for affordable rental housing still far exceeds supply and 
court actions for evictions have not moderated. As the year progresses more  
household that rent will be  forced to look  for another place to live . The most 
recent Maine Judicial Branch data shows that over 4900 evictions actions 
were filed in 2022. Tha t’s 25 percent more than the year before. Last  year at 
LSE we experienced a 30 percent increase in cases involving evictions and 
in most of those cases the risk of homelessness  was real.  
 Our statutes recognize an individua l’s right to control their own property 
including the right to choose when to begin or end a land lord/tenant 
2 
 relationshi p. However  they also recognize the tenant’ s need to have a safe 
place to live  and the right to be treated fairly  by the landlord.  Thus our laws 
require lan dlords to offer housing that is hab itable ; contain a process that a 
landlord must follow to legally  terminate a tenancy ; and provisions that will 
allow tenants to defend against illegal evictions. A retaliatory evict ion is a 
type of prohibited illegal e viction s.   
 
This bill proposes to affect the existing law on the subject of retaliatory evictions in three different ways. Two are intended and the third appears to be unintended.  
 First, it adds to the  list of things that, if proved, constitute a ret aliatory 
evicti on the following:  existing prohibitions on raising rent without giving a 
45 day notice  or raising the rent if the rented dwelling is unfit for habitation 
and new language raising rent pursuant to a municipal ordinance limiting 
rent increase . Second, it clarifies how a landlord may overcome a 
presumption that a retaliatory eviction exists once it is raised by the tenant.  
Third, it removes from the existing retaliatory eviction section an eviction 
filed in response to legally allowed actions a tenant has taken to fix a 
dangerous condition requiring minor repair.  
 The following are our comments on each of these potential changes.  
 
First, the additions.  Currently, section 6015 prohibits a landlor d from raising 
the rent without giving the tenant a 45 -day notice in writing. Section 6016 
prohibits a landlord from raising the rent if the physical conditions in the 
apartment breach the landlord obligation to provide the tenant with a 
habitable dwelling.  The text of those sections follows .  
  
§6015.  Notice of rent increase  
Rent charged for residential estates m ay be increased by the lessor only after 
providing at least 45 days' written notice to the tenant.  A written or oral waiver of this requirement is against public policy and is void.  Any person in violation of this section is liable for the return of any sums unlawfully 
obtained from the lessee, with interest, and reasonable attorney's fees and 
costs.  
    
3 
 6016.  Rent increase limitation 
Rent charged for residential estates may not be increased if the dwelling unit is in violation of the warranty of habitability. Any violation caused by the tenant, his family, guests or invitees shall not bar a rent increase. A written 
or oral waiver of this requirement is against public policy and is void. Any 
person in violation of this section shall be liable for the return of any sums 
unlawfully obtained from the lessee, with interest and reasonable attorneys' fees and costs.      As you see, the tenant’s remedy in each case is to sue for return of the 
increased rent. However , an illegally increased the rent does not provide the 
tenant with a defense against an eviction. If a landlord files an eviction action against a tenant who has had their rent increased without the proper notice, adding these sections will allow the court to analyze whether the eviction is retaliatory. We have no t provided an example of a municipal 
ordinance  limiting rent increases but be lieve  that a tenant who is evicted in 
retaliation for a rent increase at violat es any law s hould have a defense .  
   
Second: the presumption.  
Currently the law creates a “rebuttable presumption” that an eviction is 
retaliatory when a defendant provides evidence to the court that within the last six months either the tenant has complained about certain illegal actions by the ir landlord or the landlord has not fulfilled the required obligations  
described in the retaliatory eviction prohibitions set out in section 6001 
subsection 3.    
 
When the court is satisfied that a rebuttable presumption exists, the landlord 
may present evidence that the eviction is not brought improperly but for another legal reason. The law does not currently specify what those other 
reason s may be. The proposed language in Section 3 of this bill adds those 
reasons. It provides the following:  
 
“To rebut the presumption of retaliation, a plaintiff in a forcible entry and detainer action must show by a preponderance of the evidence that a rea son 
set forth in section 6002, subsection 1 or a violation of a lease provision is a substantial reason for bringing the action.”  
   
4 
 The citation to Section 6002 subsection 1 (attached to this testimony)  
describes the reasons for which the landlord may evict the tenant with a 7-
day notice. The “preponderance of the evidence” standard is commonly 
described as meaning “more likely than n ot”. So, adding this language will 
bring more certainty to the task of rebutting the presumption and will assist the court in deciding whether it is “more likely than not” the landlord’s reasoning has been persuasive.  We believe that this will serve the i nterests 
of justice and support its adoption.  
 Lastly, we believe that one of the grounds described in the exis ting 
retaliatory eviction sections will be unintentionally removed. Here’s the 
pertinent part of what is deleted: " …If an action of forcible entry and 
detainer is brought for any reason set forth in section 6002, subsection 1 or 
for violation of a lease provision, the presumption of retaliation does not apply, unless the tenant has asserted a right pursuant to section 6026."  
Emphasis added.  
 
Section 6026 i s titled “Dangerous conditions requiring minor repairs”. It 
describes dangerous conditions as follows:  
 
“1.  Prohibition of dangerous conditions.  A landlord who enters into a lease or tenancy at will agreement renting premises for human habitation may not maintain or permit to exist on those premises any condition that endangers 
or materially impairs the health or safety of the tenants. ” 
 
It allows a tenant to give notice to the landlord that such a condition exists in 
the rented dwelling and to spend up to $500 or half the rent to address the 
problem if the landlord fails to act.   
We hope that this deletion was not intended and see no reason for changing 
existing law in this manner. If a landlord attempts to evict a tenant for fixing  a condition that the landlord had the obligation to address,  it should remain a 
subject that the court may address as a potentially retaliatory eviction. This omission may be remedied by adding Section 6026 to the other additions in 
Section 1 of the LD.  
 
Thank you for allowing u s to share our thoughts with you.    
 
  
5 
 §6002.  Tenancy at will; buildings on land of another  
 
…1.  Causes for 7-day notice of termination of tenancy.  
Notwithstanding any other pr ovisions of this chapter, the tenancy may be 
terminated upon 7 days' written notice in the event that the landlord can 
show, by affirmative proof, that:  
A.  The tenant, the tenant's family or an invitee of the tenant has caused 
substantial damage to the de mised premises that the tenant has not repaired 
or caused to be repaired before the giving of the notice provided in this subsection;  [PL 2009, c. 171, §2 (NEW).]  
B.  The tenant, the tenant's family or an invitee of the tenant caused or 
permitted a nuisance within the premises, has caused or permitted an 
invitee to cause the dwelling unit to become unfit for human habitation or 
has violated or permitted a violation of the law regarding the tenancy;  [PL 2015, c. 293, §7 (AMD).]  
C.  The tenant is 7 days or more in arrears in the payment of rent;  [PL 
2017, c. 103, §1 (AMD).]  
D.  The tenant is a perpetrator of domestic violence, sexual assault or 
stalking and the victim is also a tenant;  [PL 2017, c. 103, §2 (AMD).]  
E.  The tenant or the tenant's guest or invitee is the perpetrator of 
violence, a threat of violence or sexual assault against another tenant, a tenant's guest, the landlord or the landlord's employee or agent, except that this paragraph does not apply to a tenant who is a victim as defined in section 6000, subsection 4 and who has taken reasonable action under the 
circumstances to comply with the landlord's request for protection of the 
tenant, another tenant, a tenant's guest or invitee, the landlord or the 
landlord's employee or agent or of the landlord's property; or  [PL 2017, c. 103, §3 (NEW).]  
F.  The person occupying the premises is not an authorized occupant of 
the premises.  [PL 2017, c. 103, §3 (NEW).]  
