PINE TREE LEGAL ASSISTANCE, INC. 
Lynn M. Ward * Lewiston Office 
95 Park Street, Suite 301 
P. O. Box 398 
Lewiston, Maine 
(207)400-3273 * V/TTY: 711 * (207) 783-8774 FAX 
www.pt/a.org ¢ /ward@ptla.org 
Written Testimony of Lynn Ward, Pine Tree Legal Assistance 
In Support of LD 45 
“An Act to Prevent Retaliatory Evictions ” 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative l\/loonen and members ofthe of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary; 
This testimony is submitted in support of LD 45 and to urge that this committee vote ought to pass on 
LD 45 as drafted. 
My name is Lynn Ward. I am a staff attorney at Pine Tree Legal Assistance. lam a resident of Auburn, 
Maine. I have represented hundreds of Maine residents with low incomes over my five years serving 
Androscoggin County. 
Since 1967 Pine Tree Legal Assistance has provided free legal services to low-income people 
throughout the State of Maine. In 2022, Pine Tree Legal Assistance provided legal services to Maine 
families and individuals in 7,582 cases, of which 4,738 (62%) involved representation of clients in 
housing cases, including preventing evictions and foreclosures, enforcing safe housing laws, and 
enforcing housing discrimination laws. ln evictions, our representation ranges from advising clients on 
the phone, to negotiating for and defending tenants during eviction proceedings. In 2022, Pine Tree 
Legal provided representation in 2,702 eviction cases statewide. 
The changes proposed by LD 45 would amend Maine's eviction statutes to better protect tenants who 
face eviction because they asserted their rights under Maine's rental housing laws. For example, under 
Maine law tenants may seek repairs when conditions in their rented homes and apartments pose 
health or safety risks. Also, Maine law currently requires a landlord to provide a tenant with a 45-day 
written notice before increasing rent. Often, when a tenant asserts these rights, a landlord will then try 
to evict. if the tenant does not have a lease, the landlord can file an eviction without stating any 
reason, this is known as a "30 day no cause eviction." 
Under current law, a judge must presume that a landlord is retaliating against a tenant if in the six 
months before the tenant got an eviction notice, the tenant complained about housing conditions, 
filed a housing discrimination complaint, or provided the landlord notice that a tenant was a victim of 
certain crimes. To overcome that presumption, the landlord only needs to state some other reason for 
the eviction. There is no clear burden of proof required to overcome the presumption of retaliation. LD 
45 would clarify the burden of proof where a tenant has asserted a retaliation defense and a landlord 
attempts to rebut the presumption of retaliation and will prevent landlords from wrongfully evicting 
tenants who are merely asserting their rights. The proposed language of LD 45 will expand protection'
1
from retaliation to tenants whose landlord tried to impose an illegal rent increase and the tenant 
refused to pay the higher rent amount. 
With 27 % of occupied housing units statewide occupied by renters and the tightening of Maine's 
rental marketl , the addition of protections from retaliatory evictions and clarity about the burden of 
proof when a retaliation defense is raised are more important than ever before. This is because 
Mainers are increasingly cost-burdened, meaning that they pay over 30% of their income to housing 
costs. When it comes to our lowest income residents, 58% are severely cost burdened- meaning that 
they pay over half of their income to housing costs. ln 2022, there were only 51 available and 
affordable housing units for per 100 extremely low-income Maine households. Providing protections to 
residents who have properly asserted their rights under lvlaine housing law is critical because there 
simply are very few places that a wrongfully evicted tenant can move to. 
As set forth above, when a landlord provides a tenant with a 30 day no cause notice to quit, Maine law 
offers only a few defenses. It is not surprising then, that a review of eviction cases in five courts located 
in various parts of the state shows that landlords are using no cause evictions much more often. ln 
fact, no cause evictions have jumped from 2.9% of evictions filed in 2019 to 12.43% in 2021. No cause 
evictions can be the most difficult to defend, because unlike in for-cause eviction proceedings, tenants 
cannot force the landlord to prove that the conduct alleged to be the reason for the eviction occurred. 
Through our representation of thousands of Mainers, Pine Tree Legal has seen that even when the 
existing presumption of retaliation applies, landlords will assert grounds for eviction which have never 
been raised to the tenant as a means of rebutting the presumption of retaliation. ln response toa 
tenants claim of retaliation, a landlord only need to assert some nondescript reason such as ”l just 
want to renovate the unit" or ”l'm considering selling the building." ln many cases, courts do not even 
require proof beyond those claims. There is no clear requirement that the landlord meet some 
standard or a certain burden of proof. This has caused many tenants be afraid to stand up fortheir 
rights out of concern that their landlord will be granted judgment even though they violated the 
tenants’ rights. LD 45 clarifies the burden of proof and makes clear that the landlord must showa 
substantial reason for the eviction, not just any reason. 
Over the past year, our staff has seen a dramatic increase in the number of tenants who call to report 
that their landlord has notified them that their rent will be going up substantially, sometimes by over 
50%. Often, these notices are not legal because they were not given in writing or were not long enough 
as required by 14 MRS 6015 or were given when a home was in violation of the warranty of habitability 
act- a violation of 14 MRS 6016. Unfortunately, without existing protections from retaliation for 
refusing an illegal rent increase, many tenants choose to pay the increase, even when their household 
budgets cannot sustain it. These tenants will explain to us that they paid the amount because they had 
nowhere to go and were concerned about becoming homeless. 
Recently, one of our advocates worked with a tenant who complained to their landlord about electrical 
and plumbing problems in their unit. Instead of fixing the problems immediately, the landlord notified 
the tenant that their rent would be more than doubled. Within days of telling their landlord they could 
' 
That percentage is higher in areas like Lewiston, where some neighborhoods have over 80% of their units occupied by 
renters.
2
not agree to that rent increase, the tenant was served with a no-cause "eviction notice. Another 
advocate had a client who was served with a notice that their rent would be going up in less than 45 
days. Even though that notice was illegal, under existing law, if the tenant refused to pay the increased 
rent, the tenant would have no recourse if the landlord choose to proceed with a no cause eviction 
rather than comply with the law. Because of the lack of legal protection from eviction and a lack of 
available and affordable housing, time and time again, our advocates are forced to advise clients of the 
potential they will be evicted if they refuse to pay illegal rent increases. 
All tenants deserve to assert their rights under Maine's housing laws and to be free from retaliation 
when they do so. Once the presumption of retaliation is established, it is not unreasonable to require 
a landlord to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that at the time a notice to quit was 
given, a valid reason for eviction unrelated to the tenant's assertion of rights existed. The changes set 
forth in LD 45 will prevent unjust evictions, and for that reason, we urge this committee to vote "Ought 
to Pass" on LD 45 as drafted.
