 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
LD 45 – Ought To Pass  
 
An Act to Prevent Retaliatory Evictions  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
February 9 , 202 3 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen  and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede , and I am 
Policy Counsel  for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil lib erties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to support 
LD 45 because it would protect the free speech rights of renters.  
 
If enacted, t his bill would establish a presumption that an eviction initiated after 
six months or less of the tenant asserting certain rights is initiated in retaliation 
against the tenant’s assertion of those rights. The rights the tenant must have 
asserted to trigger the presumption of retaliation are a violation of stat e or local 
laws concerning rent increases  or a violation of the warranty of habitability . The bill 
would give landlord s a chance to rebut the presumption of retaliation.  
 
The right to advocate for oneself is necessary for a free society. That is why the 
ACLU has defended free speech for over a century. For renters, telling landlords 
how their property fails to meet basic standards of habitability can mean the 
difference between a healthy, dignified life, and a life marred by illness and 
constant discomfort. That is why state law requires landlords to ensure that their 
rental properties can maintain temperatures of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit . 14 
MRS §6021 (6). That is why landl ords must keep their rental properties fit for 
human habitation. Id. §6021 (2).  
 
Habitability laws, which  require a basic level of health and safet y in rental  housing , 
might remain  unenforced if tenants are too afraid to speak up about their rights. 
Whe n the landlord has the ultimate and arbitrary power over a tenant’s ability to 
remain in their home, there is no level playing field and no genuine opportunity for 
tenants to exercise their legal rights.  If enacted, t his bill will help ensure that 
tenants can speak up without fear of being made homeless. We urge you to vote 
ought to pass . 
 
