Testimony of 
DANA A. DORAN 
Executive Director 
Professional Logging Contractors of Maine 
Before the Committee on Taxation in Opposition to LD 1135 — An Act To Ensure 
that Carbon Credits Can Be Sold on Forest Land Enrolled in Maine Tree Growth 
Tax Law 
Tuesday, April 18, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation, my name is Dana Doran, and I am the Executive Director of the Professional Logging 
Contractors of Maine. The Professional Logging Contractors of Maine (PLC) is the voice of 
logging and associated trucking contractors throughout the state of Maine. The PLC was formed 
in 1995 to represent independent contractors in a rapidly changing forest industry. 
As of 2021, logging and trucking contractors in Maine employed over 3,000 people directly and 
were indirectly responsible for the creation of an additional 2,500 jobs. This employment and 
the investments that contractors make contributed $582 million to the state’s economy. Our 
membership, which includes 200 contractor members and an additional 120 associate 
members, employs more than 75% of the individuals who work in this industry and is also 
responsible for 80% of Maine’s annual timber harvest. 
Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify on behalf of our membership in 
opposition to LD 1135 — An Act To Ensure that Carbon Credits Can Be Sold on Forest Land 
Enrolled in Maine Tree Growth Tax Law. While this bill has been presented as a concept draft 
with no language to explain what it attempts to do, the description provided seems to point toa 
concept where landowners can continue to receive beneﬁts from the Tree Growth Tax Law 
(TGTL) if they are enrolled in a carbon sequestration monetization program. While this isa 
noble perspective, it will ultimately reduce the amount of wood that could be harvested asa 
result of the current provisions of the TGTL and is counter to the statute’ s intent. This kind of 
policy will likely create an incentive to not manage one’s land for timber. If this is the case, our 
membership is adamantly opposed as this will have a detrimental impact on Maine’ s timber 
harvesting contractors. 
In 1972, the TGTL was enacted by the Legislature to encourage landowners to retain their 
forestland, promote better forest management and grow forest products for wood consuming 
mills in the state. Land enrolled in the program would be taxed based upon its current use, 
which is forested use and not taxed based upon development potential. The Legislature at that 
time realized the importance of maintaining forestland for multiple uses, but the greatest use 
was forest management for the forest economy.
0 
Currently, there is no restriction for landowners who take advantage of the TGTL to enroll their 
property in a carbon sequestration monetization program, as long as they meet the intent of the 
TGTL and manage their property for forest products. Thus, there is no need to change the TGTL 
in order for landowners to take advantage of a carbon program. 
As a member of the Governor ’ s Task Force on the Creation of a Forest Carbon Program, which 
was created by Executive Order in January 2021 and submitted its ﬁnal report on October 21, 
2021, the taskforce never discussed, nor recommended making changes to the TGTL asa 
pathway to increasing carbon sequestration in Maine’s forests. As this Committee has come to 
understand through other legislation regarding TGTL, this current use taxation program has 
been in existence since the 1970’s and should not be amended to create beneﬁts for other 
programs or alternative uses. As the Maine Forest Service stated in their testimony to this 
Committee on another proposed amendment to the TGTL on March 30, 2023, “the risk of policy 
changes in current use taxation is a strong disincentive to landowners making long-term 
investments in the future of Maine’ s forests”. 
The Executive Summary of the Governor ’s Task Force on the Creation of a Forest Carbon 
Program is attached to my testimony. The goals and suggestions of the Task Force are clearly 
articulated, and you will note that the TGTL is not mentioned in any way shape or form. It was 
the unanimous consensus of the Task Force that two of the three overarching principles of the 
report were focused on forest practices and markets. Markets are necessary for practices to be 
implemented. Additionally, any carbon market participation, as stated in the Governor ’s 
Executive order, would be voluntary but not mandated through statute. 
The logging industry is suffering today to remain proﬁtable and supply our mills with the wood 
they need. Right now, loggers are at risk because of escalating operating costs that are involved 
with running this kind of business. If the forest products industry is going to continue to thrive 
into the future, the state of Maine should be doing all it can to create a competitive platform and 
not creating incentives to do less with the management of our forests. From our point of view, 
the idea established in the title of this bill will only incentivize doing less, which will harm, not 
help the forest products economy. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak before you today and I look forward to answering any 
questions you may have.
Governor ’s Task Force 
on the 
Creation of a Forest Carbon Program 
Final Report 
October 29, 2021
Maine Forest Carbon Program Task Force 
Co-Chairs 
Tom Abello, Legislative Director, Ofﬁce of the Governor 
Amanda Beal, Commissioner, Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Members 
Mark Berry, The Nature Conservancy 
Barrie Brusila, Mid-Maine Forestry 
Adam Daigneault, University of Maine 
Tom Doak, Maine Woodland Owners 
Dana Doran, Professional Logging Contractors of Maine 
Ivan Fernandez, University of Maine Climate Change Institute 
Alec Giffen, New England Forestry Foundation 
Stacy Knapp, Maine Department of Environmental Protection 
Donald Mansius, Maine Forest Service 
Ryan Robicheau, Maine Department of lnland Fisheries &Wildlife 
Melissa Shea, Mountain Farm 
Patrick Strauch, Maine Forest Products Council 
Karin Tilberg, Forest Society of Maine 
Facilitator/Report Writer 
Jo D. Saffeir, Consultant 
Staff Support 
Tom Gordon, Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry
Executive Summary 
The Governor ’s Task Force on the Creation of a Forest Carbon Program was established by 
Executive Order on January l3, 2021. The Executive Order directs the Task Force to develop 
incentives to encourage forestland management practices that increase carbon storage 
speciﬁcally on woodland owners of 10 to l0,000 acres while maintaining harvest levels overall. 
lt notes the negative impacts climate change is having on Maine, and recognizes that Maine’s 
forests, which cover 89% of the state, currently sequester an amount of carbon equal to at least 
60% of the state’s annual carbon emissions, or 75% when durable forest products are included. lt 
also notes that Maine is losing an estimated 10,000 acres of natural and working lands to 
development each year, and that this development is a direct source of carbon emissions and 
hinders the growth of natural climate solutions. The work of the Task Force advances that 
recommendation of the Maine Climate Council’s Natural and Working Lands Work Group to 
develop incentives that increase carbon storage on this forestland size category while 
maintaining harvest levels. 
The Task Force also identiﬁed certain overarching principles that are foundational to the success 
of Maine’s forests in sequestering more carbon. These include: 
~ Maintaining existing forestland (“keeping forests as forests”) is fundamentally important if 
forests are to make a growing contribution toward achieving the State’s climate goals. The 
Task Force supports increasing state, federal, and private funding for forestland protection, 
including funding for conservation easements or fee purchase. To monitor Maine’s progress 
in this regard, the Task Force recommends that the Department of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry (DACF) be permanently tasked with tracking the amount and type of conserved 
land in Maine (including municipal, NGO, state, and federal lands), and also tracking 
forestland loss. 
- lt is equally important to increase forest carbon on existing forestland by improving forest 
condition through the widespread adoption of sustainable forest practices that increase 
carbon sequestration, both through more intensive silvicultural management of stands that 
will increase forest growth, and by delayed harvests that allow trees to mature into older 
forest, resulting in greater carbon storage, which also increases the opportunity to store more 
carbon in long-lived forest products. 
' The adoption of carbon-enhancing forest practices depends on the existence of economically 
viable markets for low-grade wood. Such markets incentivize Maine woodland owners and 
loggers to practice sustainable forestry that results in improved silviculture. The lack of such 
markets is a particular and ongoing challenge for Maine woodland owners and loggers. 
While markets alone do not inherently produce climate beneﬁts, they are a necessary part of 
the equation as they can either reduce the costs of climate-bene ﬁcial practices or even make
4
them proﬁtable. Expanded, ﬁnancially viable markets for low-grade wood will also help to 
counteract pressures to convert forestland to non-forest uses. 
In offering its ambitious recommendations, the Task Force also offers a note of caution, 
acknowledging the signiﬁcant uncertainties that inﬂuence the health and productivity of Maine’s 
forests. These vulnerabilities, exacerbated by climate change, include impacts from pest 
outbreaks, disease, extreme weather events, wildﬁre and invasives, all of which can havea 
negative bearing on the ability of Maine’s forestland to sequester carbon. Despite these risks, the 
Task Force enthusiastically supports the recommendations in this report, understanding the 
important role Maine’s forests currently play in sequestering carbon, and the potential of Maine’s 
forests to continue to make signiﬁcant contributions to achieving Maine’s climate goals. 
This report is structured to align with the nine directives outlined in the Governor ’s Executive 
Order. These directives provide the framework for actions the Task Force is recommending be 
taken to develop a voluntary, incentive-based program for woodland owners of l0 to 10,000 
acres and forestry practitioners to increase carbon storage in Maine’s forests. In broad ten"ns, 
these actions aim to: 
0 Increase investment in forestland conservation 
0 Encourage, promote, and incentivize the voluntary adoption of climate-friendly forest 
management practices 
0 Promote the expansion of markets for low-grade wood 
0 Highlight the need for better data regarding harvest levels within this broad landowner size 
class, and the relative effectiveness of various forest management practices in increasing 
carbon sequestration 
0 Signiﬁcantly increase technical assistance to landowners by expanding Maine Forest Service 
capacity and engaging licensed consulting foresters 
0 Increase alignment with federal funding programs that support forest carbon sequestration 
efforts 
0 Explore partnerships with a private entity or entities to support the development 
of a voluntary credit-based and/or practice-oriented carbon program 
O Promote climate-friendly timber harvesting practices and support the use of low-impact 
harvesting equipment 
0 Identify a suite of potential changes to the Open Space Current Use Taxation program that 
integrate carbon management elements into the program 
0 Encourage coordination between landowners of l0-I 0,000 acres and large, commercial 
forestland owners for mutual learning and beneﬁt 
O Recognize the potential of collaborating with other states to increase investment in forest 
carbon sequestration 
0 Establish a statewide total forest sector carbon sequestration target
5
