Greg C. Robie95 Mineral Springs RdHighland Mills, NY  10930April 17-18, 2023Taxation Committee2-3 State House Station Augusta, Maine 04333 Maine State Legislature, Joint Committee on TaxationTECHNICAL TESTIMONY REGARDING CARBON CREDIT MARKETSRe: This testimony is a generic concern about the efficacy of carbon credits and the emergency climate declaration, but is tailored to address LD 1135, which, even in its concept draft form ought not to pass (ONTP).Chairpersons Grohoski and Perry, and Honorable Members of the Joint Committee on Taxation: In 2019, the Legislature established as fact that there are a number of critical and pressing issues relating to the effects of climate change on the State, its communities and its environment and natural resources, and that these must be addressed by commencing work on climate changing issues as soon as is possible. This is a paraphrasing of the emergency preamble of 2019 Public Law, Chapter 476, “An Act To Promote Clean Energy Jobs and To Establish the Maine Climate Council.” It should be recalled that as LD 1679, our 2019 law establishing our Maine Climate Council, was titled “An Act To Establish the Maine Climate Change Council To Assist Maine To Mitigate, Prepare for and Adapt to Climate Change.” By either title, this proposed bill does not constitute policy that can, and this because of physics, significantly promote Maine jobs beyond what our Tree Growth Law currently provides and subsidizes. Nor does it mitigate climate change for Mainers. In fact, and as policy, it abuses Mainers efforts to prepare for and do adaptation concerning our changing climate. Again because of physics, LD 1135 feeds into market forces that are delaying and obfuscating policy that physics could dance with as is hoped. Carbon markets accommodate policies that exasperate the physics driving our abruptly changing climate system; our 
climate emergency. This bill, because carbon markets are not a solution that physics recognizes, is more of a continued snookering and manipulation of Mainers goodwill. The concept of carbon markets counters what may be hoped for with the work underway on climate change matters. What is built into trusted climate models are assumptions that are implausible given unmodeled tipping points tipped, and negative emission technologies imagined as implemented at a scale and within a time frame that exceeds the identified/assumed technology for doing so.As an aside, the IRA’s six pages on “clean” hydrogen which, our State, through our Governor, has joined the Governor of New York to effect a northeast hydrogen pipeline loop, is retrograde regarding emissions AND economics. Hydrogen is definable under Maine law as an “energy storage system” ((35-A MRS §3481(6)). Hydrogen is not a traditional fuel in any plausible economic sense. As the periodic table’s smallest molecule, it leaks out of any and everything. Leaked hydrogen out competes methane of the hydroxyl radical. The hydroxyl radical (OH) is critical to the measurement of methane’s CO2e. As the hydrogen piping is conceptualized and built, and under the IRA, it will inefficiently turn the available energy that is in oil and/or natural gas into a less dense fuel. Any CO2 captured from the fractional distillation of these fossil carbon fuels to produce a transportable “energy” will become a slurry that will be injected into production wells to produce even more fossil carbon.Physics dictates that fossil carbon must be kept in the ground.Facilitating Wall Street-types instituting the ongoing snookering of Maine is not good policy regarding climate change and Maine, nor is it good for Mainers and our Downeast Environment. Our Constitution obligates our State government to compensate municipalities for real property tax revenues lost due to our Tree Growth law. I note that LD 1648 is pending regarding Committee action, and does have meaningful text published. I note that the text of that bill preemptively incorporates language that relates to tree growth. As an example it includes the term “base lot.” The term only exists in law relative past wrangling concerning valuation of record title in real property. Interesting. Specious? Snookering?
To facilitate any policy that delays rapid and precipitous decline in carbon emissions, both within our State and globally, LD 1135 (and LD1648) is/(are) functionally duplicitous. Furthermore, the carbon credit trading concept is the sole part of the Kyoto Protocol that the Obama Administration preserved and ported into the Paris Accords. As a “mechanism” its porting constitutes the only “shall” of the 2016 Agreement’s 36 pages of text. Carbon markets were egregiously abused under Kyoto. Wrangling over the scientific rulebook regarding the Paris Accords generate several years of delay as financial interest angled for an as profitable an approach to regulating this market as could be wrestled away from science.With LD 1648 as insight, LD 1135 will also have language to snooker Maine and Mainers. Scheduling a public hearing on LD 1135 without the text being published is a generational effecting of malfeasance. Algorithms and computer models owned and operated elsewhere will establish “vetted” credits for carbon credit markets both in substance, securitized, and as an exploitable futures market, one that will economically enhance the well being of our too-big-to-fail globalized financial institutions while perpetuating a redistribution of wealth out-of-state that exasperates the economic well being of Mainers. Furthermore, and particularly when credits associated with carbon trading markets become securitized, and unless the withdrawal of qualified real property from these tax programs is adequately addressed in these proposed bills, another administrative mess will be dumped on property owners and municipalities. Please consider: I own land that is in tree growth. It has been in this real property tax abatement program since 1977. The management of our timbered property has effected employment and economic gain in Maine. Periodic harvests have kept the property managed in its growth cycle so that it likely has effected more carbon capture and storage when compared to that of a mature and unmanaged forest in excess of 100 years of age might otherwise effect. I note in LD 1648 contains no modifications to §1112-C, which relates to withdrawal of classified land from that program. With no mechanism specified concerning how carbon credit market rights will be secured for trade, two significant concerns should be investigate and review if either bill is to be other than voted ONTP.
If LD 1135 and/or LD 1648 text and/or related rules allow for such credits to be recorded and utilized in a manner other than these being carbon credit rights and commonly appurtenant to the recorded title in real property, a class of rights is established that encumber a title in real property that no owner in their right mind would take on. Please recall that securitized ownership of bundled and tranched mortgages had significant consequences. If this concern regarding the color of title and real property is researched and found to be a valid concern, the followup question is who might benefit financially from so encumbering real property … if not the stacked LLC business model whose exempted member interest transfers, and under our Solar Energy Development Decommissioning statue, have and are being permitted to abandon solar projects at the end of their useful life by existing and unnamed financial entities and leaving the mess for other to clean up. This, by the way, merits the term “duplicitous”!I note in an array of bills related to this is before this Legislature that:1. the 15,000 acre cap on open space classification is proposed to be removed (LD 1648);2. the 100MW cap for distributed power generation is proper to be repealed (LD 43);3. subdivision regulations are proposed by the sponsoring Representative that modified them to align exemption from current subdivision regulations so that the proposed change accommodates less than 5MW projects in a phased three year cycle of development (LD 1134); 4. LD 496 bundles-by-‘amendment’ batteries as “energy storage systems” under a “distributed energy generation” decommissioning law, and 5. furthermore, this is a law that our Board of Environmental Protection has not done the requisite routine technical rulemaking on, and6. it is the opinion of the DEP rulemaking liaison, that what has been applied in lieu of rulemaking – wind rule chapter 
decommissioning triggers – is not correct, but may now come to also apply to solar/battery developments, and7. minor review applications, existing since 11/31/21, are applied to pre and post ‘decommission’ law reviewed and DEP permitted solar energy developments, and8. the minor review application for solar energy developments that have permits from before our 2021 “decommissioning’ law, does not have statutory justification … but LD 496, and including considered testimony render regarding that bill, attempts to retroactively cover this, and9. these minor reviews are exempt under the DEP’s Administrative Rule Chapter 2 from being contested by any person other than the applicant, and 9. this in direct violation of our MAPA, and11. these exempt ‘minor reviews’ are not ‘required’ for 15 years, and12. thereby renders the alleged “Effect” of 06-096 C.M.R. ch. 2(2)(C) – language that afford deference to our MAPA – specious.I would suggest that this is a “Snookering Dozen” … i.e., an ONTP judgement on steroids.Thank you for your time and consideration. If helpful, I am a happy to answer any questions that this written testimony may engender.(845) 534-7291robie@hvc.rr.comor at the above address.=)Greg

Greg Robie
Highland Mills/Winslow/China
LD 1135
Please consider this a substitution for the version of this I uploaded yesterday. That 
version needed the clarifying edits this one presents for the Committee's 
consideration, Thx.   =)
PS: The "snookering" graphic at the end is included to summarize and, perhaps, 
intrigue.
