A. 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
I T-1 1» 
a 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
; AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
° :~ (207) 287-1400 
James Boyle TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
25 Dundee Road 
Gorham, ME 04038 
Cell Phone: (207)756-2928 
J ames.Bovle@le2islature.maine.2ov 
April 1s, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Jim Boyle presenting 
LD 1135, An Act Ensure that Carbon Credits Can Be Sold on Forest Land Enrolled in the 
Maine Tree Growth Tax Law 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation, my name is Jim Boyle and I represent House District 109, which is the 
eastem half of Gorham. I am here today to present LD 1135, “An Act Ensure that Carbon 
Credits Can Be Sold on Forest Land Enrolled in the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law.” 
I brought this bill forward on behalf of the Maine Woodland Owners Association. The bill isa 
concept draft, but I have provided to you today with my testimony a sponsor’s amendment for 
your consideration. The amendment creates a Resolve that requires the Maine Forest Sen/ice and 
Maine Revenue Services to work together to provide joint guidance regarding whether carbon 
projects are compatible with the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law. I understand interested parties 
have worked together to propose this Resolve. 
Landowners in Maine are thinking about climate change and how they can help. More and more 
landowners, large and small, are beginning to participate in carbon projects where they agree to 
delay or reduce harvests for a period of time and then sell the carbon that is sequestered during 
that time on the carbon markets. 
Currently there is no guidance for municipal assessors on the issue of whether the Tree Growth 
Tax Law permits the sale of carbon. This leaves the assessors to make individual judgments with 
limited information or precedent. The lack of clarity may cause confusion and createa 
patchwork of different decisions. Having the Maine Forest Service and Maine Revenue Services 
work together to provide this guidance makes sense and will create uniformity. 
Thank you for your time, and I would be happy answer any questions. 
District 109: Gorham (part)
LD 1135 Bill Title: 
An Act to Ensure that Carbon Credits Can Be Sold On Forest Land Enrolled in the Maine Tree 
Growth Tax Law 
Proposed Text: 
Sec. 1. The Maine Forest Sen/ice and Maine Revenue Services shall work together to provide 
joint guidance on the impact of the sale of carbon by an enrollee in the Maine Tree Growth Tax 
Law. 
Summary: 
This Resolve directs the Maine Forest Service and Maine Revenue Services to work together to 
provide joint guidance on the impact of the sale of carbon by an enrollee in the Maine Tree 
Growth Tax Law.
