April 18,  2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
 
RE: LD 1135 - An Act to Ensure that Carbon Credits Can Be Sold on Forest Land Enrolled 
in the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the Government Relations Director  for 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this opportunity to comment  in 
support of LD 1135 - An Act to Ensure that Carbon Credits Can Be Sold on Fo rest 
Land Enrolled in the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law.  We understand the bill sponsor, 
Representative Boyle, will introduce an amendment and we support the amended 
language.  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.  The Nature 
Conservancy has  been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in  the state, owning a nd managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate.  
 
LD 1135 seeks to p rovide important clarity on how an emerging trend in Maine forest 
management, forest carbon markets, can coexist with the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law. 
The amendment offered today directs the Maine Forest Service and the Maine Revenue 
Service to work together  to provide guidance on “the impact of the sale of carbon by an 
enrollee in the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law.”  
 
TNC has experience with both the Tree Growth Tax Law and carbon markets. In 2019, 
TNC enrolled a significant portion of the lands we own on the Upp er St. John River in a 
forest carbon project, under the California Air Resources Board Protocol for U.S. Forest 
Projects, with carbon offsets to be sold in the Western Climate Initiative carbon 
market. Our participation in a forest carbon project does not halt our harvesting 
operations. In fact, our agreement requires carefully designed harvests with a focus on 
improved stand structure and accelerating the rate of increase of timber stocking on 
the land, including investment in thinning of young stands. Future harvests will be able 
to generate a higher proportion of sawtimber, continuing to contribute to the forest 
products economy and storing carbon in lumber and built products.  Additionally, the 
entirety of this 185,000 -acre  property has remained in the Tr ee Growth Tax program.  
 
Participating in the carbon market diversifies TNC’s revenue from property ownership, 
supports our management objectives, and ensures the financial viability of long -term 
management of the property. It is a tool that has been beneficial to our organization, 
and we believe additional guidance from the Maine Forest Service and the Maine 
Revenue Service would help other landowners better understand the opportunities in 
forest carbon markets.  
 
For these reasons, we urge the Committ ee to support the amendment to  LD 1135.  
