M MAINE MUNICIPAL 
. ASSOCIATION S:N(;E 1938 
60 Community Drive Augusto, ME 0l¢330~9l»86 
l~800~b5Z-8786 (In state) (t) 207~623~B/+28 
(f) 207-62/4-0129 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1135, An Act to Ensure that Carbon Credits Can Be Sold 0n Forest Land Enrolled in the 
Maine Tree Growth Tax Law 
April 18, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony neither for nor against LD 1135 on behalf of 
the 70 municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association ’s 
Legislative Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal 
interest. 
It is very difﬁcult for our policy committee to establish a well-informed position ona 
concept draft bill. For that reason, the committee elected to submit placeholder testimony for the 
purpose of expressing an interest in participating in the conversation when the details of LD 
1135 are available for review. 
However, based on a preliminary discussion of the bill, the members of the policy 
committee have several questions, especially around compliance with Maine’s Tree Growth Tax 
law. To garner municipal level support for the bill, the adopted language would need to 
explicitly provide that all other requirements of the existing law would remain in place. If not, 
community leaders would oppose the bill as it could shift additional burdens onto the property 
owners left to subsize the unreimbursed portion of a generous tax beneﬁt provided to those 
enrolled in the program. 
While it is at times the case that the Association ’s objections and concerns with the 
advancement of a new or the expansion of existing property tax exemption are interpreted by 
legislators as municipalities “just in it for the money,” those remarks do not reﬂect the reality. 
Roads need to be plowed, solid waste needs to be managed, state laws need to be enforced and 
revenue collected and remitted to the state. Unless the public sector elects to provide these 
services, after school and county assessments are paid, municipal leaders are left to struggle with 
how to best fund and provide all other necessary services. 
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue. If you have any 
questions about the Association ’s position on this bill, please do not hesitate to contact me at 
kduf‘ our<'a7xne1nun.org or 1-800-452-8786.
