.. STATE or MAINE 
_ ,’ 
__ - 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION & FORESTRY 
>-#11"? ff 
‘ OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER 
;:. _.. all 22 STATE HOUSE STATION 
t 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
JANET T. MILLS AMANDA E. BEAL 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON TAXATION 
IN RESPONSE TO LD 1135 
An Act to Ensure that Carbon Credits Can be Sold on Forest Land Enrolled in the Maine Tree 
Growth Tax Law 
April 18, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Peny, and members of the Taxation Committee, my name is 
Patty Connier, and I am the Director of the Maine Forest Service. I am speaking on behalf of the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry regarding LD 1135. 
LD 1135, An Act to Ensure that Carbon Credits Can be Sold on Forest Land Enrolled in the 
Maine Tree Growth Tax Law, is a concept draft that does not provide sufﬁcient information for 
the Department to take a position on the bill before you today. The Department appreciates the 
need to address forest carbon markets in the context of broader forest policy discussions. The 
Tree Growth Tax Program (TGTL) has proven successful over several decades, so we want to 
assess any proposed changes to the law carefully. 
During the 130"‘ Legislature, Govemor Mills signed an Executive Order establishing the Forest 
Carbon Task Force, recommended by the state’s four-year climate action plan, Maine Won ’t 
M. Its purpose was to develop a voluntary, incentive-based program for woodland owners of 
10 to 10,000 acres to increase carbon storage in Maine’s forests. The 10-month-long process 
involved substantial public input and resulted in a consensus report containing wide-ranging 
recommendations which, if implemented, will enable Maine’s forests to contribute signiﬁcantly 
toward achieving the state’s climate goals. The Task Force released a report with its ﬁnal 
recommendations for maximizing carbon storage on Maine’s smaller woodlands. Included in that 
report was a recommendation that the TGTL be updated, but that given the critical importance of 
this program to Maine woodland owners, further dialogue with municipalities and other interests 
would be required to arrive at a thoughtful and sound approach. 
Enacted in 1972, the purpose of the TGTL is to promote better forest management and to 
encourage landowners to retain and improve their forest land. All enrolled forest lands are 
assessed for tax purposes based on their current use — in effect, growing trees — rather than on 
their “highest and best use,” which in most cases means some form of development. A 
landowner makes a long-tenn commitment to manage their property “primarily for growth of 
trees to be harvested for commercial use” in accordance with a written Forest Management Plan 
prepared or endorsed by a Maine Licensed Forester. In most cases, the reduced valuation of 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 8; Forestry WEB: WWW.MAINE.GOV/DACF HARLOW BUILDING PHONEI (207) 287-3200
lands enrolled in Tree Growth substantially lessens the property tax burden on landowners, 
enabling them to make long-term timber management decisions and investments. 
The Department promotes the stability and predictability of the TGTL. We typically discourage 
changes to the law as doing so creates risks, disincentives to investment, and confusion among 
landowners, who collectively manage 11.3 million acres of enrolled forest lands statewide, 3.7 
million of which are in the organized towns. The TGTL was created to encourage sound forest 
management and support Maine’s forest products industries. The lands managed for timber 
harvesting support a healthy forest economy and provide other key beneﬁts, including wildlife 
habitat, scenic beauty, recreation, and clean water. In short, the TGTL has been extremely 
successful. 
The Department recognizes the emerging markets for forest carbon credits through privately 
administered carbon offset programs, which are vetted through intemational veriﬁcation 
programs. The voluntary, largely unregulated market for such carbon offsets is still maturing. In 
addition, Maine’s ambitious Climate Action Plan Maine Won ’t Wait recognizes Maine’s forests 
as foundational to the state achieving its climate goal of carbon neutrality by 2045. The plan 
further identiﬁes “maintaining the Tree Growth Tax Law” as a key means of supporting long- 
standing incentives for climate-friendly forest management. 
Maine’s forests and their durable products offset up to 75% of the state’s carbon emissions. 
However, the state’s forestland is under persistent development pressure, impacting the degree to 
which this resource can help combat climate change. The TGTL is the critical tool that forest 
landowners utilize to protect this resource for multiple public beneﬁts. Forestlands enrolled ina 
forest carbon offset project can be actively managed for timber and other wood products along 
with other goals like improved wildlife habitat or recreational opportunities and therefore can be 
compatible with the TGTL. 
Thank you for your time. I would happily answer any questions now or at the work session.
