 
 
April 10, 2023  
 
Testimony re: LD 1040 : “An Act to R equire R eimburs ement for Gender -affirming Care for MaineCare Members ” 
– OUGHT TO PASS  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and honorable members of the Joint Committee on Health and Human 
Services : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment on LD 1040 : “An Act to R equire R eimburs ement for Gender -
affirming Care for MaineCare Members ”. My name is Chris McLaughlin, and I am a clinical social worker with 
over 2 2 years of experience providing behavioral health services to children and families across a variety of 
treatment settings  here in Maine . I am also h umbed to be  the Executive Director of the Maine Chapter of the 
National Association of Social Workers (NASW) .  
 
NASW ME  has identified LD 1040 as one of our priorities this legislative session given the attention that the 
topic  of gender -affirming care has received  both her e in Maine and ac ross the cou ntry. NASW nationally has 
issued a public statement  in support of gender -affirming care that in  part states, “The unprecedented increase in 
legislation focused on Transgender and Gender Dive rse youth seeking af firming health care, the professionals 
who provide their medical care, and the families and social supports that offer resources to them is an 
unfortunate indicator of the lack of understanding and misinformation that currently exists. ”  
 
Transgender individuals , especially you ng pe ople,  are a mong some of  the most marginalized, oppress ed, and 
targeted both here in Maine and national ly. They are also among some of the most vulnera ble. Hostile anti -trans 
rhetoric has become increasingly pervasive  in our society , which has direct impacts on the health and well -being 
of transgender people. By now, you are well aware of the statisti cs related to tran s- and gender -diverse 
individuals in regards to the disprop ortionate rates of depression and suicidal ideation  this community 
experiences . Research conducted over the last 6 years has  documented transgender people’s experiences with 
personal hate crimes, concerns for their safety, and feelings of depression and anxiety.  Studies have found that 
transgender people have a higher likelihood of experiencing depression, anxiety,  and PTSD when they were 
concerned about politicians passing anti -trans laws in their state.  Additionally, The Trevor Project’s 2021 
National Survey on LGBTQ Youth Mental Health survey found that 94% of the almost 35,000 LGBTQ + youth 
surveyed reported th at recent politics negatively impacted their mental health. Parents of transgender youth  also 
have fears about the consequences of banning gender -affirming care, including losing their child to suicide due 
to worsening depression, anxiety, self-harm, and suicid al ideation . In addition  to behavioral health concerns, it is 
also widely documented that transgender individuals  experience poorer  physical  health outcomes as compared 
with the general population due to frequent discrimination, bullying, and harassment. A recent report highlighted 
that nearly 40% of transgender respondents had postponed or skipped needed medical care because of disrespect 
or discrimination from providers.  Here in Maine, we ’re also seeing similar  data on our LGBTQ+ youth as 
reflected in the 2021 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey (MIYHS) . Simply put , I believe that Maine  can, and 
must, do better to keep our c itizens safe , healthy, and well. LD 10 40 is a step in the r ight direction.   
 
Gender -affirming care is safe, effective, and necessary for the health and well -being of transgender people. This 
life-saving care encompasses both social affirmatio n (e.g., supporting a transgender person’s chosen name and 
pronouns) and medical affirmation, which allows transgender people to live in a body that matches their gender 
identity. Recent research found that 98% of transgender youth who begin gender -affirmi ng medical treatment in 
adolescence continue gender -affirming medical care into young adulthood.  This adds to the vast body of 
scientific evidence demonstrating that gender -affirming care is essential for improving the mental health and 
overall well -being  of transgender people.  
 
Research has  shown that receipt of gender -affirming care among young people (aged 13 to 20) was associated 
with 60% lower odds of depression and 73% lower odds of suicidality.  Other studies have found similar positi ve 
impacts  on the mental health of transgender and nonbinary youth, including a nearly 40% lower odds of having a 
suicide attempt  in the past year when they have access to gender -affirming hormone therapy.  For transgender 
adults, gender -affirming sur geries were associated with reduced rates of suicide attempts, anxiety, depression, 
and symptoms of gender dysphoria along with higher levels of life satisfaction, happiness, and quality of life.  
While studies in peer -reviewed journals show that transgen der adolescents are at increased risk of suicide, 
depression, and other negative mental health conditions,  the scientific evidence indicates that access to 
gender -affirming medical care can reduce these negative experiences.  
 
Furthermore, professional a ssociations across medical and mental health disciplines agree that gender -affirming 
care is necessary for transgender people to be healthy, safe, and supported in who they are. Every major medical 
association endorses individualized and age -appropriate ac cess to gender -affirming care. This includes the 
American Medical Association , American Academy of Pediatrics , Federation of Pediatric Organizations , and 
American Psychological Association . These endorsements reflect expert consensus that gender -affirming care 
is medically necessary and lifesaving . 
 
Across the nation, p arity in the insurance coverage of medically necessary treatments which are prescribed by 
medical providers  who follow  best practice  standards of care, is a well -established principle in the Medicaid 
program.  Gender -affirming care is routinely provided by providers  and covered by insurers for a variety of 
indications, which may be met by transgender and cisgender  (non-transgender)  people alike . The provision of 
gender -affirming clinical services to transgender indiv iduals  is guided by the expert  standards laid out by the 
World Professional  Association for Transgender Healt h (WPATH ), which has  maintained these standards 
continuously since 1979.  The authority of these expert standards is recognized by major public and private 
insurance plans and coverage programs across the country . For example, the Federal Employee Health Benefits 
Program (FEHBP) requi res carriers to adopt “one or more recognized entities in order to guide evidence -based 
benefits coverage and medical policies pertaining to gender -affirming care and services, such as the  WPATH  
Standa rds of Care, the Endocrine Society, and the Fenway Institute. These entities provide evidence -based 
clinical guidelines for health professionals to assist transgender and gender diverse people with safe and effective 
pathways that maximize their overall he alth, including physical and psychological well -being.”  NASW ME 
believes that by enacting LD 1040, Maine can become a saf e place for transgender individuals of all ages to live, 
work, and play while resting assured that their medically n ecessar y healthcare se rvices re main  financially 
covered  and intact . We believe that Maine can lead the nation in ens uring all our citizens are safe and  cared for.   
 
I want to  thank you all for your work on this emoti onal and important issue .  Please do not hesitate to reach out 
to NASW ME for any support we can offer , including any behavioral health representation and participation in 
any future work sessions for LD 1040 . 
 
Thank you again,  
 
 
Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW  
Executive Director  
Maine Chapter – NASW  

References : 
 
• American Academy of Pediatrics. (2022, October 3). Leading Health Care Organizations Urge Action to Protect 
Physicians, Hospitals, Patients and Families from Violence. https://www.aap.org/en/news -room/news -
releases/ aap/2022/leading -health -care-organizations -urge-action -to-protect -physicians -hospitals -patients -and-families -
from -violence      
• Veldhuis, C. B., Drabble, L., Riggle, E. D. B., Wootton, A. R. & Hughes T. L. (2018). “I Fear for My Safety, but Want 
to Show Bravery for Others”: Violence and Discrimination Concerns Among Transgender and Gender -Nonconforming 
Individuals After the 2016 Presidential Election. Violence and Gender. 26 -36. http://doi.org/10.1089/vio.2017.0032  
• Hughto, J. M. W., Meyers,  D. J., Mimiaga, M. J., Reisner, S. L., & Cahill, S. (2021). Uncertainty and Confusion 
Regarding Transgender Non -discrimination Policies: Implications for the Mental Health of Transgender Adults. 
Sexuality and Social Policy. 19:1069 –1079. https://doi.org/1 0.1007/s13178 -021-00602 -w 
• Paceley, M. S., Dikitsas, Z. A., Greenwood, E., McInroy, L. B., Fish, J. N., Williams, N., Riquino, M. R., Lin, M., 
Henderson, S. B., & Levine, D. S. (2021). The Perceived Health Implications of Policies and Rhetoric Targeting 
Transgender and Gender Diverse Youth: A Community -Based Qualitative Study. Transgender Health. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/trgh.2021.0125  
• Kidd, K. M., Sequeira, G. M., Paglisotti, T., Katz -Wise, S. L., Kazmerski, T. M., Hillier, A., Miller, E., & Dowshen, N. 
(2021). "This Could Mean Death for My Child": Parent Perspectives on Laws Banning Gender -Affirming Care for 
Transgender Adolescents, The Journal of Adolescent Health. 68(6), 1082 –1088. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2020.09.010  
• Hughes, L. D., Kidd,  K. M., Gamarel, K. E., Operario, D., & Dowshen, N. (2021). "These Laws Will Be Devastating": 
Provider Perspectives on Legislation Banning Gender -Affirming Care for Transgender Adolescents. The Journal of 
Adolescent Health, 69(6), 976 –982. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.08.020   
• Hatzenbuehler, M. L., & Pachankis, J. E. (2016). Stigma and Minority Stress as Social Determinants of Health A mong 
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Youth: Research Evidence and Clinical Implications. Pediatric Clinics of 
North America, 63(6). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcl.2016.07.00 3 
• Medina, C., & Mahowald, L. (2022, September 8). Advancing Health Care Nondiscrimination Protections for 
LGBTQI+ Comm unities. Center for American Progress. https://www.americanprogress.org/article/advancing -health -
care-nondiscrimination -protections -for-lgbtqi -communities/   
• Green, A. E., DeChants, J. P., Price, M. N., & Davis, C. K. (2021). Association of Gender -Affirmin g Hormone 
Therapy With Depression, Thoughts of Suicide, and Attempted Suicide Among Transgender and Nonbinary Youth. 
Journal of Adolescent Health, 70(4). 643 – 649. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.10.036  
• Swan, J., Phillips, T. M., Sanders, T.,  Mullens, A. B., Debattista, J. & Bromdal, A. (2022). Mental health and quality of 
life outcomes of gender -affirming surgery: A systematic literature review. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Mental Health. 
DOI: 10.1080/19359705.2021.2016537   
• Connolly, M. D., Zer vos, M. J., Barone 2nd , C. J., Johnson, C. C., & Joseph, C. L. M. (2016). The Mental Health of 
Transgender Youth: Advances in Understanding. Journal of Adolescent Health, 59(5):489 -495. doi: 
10.1016/j.jadohealth.2016.06.012  
 
