1 
A 
'“°""‘* 
ACLU GL/\D EQUAUTYMAINE ,. l\/l;1in@ 
Maine Women's Lobby 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
LD 1040 - An Act to Require Reimbursement for Gender-af ﬁnning Care 
. 
for MaineCare Members 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Gia Drew. I am the Executive Director of 
EqualityMaine, which has been representing and advocating for Maine's LGBTQ+ 
community since 1984, and I am testifying today on behalf of EqualityMaine and our 
partners from GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders (GLAD), ACLU of Maine, the 
Maine Women's Lobby, and the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics 
in support of LD 1040, An Act to Require Reimbursement for Gender-affirming Care for 
MaineCare Members. We appreciate the Department and Representative Moonen for 
bringing this bill forward. 
With the passage of LD 1 - An Act To Protect Health Care Coverage for Maine Families, 
in 2019, exclusions for transgender healthcare in private insurance plans were 
removed, yet our state’s version of Medicaid - MaineCare - still had an exclusion. Asa 
result, the Maine Department of Health and Human Services initiated rulemaking to 
bring MaineCare into alignment with private insurance. Along with our GLAD, Maine 
TransNet, and ACLU of Maine partners we testified in favor of the change, and in the fall 
of 2019 DHHS adapted their rules, removing the exclusion and officially providing 
coverage for medically necessary care for transgender Mainers who utilize MaineCare. 
1 
10-144 Chapter 101, MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapter ll.
Unfortunately, medical care bans across the country represent one of the most extreme 
and coordinated political attacks on transgender people in years. These bills target 
transgender people, especially youth, by blocking their access to medically necessary 
care provided in a context of a long-developed, rigorous standard of care for 
assessment, diagnosis, and treatment. This affirming model has been recommended by 
nearly every major medical association, including the American Academy of Pediatrics, 
the American Medical Association, the American Psychological Association, the 
Endocrine Society, the World Professional Association for Transgender Health 
(WPATH), the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and many others. 
These bills not only display a fundamental lack of understanding of transgender people, 
but they also ban access to medically-necessary care and punish those who seek it by 
often criminalizing either the doctors or even the parents of transgender youth seeking 
to provide best-practice medicine for children in their care. ., 
Nationwide, state Medicaid policies reflect vaiying interpretations of federal regulations 
that prohibit discrimination based on gender identity. But 26 states, including Maine and 
the District of Columbia, explicitly say that their Medicaid program covers medically 
necessary care for transgender people, and we want to ensure this is the plainly stated 
in Maine law so that people can get the care they need. Of course, there is real fear in 
our community that what is happening in states across the country will end up causing 
harm here in Maine. 
This bill would prohibit the MaineCare program from discriminating in its reimbursement 
for medically necessary treatment on the basis of a MaineCare member's gender 
identity or gender expression, or on the basis that the MaineCare member isa 
transgender individual, and requires that the program cover medically necessary 
treatment for or related to gender dysphoria. Stated another way, gender transition that 
falls within a member’s scope of covered MaineCare benefits (physician services, 
prescribed drugs, inpatient and outpatient hospital sen/ices) will be compensable under 
the MaineCare program when medically necessary.
By steadfastly aligning with accepted standards of care, it represents a critical step in 
reducing documented transgender health disparities, especially in low-income 
populations. 
I urge you to support this bill, and to vote ought to pass on LD 1040. Let's respect and 
protect the rights of Mainers seeking life-saving medical care. 
Gia Drew 
(she/her) 
On behalf of: 
ACLU Maine 
EqualityMaine 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders (GLAD) 
Maine Women's Lobby 
Maine Chapter, American Academy of Pediatrics
