70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Maine Committee 
on Health and Human Services, I am Mike McClellan, Policy Director for the 
Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic League of Maine envisions a 
state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom flourishes, families 
thrive, and life is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and 
including in governance. 
I am here to testify against LD 1040, An Act to Require Reimbursement for 
Gender-Affirming Care for Maine-Care Members sponsored by Rep. Moonen. It is 
very sad to be here watching some in government again work to enable 
unhealthy behaviors in a way that affects, in this case children as well as adults. 
That we would be considering a bill that would make it easier to do things that 
cannot be repaired. I cannot be that much older than many of you - how do we 
not all see that children in their teen years are uncomfortable in their bodies. 
They want to be adults as quick as possible. Just watching movies we can see that 
past strategies to gain adulthood for kids include teens smoking, teens having sex, 
teens driving fast and other such behaviors. These strategies did not work, the 
kids often had to learn through growing pains. Many of us traveled that road.  
 
Past studies of children show that 80% of teenage “confused” kids are married 
and are in a traditional relationship 10 years later. More recent studies seem to 
have changed the number slightly downward but I have to wonder if adult 
encouragement is the reason for the change? I was drawn to the Keira Bell story a 
few years ago when this assault on our kids was beginning to ramp up. Living in 
England, she had a typical tomboy story and then as a mid-teen, felt alone. 
 
In a quick sense, the adults in her life encouraged her to transition. She talks 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 about a few “superficial” conversations with medical people, then she quickly 
moved forward. Parents, Dr.’s, therapists, counselors all in support. She had 
surgeries and became a life as a “man.” However, she soon realized the issues 
troubling her life remained. In quick time she began the detransition process. 
The consequences of what happened to her have been profound: possible 
infertility, loss of my breasts and inability to breastfeed, atrophied genitals, a 
permanently changed voice, facial hair. She now, like many who took these 
destructive steps, is an advocate against the surgery process. When I give 
blood, I must read a large booklet of all the issues associated with giving blood. 
It is simply amazing to me that in areas like abortion and transitioning…we do 
not feel the need to share the implications and possible consequences. 
 
I focused on children but feel the same for adults. Again, looking to Europe we 
see this has come and is beginning to turn as people and even governments in 
Europe are realizing the implications of endorsing surgeries to change bodies in 
ways that cannot be repaired. Please do not endorse this bill that would do 
such harm to people who in fact need real support systems. Vote ought not to 
pass on LD 1040 
Thank you for your time and consideration today.    
Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are praying for you and your 
families. God bless, 
 
Mike    
 
Mike McClellan 
Policy Director 
Christian Civic League Maine 
 
 
 
 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
  
