 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
 
TO:   Joint Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate  
 
DATE:  April 12, 2023 
 
SUPPORT – LD 1040, An Act to Require Reimbursement for Gender-affirming Care for 
MaineCare Members 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health and Government Affairs 
Associate for the Maine Medical Association and I live in Windham. The MMA appreciates the 
opportunity to submit the following comments in support of LD 1040 which would prohibit MaineCare 
from discriminating in its reimbursement for medically necessary treatment based on gender identity, 
gender expression or on the basis that the MaineCare member is transgender and requires that the 
program cover medically necessary treatment for or related to gender dysphoria.  
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings.  
 
The MMA’s core priorities include protecting, supporting, and advancing the access to and 
quality of health care for all Maine people. Transgender and nonbinary adults often face 
additional challenges and barriers to access needed health services and face worse health 
outcomes in comparison to cisgender individuals. Transgender adults are also more likely  to 
be uninured, report poor health, have lower household incomes, and have barriers to care due 
cost. 
 
In 2019, Maine began covering medically necessary care for transgender Mainers by removing 
an exclusion affecting gender transition care. MaineCare rules currently state: “Physicians and 
rendering providers will be reimbursed for providing MaineCare covered services to treat a 
member with gender dysphoria, as prescribed by a physician or other referring medical 
professional. Coverage for surgical services related to gender dysphoria will require a prior 
authorization…” This bill would ensure individuals have access to this care without fear of 
discrimination by putting this protection in statute.  
 
Gender dysphoria is a medical diagnosis that involves feelings of distress due to a strong, 
pervasive desire to be another gender. According to the American Psychiatric Association  the 
clinical guidelines for gender dysphoria diagnosis are as follows:  
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
  
The DSM-5-TR defines gender dysphoria in adolescents and adults as a marked incongruence 
between one’s experienced/expressed gender and their assigned gender, lasting at least 6 
months, as manifested by at least two of the following: 
• A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and primary 
and/or secondary sex characteristics (or in young adolescents, the anticipated 
secondary sex characteristics) 
• A strong desire to be rid of one’s primary and/or secondary sex characteristics because 
of a marked incongruence with one’s experienced/expressed gender (or in young 
adolescents, a desire to prevent the development of the anticipated secondary sex 
characteristics) 
• A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics of the other gender 
• A strong desire to be of the other gender (or some alternative gender different from 
one’s assigned gender) 
• A strong desire to be treated as the other gender (or some alternative gender different 
from one’s assigned gender) 
• A strong conviction that one has the typical feelings and reactions of the other gender 
(or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender) 
To meet criteria for the diagnosis, the condition must also be associated with clinically 
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of 
functioning. 
 
The DSM-5-TR defines gender dysphoria in children as a marked incongruence between one’s 
experienced/expressed gender and assigned gender, lasting at least 6 months, as manifested 
by at least six of the following (one of which must be the first criterion): 
• A strong desire to be of the other gender or an insistence that one is the other gender 
(or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender) 
• In boys (assigned gender), a strong preference for cross-dressing or simulating female 
attire; or in girls (assigned gender), a strong preference for wearing only typical 
masculine clothing and a strong resistance to the wearing of typical feminine clothing. 
• A strong preference for cross-gender roles in make-believe play or fantasy play 
• A strong preference for the toys, games or activities stereotypically used or engaged in 
by the other gender. 
• A strong preference for playmates of the other gender 
• In boys (assigned gender), a strong rejection of typically masculine toys, games, and 
activities and a strong avoidance of rough-and-tumble play; or in girls (assigned 
gender), a strong rejection of typically feminine toys, games, and activities. 
• A strong dislike of one’s sexual anatomy. 
• A strong desire for the physical sex characteristics that match one’s experienced 
gender. 
As with the diagnostic criteria for adolescents and adults, the condition must also be 
associated with clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other 
important areas of functioning. Treatments related to gender dysphoria include mental health 
counseling, gender-affirming hormone therapy, gender-affirming surgeries and non-medical 
social transition.  
 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 Transgender individuals have a statistically significant increase  in prevalence for mental health 
issues. Compared to the general population, transgender individuals with a gender 
incongruences were about 6 times as likely  to have a mood or anxiety disorder health care visit 
and more than 6 times has likely to have been hospitalized after a suicide attempt. Several 
recent studies have found that gender-affirming medical interventions were associated with 
lower odds of depression and suicidality.  
 
Protecting access to care by reducing barriers such as discrimination is essential to ensuring 
public health and improving health outcomes. LD 1040 would further our efforts to expand 
access to health care in the state of Maine and caring for our people.  
 
Thank you for your time and attention on this issue. We are happy to answer any questions the 
committee may have. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mikenzie Dwyer 
(mdwyer@mainemed.com ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Studies on the mental health outcomes of gender-affirming care 
 
Mental Health Outcomes in Transgender and Nonbinary Youths Receiving Gender-Affirming 
Care  
Diana M Tordoff 1, Jonathon W Wanta 2, Arin Collin 3, Cesalie Stepney 4, David J Inwards-
Breland 5, Kym Ahrens 6 
Affiliations expand. 
PMID: 35212746 PMCID: PMC8881768 DOI: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.0978 
 
Association of Gender-Affirming Hormone Therapy with Depression, Thoughts of Suicide, and 
Attempted Suicide Among Transgender and Nonbinary Youth.  
Green AE, DeChants JP, Price MN, Davis CK. 
J Adolesc Health. 2022 Apr;70(4):643-649. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.10.036. Epub 2021 
Dec 14. 
PMID: 34920935 
 
Association Between Gender-Affirming Surgeries and Mental Health Outcomes  
Anthony N. Almazan, BA1,2; Alex S. Keuroghlian, MD, MPH1,3,4 
Author Affiliations Article Information 
JAMA Surg. 2021;156(7):611-618. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2021.0952 
 
Gender-affirming Care Saves Lives  
Kareen M. Matouk and Melina Wald 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 Columbia University 
