 
       
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association in Support of : 
LD 1040: An Act to Require Reimbursement for Gender- affirming Care for MaineCare Members  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Room 209, Cross State Office Building Wednesday, April 1 2, 2023 
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive 
director of Maine Public Health Association.  
 
MPHA is the st ate’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent 
more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility ser iously. 
 
MPHA is  in support of LD 1040: “An Act to Require Reimbursement for Gender -affirming Care for MaineCare 
Members.” This bill prohibits the MaineCare  program from discriminating in its reimbursement for medically 
necessary treatment based on the MaineCare member’s  gender identity, gender expression, or on the basis that 
the MaineCare member is a transgender individual . The bill also requires that the p rogram cover medically 
necessary treatment for or related to gender dysphoria.  Transgender individuals are frequently subject to stigma  and discrimination, including in health care settings . 
As such, they are at greater  risk of poor health outcomes and health -harming behaviors , such as delaying 
medical care, because of mistreatment and other systemic barriers .
1,2 
 Improving access to gender -affirming care will improve health outcomes for transgender patients. Receipt of 
gender -affirming care has been  shown to reduce rates of suicide attempts, depression, anxiety, and substance 
misuse, and improve  medication adherence.
3 When people can access the health care they need, their health – 
mental, physical, and spiritual – improves. We believe this bill is good public health policy and will help 
improve health outcomes. We respectfully request you to vote to LD 1040 “Ought to pass.” Thank you for 
considering our testimony. 
 
 
1 Jackson CL, Agénor  M, Johnson DA, et al. Sexual orientation identity disparities in health behaviors, outcomes, and services use 
among men and women in the United States: A cross -sectional study. BMC Public Health  2016;16:807.  
2 Kates J, Ranji U, Beamesderfer A, Salganicoff A & Dawson L. Health and access to care and coverage for lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender (LGBT) individuals in the U.S.  Kaiser Family Foundation. 2018.  
3 State of Cal ifornia, Department of Insurance. Economic impact assessment : Gender nondiscrimination in h ealth insurance . Reg-
2011 -00023. 2012).  
