 
 
 
PO BOX 263 •254 ALEXANDER REED RD 
 RICHMOND, ME  04357
PHONE: 207-737-4092 • FAX: 207-737-7150
 E-MAIL: MRWA@MAINERWA.ORG
WEBSITE: WWW.MAINERWA.ORG
 
To:   Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee for Energy Utilities 
and Technology 
 
From:   Bradley Sawyer, Deputy Director  
 
Date:   April 20, 2023 
 
Re:  Testimony in Opposition to L.D. 1427, An Act to Clarify the Public Utilities Commission's 
Authority to Consider the Impact on Low-income Residential Ratepayers When Setting Rates 
 
 
The Maine Rural Water Association is a member-driven non-profit organization based in 
Richmond that specializes in training, technical assistance, and advocacy on behalf of our almost 300 
members. The majority of our membership is made up of water and wastewater utilities from around the 
state and are committed to ensuring clean and safe drinking water and a healthy environment through the 
proper treatment of wastewater.  
Maine Rural Water Association’s Policy Committee opposes this well-meaning legislation for 
two reasons. We also believe this legislation is not targeted at consumer owned water utilities so with an 
exemption for our industry we would rescind our opposition. 
Firstly, our members are concerned that the plurality of term “design rates” and how it may be 
interpreted in the future. While this could certainly refer to the different rates that separate utilities 
charge, we worry that it will lead to bifurcated rates in COUs based on income. Our members do not 
possess income data from their rate payers and asking them to do so would represent a significant 
addition in the workload of the front office staff. We also believe that in a consumer owned utility 
forcing some ratepayers above an arbitrary line to carry more of the burden is inherently unfair and runs 
counter to more than a century of industry practice.  
The second concern is that in a world of increasing costs water utilities are forced to spend more 
to maintain their aging infrastructure. This legislation has the ability to handicap consumer owned water 
utilities that need to increased revenue to stay above water with labor, capital projects, supplies, and 
maintenance. These utilities are constantly being asked to do more with less resources, and a proposal 
that may limit those further is concerning to us all.   
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this legislation, I am happy to be present at the 
work session should the committee like. If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me 
at Bradley.Sawyer@MaineRWA.org  or 207-737-9014.  
 
 
