MWUA Maine Water Utilities Association 
"‘-'~==-‘~" """'“ 
Organized 1925 
15 University Drive 
Aprﬂ 19, 2923 Augusta, Maine 04330 
207-623-951 1 
Honorable Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Honorable Stanley Zeigler House Chair 
Joint Legislative Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
l00 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in Opposition to LD 1427' , An Act to Clarify the Public Utilities Commission 's 
Authority to Consider the Impact on Low-income Residential Ratepayers When Setting Rates 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony in 
opposition to LD 1427 which would allow the Public Utilities Commission to consider low-income 
residential ratepayers in rate design. Currently, assistance is provided to low-income residential 
ratepayers through programs administered by other agencies; shifting this to the utility itself creates 
administrative burdens that small water utilities do not have the staff resources to handle. 
About MWUA. MWUA is a nonproﬁt association based in Augusta that provides support for water 
works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water through 
educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The 
Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members. 
Discussion. Water utilities have traditionally implemented rates which are just and reasonable, as 
required by law. These rates are allocated among customer classes based on principles of cost-causation, 
fairness, and public policy. In fact, the rules and regulations in place regulating water utility rates are 
based on these principles, ultimately governed by the PUC. 
This bill would direct the Maine PUC to consider implementing a new customer rate class for low-income 
customers. This is not a process that currently exists. However, it is important to note that today, whena 
customer has difficulty paying their bill, a water utility is required to provide that customer with avenues 
of assistance available to them in their community. Those avenues of assistance include things such as 
General Assistance available through the local municipality, charity organizations, and speciﬁc assistance 
programs such as the Maine Housing Authority/ ’s Maine Water Assistance Program. The organizations 
administering those programs are very good at determining levels of eligibility and at properly dispersing 
funding in a manner that maximizes beneﬁt to the intended recipients. 
If LD 1427' were adopted such that water utilities needed to administer a low-income rate, the implication 
is that water utilities would need to determine who is eligible for such rate. This is signiﬁcant because, 
unlike the community organizations who administer low-income programs, water utilities have neither the 
staff nor the resources to administer low-income assistance programs. We are, for the most part, small or 
very small organizations with very limited staffing in our business ofﬁces. Water utilities are structured 
to deliver safe drinking water and adequate ﬁre ﬂows to their customers and an efﬁcient and effective
t 
Letter from MWUA re LD 1427 
April 12, 2023 
Page2 
manner. They are not structured as social sen/ice entities capable of shifting the burden of funding 
revenues based on a customer ’s ability to pay. 
If this bill does move forward, we respectfully request that water utilities be exempt from this proposed 
change to rate design. 
Conclusion. We appreciate the opportunity to provide comments on this bill, and if the Committee has 
questions or needs additional information, please let us know. Again, we urge the Committee to vote 
ought not to pass on LD 1427. 
Sincerely, 
Et:&;::§W§/g 
Executive Director, 
Maine Water Utilities Association 
cc: 
Roger Crouse, Legislative Committee Chair, MW UA 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
