Testimony of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group 
In Opposition T0 
L.D. 1427, An Act to Clarify the Public Utilities Commission ’s Authority to Consider the 
Impact on Low-income Residential Ratepayers When Setting Rates 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology: 
The Industrial Energy Consumer Group (IECG) has been representing medium and large 
sized consumers of energy in Maine for more than thirty-ﬁve years at the state, regional and 
federal level. We advocate for policies that reduce the cost of energy for our members and cost- 
effectively help Maine achieve its climate goals. 
IECG has two overarching observations about LD 1427, which would amend one of the 
statutes governing the PUC, followed by one suggestion. First, the PUC already has the authority 
it needs to consider affordability when setting rates. By statute, the basic purposes of Maine’s 
regulatory system include “to assist in minimizing the cost of energy available to the State’s 
consumers ” and “to ensure that the rates of public utilities subject to rate regulation are just and 
reasonable to customers and public utilities ” . 35-A M.R.S. § 101. Any rate made, exacted, 
demanded or collected by any public utility for electricity “shall be just and reasonable ” , and 
every unjust or unreasonable charge for public utility service is prohibited and declared unlawful. 
35-A M.R.S. § 301(2)-(3). VVhen a utility proposes a rate change, the burden of proof to show 
that the change is just and reasonable is upon the public utility. 35-A M.R.S. § 310. How cana 
rate be “just and reasonable ” if it is not affordable by ratepayers? 
Second, Maine has various programs designed to support low-income residential 
ratepayers, including the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP), the Low Income 
Assistance Program (LIAP), the Arrearage Management Program (AMP), Efﬁciency Maine 
Trust (EMT), and protections against winter disconnection. The LIAP program was created in 
1997 to fulﬁll the statutory mandate “to meet legitimate needs of electricity consumers who are 
unable to pay their electricity bills in full and who satisfy eligibility criteria for assistance ” . 35-A 
M.R.S. § 3214. The statute requires the PUC to set LIAP funding levels periodically, at a level 
sufﬁcient “to continue existing levels of ﬁnancial assistance for low-income households and to 
meet future increases in need caused by economic exigencies. ” Id. The PUC has recently used 
this provision to increase funding for LIAP based on the increased cost of electricity. 
As noted above, the PUC already has the duty to ensure that rates are just and reasonable, 
and in exercising this duty the PUC can and should consider whether ratepayers can afford the 
rates that the PUC is setting. If the Legislature wanted to do anything to clarify this point, it 
could enact an amended version of LD 1427 explicitly providing that the PUC “may consider the 
ability of ratepayers to pay the rates and may design rates to be affordable ” — for all ratepayers. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments. IECG is happy to answer 
questions now or at the work session. 
20367266.l
