March 2, 2023
Testimony of the Honorable Barb Wood of Portland
In support of
LD 522 An Act to Require That Motor Vehicles Be Clear of Snow When Operated 
on Public Ways
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation
Good afternoon Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and esteemed members of the 
Transportation Committee. I am Barb Wood from Portland and was a House Representative in the 130th 
Legislature.  This is my first time back in a legislative meeting and it’s good to see everyone actually in a 
committee room! I am here today to testify in support of LD 522, An Act to Require That Motor Vehicles 
Be Clear of Snow When Operated on Public Ways. I will be giving very similar testimony to a bill I 
cosponsored in the 130th Legislature, LD 1623, An Act to Require That Motor Vehicles Be Clear of Snow 
and Ice When Operated on Public Ways. As the previous speaker said, this new bill is an improvement 
with the addition of the grace period. Last session there was an issue brought forward about stopping 
on the road DURING a storm to clear snow being a safety issue. The grace period would clear up that 
issue.
I became involved when a constituent contacted me after she saw a press conference re: that bill. She 
shared with me that she was on the highway in New Hampshire a few years back when a woman was 
killed because of the ice coming off of another vehicle on the highway. New Hampshire Passed “Jessica’s 
bill” shortly thereafter, which is similar to what is being proposed here today.
One of the issues that came up against the previous bill was about how to enforce it. I just couldn’t 
understand what the specific issue was? To me, it is enforced the same as something like speeding. 
When a law enforcement officer sees someone speeding, they stop them. They can issue a warning or a 
ticket that includes a fine. The same would apply here. If an officer sees someone driving with snow on 
their vehicle roof, they stop them. They can issue a warning or a ticket that includes a fine. I’ve done 
some research on this, and I’ve seen some places where fines are only given when there has been an 
actual incident of snow becoming dislodged and striking another vehicle, person or object.  That would 
be up to the committee to decide how stringent you wanted to be.
Personally, I am strongly supportive of this bill.  I ran the Distribution Center at L.L. Bean for a number of 
years.  For a period of time, the Trucking Department reported to me.  This topic came up back then and 
I was told by the supervisor who worked for me that there was no law against it, so the department 
didn’t do anything about the snow on top of a truck or tractor-trailer.
Whether there was a law or not, it was the right thing to do to remove snow and ice.  I was trained at a 
young age by my father to do this. And I want to mention that my father had a saying, “It takes 6 
seconds longer to do something right than to do something wrong.”  That was usually an exaggeration, 
but we always got his point. People are trainable and can learn to clean off their vehicle if they don’t do 
so already. 
I knew there would be an expense to deal with the big rigs at L.L. Bean.  But at L.L. Bean safety is really 
the utmost. So we built a structure, fondly called a “sky plow,” that tractor-trailers drive under and is at 
the height to scrape anow off the roof.  It can also be adjusted to different heights.
I spoke with the company in Kennebunkport that built and installed the “sky plow” several years ago at 
just under $20,000. Making one that isn’t quite as sophisticated would probably be about $15,000. They 
installed these devices at various trucking companies around the state and as far as Nassau, NH and 
Rochester, NY. These have been at places that have fleets of trucks, like L.L. Bean in Freeport and 
Hannaford in South Portland and Associated Grocers in Gardner. Yes, trucking companies and truckers 
are going to have to spend some money. But there is a way to solve this safety problem.
But what about companies? That’s a lot of expense for them. There are places that have gotten creative.  
The Ontario Trucking Association created an app, similar to what we have for Electric Vehicle Charging 
Station locations.  This particular app was for places where these structures are located and whose 
owners would agree, thru the Trucking Association, to let other members of the Association use their 
“sky plow.” Another examples was in New Brunswick, Canada where the government decided to invest 
in these devices and installed them at the 7 Trucking Weigh Stations on their highway.
There are ways to get creative and make this happen.  I’m afraid if we do nothing, this will continue to 
be a serious safety issue.  I don’t want Maine to have a “Jessica” incident like New Hampshire did, 
resulting in someone dying on the highway and then getting around to implementing a law.
Thank you for your time and consideration of LD 522. I would be happy to answer any questions you 
might have for me.
