STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
Traffic Safety Unit 
State House Station 20 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS ACT. COL. WILLIAM ROSS 
GOVERNOR CHIEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOT1‘ 
COMMISSIONER DEPUTY carer 
Testirnony of Lt. Bruce Scott 
IN SUPPORT or LD 522 
An Act to Require That Motor Vehicles Be Clear of Snow When 
Operated on Public Ways 
Senator Chipman, Rep. Williams, and distinguished Members of the 
]oint Standing Committee on Transportation, my name is Lt. Bruce 
Scott, and I am the Commanding Officer of the State Police Traffic 
Safety Unit. I am here today to testify on behalf of the Department of 
Public Safety and the Maine State Police in Support Of LD 52.2. 
This bill will clarify that a snow and or ice load must be properly 
secured to prevent it from falling from a vehicle. It will further require 
snow and or ice that accumulates naturally on the tops of vehicles to 
be cleared from the vehicle within 48 hours after a snow event. 
Contrary to previous similar bills that have failed in the past, this bill 
provides a reasonable amount of time for the operator of a snow and or 
ice covered vehicle to remove or have removed, the snow and or ice on 
the top of the vehicle. 
Current law, under Title 29-A section 2.396, already requires ill loads 
to be properly secured. This bill will add speciﬁc language to that 
section of law to include snow and or ice as a point of clariﬁcation. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
r 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax) _l 
2. 
:3 
1; 
*5
R
>:
This requirement does not include secured loads, such as built-up ice 
on the roof of a vehicle that is solidly frozen and not in danger of 
falling off, or when a reasonable effort has been made to cover the 
entire load. This bill creates a distinction between snow and or ice that 
was intentionally placed in the back of dump truck that is used to 
transport a snow and or ice load from one location to another and 
snow and or ice that has accumulated naturally on the top of a vehicle. 
Snow and or ice that is part of a load must be properly secured prior to 
transport and is not exempted during the snow event or the 48 hours 
after a storm. It is the snow and or ice that accumulated naturally on 
the vehicle that the operator has 48 hours after a snow event to 
remove or to ﬁnd a method to properly secure, so it doesn't fall off. 
Only if snow and or ice falls off from a vehicle and causes damage or 
injuries can an operator be cited within that 48-hour period. This bill 
seems like a commonsense approach to dealing with this issue in a fair 
and reasonable manner compared to previous bills that did not 
provide any grace period to allow others to safely gain compliance. 
Locating the exact number of crashes as a result of snow and or ice 
that has fallen off from other vehicles is difficult to determine as we 
don’t track that speciﬁc type of incident. We do collect data on all 
reportable crashes that occur as a result of falling or thrown objects 
which includes these types of crashes, rocks and debris kicked up from 
tires, snow that falls from bridges, unsecured loads, etc. From 
November 15° 2022, to February 23, 2023, law enforcement in Maine has 
recorded 93 crashes in this category type. I would estimate that 
approximately 30 of them are due to snow and or ice falling off from 
one vehicle and landing on another. We also know that many of those 
crashes would have been avoided if this law was in effect and adhered 
to. I have personally investigated dozens of these types of accidents 
that range from minor property damage crashes to serious bodily 
injuries to the occupants within the vehicle and at times were 
completely preventable. 
For these reasons, we urge you to vote in favor LD 522. 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State 
Police, I thank you for your time and would be happy to try and 
answer any questions that you might have. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
