Testimony for LD 522 - An Act to Require That Motor Vehicles Be Clear of Snow When Operated on
Public Ways
To the Transportation Committee:
I am writing to support LD 522: An Act to Require that Motor Vehicles Be Clear of Snow When
Operated on Public Ways. Last winter, as I was driving home on Route 1 from grocery shopping in
Brunswick to my home in Topsham, an 18 inch chunk of snow and ice from the roof of the car in front
of me flew up into the air. As the block of ice hovered over me, I quickly processed my options. I could
not change lanes because there was a car to my left. I could not pull into the breakdown lane because it
was not yet clear of snow and ice from the storm the night before and doing so would be unsafe. I
slowed down in the hope that the ice would miss my car. Unfortunately, luck was not on my side, and
the ice hit my windshield directly. Here is the photo of the result:
The cost of a rental car and repairs resulted in about $700 in out of pocket costs after insurance. While I
am lucky to be able to afford such an unanticipated expense, many Mainers are not. Moreover, I was
incredibly lucky that the impact did not lead to injury or worse.
This is just one example of what can happen on Maine roads when people neglect to clean off their
cars. I am sure the person in front of me did not leave home intending to cause so much damage.
Nonetheless, they did. The driver never stopped. I have no idea whether they even saw what happened
as a result of their lack of attention to clearing off their car. The outcome was that I was left “holding
the bag” for their negligence.

Supporting LD 522 will provide clear expectations to Mainers regarding their responsibility to operate
their vehicles on our public roadways after storms. It is unfortunate that we need a law to regulate
behavior toward making roads safer for all, but the fact remains that until we do, accidents like mine
will continue to happen. I urge you to support LD 522 and help keep our roads safer for Maine drivers.
Thank you,
Mar-E Trebilcock
Topsham Maine resident
10 Crabtree Drive, Topsham
Margaret  Trebilcock
Topsham
LD 522
I am not able to attend the Zoom or in person hearing. I have attached written 
testimony for your reference.
