TESTIMONY of Megan Diver                
Vice President
Maine Energy Marketers Association
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
Transportation
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 522
An Act to Require That Motor Vehicles Be Clear of Snow When Operated on Public Ways
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Transportation Committee. My name is 
Megan Diver, I am the President and CEO of the Maine Energy Marketers Association (MEMA).
MEMA is a trade association with approximately 300-member companies and over 5,000 direct and 
5,000 indirect people working in energy delivery and servicing businesses delivering heating oil, biofuels, 
motor fuels, propane, pellets and kerosene and offering service and installations on the equipment that 
operates these fuels. In addition, our members own and operate 70% of Maine's 1,300 convenience 
stores in Maine and employ approximately 10,000 Maine people and sell more than 1 billion gallons of 
gasoline and diesel fuel each year. We provide education and training to the heating, ventilation, air 
conditioning, weatherization, and energy auditing trades through our courses at our own state of the art 
training facility MEMA Technical Education Center (MTEC) in Brunswick. 
l am here today to testify in opposition to LD 522, An Act to Require That Motor Vehicles Be Clear of 
Snow When Operated on Public Ways.
The Association and each of our members strongly believes in motor vehicle safety, and certainly 
understands why this bill has been presented again this Legislature. The issue is not new to the Maine 
Legislature and the problems remain the same and that is that there is no easy solution. MEMA 
understands the that the issue at hand is to mitigate any problems that may stem from snow and ice 
accumulation. Clearing the snow and ice from passenger vehicles is relatively easy to accomplish. 
Clearing the snow and ice from commercial trucks, however, is not easy, safe, and sometimes not even 
possible.
In climates such as Maine's, snow and ice will always present a problem for our Industry. When trucks 
leave to deliver their products, the snow blows off the trailers and any ice that has accumulated may 
also come off in sheets hitting the highway. It would seem that an easy solution would be to have the 
driver clean the top of the trailer prior to travelling on a public way. This, however, presents a huge’ 
challenge as the trailer roofs are 13’ 5” in the air. Motor Carriers that allow their drivers to climb that 
high to clear trailers would be in violation of OSHA regulations which prevent working at such heights 
without proper safe guards. Further, the trailers are not built to accommodate walking on top of them. 
Box trailers are either thin metal or translucent plastic and are simply not designed to hold much weight. 
Walking on top, especially when it is slippery, would be dangerous for drivers.
While we understand why this bill was presented, we urge the committee to vote ought not to pass on 
this bill, or to carve out commercial trucks for which it would be impractical, if not impossible, to clean 
of ice and snow.
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions the committee may have.
