aura: moron 
£1 mmsroin ,r 
Assecrmou 1KiﬂAiril'ré4?% 
\nnI.mnta.un A,» 
A ‘ 
(26T)I23-412$ 
TESTIMONY OF 
Timothy S. Doyle 
A 
oN 
L.D. 522, “An Act To Require That Motor Vehicles Be Clear of 
Snow When Operated on Public Ways” 
Good afternoon, Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and 
members of the Transportation Committee. My name is Tim Doyle 
and I am the Vice President of Maine Motor Transport Association. 
The Association is comprised of over 1,700-member companies, 
whose employees comprise a large portion of the nearly 34,000 
people who make their living in thetrucking industry in Maine. _ 
l am here today to testify in opposition to LD 522. 
The Association strongly believes in highwayisafety, and certainly 
understands why this bill has been presented. This issue has been 
debated in this committee previously however the problem remains 
because there is no easy solution. Clearing the snow and ice from 
passenger vehicles is relatively easy and safe to accomplish. 
Clearing the snow and ice from -commercial trucks, however, is not 
easy, safe, and sometimes not even possible. -» 
ln climates such as Maine’s, snow and ice will always present a 
problem for our. Industry. Snow that accumulates on trailer roofs -s 
~»: 
fr 
5,‘ 
Ki
1 
i\
l
r 
7. 
ii 
3. 
X”
i 
l” iv 
,,
6
r ‘J
ll
industry. Drivers on the road have very few publicly available options 
for clearing snow from trailer roofs. -- 
Our Association believes that the long-term answer to this problem is 
to engineer a solution that would prevent snow and ice from 
accumulating on trailers in the first place. We have joined with 31 
other state trucking associations who have written to the National 
Transportation Safety Administration and the Federal Motor Carrier 
Safety Administration to urge them to work collectively with the 
trucking industry to determine the scope of the problem and develop 
the most practical, effective, and economically viable approaches to 
address the problem. 
We also advocate each year forour members to do everythingwithin 
their control to ensure that trucks are clear of snow, ice, or any other 
debris that can fall from their trucks during travel. We do this by 
publishing articles in our newsletter that’s available to all members 
and we strive to remind them annually. 
We appreciate the sponsors attempt to find compromise, giving up to 
48 hours after a snow event to clear the trailer. While this certainly 
mitigates the potential for fines, it seems to us difficult to enforce 
while doing little to solve the problem as accumulated snow is 
typically gone from trailer roofs soon after they begin travel. 1/- 
ll 
l
1 
ll 
ll 
ll 
ll 
’l
r
