 
  WWW.WSWA.ORG  
 
April 21, 2023     
 
Re: LD 1695, An Act to Provide for the D irect Shipment of Spirits to Consumers.   
 
Dear Chair s Hickman and Supica and committee members,   
 On behalf of the Wine and Spirits Wholesalers of America
1 (WSWA), whose members include 
wine and spirits wholesalers and brokers large and small across America, we respectfully submit these comments in opposition to LD 1695 which would authorize in- and out -of-state distillers 
and rectifiers to ship their produc ts directly to Maine’s  consumers. 
LD 1695 would harm Maine’s  distillers and state agency stores .  
LD 1695 would not benefit Maine’s  in-state distillers. Instead, the large spirit companies that 
have the infrastructure and can afford to ship across the country will take sales away from Maine’s  distillers and revenue away from Maine’s  agency stores .  
A recent study estimated that if spirits DTC was  enacted, Maine’s  spirits industry would lose 64 
jobs resulting in  $2,983,253 in lost wages.
2  
LD 1695 would increase the risk of underage access.   
The shipment of alcohol directly to consumers’ houses increases the likelihood of underage access as there is little to no oversight of the final delivery of the product by a common carrier.  
In fact, in April of 2021, t his committee heard testimony proving this very point from a Maine 
retailer David Makson who testified that a bottle of whiskey shipped illegally to his house by a 
common carrier that not only did not obtain a signature but handed it to his 5- year-old.
3  
This public safety concern goes unabated by BABLO as “Maine does not require carriers to be 
licensed, which means BABLO does not have administrative authority to enforce violations, so 
 
1 WSWA is the trade association that represents wine and spirits wholesalers large and small across America. Founded in 1943, 
WSWA includes more than 350 member companies in 50 states and the District of Columbia. Our members distribute more 
than 80 percent of all wines and spirits sold at wholesale in the United States. Across the country w holesalers employ 
approximately 87,000 people who receive nearly $7.5 billion in wages annually.  
2 Wine and Spirits Industry Direct Ship Enforcement Model, John Dunham & Associates , 2023,  
https://brandfolder.com/s/fhhqnwm7nzv47gv3ptzt7xr .   
3 VLA Public Hearing and Work Session 4/16/2021 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5CP0ltYDkQk&t=9621s  at 2:40:00.  
 
  WWW.WSWA.ORG  
 
an operation to assess carrier compliance with age identification, signature and delivery 
procedures would need to be coordinated with local law enforcement agencies.”4 
The problem is not unique to Maine. Compliance checks performed by the Massachusetts 
Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission (ABCC) found the following: 
• 96 percent  of DTC licensees investigated accepted orders and payment from a 15 -year-
old. 
• 43 percent of shipments did not obtain an adult signature upon delivery to the consum er.  
• 26 percent of shipments were left at the consumer ’s front door despite being labeled as 
containing alcohol.  
• 100 percent of deliveries failed to verif y the age of the recipient by checking an ID .5  
In an investigation into DTC shipments in Kansas , two shipments were delivered to underage 
individuals. In fact, one box of liquor was handed to a 7- year-old. In Vermont , a local retailer 
testified that a shipment of spirits was handed to his five -year-old. Moreover, nothing in LD 
1695 would prohibit a common carrier from delivering a package of spirits to one of Maine’s  29 
college campuses.  
In a recent survey of American moms, 91 percent  agreed that preventing underage drinking is 
important to consider when making new laws and regulations, and 72 percent  were concerned 
that DTC spirits shipping will increase underage access to alcohol.6 
BABLO is not equipped to audit DTC licenses or enforce compliance.  
Shipments from the country’s 4,126 distilleries would limit Maine’s  regulators’ ab ility to ensure 
taxes are properly collected, IDs are checked, and illicit alcohol is not getting into the hands of 
consumers.  
In 2022, there were 649 licensed wine  DTC shippers in Maine, in addition to 11,418 on- premises 
and off- premises licenses. The ratio of licenses to enforcement staff is already 1,631 to 1.7 
Maine’s  seven  enforcement agents would be overwhelmed if they become responsible for 
thousands of additional out-of- state spirits  DTC licenses .  
In fact, a recent  study of Maine’s current shipping environment found that “W hile Maine 
BABLO investigates complaints and suspicious situations, it does not routinely conduct 
 
4 Direct To Consumer (DTC) Shipping Assessment of State DTC Laws, Scope of Enforcement by States, Participation in Beverage 
Container Laws, and Input from Maine Stakeholders, pg. 2 2, https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9965 . 
5 https://www.wswa.org/news/massachusetts- abcc -finds -direct -link-between -dtc-alcohol -shipping- and- increased -underage .  
6 https://www.wswa.org/news/new- wswa -study -finds -us-mothers -concerned- direct -consumer- spirits -shipping- endangers -
children  
7 Direct To Consumer (DTC) Shipping Assessment of State DTC Laws, Scope of Enforcement by States, Participation in Beverage 
Container Laws, and Input from Maine Stakeholders, pg. 26 , https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9965 .  
 
  WWW.WSWA.ORG  
 
compliance operations to identify illegal shippers or assess delivery procedures without a 
compl aint.”8 
Additionally, “ [M]any of Maine’s systems are not digitalized yet, which also limits capacity for 
overseeing DTC shipping.” 
A recent study found that to fully enforce wine and spirits shipping laws in Maine it would cost 
$474,704, an increase of $395,447 from the estimated current expenditure on DTC enforcement.9 
Spirits  DTC  Expansion a Myth.  
Claims about an increased nationwide desire for DTC are simply not true. Only five states and D.C. authorize spirits to be shipped directly from producers to c onsumers. In 2021 and 2022, 
every one of the 13 states that introduced spirits DTC shipping bills chose not to enact permanent DTC because of the concerns listed above. In 2020, only one state, Kentucky, enacted spirits shipping legislation. 
We respectfull y request that you oppose LD 1695.  
Sincerely,  
 
Chelsea Crucitti  
Vice President, State Affairs  
Wine & Spirits Wholesalers of America  
 
 
 
8 Ibid, 22.  
9 Wine and Spirits Industry Direct Ship Enforcement Model, John Dunham & Associates , 2023,  
https://brandfolder.com/s/fhhqnwm7nzv47gv3ptzt7xr .   

