 
Testimony of Three of Strong Spirits 
In Support Of  
L.D. 1695, An Act To Provide for the Direct Shipment of Spirits to Consumers 
April 24, 2023 
 
 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Dave McConnell, I am a resident of Falmouth, Maine, and I am 
providing testimony in support of L.D. 1695 on behalf of Three of Strong Spirits (“Three of 
Strong”), a small distillery in Portland. 
 
We support this direct to consumer (“DTC”) legislation for a several reasons: 
 
It is Fair and it is Safe. 
 
Like a number of other states, Maine already permits wineries to ship directly to consumers in 
our state.  There are no special hazards associated with the shipping of spirits in consumer 
packaging as compared to the shipment of wine.  Common carrier shipments have both tracking 
and proof of age documentation.  In fact, DTC delivery has even more documentation and 
protection than over-the-counter sales, making it an even better way to prevent underage 
drinking. 
 
It is a win for consumers and for the State. 
 
Maine consumers should be allowed to legally purchase distilled spirits of their choosing and to 
choose how they want those spirits to be delivered.  Folks who live in the Greater Portland area 
have a wide variety of choices when it comes to distilled spirits, but people who live in the more 
rural parts of our state often do not.  If a local liquor store cannot find room on the shelf for a 
bottle of small batch rum made by a tiny Portland distillery like ours, then the people in that area 
who might otherwise want to try our rum won’t get that opportunity.  This bill would give folks 
in Eagle Lake just as many options when it comes to spirits as the people who live in Portland. 
 
As noted above, the state already has a system in place to track and collect tax from winery DTC 
sales, so it would not be difficult to replicate the system for distilleries.  Furthermore, increased 
access to the diverse range of unique offerings from small distilleries will bring increased tax 
revenue to the State. 
  

Three of Strong Spirits Testimony in Support of LD 1695 
April 24, 2023 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
It is a win for small distilleries. 
 
Despite the good intentions behind the DTC legislation that was enacted in an earlier session, 
because of reciprocity provisions in the DTC laws of many other states, Maine distilleries will be 
unable to take advantage of the growing wave of DTC laws around the country until Maine 
allows inbound DTC sales. 
 
DTC would be a gamechanger for Maine’s small distilleries.  Maine’s food and beverage culture 
is central to Maine’s “brand” as a tourist destination.  A critical part of the tourist experience is 
the ability to be able to visit a distillery and purchase products direct from the producer. 
However, in many cases the inconvenience of having to physically carry away a purchase (think 
of air travel for instance) or the legal inability to purchase directly from the distiller, significantly 
hinders both the hospitality experience for the customer and the economic benefits for the 
distillery – and the larger Maine economy. Allowing consumers to receive spirits at their location 
of choice permits the consumer to continue the relationship even after a return home, perhaps 
extending the experience by introducing the product to family or friends. 
 
DTC sales will help Maine distilleries with visibility in and out of our state, creating a cost-
effective way to generate the kind of product attention that is critical for attracting and 
supporting wholesale distributers. The dramatic increase in distilled spirit manufactures over the 
last decade (from less than 50 to now more than 1900), combined with a natural limit to how 
many products any one distributor can represent, has put a severe strain on a distribution system 
that was not built for so many small brands. Most small distilleries in Maine produce less than 
500 cases per year, and it is increasingly difficult—in many cases impossible—to secure 
distribution at that volume. DTC is the only viable path for most small distilleries to grow their 
sales to a level that would become attractive to a state, regional, or national distributor. Without 
DTC, small distilleries have no path to distributors.  Without distributors, small distilleries have 
no path to retail. 
 
Thank you for your consideration.  For all of these reasons, I urge the Committee to vote LD 
1695 “Ought to Pass.”  
