April 24, 2023 
Veterans & Legal Affairs 
Public Hearing - LD 1695 
Good morning distinguished committee members, 
My name is Kristina Hansen. l am the co-founder and general manager of Round Turn Distilling 
in Biddeford where we produce the Bimini Gin family of products. lam here today to testify in 
support of LD 1695. 
Since our opening in June of 2015, we have had the ability to connect directly with our local 
community and customers through our downtown tasting room. In-person retail sales of Bimini 
Gin constitutes a signiﬁcant percentage of our revenue, afforded by the privilege of being able 
to sell our gin at our facility without having to operate as a full agency store. It is our hope that 
this bill is voted out of committee "Ought to Pass" so that we can expand our community to 
include the whole state, particularly areas where our product is not available through local 
agents. 
There is precedent for this type of change. Maine lawmakers have approved other measures 
designed to aid small in-state producers like us. There were times in our ﬁrst year of business 
where our tasting room "sold out" of retail bottles, not because our entire inventory had been 
cleaned out, but because we simply sold through the cases of our product that we had to 
purchase from the state warehouse and have delivered back to us. Thankfully, in 2016, an 
amendment was passed that allowed us to simply track the inventory that passed through our 
tasting room, meaning we could now easily move product from our warehouse to our tasting 
room shelves and settle up with the state on a monthly basis, a system very similar to the sales 
reporting outlined in this bill. We can also now sell at farmer's markets and at tasting events. 
These provisions have allowed us to expand our presence as a small Maine company selling 
directly to Maine consumers, and we believe that LD 1695 can serve as the newest phase in this 
progression toward growing Maine's craft distilling sector and the state economy as a whole. 
We respectfully ask the members of this committee to consider the beneﬁts of this bill and to 
vote out LD 1695 "Ought to Pass." 
l thank you for your time and wish you a pleasant and productive week. 
Kristina Hansen 
kristina@roundturndistilling.com
