 
{W12898792.1}  
#16015488v1  
May 5, 2023 
 
Senator Craig Hickman 
Representative Laura Supica 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04330 
 
RE: LD 1695, An Act to Provide for the Direct Shipment of  
Spirits to Consumers 
 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs: 
Per a question asked at the public hearing last week, I appreciate the 
opportunity to share this list of advantages and disadvantages of a state 
control system for the sale of spirits in Maine. 
PROs 
• State revenue: Alcohol sales tend to have a solid profit margin for the 
state, which means that control states can earn a decent amount of 
revenue. This capital is then put back into the community to help 
improve public education and provide affordable healthcare . 
• Support and education for alcohol programs: Control states can use 
the revenue generated from liquor sales to support and educate people 
about alcohol programs . 
• Promoting moderate consumption: Control states can promote 
moderate consumption by controlling the distribution and pricing of 
alcoholic beverages . 
• Reduced alcohol-related problems: Control states can help reduce 
alcohol-related problems by controlling the distribution and pricing of 
alcoholic beverages . 

 
{W12898792.1}  
#16015488v1 • Better public health: The revenue generated from liquor sales can be 
used to provide better education and health facilities to the residents 
at a reasonable cost . 
• Reduced crime rates: Control states can help reduce crime rates by 
controlling the distribution and pricing of alcoholic beverages . 
• Better regulation: Control states can regulate the sale of alcohol more 
effectively than private businesses . 
• Agency store partnership: Control states create a valuable 
commitment to Maine based business and supports local communities. 
• Uniform pricing throughout the state: This ensures fair pricing in rural 
communities. 
CONs 
• Possibility for limited choices for consumers: Because the government 
controls the distribution and pricing of alcoholic beverages, consumers 
may have limited choices when it comes to purchasing alcohol . 
• Difficult for new distilleries: Because control states have a strict 
licensing process, it can be difficult for new distilleries to meet 
requirements. As a result, they may not prioritize applying for liquor 
licenses in control states . 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments.  RSVP remains 
supportive of our existing control state model, and opposed to the bill as 
currently drafted.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Newell A. Augur 
 

Newell Augur
RSVP
LD 1695
To the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs:
Per a question asked at the public hearing last week, I appreciate the opportunity to 
share this list of advantages and disadvantages of a state control system for the sale of
spirits in Maine.
PROs
•State revenue: Alcohol sales tend to have a solid profit margin for the state, which 
means that control states can earn a decent amount of revenue. This capital is then put
back into the community to help improve public education and provide affordable 
healthcare.
•Support and education for alcohol programs: Control states can use the revenue 
generated from liquor sales to support and educate people about alcohol programs.
•Promoting moderate consumption: Control states can promote moderate 
consumption by controlling the distribution and pricing of alcoholic beverages.
•Reduced alcohol-related problems: Control states can help reduce alcohol-related 
problems by controlling the distribution and pricing of alcoholic beverages.
•Better public health: The revenue generated from liquor sales can be used to 
provide better education and health facilities to the residents at a reasonable cost.
•Reduced crime rates: Control states can help reduce crime rates by controlling the 
distribution and pricing of alcoholic beverages.
•Better regulation: Control states can regulate the sale of alcohol more effectively 
than private businesses.
•Agency store partnership: Control states create a valuable commitment to Maine 
based business and supports local communities.
•Uniform pricing throughout the state: This ensures fair pricing in rural 
communities.
CONs
•Possibility for limited choices for consumers: Because the government controls the
distribution and pricing of alcoholic beverages, consumers may have limited choices 
when it comes to purchasing alcohol.
•Difficult for new distilleries: Because control states have a strict licensing process, 
it can be difficult for new distilleries to meet requirements. As a result, they may not 
prioritize applying for liquor licenses in control states.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments.  RSVP remains supportive 
of our existing control state model, and opposed to the bill as currently drafted.  
Sincerely, 
 
Newell A. Augur

