Chris Buchanan
Searsport
LD 1723
Honorable members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee, my name
is Chris Buchanan and I am a carpenter from Searsport.  Please accept this testimony 
in favor of LD 1723.
The last time I testified before you was in favor of LD 1111.  I was lucky to have the 
day off of work and I wish I had May 1 off as well.  Both of these bills are similar in 
the sense that they are not intending to prevent water extraction, but increase 
transparency and add public protections.  LD 1723 is also needed for the preparedness
measures it introduces.  
Over the past 20 years, concerned citizens and municipalities have been frustrated and
alarmed by shortcomings in the existing regulatory framework.  Yes, there are many 
state agencies involved in the regulation of large scale water extraction.  However, 
there have been numerous, shameful, conflict of interest issues in all of those 
agencies, and in my view no one is looking out for the big picture.  LD 1723 not only 
increases oversight in a sensical and manageable way, it brings water into every day 
conversations about the future of our people, small business, and agriculture.
I think its important that the goals of this bill address the recommendations of the 
2022 Commission to Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine.
Water is the essential element of our lives.  Nothing about its protection and use 
should be difficult to access.  No one who is making money off of it should be in a 
position to decide how much is sold.  I believe we will all benefit from the increased 
awareness the implementation of this bill will provide.  Industry players like Poland 
Spring should have no problem dealing with the measures outlined by this bill.  To 
make an analogy with phone or computer upgrades, which we must all do regularly to
maintain functional devices... While the state remains married to absolute dominion, 
LD 1723 is a smart, approachable update to address the bugs in our archaic water 
regulatory system.
