Greetings Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and ENR Committee Members,   My name is Clifford Krolick I live in Parsonsfield, Maine and I am testifying in support of LD 1723  “An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and Contracts in a Sale of Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to Amend the Membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public Drinking Water Commission”.  More than any other resource water is the most important.  Maine has been blessed with abundances of water.  Yet it is easy even for abundant circumstances to Change on a dime This is particularly true as the weather becomes more unpredictable and extremes become commonplace  Maine is not spared of periods of draught. The Fire of 1947 was a prime example and more currently it is not uncommon to have weeks of no or very little rain.  And we all know of friends or neighbors wells have gone dry.  Large extraction corporations certainly can have a lasting effect on local water aquifers. This is why we should let local populations have some choices and be able to update and review current aquifer conditions, and particular requests or continuations prior to the sale of a town asset, which is really a public asset.  We need not be run over at the time of transferring ownership.     This act LD1723 recognizes and appreciates the towns relationships to its resources and its’ people.  BOTH need to come 1st prior to it’s possible new corporate resident. And water management committee members need to be regularly updated or amended with new members to be decided by voters.  This will help prevent long term influence pedaling and corruption.  
clifford Krolick
Parsonsfield
LD 1723
Greetings Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and ENR Committee Members,
My name is Clifford Krolick I live in Parsonsfield, Maine and I am testifying in 
support of LD 1723 “An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and 
Contracts in a Sale of Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to 
Amend the Membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine 
Public Drinking Water Commission”.
More than any other resource water is the most important. Maine has been blessed 
with abundances of water. Yet it is easy even for abundant circumstances to Change 
on a dime
This is particularly true as the weather becomes more unpredictable and extremes 
become commonplace
Maine is not spared of periods of draught. The Fire of 1947 was a prime example and 
more currently it is not uncommon to have weeks of no or very little rain. And we all 
know of friends or neighbors wells have gone dry.
Large extraction corporations certainly can have a lasting effect on local water 
aquifers. This is why we should let local populations have some choices and be able 
to update and review current aquifer conditions, and particular requests or 
continuations prior to the sale of a town asset, which is really a public asset. We need 
not be run over at the time of transferring ownership.
This act LD1723 recognizes and appreciates the towns relationships to its resources 
and its’ people. BOTH need to come 1st prior to it’s possible new corporate resident. 
And water management committee members need to be regularly updated or amended
with new members to be decided by voters. This will help prevent long term influence
pedalling and corruption.
