      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
May 1, 2023  
 
RE:  LD 1723 “An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and Contracts in a Sale of 
Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to Amend the Membership of the 
Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public Drinking Water Commission”  
 
Senator B renner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Cullen Ryan and I live in Portland and 
Denmark Maine, and I am testifying is strong support of LD 1723.  I am also the Executive 
Director of Community Housing of Maine (CHOM), which provides supportive and affordable 
housing to 1160 of Maine’s most vulnerable residents in urban and rural areas of Maine  in 
1010 apartments spread out across the state.   
 
As you know, t his bill does the following:  
 
1. It amends the membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine 
Public Drinking Water Commission by prohibiting a person who has received income from an 
entity engaged in the export from the State of water extracted in t he State or has an immediate 
family member who has received income from such an entity from serving as a member.  
 
2. It amends the duties of the Water Resources Planning Committee to include planning for the 
sustainable use of water resources by encouragin g the consolidation and centralization of 
collected state water resources information within a single state agency, ensuring public 
access to that information and identifying opportunities and resources to enhance or 
supplement the collection of state wate r resources information. It requires the Water 
Resources Planning Committee to submit a report to relevant joint standing committees of the Legislature including a summary of the Water Resources Planning Committee's activities 
during the prior calendar year and any findings and recommendations.  
 
3. It amends the duties of the Maine Agricultural Water Management Board to include 
recommendations for measures to enhance drought preparedness and drought resilience by 
agricultural producers and requires the boar d to submit a report to the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation including a summary of the board’s activities during the prior calendar year and any findings and recommendations.  
 
4. It establishes the Commission to Study the Role of Water as a Resource i n the State of 
Maine to develop findings and recommendations, including any suggested legislation, to ensure that there is adequate clean, safe and accessible drinking water for the State's residents 
and to meet the needs of commercial and business interests now and in the future. This study is designed to build off the work of the Commission to Study the Role of Water as a Resource in 
the State of Maine that was established pursuant to Resolve 2021, chapter 185. The 
commission is also required to review proposed major substantive rules of the Maine Public 
Drinking Water Commission regarding the transfer of a permit or contract in a sale of assets 
of an entity engaged in the exporting from the State of water extracted in the State and making 
recommendations, if any, to the Maine Public Water Drinking Commission.  
 
5. It requires the Maine Public Water Drinking Commission to adopt major substantive rules 
regarding the transfer of a permit or contract in a sale of assets of an entity engaged in the 
exporting from the State of water extracted in the State and to submit the proposed rules to the 
Commission to Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine established under 
this bill for review before submitting the proposed rules for legis lative review.   
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro  
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins  
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan  
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell  
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba  
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea 
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Sarah Derosier  
Asset  Manager  
 
Chris Harmon  
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill 
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
These five things will be beneficial t o Maine.  Maine is fortunate to have a good and healt hy supply of groundwater 
maki ng for a healthy ecosystem, safe potability, biodiversit y of species, and healthy wilderness areas.  Overexploiting 
this resource will ne gatively af fect every f acet o f Maine.  From an econ omic perspective, ther e may be some benefit to 
water ex traction  in the form of modest ta x revenue .  But there is a far greater economic, social, and practical advantage 
to preserving our ecology and beautiful lakes, streams , vernal pools, aquifers , and surrounding areas.  They support the 
very balance that makes Maine a wonderful place to live and interact with nature .  They make Maine a tourist 
destination, a recreational destination, a nd a great place t o live and raise a family.  The revenue benefits of these 
factors outweigh extraction revenue for everyone except the huge corporation that is pumping and hauling our precious 
resource out of Maine.   
I hand built a camp in Denmark.  I built it using secondhand material s from U ncle Henry’s and  #4 g rade pine from 
lumber compani es headquartered in Maine.  I a m there eve ry weekend,  and frankly every ch ance that I can.   It is next 
to a small trout pond and adjacent to Pleasant Mountain with wonde rful hiking trails .  Many of my neighbors have 
built similar homes and have begun t o retire there as full-time residents.  The 42- acre pond (Long Pond) and many 
other bodies of water sit right on top of a large aquifer now being pumpe d to 60% of its rechar ge rat e on a daily b asis.  
Over the past 24 years I have watche d the frog population become a fracti on of what it was while the pond steadily 
shrinks.  It used to be 2 feet higher in dept h in the spring; now it is comm on to see it never re-charge.  T his is a spring 
fed pond, a nd the springs are affected by  the water extraction  below.  O ur pond is slowly but perceptibly disappearing 
in front of our eyes.  Our wells are drying up.  A nd we as residents a nd taxpaying non- resident s appear t o be powerless 
to correct this.  
Poland Spring, a.k.a. N estle B lue Triton,  is a multinational corporation .  Denmark is a town with 1100 residents.  The 
town is so frugal it doesn’t pave many  of its roads and doesn’t paint l ines on  the one s it paves in m any cases.  I t’s also 
very spari ng in its use of the town attorney.  In a nutshell, it was vastly outgunned and outwitted by Poland Spring 
then, and Blue Triton now , and meanwhile the unde rlying aquifer is maki ng millions of dollars for the corporation.   
The Town residents and seasonal residents are losing in this equation.   
This bill begins to change the balance .  Instead of each of 437 municipalities having a go of it with a major 
multi national corporation wit h extraction interests affecti ng an entire regi on, it puts the State of Maine in the protector 
role.  It levels the playing field.   
Water extraction happens in a number of towns in Maine.  Each time water is removed below that town, it is drawn 
from aquifers that extend regionally and underlie other towns which have not even been involved with the permit 
process.  Yet there are no regional protections.  T here are no state protections.   We need Maine to ste p into the middle.  
We need to have an eye on the big picture – pr otection of our comm on resources, protection of the very essence of 
Maine, and accountabilit y for corporations who are having a free for all with our resources a nd maki ng a joke of our 
outgunned small towns.  
Please pa ss LD 1723 to protect the people and the biodiversity of Maine.  Your constituents who are building their 
lives here depend on you doi ng this.  Thank you for the oppo rtunity t o comment.    
One C ity Center , 4th Floor · Portland, M E 04101 · phone 207.879. 0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org 
Cullen Ryan
Portland
LD 1723
May 1, 2023
RE:  LD 1723 “An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and Contracts in
a Sale of Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to Amend the 
Membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public 
Drinking Water Commission”
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Cullen Ryan and I 
live in Portland and Denmark Maine, and I am testifying is strong support of LD 
1723.  I am also the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine (CHOM), 
which provides supportive and affordable housing to 1160 of Maine’s most 
vulnerable residents in urban and rural areas of Maine in 1010 apartments spread out 
across the state.  
As you know, this bill does the following:
1. It amends the membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the 
Maine Public Drinking Water Commission by prohibiting a person who has received 
income from an entity engaged in the export from the State of water extracted in the 
State or has an immediate family member who has received income from such an 
entity from serving as a member.
2. It amends the duties of the Water Resources Planning Committee to include 
planning for the sustainable use of water resources by encouraging the consolidation 
and centralization of collected state water resources information within a single state 
agency, ensuring public access to that information and identifying opportunities and 
resources to enhance or supplement the collection of state water resources 
information. It requires the Water Resources Planning Committee to submit a report 
to relevant joint standing committees of the Legislature including a summary of the 
Water Resources Planning Committee's activities during the prior calendar year and 
any findings and recommendations.
3. It amends the duties of the Maine Agricultural Water Management Board to 
include recommendations for measures to enhance drought preparedness and drought 
resilience by agricultural producers and requires the board to submit a report to the 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation including a summary of the board’s activities 
during the prior calendar year and any findings and recommendations.
4. It establishes the Commission to Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State
of Maine to develop findings and recommendations, including any suggested 
legislation, to ensure that there is adequate clean, safe and accessible drinking water 
for the State's residents and to meet the needs of commercial and business interests 
now and in the future. This study is designed to build off the work of the Commission
to Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine that was established 
pursuant to Resolve 2021, chapter 185. The commission is also required to review 
proposed major substantive rules of the Maine Public Drinking Water Commission 
regarding the transfer of a permit or contract in a sale of assets of an entity engaged in
the exporting from the State of water extracted in the State and making 
recommendations, if any, to the Maine Public Water Drinking Commission.
5. It requires the Maine Public Water Drinking Commission to adopt major 
substantive rules regarding the transfer of a permit or contract in a sale of assets of an 
entity engaged in the exporting from the State of water extracted in the State and to 
submit the proposed rules to the Commission to Study the Role of Water as a 
Resource in the State of Maine established under this bill for review before submitting
the proposed rules for legislative review.
These five things will be beneficial to Maine.  Maine is fortunate to have a good and 
healthy supply of groundwater making for a healthy ecosystem, safe potability, 
biodiversity of species, and healthy wilderness areas.  Overexploiting this resource 
will negatively affect every facet of Maine.  From an economic perspective, there may
be some benefit to water extraction in the form of modest tax revenue.  But there is a 
far greater economic, social, and practical advantage to preserving our ecology and 
beautiful lakes, streams, vernal pools, aquifers, and surrounding areas.  They support 
the very balance that makes Maine a wonderful place to live and interact with nature.  
They make Maine a tourist destination, a recreational destination, and a great place to 
live and raise a family.  The revenue benefits of these factors outweigh extraction 
revenue for everyone except the huge corporation that is pumping and hauling our 
precious resource out of Maine.  
I hand built a camp in Denmark.  I built it using secondhand materials from Uncle 
Henry’s and #4 grade pine from lumber companies headquartered in Maine.  I am 
there every weekend, and frankly every chance that I can.  It is next to a small trout 
pond and adjacent to Pleasant Mountain with wonderful hiking trails.  Many of my 
neighbors have built similar homes and have begun to retire there as full-time 
residents.  The 42-acre pond (Long Pond) and many other bodies of water sit right on 
top of a large aquifer now being pumped to 60% of its recharge rate on a daily basis.  
Over the past 24 years I have watched the frog population become a fraction of what 
it was while the pond steadily shrinks.  It used to be 2 feet higher in depth in the 
spring; now it is common to see it never re-charge.  This is a spring fed pond, and the 
springs are affected by the water extraction below.  Our pond is slowly but 
perceptibly disappearing in front of our eyes.  Our wells are drying up.  And we as 
residents and taxpaying non-residents appear to be powerless to correct this. 
 
Poland Spring, a.k.a. Nestle Blue Triton, is a multinational corporation.  Denmark is a
town with 1100 residents.  The town is so frugal it doesn’t pave many of its roads and 
doesn’t paint lines on the ones it paves in many cases.  It’s also very sparing in its use 
of the town attorney.  In a nutshell, it was vastly outgunned and outwitted by Poland 
Spring then, and Blue Triton now, and meanwhile the underlying aquifer is making 
millions of dollars for the corporation.  The Town residents and seasonal residents are
losing in this equation.  
This bill begins to change the balance.  Instead of each of 437 municipalities having a 
go of it with a major multinational corporation with extraction interests affecting an 
entire region, it puts the State of Maine in the protector role.  It levels the playing 
field.  
Water extraction happens in a number of towns in Maine.  Each time water is 
removed below that town, it is drawn from aquifers that extend regionally and 
underlie other towns which have not even been involved with the permit process.  Yet
there are no regional protections.  There are no state protections.  We need Maine to 
step into the middle.  We need to have an eye on the big picture – protection of our 
common resources, protection of the very essence of Maine, and accountability for 
corporations who are having a free for all with our resources and making a joke of our
outgunned small towns. 
Please pass LD 1723 to protect the people and the biodiversity of Maine.  Your 
constituents who are building their lives here depend on you doing this.  Thank you 
for the opportunity to comment.   

