Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and members of the ENR Committee:  
I represent no agency or entity other than myself and write testimony in support of LD 1723 , as it attempts to 
restore the public trust and to close the backdoors and blind spots  that allow Maine to be bamboozled with 
respect to its water resources . We’ve been bamboozled for the last generation by the groupthink of analysts, 
experts, lobbyists , and wate r utility shills  working lockstep with a bottler who controls th e entire market in this 
state and has our government in a perpetual state of paralysis . I’d like to end that, as it’s embarrassing to watch  
and unbecoming of our state representatives and agencies . 
Maine has dropped the ball on respect for, and protection of, its water for the last 30+ years, at our own peril.  
We are one of only a handful of states  left in the nation who has not kept up.  
As far as the 2005 -2007 or t he 2022 token ‘’water committees’’, they were both compromised as we ha d not  yet 
remove d the backdoor s allow ing international conglomerates to influence and control their own risk and profit 
through our government agencies , committees, and commissions . I’d recommend folks on the ENR Committee 
spend some time to fully read and understand the 1989 -1991 Water Board Report , as that was prior to Maine’s 
state government, boards, commissions, and agencies being compromised.  
A preference of mine would be that this  legislative bill , LD 1723 , articulate s that the State will consider moving 
to Reasonable Use  (nullifying Absolute Dominion ), and after 12 years maybe actually complete  their water 
committee duties and define the bulk water extraction use , define reasonable use of water , and affirm that 
political subdivisions are being undermined and subverted from reviewing and approving of this use in their 
region  and that  it is caus ing impacts outside of the wellhead , but this will do for a first step.  
A prefere nce of mine would also be that we comply with Section 402 of the Federal Pollution Control Act, 33 
USC, Sec. 1342 and not allow water resource managers of multi -national conglomerates  bottling water  to 
influence the risk and profit of their parent corporat ion from within seats on our state BEP, MDWP , and Water 
boards, commissions, and committees . We can’t really make any sensible improvements regarding our water 
without closing th ese backdoor conflict s of interest.  
A preference of mine is that we repeal the 2009 law that obscures state agenc ies, department s, commission s, 
utilit ies, and bottler actions regarding long -term contracts, as it is very shady and inappropriate ( See MRSA 35 -A 
Section 6109 -B subsections 5.A.1 and 5.B implemented in 2009).  
A preference of mine is that the State  of Maine  stop  hiding bottling extraction and wellhead location data from 
the public, as it is  also very shady and inappropriate.    
I’d like to unpackage  these and get back to affirming our State sovereignty on water if we can , and if you are 
willing to help.  
For a basic overview of the egregious behaviors of this hidden industry  here in Maine , please review my 
testimon ies for LD11 11, LD73, and LD 1248 , link s below :  
https://legislature.maine.gov/backend/app/services/getDocument.aspx?doctype=test&docu mentId=10014346  
https://legislature.maine.gov/backend/app/services/getDocument.aspx?doctype=test&document Id=10019636  
 
 
 
 
 
After the State’s failure to act from 1991 to 1999, the Maddox v. Giles ruling basically sealed Maine’s fate to a 
life of servitude under  corporate take -over . You can see how they metastasized like a cancer, then infiltrated our 
State to gut our water pro tection laws.  Now are unfavorable contracts are being sold to the highest bidder.  
For the last six (6) years, our state  ‘’experts  and advisors ’’ and the largest controlling interest in the bottling 
water market here in Maine have  been steadfast and consistent in  vehemently f ighting  against any and all 
legislation that seeks to  improve transparency, defen ds of home rule authority, limits unreasonable contract 
lengths, remov es conflicts of interests, nullifi es absolute dominion due to waste, neglect, and abuse  by large -
scale bottlers and aquaculture speculators , restores economic and social equality, assure  accountability and 
democracy regarding our water , or anything water stewardship that is  in the long -term best interests of all 
Mainers.  
 
Even here in the 131st, when LD1111 was introduced to limit contracts and reaffirm that political subdivisions 
have Home Rule Authority ( water utilities  are not municipalities, although they may feel they are ), the testimony 
in opposition from water district s was that honoring Home Rule was hurting  Home Rule by prevent ing water 
utilities from doing whatever they want , with whoever they want, however they want, without any oversight or 
transparency , and being a ble to caus e negative impacts to regions of Maine without accountability .  
Maybe if public utility trustees spent  less time in Augusta fighting against transparency, accountability, 
democracy , and reason  they  would have more time to properly manage their  own infrastructure and recover 
decades of depreciation neglect.  
After all of this, we’ve now  got a water bottler controlling the market here in the State of Maine wh o is now  
desperate to recover from recent losses and to restore their promised profit margins to  shareholders of water 
futures (see below ): 
 

“[A] big buy out fac ing fi nancial pres sure is One Rock Cap ital Part ners LLC and Metropou los & Co.’s $4.3 bil -
lion pur chase in 2021 of  Blue Triton Brands, which owns Poland Spring wa ter and o ther bev erage mak ers. The 
company doesn’t have in terest-rate hedges to mit igate the im pact of ris ing rates on its $2.4 bil lion buy out loan, 
according to a re port by Moody’s, which down graded Blue Triton to a low -junk rat ing on March 27. “  (April 10, 
2023 – WSJ article)  
When large corporations get a low -junk rating they take calculated risks . What will this mean for Mainers , do 
you think they will make sound contract decisions in our best interest ? Do you think our water utilities will make 
sound contract decisions based on good faith either? Right now, neither  of them have to legally do anything.   
We’re in the worst position possible now, a hot potato having  long -term contracts we ’ve signed being 
transferring between vulture capi talists . This  is the last place we want to be . 
Maybe t he bottler who controls 96% the market  in Maine  and has our state government in  complete  paralysis 
will send its lapdog public utilit ies to speak to you on its behalf . Maybe  the water district  who has the cheapest 
and most embarrassing large -scale extraction rate fee in all of Maine , can’t manage its infrastructure, and  who 
only needs a few  trinkets in return to be a shill  will continue to come to Augusta and rail against democracy and 
transparency  (Rumford ): ‘’It will make things hard for us’’, ‘’ They (insert monopolist)  do so much for helpless us’’, 
‘’We have so much clean water it’s insane, no one will ever know’’, ‘’ Accountability, transparency, and quality  
cause burden s and  stress  on trustees’’,  ‘’This is unfair’’, ‘’  transparency and quality assurance hurts Home 
Rule’’ …….who knows .  
Water is one of the most precious things on Earth, yet Maine has been giving  it away , subverting local and 
regional control , allowing the integrity of its  boards , commissions, and committees to be compromised, and 
bouncing  around unfavorable and stupid contracts to the highest  bidder as markets collapse . 
Maybe we stop doing that , and it starts by requiring reasonable length contract caps , closing backdoor conflict s 
of interest , and giving in to common sense and reason that activities , conditions, and agreements surroun ding  
our water should be reviewed more fre quently  and be treated with more care , especially as it trades hands .  
I strongly urge the committee to  vote OUGHT TO PASS on LD 1723 , likely one of the most important bills of our 
lifetime. I’d like to look back on this in 40 years and say that I was proud of Maine for standing up for itsel f and 
for social and economic equality.  Be strong ENR, don’t buckle.  
