Elisabeth Thompson
Brownfield, Me
LD 1723
My name is Elisabeth Thompson and I live in Brownfield Maine and I am testifying 
in support of LD 1723  “An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and 
Contracts in a Sale of Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to 
Amend the Membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine 
Public Drinking Water Commission”.
Our town shares the Ward's Brook Aquifer with Fryeburg and is adjacent to Denmark 
Maine. I was part of the group that produced Brownfield's Water Extraction 
ordinance.  That fact that Black Rock/Poland Springs has a permit to extract 
603,000,000 gallons a year from Fryeburg, which shares an aquifer with Brownfield 
and 105.1 million gallons a year from the adjacent Town of Denmark is of grave 
concern to our town and its residents. 
As a result of the work that was done to understand the issue and to protect the 
Town's water we studied the issues inherent in large scale water extraction. 
What we learned is that is is extremely difficult to understand the health and volume 
of the aquifer or the affect of withdrawing vast volumes of water and removing if 
from the area.  It was alarming to discover that the 2018 study by Emery and Garret in
the Ground Water Investigation produced for the Town of Fryeburg was based on an 
extrapolation of the results found in the 2003-2005 study of the Ward's Brook 
Aquifer.  The results were published in a report labeled: "Recalibration and 
Application of the Numerical Model of the Wards Brook Aquifer." Under the section,
“Limitations of the Model”, it was stated that they were unable to accurately simulate 
the hydraulic connection between the Aquifer and Wards Pond.” Additionally it was 
stated, “The numerical model is not designed to provide a determination of the 
minimum flow required in
Wards Brook to protect flora/fauna or the aesthetic value of a particular flow regime 
in Wards Pond, Wards Brook or Lovewell Pond. Only observations and/or modeling 
by a qualified Natural Resource Specialist can provide insight into the potential 
impact of any change in the surface water flow regime." There is NO concrete study 
of the impact on the aquifer of this extraction other than observation of lowered water 
levels and dry wells. We have many residents whose wells go dry during periods of 
drought, however this data is only voluntarily submitted and not collated.
LD1723 will create a committee to gather information necessary to understand the 
health of our State's water resources thus giving individual communities a realistic 
perspective of  their water resources and when faced with permit applications or 
renewal permits for large scale extraction, they will have a better understanding of the
consequences of approving the permit, both intended and unintended.  Additionally, 
addressing the membership of those overseeing our water resources is a necessary 
step in protecting this one of our state's most valuable resources.
Water is life; in Maine we are blessed with this resource but need to be wise in its use.
Please vote to pass LD1723
Thank you.  Elisabeth Thompson

