Testimony in Opposition 
5/8/2023 
LD 1723, An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and Contracts in a Sale of Assets of a 
Water Export Company Without Review and to Amend the Membership of the Water Resources 
Planning Committee and the Maine Public Drinking Water Commission 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Honorable Members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee;  
On behalf of the Poland Spring brand, I am submitting these comments in opposition to LD 1723, An Act 
to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and Contracts in a Sale of Assets of a Water Export 
Company Without Review and to Amend the Membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee 
and the Maine Public Drinking Water Commission. In particular, we object to the proposal in Section 10 
of the bill, which would direct the Maine Public Drinking Water Commission to adopt major substantive 
rules regarding the transfer of permits in the asset sale of a company engaged in exporting water 
extracted from Maine.  
It is challenging to adequately respond to this proposal because it is vague and confusing. We 
understand it is the sponsor’s intent to amend the bill to require the Board of Environmental Protection, 
rather than the Maine Public Drinking Water Commission, to issue major substantive rules “regarding 
the transfer of a permit or contract in a sale of assets” of a business engaged in exporting water 
extracted from Maine. We are not sure what specific permits or contracts would be governed by such a 
rulemaking – for example, would it be only those permits governed by the Department of Environmental 
Protection? What contracts, governed by the Department of Environmental Protection, would be 
subject to these rules?  
Additionally, we are not clear as to whether the proposed rules would be submitted “for review” to the 
Commission to Study the Role of Water as a Resource in Maine. We would submit that there is not 
existing statutory or administrative procedure that delegates rulemaking authority back to the 
legislative branch in this fashion – in fact, we would argue that such would be a violation of the 
separation of powers doctrine.  
To that same end, we question whether the direction from the legislature that an agency should issue 
rules “regarding” constitutes substantial direction so as not to violate the non-delegation doctrine and 
cede legislative authority to the executive branch.  
In short, the proposed Section 10 is overbroad, vague, and potentially violate of the Maine 
Administrative Procedures Act and the Maine State Constitution. We would urge this committee not to 
support Section 10 of this bill or indeed any rulemaking that would interfere with private contracts or 
duly authorized permits.  
We encourage the committee to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1723.  
Sincerely,  
Elizabeth M. Frazier, Esq. 
On behalf of the Poland Spring Brand  

