1 
  
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
 
LD 1723 - An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and Contracts in a Sale  of 
Assets of a W ater Export Company Without Review and to Amend the Membership of the 
Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public Drinking Water Commission  
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT  
Public Hearing  
Jacquelyn Elliott  ǀ May 1, 2023   
 
Honorable Senator Brenner, Chair ; Honorable Representative Gramlich, Chair; and Honorable 
Committee Members:  
 
 Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony IN SUPPORT O F LD 1723 . My name is 
Jacquely n Elliott  and I am submitting this testimony  as a long -time health and justice advocate. 
My participation for nearly thirty  years in the policy advocacy  arena has demonstrated that the 
policy choices we make are not unrelated one to another. Thos e decisions all contribute  to the 
outcome of the whole. We can be agreed that water is  the most precious resource as the 
sustainer of  all life on this plan et. Maine has been magnanimously  gifted with an abundance of 
that valued treasure. Perhaps , we must admit that we have not provided the best stewardship 
of that fin ite resource and have in fact, squandered it in many instances. As Mainers, ‘upta camp ’ 
undoubtedly involves some relationship  with water.  Tourists  flock to our state to support  an 
industry  that contributes so heavily to our economy  and depends on clean, abund ant water.  
 At this moment in time, M aine is standing at a critical  crossroads of decision  as to how we 
will man age those water r esources  going forward. Pressure s from p romoters for the us e of our 
water resources ostensibly to promote economic  development are running headlong into the 
reality that we have serious challenges facing us with the safety and preservation  of our water 
supply. It appears that unwise policy decisions  have brough t us to  where we  are today. But 
thankfully, Maine Legis lators have ste pped up to the hard choices and passed laws that will be 
protecting Maine ’s natural resources and people in the future.   
Maine is on the forefront of discovering the ways to re spond  to the unfolding nightmare 
of PFAS - (Perfluoroalky l and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances) contami nated wel ls and water sources. 
The mag nitude of that crisis is likely to only increase within the context we have yet to discover 
all the contamination , and there is to date no  sure way to mitigate the impact s of that 
contamination. Maine residents  are losing their  livelihoods ; facing the r eality their properties 
have no value with which to recoup losses on their investment s; they have los t safe sources of 
drinking wat er apart from installation of expensive purification systems, that may, or may not , 
adequately protect from additional PFAS exp osure; and families  are confronting  an uncertain 
health future as they re ckon with exceeding ly high levels of PFAS con tamination in their  bodies, 
2 
 and most especially the bodies of their children. It is almost more tha n we can absorb and process 
as to what should be the re joinder .  
 The one thing that we should be sure of, however, is that we need to take a hard look at 
what legal framework guards and protects our water resources so that we can reasonably  
anticipate sustainability  of that supply. We have perhaps been too cavalier  assuming there will 
be no day of accountability . LD 1723  is an attempt to put in place some reasonable parameters 
for how deci sions are reached for large , commercial ex tractions of our priceless  and limited  water 
resources. This bill begins to address the injustice of how those decisions  have been previously 
reached . It cann ot be denied that the rights of average Mainers have been sacrificed with the 
current process. To continue thusly, is untenable  in light of the fact Maine is attempting to 
seriou sly engage  and address the rights of our neighbors who are historically more  negatively 
impacted  by deci sions on how our water is utilized. Our economically  challenged  communities; 
our Indigenous, Black and brown neighbors, and other marginalized residents are the ones who 
have suffered the most harm from  polluting and extractive econ omic development . Our 
Indigenous neighbors have lost the ability to pa rticipate in their cultur e beca use the fish in the 
rivers, that are sac red to them, are to o contaminated to eat without endangering1 their health. 
Because  we all now openly know these facts, we cannot continue with the same old ways of how 
we do things. We must make the important changes that will take us all in a more sustainable 
direction.  
LD 1723  starts that process .  Placing water into the space of functioning as a commodity 
to be financialized, puts Mai ne residents at risk of losing  access to the life -sustaining water to 
which they are entitled . We must meet that test. 
 
LD 1723  outlines important policy me asure s: 
 
• Supports recommendations of the 2022 Commission to Study the Role of Water as a 
Resource in the State of Maine . 
• Create s a more accountable process  that consid ers EJ (Envi ronmental Justice) and  
protect s our communities and the environment against  privatized interests who  extract 
and export our finite water resources  and pose  a threat to community resiliency 
planning  to meet the challenges  of climate dis ruption . 
• Makes water exports by the bottled water industry more transparent and accountable to 
the care of our groundwater sources (aquifers) that sustain us . 
 
1 2021, ATSDR Annual Report, Helping the Penobscot Nation: Review of Anadromous Fish for Consumptions : 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/2021 -annual -report/listening -responding -taking -action/Penobscot -
River.html#:~:text=ATSDR%20identified%20anadromous%20fish%20species%20in%20the%20river,were%20identif
ied%20and%20described%20in%20this%20fact%20sheet .  
3 
 • Initiates  an opportunity for a permitting process whereby all  permits and contracts held 
for t he export of water will be examined, allowing for important discoveries about the 
existing status of exports and any vulnerabilities presented with in the current system.  
 
Additionally, ther e are other important cons iderations that apply:  
• The Water Board Research and Reporting from 1989 -1991  warns of water issues we are 
having here today. This board was not influenced by powerful outside interests or 
internal conflicts -of-intere sts, and should be thoroughly read and understood by 
lawmakers.  
• The credibility of any legislation intended to create water committees or water legislation 
following the  1999 Maddox vs. Giles  decision  is strained . Many see s erious conflict of 
interest gaps that have existed and re main in current law  affect ing several state 
agencies' decision -making  processes. A specific instance  includ es the Maine Drinking 
Water Program,  apparently violating state law .   
Thank you for considering my comments. I would ask the Committee  carefully consider LD 
1723 and  VOTE OUGHT TO PASS .  
 
Jacquelyn  Elliott  
Waterbor o, ME  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com    
 
 
