 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
May 1, 2023  
 
Senator  Stacy Brenner , Chair  
Representative  Lori Gramlich , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1723  - An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and Contracts in a Sale of  
Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to Amend the Membership of the Water 
Resources Planning Committee and the  Maine Public Drinking Water Commission  
 
Dear Senator  Brenner , Representative  Gramlich , and Members of the  Committee  on Environment 
and Natural Resources : 
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 1723, An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of 
Permits and Contracts in a Sale of Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to 
Amend the Membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public 
Drinking Water Commission and the pote ntial impact of the proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
The Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC)  is neither for nor against  this 
bill and offers the following comments  for your consideration . 
 
LD 1723  proposals  impact the Water Resou rces Planning Committee, as established in the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  to advise State agencies, review policies and 
procedures, conduct studies, evaluate programs , and make recommendations to the State agencies, 
the Legislatur e, or the Governor . (5 MRS  §12004 -I.) This bill:  
 
1.  Amends the membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public 
Drinking Water Commission by prohibiting a person who has received income from an entity 
engaged in the export from the State of water extracted in the State or has an immediate family 
member who has received income from such an entity from serving as a member.  
2.  Amends the duties of the Water Resources Planning Committee to include planning for the 
sustainable u se of water resources by encouraging the consolidation and centralization of collected 
state water resources information within a single state agency, ensuring public access to that 
information and identifying opportunities and resources to enhance or supp lement the collection of 
state water resources information.  It requires the Water Resources Planning Committee to submit a 
report to relevant joint standing committees of the Legislature including a summary of the Water 
Resources Planning Committee's acti vities during the prior calendar year and any findings and 
recommendations.  
3.  Amends the duties of the Maine Agricultural Water Management Board to include 
recommendations for measures to enhance drought preparedness and drought resilience by 
 
 agricultura l producers and requires the board to submit a report to the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation including a summary of the board’s activities during the prior calendar year and any 
findings and recommendations.  
4.  Establishes the Commission to Study the  Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine to 
develop findings and recommendations, including any suggested legislation, to ensure that there is 
adequate clean, safe , and accessible drinking water for the State's residents and to meet the needs of 
commercial and business interests now and in the future. This study is designed to build off the 
work of the Commission to Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine that was 
established pursuant to Resolve 2021, chapter 185. The commissio n is also required to review 
proposed major substantive rules of the Maine Public Drinking Water Commission regarding the 
transfer of a permit or contract in the sale of assets of an entity engaged in the exporting from the 
State of water extracted in the State and making recommendations, if any, to the Maine Public 
Water Drinking Commission.  
5.  Requires the Maine Public Water Drinking Commission to adopt major substantive rules regarding 
the transfer of a permit or contract in the sale of assets of an ent ity engaged in the exporting from 
the State of water extracted in the State and to submit the proposed rules to the Commission to 
Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine established under this bill for review 
before submitting the propo sed rules for legislative review."  
 
Maine CDC’s principal concern with this bill relates to the requirement for the Maine Drinking 
Water Commission to adopt rules regarding the transfer of water extraction permits. This 
Commission, established by 5 MRS § 12004 -I sub§ 47 -C and authorized by t he Maine Water for 
Human Consumption Act, 22 MRS § 2660 is not a regulatory body and has a very specific scope 
that does not include rulemaking. Permitting of significant groundwater wells is conducted by the 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (D EP). The DWP oversees the source, treatment, 
and water quality components of bottled water extraction, and works closely with both the DEP and 
the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (DAFS) to coordinate the multi -agency 
regulatory oversig ht of water bottling operations.   
 
Regarding the provisions of this bill addressing the consolidation and centralization of State water 
resources, the Maine CDC’s Drinking Water Program (DWP) regularly cooperates with other state 
agencies tasked with wate r resource information, adding to this data and making it available for 
public access. The Maine CDC has no concerns with continuing this cooperation as described in 
this bill.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends that if the Committee is inc lined to move 
forward with this bill,  that an amendment  is included to make it clear that the  Drinking Water 
Commission would not be tasked with rulemaking  and that  DEP continue to provide regulatory 
oversight for the transfer of significant groundwater we ll permits.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
information for the work session or answer Committee questions.  
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  

