Nancy Conway
Hollis
LD 1723
Greetings Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and ENR Committee Members,
My name is Nancy Conway.  I live in Hollis, ME and I am testifying in support of LD
1723 “An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and Contracts in a Sale of
Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to Amend the Membership 
of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public Drinking Water 
Commission”.
For far too long, Poland Spring has had an unfair advantage when it comes to decision
making regarding water extraction.  Board members should be free of any connection 
to bulk water extractors.  Otherwise, we cannot trust the process and will always 
wonder how many decisions were made because of undue influence.    I am not sure 
LD 1723 goes far enough, but it is a step in the right direction.  
The small Poland Spring company Hiram Ricker started no longer exists. We all need 
to keep that in mind.   It is now owned by two investment firms whose main goal is to
increase shareholder profits.   As the demand for bulk water extraction increases, it is 
important that the State’s top priority be to ensure Maine communities will always 
have an adequate supply of fresh, clean drinking water and that there will be enough 
water to meet the needs of farmers and local businesses for years to come.  
Transparency in the bulk water extraction industry is totally lacking.  Independent 
studies are not available.  Testing has either been done by the bulk water extractor or 
someone they have hired.  It is basically self-monitoring.  Currently, it is difficult to 
know which state agency to call to get any information.  From my experience, reports 
generated and submitted by the bulk water extractor are taken at face value.  These 
need more scrutiny.  I’m hoping this will change with the proposed coordinating and 
centralization of state water resources information.  Public access to that information 
is important, especially for those living in towns affected by bulk water extraction. 
Transfer of a permit or contract for water extraction should never be automatic.  That 
is the time for reevaluation, both at the state and local level.   Do we trust the new 
company to honor promises made by the previous owner?   Will they be “good 
neighbors”?  Are we sure they will take good care of our aquifer and protect the 
environment?  Is the current withdrawal rate still adequate?  Are we allowing too 
much water to be extracted?  Do we need to renegotiate the contract?   
In summary, I support the passage of LD 1723 because bulk water extractors have 
way too much influence in our state government and that must stop now.  
Furthermore, the State needs to do a better job of overseeing bulk water extraction 
and needs to protect Maine from over privatization of our water.  Water is now a 
commodity traded on Wall Street and the demand for increased bulk water extraction 
will be coming.  We must be prepared.  We need to know the status of our water 
sources and plan for the future needs of Maine residents.  Public access to information
about the State’s water resources is needed for residents to make decisions at a local 
level.  As it stands now, there is little opportunity for towns to renegotiate permits or 
contracts.  When there is change of ownership of the bulk water exporter, 
renegotiation of permits or contracts should be mandatory. 
Thank you for your time,
Nancy Conway

