Nels  Liljedahl
Fryeburg
LD 1723
Greetings Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and ENR Committee Members,
My name is Nels Liljedahl, I live in  Fryeburg, ME and I am testifying in support of 
LD 1723  “An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and Contracts in a 
Sale of Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to Amend the 
Membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public 
Drinking Water Commission”.
I have been working in the Natural Resources field for my whole life and it is very 
clear to me that all life is dependent on clean and abundant water. Maine is rich in 
water resources, which is why I have chosen to live here for the past 45 years. I have 
read the final report of the Water Resources Planning Committee. I am very 
impressed by the amount of work completed by this committee and see there is more 
to be done in the future. 
For the most part I think the choices of members in this committee are excellent, with 
the exception of a representative of a major water extraction and bottling corporation. 
This raises suspicions of conflict of interest and I strongly support the elimination of 
anyone with financial ties to this type of corporation. I would very much like to have 
my faith restored in Maine government which has unfortunately been heavily tainted 
by appointments of this nature to committees that have the ability to influence 
legislation.
I am also strongly in favor of not allowing transfers of contracts of water mining and 
exportation from one corporation to another, without a very intense review. Water is 
much to precious to hand it over to corporations whose mission is to make as much 
money as possible through privatization and commodification. This water belongs to 
all Maine citizens, and we all pay a variety of taxes and other efforts to keep it clean 
and abundant. Why should corporations be allowed to hijack it and make enormous 
profits from it, if everyone is involved in the stewardship. Bottled water is in general 
not a necessity, but a minor convenience that depletes the resource and degrades the 
oceans and landfills with the plastic waste. 
I am very pleased to see that Maine is finally taking ground water resources more 
seriously. If this had happened sooner, Fryeburg would be in a much better place in 
regards to water extraction and exportation. Fryeburg has two very special ponds that 
are disappearing since these uncontrolled activities commenced. I hope that passage 
of this proposed law will help protect other towns from the predatory tactics of bulk 
water mining and exportation and protect our water.
Thank you very much for your efforts.
Nels Liljedahl
 
