Nickie Sekera
Fryeburg
LD 1723
Greetings Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and ENR Committee Members,
My name is Nickie Sekera, I live in Fryeburg, ME. I am a cofounder of Community 
Water Justice and I recently had the privilege to serve on the State Commission to 
Study The Role of Water As A Resource in Maine, representing the public. I am 
testifying in support of LD 1723  “An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of 
Permits and Contracts in a Sale of Assets of a Water Export Company Without 
Review and to Amend the Membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee 
and the Maine Public Drinking Water Commission”.
A 45 year contract (20 years with an additional 5 automatically renewable extensions 
for 5 years each) was approved by the Maine Public Utilities Commission in 2012 
between the Fryeburg Water Company and Poland Spring's parent company without 
the consent of the residents of Fryeburg. Since the contract was negotiated between a 
private company and privately owned water utility, townspeoples' objections were not
considered. All the MPUC commissioners had conflicts of interest with Poland 
Spring, and took about a year and a half of pressuring them to all recuse themselves 
from the proceedings. Upon challenging this contract in the Maine Supreme Court, 
the Court ruled on the side of the water exporters because the PUC had no legal limit 
set on how long a contract could last, and also because it is not within the purview of 
the MPUC to consider environmental impacts outside the wellhead area when 
approving such contracts. The precautionary principle was not applied.
This 45 year contract allows Poland Spring to extract 603,000 gallons per day. This 
amount was determined to be the "sustainable yield" of Fryeburg's aquifer, or what 
they sometimes call "excess". This aquifer is part of a larger aquifer system that 
people outside the Water District and other towns rely upon, as aquifers do not adhere
to political boundaries. When a water bottling business secures the "sustainable yield"
of an aquifer for export, it has the potential to limit other users or uses, or over extend 
the water supply. Since Fryeburg's "sustainable yield" is locked up for export, this 
deal limits our community growth potential economically, and poses an 
environmental threat based upon any increased needs for groundwater.
In 2017, Poland Spring bought land from a Fryeburg Selectman that held a small 
bottling facility (WE Corp) which came with a permit for an additional 405,000 
gallons of groundwater per day.
603,000 gallons per day  
+ 405,000 gallons per day
= 1,008,000 gallons per day
367,920,000 gallons per year.  For export.
In a state with 1.3 million people, the above total equals 283 gallons per resident, per 
year, from one site alone. This is privatized control over a public groundwater source.
Though the records don't indicate extraction totals to that upper end-- where is the 
accountable and accessible data on water exports, accessible to the public for 
exporting a public resource? Are stockpiling permits and contracts for this much 
water reasonable or beneficial? When a private equity firm flips Maine's largest 
bottled water brand, will all these permits and contracts automatically go to the next 
Wall Street speculator without an environmental and economic impact review and 
consent from those that rely on the water source for their essential needs?
We need better protections for local kinship to water sources.
Meanwhile, surface waters over the central part of Fryeburg's aquifer are showing 
signs of stress, complaints of wells going dry, and a recently uncovered PFAS 
contaminated drinking water supply.
To speak to the conflicts of interest that have existed within our state agencies - it has 
hurt us. It has hurt us on the local level and it hurts us on the state level. I was 
troubled to read the current lawsuit that is in the Connecticut courts which alleges that
for decades, Poland Spring's marketing and sales of bottled water has been “a colossal
fraud perpetrated against American consumers”. This lawsuit claims that because of a 
conflict of interest within the Maine Drinking Water Program, our State is breaking 
federal law. Even an appearance of a conflict of interest should be avoided where it 
involves our most precious water sources.
And with respect to our recently enshrined Right To Food in Maine’s constitution, 
this bill further supports this constitutional right. Our rural farms cannot afford to 
compete with the deep pockets of multinational corporations for the groundwater 
needed to produce and expand upon our sustainable model of local food systems 
which are a backbone of our rural economy.
Now is the time to look ahead and put sensible protections in place to ensure that our 
future generations will also know the freedoms associated with an access to clean 
water.
Thank you for considering this important piece of legislation in all its parts. LD 1723 
is an opportunity to improve our legal framework and I hope you will support its 
passing.
Nickie Sekera
Fryeburg, ME
May 1, 2023

