Susan Cullen
Denmark
LD 1723
Greetings Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and ENR Committee Members,
My name is Susan Cullen, I live in Denmark, ME and I am testifying in support of LD
1723  “An Act to Prevent the Automatic Transfer of Permits and Contracts in a Sale 
of Assets of a Water Export Company Without Review and to Amend the 
Membership of the Water Resources Planning Committee and the Maine Public 
Drinking Water Commission”.
I live on Long Pond in Denmark which is within the zone of influence for Poland 
Springs extraction.  I have noticed since 2015 the water level of the pond has greatly 
decreased beginning from the spring season to dramatically low levels in the fall.  
Neighbors of the pond have had wells stop producing adequate amounts of water for 
their consumption. Wildlife that is supported by pond life has decreased.  To see the 
changes and the thought of losing a natural resource that provides water to residents 
and habitat to many species spurred the people of Denmark to ask for a committee to 
be started to investigate how we can work with Poland Springs to better manage their 
water extraction. And with better transparency. I have attended the town meetings 
DWORC (Denmark Water Ordinance Review Committee), one member of the 
committee is a paid employee of Poland Springs.  It is clear that his agenda is not for 
the best welfare of the town rather for the business he is being paid by.  Another 
member is working on construction of a building  project for Poland Springs  and the 
town code enforcement officer father works for Poland Springs.  Are there ethical 
breaches here? Can these people work and support the town’s best interest?  The 
passing of LD 1723 would ensure the ethical standards be upheld in regards to those 
who are being paid or have family members paid or compensated by Poland Springs.  
Denmark and Western Maine have had much less precipitation creating drought and 
lower water levels of Long Pond so much that protected fish habitat at both ends of 
the pond dried up in 2022.  I feel we need to plan ahead and take steps to protect 
Maine’s natural water supplies as the business of bottled water is expanding with 
predictions of sales for bottled water to reach $403.5 billion by 2026. (Global Bottled 
Water Market By Product (purified water, mineral water, spring water, sparkling 
water, distilled water, and other products), By Region, Industry Analysis and 
Forecast, 2020 - 2026 (researchandmarkets.com)  
Large scale water extraction is big business with much profit and without 
comprehensive permits and guidelines, environmental, personal and community  
welfare is at risk.
Sincerely,
Susan Cullen

