      
                     
 
Sen. Carney , Rep.  Moon en, members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary,  my name is 
Judith Meyer . I am the editor of the Sun Journal in Lewiston, the Kennebec Journal and the 
Morning Sentinel .  
I write o n behalf of the Maine Press Association  in opposition to  LD 848, An Act to Expunge 
Certain Nonviolent Drug Crimes . 
* * *  
When the Criminal Records Review Committee was formed and convened in 2021 , on which a 
representative of the Maine Press Association served, we were tasked with coming  forward 
with a recommendation on the concept of expunging certain nonviolent  criminal records .  
The committee – which included more than two dozen stakeholders in law enforcement, prison 
reform, public access, victim advocacy groups and other interested parties -- met for months 
and came forward with a number of recommendations, but could not settle the question of 
expunging crimes defined under Titl e 17 -A, Section 1107 -A because , while that section is 
specific to possession of small amounts of cocaine  and methamphetamines, the statute also 
raises possession charges to felony level crimes if the defendant has certain  previous 
convictions.  
Criminal Records Review Committee members  agreed that there is merit in the concept of 
expung ing low-level misdemeanors , but this bill as written complicates the matter when there 
are previous convictions  that can bring these convictions to felony level offenses . 
Unfortunately, the Criminal  Records Review Committee did not have time to further investigate 
expungement possibilities that make sense for Maine in the time allotted  for our work . 
Given the amount of research that has already been gathered and the level of discussion that has alrea dy been held on this concept by members of the Criminal Records Review Committee, 
the Maine Press Association opposes this bill and requests that Judiciary move further 
discussion back to a reconstituted Criminal Records Review Committee for recommendation . 
  * * *  
The Maine Press Association (MPA), founded in 1864, is one of the oldest professional news 
organizations in the nation. Our goals, as spelled out in our charter and by -laws are to promote 

and foster high ethical standards and the best interests of the newspapers, journalists, and 
media organizations of the state of Maine that constitute its membership; to encourage improved business and editorial practices and better media environment in the state; and to improve the conditions of journalism and journalists by promoting and protecting the principles 
of freedom of speech and of the press and the public’s right to know.  
 
