295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~  theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support  of LD 848 
An Act to Expunge Certain Nonviolent Drug Crimes  
Sponsored by Representative Billy Bob Faulkingham  
4.27.2023  
 
Good morning,  Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary . I am Malory 
Shaughnessy, a Westbrook resident,  and the Executive Director of the Alliance 
for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide 
association representing the majority of Maine’s safety net community -based  
mental health and substance use treatment providers. The Allianc e advocates 
for the implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices that 
serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system.  We thank Representative Faulkingham  and the co -sponsors  for 
bringing this bill forward.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in favor of LD 848, “An Act 
to Expunge Certain Nonviolent Drug Crimes .” This bill allows a person 
convicted of violating the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 17 A, section 1107 -A 
to petition the court where the person was convicted to expunge all records 
of the crime 5 years after the comp letion of the person's sentence. The 
proposal does not allow for e xpungement  of records for persons who have 
subsequent convictions or pending criminal charges.  The Alliance recognizes 
that there will likely be debate around expungement v. expunging or sea ling, 
so we are testifying in support of  second chances generally, and expungement 
and/or sealing of records specifically. Expunging or sealing  drug crime records 
refers to the process of restricting access to criminal records related to drug 
offenses. Thi s can have significant benefits for individuals who have been 
convicted of drug crimes, as well as for society as a whole  and that is why the 
Alliance strongly supports this proposal.  
 
Firstly, expunging or sealing  drug crime records can help individuals move on 
from their past mistakes and start afresh. A criminal record can have a lasting 
impact on an individual's ability to find employment, housing, and education. 
By expunging or sealing  drug crime records, indiv iduals can have a fair chance 
at rebuilding their lives without the stigma and discrimination associated with 
a criminal record.  
 
Secondly, expunging or sealing  drug crime records can reduce recidivism 
rates. Without access to employment, housing, and educ ation, individuals 
convicted of drug crimes are more likely to reoffend. By giving them a second 
chance, we can reduce the likelihood of future criminal behavior and promote 
rehabilitation.  
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  Mental Health  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Concepts, Inc.  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Couns eling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
KidsPeace Maine  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Pathways of Maine  
Portland  Recovery Community 
Center  
Rumford Group Homes  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~  theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
 
Thirdly, expunging or sealing  drug crime records can benefit our entire state by reducing the 
burden on the criminal justice system. With fewer individuals reoffending, we can reduce the 
number of people in prison and the associated costs of incarceration.  
 
In conclusion, expunging or  sealing  drug crime records can have significant benefits for individuals 
who have been convicted of drug crimes, as well as for our state . It can help promote 
rehabilitation, reduce recidivism, and reduce the burden on the criminal justice system.  Recover y 
is possible and second chances are critical to move forward. It is for all these reasons that I urge 
committee members to vote ought to pass on LD 848. Thank you.  
 
 
 
 
