- 
PO Box 7860 
ff; Portland,ME 04112 
C, (207)774-5444 
ifl 
- ' 
www.aclumaine org 
AMERICAN CIVIL IJBERTIES UNION 
Maine -' 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought to Pass —LDs 848, 1550, 1646 
An Act to Expunge Certain Nonviolent Drug Crimes A 
An Act to Authorize the Expungement of Records of Nonviolent Crimes‘ 
An Act to Vacate or Adjust Sentences and Expunge Arrests, 
Convictions and Adjudications for Cannabis-related Offenses
‘ 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON IUDICIARY 
April 27, 2023
,
_ 
. Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede, and I am Policy Counsel at the 
ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and 
civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge 
you to support LDs 848, 1550, and 1646 because each bill would free Mainers from the debilitating 
unintended consequences of criminal records, extending the promise of our constitution to all 
people in our state.- 
, '' 
This is how criminal law was designed to work. The legislature decides that something is 
a crime and designates consequences for committing the crime. These consequences can include 
a prison sentence, rehabilitation or mental health services, community service, supervised release, 
and more. Unfortunately, for as long as there have been criminal laws — but exponentially more in 
the digital age — these punishments often far outweigh the crime committed. Past convictions can 
make people ineligible for job opportunities, professional licenses, housing assistance, education, 
volunteering with their children ’s activities, and more. In short, a criminal record has prevented 
millions across the country, and thousands across Maine,. from moving on with their lives, pushing 
them into second-class status even after they completed their sentences. Keeping people from 
being able to fully reenter and contribute to their communities also makes it more likely they will 
become entangled in the legal system again.' 
_'
_
