mag */i Cottagz Comiertfon 
Boothbay, Maine Vacation Rental Professionals of Maine, Inc. 
Opposition to LD 1734 May 2, 2023 
My name is Audrey Leeds Miller, l am a resident of East Boothbay. I have been offering private 
vacation homes (entire properties) to visitors with my husband, as Cottage Connection, since 1993. 
That is 30 years, long before Airbnb. I also speak for the hundreds of small Maine businesses that 
offer seasonal tourism lodging and thousands of individuals who love Maine and come every year to 
stay in a private home. There are many different types of short-term lodging these days catering to 
different types of travelers. Trying to label them all as STRs and treat them all the same may 
cause harm to our tourism industry. I urge you to use caution. Here are my 5 reasons: 
1. Short term rentals are a 3"‘ of 1 percent or .029% of all available housing in Maine; (source: 
Maine Housing) yet, they pay the 9% lodging tax and bring millions of dollars to Maine each 
year 
2. Visitors in private homes spend an average of $2,000 per person per stay. 
3. Private family second homes represent the majority of STRs. Many are in rural parts of Maine, 
and need to be differentiated from housing in highly populated areas. They are not “housing” 
eligible because the owners live in them part of the year. They rent them a few weeks a year to 
help pay property taxes, help with kid’s education, or for extra retirement income. 
4. They do not require and are not compatible with a DHHS license because they are residential 
homes, not commercial establishments and they don’t sen/e food. 
5. Affordable housing is defined as no more than 30% of a person’s income. The average median 
sales price of a home in Maine in 2023 is now $330,000. (source: Boothbay Register) 30% 
would be an income of $99,000. The average income in Maine for a 2-person household is just 
shy of $60,000. 
Rather than do away with or disrupt this part of the tourism industry that has existed in Maine 
since the 1800s (fishing & hunting camps, lake & ocean-side seasonal homes, many valued 
higher than the median house price), maybe it makes more sense to take a look at the 
developers and their plans for affordable housing in the future. 
My main message is: the oven/vhelming majority of STRs are homes that are simply not suitable 
for affordable housing. Changing the definition of all STRs to allow towns to tell people what 
to do with their private vacation homes to meet “housing goals” will likely hurt the 
homeowner, the municipalities and the tourism industry. We sympathize with the current lack 
of housing, it affects all of us but changing the law for STRs will not solve the problem. Please 
look elsewhere. 
Sincerely, 
/lzzaﬁwyll ﬂlifér 
Co-Founder, Cottage Connection of Maine, Inc. 
Founding President, Vacation Rental Professionals of Maine, Inc. 
207-633-6545
