L l-800—li52-8786 (in state) 
ASSOCIATION since was (F),0,_62,_O,29 MAINE MUNICIPA (T) 207—623—8li28 
60 Community Drive I Augusto, ME 04330-9486 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Support For 
LD 1734 - An Act to Clarifv the Authority of Mimicipalities to Regulate Short-term Rentals 
May 2, 2023 
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, and distinguished members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony in support for LD 1734, An Act 
to Clari]j/ the Authority ofMi1nicipalities to Regulate Short-term Rentals, on behalf of the Maine 
Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. 
As drafted, the bill seeks to clarify that municipalities may regulate short-term rentals in places 
that are not required to meet state licensing guidelines or regulations under the Department of Health and 
Human Services (DHHS) or the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention (MECDC). While 
municipal ofﬁcials feel they already had home rule authority to regulate shoit-term rentals including those 
exceptions listed in Title 22 §250l, as the additional language enacted through PL 2021, c. 672, §7 has 
' ' ' ' 
ff ' 
l to interpret in other sections, they have no been deeply confusing and problematic for municipal o icias 
ted iopeities in Title 22 However, it’s important to note that this immediate objections to adding exemp p". 
section of law only applies to state regulation for health and welfare, which municipalities only participate 
in with delegated authority. 
Currently, the deﬁnition of living quaiters that municipalities may regulate for this purpose is 
d ' 
the same title as the deﬁnition for transient rental platform, Title 36, Sec. 1752, §6, and reads: foun in 
,, . . ,, . . . . 
Living quarters means sleeping rooms, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations, and tent or 
trailer space." 
All of the exemptions in Title 22 §2501 do not apply to municipal home rule authority for ordinance 
adoption, or local short-tenn rental regulation with the exception of requiring those exempted living quarters to have 
' ' ' ' ' 
h t " 
ide transient or long-teim rentals for a state license before municipal approval. Even non-proﬁt institutions t a pi ov 
' ' ' 
1 t' are subject to municipal taxation for the activity and local proﬁt listed in this statute as exempt from state regu a ion, 
regulations, including occupancy requirements, where applicable. 
However, for the purposes of clarity for private individuals seeking regulatory compliance, additional 
language that is explicitly adding living quarters govemed by other law may be beneﬁcial. For this reason, 
municipal officials support the goals of LD 1734 and ask that the committee support the efforts as well.
