.
W ,3 ‘V 
‘I? ,'u.£¢¢+Z .¢’ 
‘s. 
Brad Farrin l3 ls‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 3 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Brad Farrin 
In Support of L.D. 526, An Act to Provide Funding to 
Emergency Medical Services Organizations 
Before the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee 
March 20, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety: I am Brad Farrin and I have the honor of representing the 
people of Senate District 3, which includes towns in Kennebec, Somerset and Penobscot 
counties. I am before you today as a cosponsor to speak in support of L.D. 526, An Act to 
Provide Funding to Emergency Medical Services Organizations. 
It is no secret that meeting healthcare needs in rural Maine, and across the country, has beena 
challenge. Throughout my eight years in the Legislature, I have worked to help pass legislation 
incentivizing people to work in rural areas; leveraged partnerships between Emergency Medical 
Service (EMS) providers and healthcare facilities; and provided funding for workforce 
development within the ﬁeld. While these steps have alleviated the challenges to an extent, we 
still have a serious crisis on our hands — particularly as it relates to EMS. 
According to a survey conducted by the American Ambulance Association, the turnover rate last 
year for full-time Emergency Medical Technicians (EMTs) was 36%. While not the greatest 
paying, the job requires many hours of training and can he stressful, often traumatic, and 
physically tasking at times. Rural communities without a healthcare facility nearby rely on 
EMTs. However, those are often the communities that struggle the most when it comes to 
receiving services. 
This past fall, I served alongside 16 other individuals on the Blue Ribbon Commission to Study 
Emergency Medical Services in the State. The Commission was tasked with reviewing all 
aspects of EMS, including but not limited to compensation, costs, reimbursement rates, retention, 
training, workforce development, organization and local and state support. Following our six' 
meetings, recommendations on the delivery and sustainability of services were compiled. While 
not surprising, one of the most signiﬁcant ﬁndings was that EMS reimbursement is not keeping 
pace with the cost of providing services. As a result, EMS agencies, EMTs, and Maine citizens 
are directly impacted. 
This bill is a result of Recommendation A-2 of the Commission ’s report, which called for the 
Legislature to allocate an initial $25 million to “speciﬁcally target transporting EMS services at 
immediate risk of failing and leaving their service area without access to adequate EMS.” I am in 
support of the amendment that Speaker Talbot Ross has proposed extending this funding to any
current Maine Licensed Transporting EMS service. I am well aware that paperwork can cut into 
valuable time for providing other services — this is true in every industry. However, I believe the 
requirement for Transporting EMS agencies, receiving part of this funding, to submit a statement each year documenting how the money was spent provides for a level of accountability and can help us to further review where and how we can better support these individuals and the critical 
work they provide. 
Thank you for your time today. I hope you will join myself and others in supporting this critically 
important appropriation.
