District 15: Brooklin, Deer Isle, Eagle Island Township, Frenchboro, Southwest Harbor, 
Stonington, Swan’s Island, Tremont, Isle au Haut, Vinalhaven  March 20, 2023  
Testimony of Representative Holly Eaton in support of  
LD 526, An Act to Provide Funding to Emergency Medical Services Organizations  
Before the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee  
 
Good morning, Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Holly Eaton, and I represent House District 
15, which includes the communities of Brooklin, Deer Isle, Frenchboro, Mars hall Island, 
Southwest Harbor, Stonington, Swan’s Island, Tremont, Eagle Island Township, Isle au Haut 
and Vinalhaven. I write to you today in support of LD 526, An Act to Provide Funding to 
Emergency Medical Services Organizations . 
 
Last year, the Blue -Ribbon Commission To Study Emergency Medical Services in the State 
released its findings and recommendations. One of the big takeaways from the report of the 
Commission, for me, is that “EMS services in Maine are at the edge of a cliff, or over it...”  
 
This is true for rural communities like ours in Hancock County. Two years ago, there was a car 
crash on MDI which injured five people. Despite having three EMS providers in the area, only 
one ambulance was available. Two ambulances were called in from Bangor, w hich is an hour 
away, and a LifeFlight helicopter was called in as well.  
 
I share this with you as just one example of what our rural first responders are dealing with and 
why I fully support the bill before you this morning. In the event of an emergency,  we cannot 
leave areas of our state without access to adequate emergency medical services.  
 
Thank you for your attention. Please let me know if you have any questions that you would like 
me to answer at the work session.  
  
Holly Rae Eaton  
63 Church Street  
Deer Isle, ME 04627  
Phone: (207) 610 -9281  
Holly.Eaton@legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287-1400  
TTY:  Maine Relay 711  
 

