northernlighthealth.orgThis institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer.Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 526 An Act to Provide Funding to Emergency Medical Services Organizations
Testimony in Support
March 20, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am providing 
testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member organizations commenting in 
support of this bill.  Northern Light Health member organizations include 10 hospitals 
located in southern, central, eastern and northern Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground 
ambulance, behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty care 
practices and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  Ninety three percent of 
Maine’s population lives in the Northern Light Health service area.  Northern Light Health is 
also proud to be one of Maine’s largest employers with over 12,000 employees statewide.
Northern Light Health operates five licensed transporting ambulance services. These 
services provide response to 911 emergency calls in some of Maine’s most rural areas, 
working with nearly 100 communities and unorganized townships. Further, our services are 
an integral part of Maine’s interfacility transport system, whereby patients needing acute 
care are transferred from community hospitals to tertiary care centers.
Our hospitals and ambulance services alike acutely recognize the impacts of workforce 
shortages and impossible pathways to sustainability for the state’s ambulance services. We 
are increasingly called upon to support rural towns that lose or are unable to staff their 
existing ambulance service. None of our ambulance services cover the costs of provision of 
the services through operations. While we recognize it is a key component of our mission to 
be in the communities we live and serve, the reimbursement equation at the federal, state 
and commercial levels continues to present an unsolvable math equation. 
We are commenting in support of the funding proposal for our state’s struggling emergency 
medical services system and feel that this could bring much needed stability as the Maine 
Emergency Medical Services Board works through its strategic plan. Of course, this bill alone 
does not bring long-term stability and sustainability, and to that end, we urge the legislature 
to strongly consider the other bills introduced this session, which speak to the long-term 
sustainability of Maine’s EMS System. 
We look forward to better understanding the formula on the distribution of these funds. We 
also feel the bill should include very specific guidance on how the funding can be used. By 
way of an example, the funding should be dedicated to workforce, non-major capital, or 
general operation expenses. 
Thank you for your consideration, and for your support of our Emergency Medical Services 
System. 
