lg. STATE OF MAINE 
i; DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
?-” --1""?n "'f 
-3&1 MAINE EMERGENCY l\/IEDICAL SERVICES _ 
152 STATE HOUSE STATION3 C ' 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
JANET T- MIU5 MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
_]. SAM HURLEY 
DIRECTOR 
Testimony of J. Sam Hurley, MPH, EMPS, NRP 
Director, Maine Bureau of Emergency Medical Services (Maine EMS) 
Department of Public Safety 
Neither For Nor Against of LD 526 
“An Act to Provide Funding to Emergency Medical Services Organizations” 
Presented by House Speaker Representative Rachel Talbot Ross 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND PUBLIC 
SAFETY 
Public Hearing: Monday, March 20, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety: 
My name is Sam Hurley, and I am the Director of Maine Emergency Medical Services, Maine 
EMS, within the Department of Public Safety. I am testifying on behalf of Maine Department of 
Public Safety and Maine EMS neither for nor against LD 526, “An Act to Provide Funding to 
Emergency Medical Services Organizations.” 
Maine EMS recognizes the immediate need for some EMS agencies in the State of Maine to 
receive supplemental funding to ensure sustainability of “essential services ” to the community(s) 
that they serve.‘ Currently, EMS agencies throughout the state are funded using a precarious 
combination of local subsidies (i.e., tax dollars), in-kind donations (including volunteer labor), 
and insurance reimbursements. Current models suggest that it is impossible for reimbursements 
alone to cover the cost of delivering EMS service as it doesn’t include the necessary 
1 
The 130th Legislature deemed emergency medical services essential; however, they did not determine where the 
responsibility for their maintenance rests (32 MRS §81-A). 
Excellence O Support O Collaboration I Integrity 
PHONE: (207) 626-3860 'ITY: (207) 287-3659 FAX: (207) 287-6251 
Wiﬂu offices located at the Central Maine Commerce Center, 45 Commerce Drive, Suite 1, Augusta, ME 04330
administration to support the operation. Even at 2,500 transports per EMS unit, it still will 
require some form of subsidy. Important to note, currently in Maine fewer than 10% of licensed 
EMS agencies have that call volume for their entire service? This strongly emphasizes the 
current lack of sustainability that is pervasive within the Maine EMS system. Therefore, it is 
imperative that any funds made available through the state no longer perpetuate a failing, 
unsustainable system, but instead assist the system with changing directions to become more 
sustainable and reliable. 
While no funding mechanism has currently been identified, we believe that one-time funding, if 
introduced into the system, should be in the form of a grant that is funded from an allocation toa 
non-lapsing state account. Fiscal support through the grant program should be designed to 
promote sustainability within the EMS system. Failure to do so, may create a future funding cliff 
and perpetuate the system’s current crisis. To be successful and avoid negatively impacting the 
advancement of the system, the program must deliberately address the following components: 
¢ Explicitly advance sustainability of the system, including deepening the understanding of 
the value and true cost of EMS locally and regionally. Additionally, they should support 
engaging local community members and leaders in assuming increasing responsibility for 
the funding of sustainable services in their area. 
0 Be in alignment and spent in furtherance of the Board’s Strategic Plan for 2035. This 
means that monies would be limited to expenditures related to public and govermnental 
understanding and valuing of EMS, EMS data, EMS system evolution, EMS ﬁnances, 
EMS Workforce, and EMS clinical care. 
0 Be used to ameliorate issues directly related to the sustainability of systems, cost 
reporting, workforce, or clinical care, excluding major capital expenditures (>=$50,000) 
0 Be equitable — entities that have created more sustainable models should not be penalized 
for those who have poorly planned or created unsustainable systems 
I Have limitations that minimize the potential effects on the EMS labor market. 
Anecdotally, it has been suggested that the funds could be used to increase salaries for 
EMS clinicians and the workforce as pay has been noted as a major contributor to 
2 It is important to note that this percentage includes some non-transporting agencies that are not eligible to bill 
payers for services rendered under current CMS and private payer rules. Only transports and a limited subset of non- 
transported patients (cardiac arrest victims that aren’t transported, diabetic patients that receive intravenous 
medications, etc.) are able to be billed to insurance carriers. 
Page 2 of3
recruitment and retention. Increases in Wages may create an unstable labor market and 
artiﬁcially create competition and wage inﬂation that is unsustainable beyond the life of 
the current funding proposal especially in an industry where there aren’t diverse income 
streams. 
Q Be Accountable — recipients of the funds must explain the intended use of the funds, the 
value-add to the system in furtherance of increasing sustainability of EMS within their 
community(s) and be held accountable for meeting deﬁned metrics associated with the 
funding. 
Q Avoid Supplantation — in the original language, the funding appears to be distributed to 
transporting EMS organizations throughout the state. Most of those organizations are 
municipal-based organizations. Distributing funds directly to municipal organizations 
Without sufﬁcient accountability mechanisms poses signiﬁcant risk for local 
mtmicipalities supplanting the EMS organizations budget equivalent to this amount. 
Maine Bureau of EMS continues to be eager to work collaboratively with House Speaker Talbot 
Ross, Chair Salisbury, and the Committee on this legislation. I am more than happy to answer 
any questions that you may have at this time, but please feel free to reach out to me anytime if 
there is any additional information that I can offer you and/or the Committee. 
Thank you. 
Page 3 of3
