 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 526, An Act to Provide Funding to Emergency Medical Services Organizations  
 
March 20, 2023 
 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in support of LD 526. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  Emergency medical services organizations are vital to communities to ensure the health and safety 
of all people across our State. However, many of these organizations are at immediate risk of failing due to a 
lack of funding. Such risk has the potential to adversely affect communities across Maine, including counties – 
particularly rural counties. LD 526 provides a General Fund appropriation of $25 million in fiscal year 2023-24 
to the Maine Department of Public Safety targeting such organizations. 
 
While this one-time appropriation is an important step, we are concerned about whether it is adequate to address 
the needs of EMS organizations across Maine. Last month, the Blue Ribbon Commission to Study Emergency 
Medical Services in the State released its Report recommending that the State set aside $70 million per year in 
State funding for EMS organizations in order to avoid provider closures. To the extent that it provides adequate 
funding for EMS organizations, our Association supports the Commission’s proposal. 
 
While we have concerns regarding the amount of the one-time appropriation to EMS organizations in LD 526, 
because the appropriation works to address the critical need for funding and is targeted at preventing provider 
closures due to a lack of funding, we believe it should be supported. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1314 
April ____, 2021 
Page 2 
 
  
