State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Courtney Belolan, Director of Policy and Government 
In Support of: L.D. 612 
An Act to Create a Green Schools Coordinator in the Department of Education 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Marc Malon . 
Co-Sponsored by: Representatives Abdi, Brennan, Dodge, Jauch, LaRochelle, Murphy, and Rana 
and Senator Rafferty 
March 9, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committees: 
I am Courtney Belolan, Director of Policy & Government Affairs for the Department of 
Education and am here to speak in support of LD 612, An Act to Create a Green Schools 
Coordinator in the Department of Education. This bill creates the position of green schools 
coordinator within the Department of Education to assist department staff and other relevant 
stakeholders in establishing school facility priorities and Working with school administrative 
units regarding building Weatherization and modification for the use of renewable energy 
resources. 
The Department ’s biennium budget includes three positions focused on green schools. Budget 
initiative reference number 1135 establishes one Public Service Executive II position who will 
serve as the Director of Green Schools. The Director of Green Schools will direct and oversee 
new and existing climate and green energy initiatives and coordinate those efforts across teams 
within the Department. Department projects will include construction, transportation, and 
connections to K-12 initiatives, in particular, engaging student voice in green initiatives. Areas of 
focus for this position will also include grant writing and coordination of green projects across 
departments and agencies. In the larger sense, this position will bring clarity and coordination to 
the support of green infrastructure in our schools by inspiring students, teachers, school 
administrators, parents and staff to make their schools and communities more sustainable. 
Budget initiative reference number 1150 provides funding for two contracted green building 
experts to support green construction and renovation in school buildings statewide. These two 
contracted positions will work under the Director of Green Schools and collaborate closely with 
the School Construction Team. 
The Department will be available to provide additional information on LD 612 An Act to Create 
a Green Schools Coordinator in the Department of Education and respond to any questions at the 
work sessions on this bi]l.'
