Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadw ay, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Ch ristopher Toppi Drive, South Portland, ME 04106 
 
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony  
                                               In S upport of  
LD 612 An Act to Create a Green Schools Coordinator  in the Department of Education  
Krystyna Dzialo, Deputy Executive Director, Maine E ducation Association  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs  
March 9, 2023  
  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and membe rs of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee,  
 
My name is Krystyna Dzialo. My pronouns are she, he r, hers. I am proud to serve as the Deputy 
Executive Director for the Maine Education Associat ion. The MEA represents nearly 24,000 educators 
in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-12  schools as well as in our institutions of higher 
education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine Community College System, along with 
students in teacher prep programs as well as many r etired educators. 
 
I am submitting testimony on behalf of the MEA in s upport of LD 612 An Act to Create a Green 
Schools Coordinator in the Department of Education.  
 
As climate change continues to intensify, and schoo ls and communities look for ways to do their part i n 
combating climate change, this bill is a key step i n supporting schools in this effort.  
 
There are many ways that schools can make changes i n their facilities to move away from their reliance  
on fossil fuels and shift towards increasing the us e of renewable energy resources, such as solar powe r.  
Making this shift will also save schools and taxpay ers money and allow for more resources to be spent 
on students and education. The federal Inflation Re duction Act of 2022 provides the resources from the  
federal level to support schools who invest in clea n energy projects.  
 
Additionally, schools and communities can utilize f ederal resources such as the ARPA funds to improve 
their building envelope and weatherize buildings. I mproving insulation and stopping air infiltration w ill 
provide long term investments for school buildings.  Too often, students and educators are learning and  
teaching in classrooms and schools that are too col d in the winter and too hot in the early fall/late spring. 
Improvements to air quality is also a critical area  of focus for school districts. Air quality is an i ssue for 
students and teachers alike. Creating better enviro nments for our students to learn and grow  in  is 
important for their success. 
 
The potential for improvements to school buildings,  air quality and reducing reliance on fossil fuels is 
important. The reality is that school districts hav e limited human resources to become experts on fund ing 
sources, processes, and to prioritize what is possi ble and effective in order to make changes.  
Establishing a position at the Department of Educat ion for someone who can help coordinate, problem  
 
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadw ay, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Ch ristopher Toppi Drive, South Portland, ME 04106 
 
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org 
 
 
 
 
solve and share successes will be essential in aidi ng school districts with creating green schools in order 
to save taxpayer money and create healthy, clean an d safe environments for students and teachers.   
 
MEA is a member of the Maine Labor Climate Council and meets with other unions who are engaged in 
this work and who are in compliance with the labor standards included in the federal funding. LD 612 
presents an opportunity for Maine to move forward i n addressing this impending crisis and improving 
the conditions in our public schools.   
 
I urge you to support LD 612. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
