  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso , on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
In Support of LD 22: “An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to Prohibited Persons ”  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
Monday, April  3, 202 3  
  
Senator  Beebe -Center , Representative  Salisbury , and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on  Criminal Justice and Public Safety , I am writing on behalf of the 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)1 to raise issues for your consideration 
regarding LD 22 , “An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to Prohibited Persons .” 
 
Keeping firearms out of the hands of those our courts have determined are 
dangerous  protects both th at person’s close family members and also the broader 
community.  MCEDV and our community partners have collaborated for decades to improve 
Maine’s ability to achieve this goal. Though the Deadly Force Review Panel’s 
recommendation for this new Class D crime may have some level of impact in preventing 
third parties from making firearms available to those who cannot legally obtain them on 
their own, MCEDV would a sk you to consider that other policy options, such as closing 
background check loopholes , would accomplish this goal more comprehensive ly.  
 
If you choose to move forward with the creation of this new Class D crime, we 
encourage you to amend the bill to bu ild in an affirmative defense  that would help ensure 
survivors of domestic violence would not be prosecuted under this new law when their 
abusive partner coerces them into obtaining weapons on their behalf. This is not a 
speculative outcome. In 2023, MCEDV  and some our member programs have been working 
with the United States Attorneys Office for the District of Maine to help address an issue 
they have identified around vulnerable women being pulled into inter -state gun trafficking 
as straw purchasers by men  who are prohibited from obtaining weapons themselves. Our 
network is a partner in this because victims of domestic violence and sex trafficking number 
significantly in the population of straw purchasers identified in just this interstate trafficking 
scena rio. We would also encourage you to direct some public awareness resources, so that 
those most likely to be in a position to provide a weapon to a prohibited person have some 
reasonable opportunity to understand the criminal liability associated with doing  so.  
 
 
1 MCEDV represents a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers across Maine as 
well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more th an 
12,000 survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children in  our state .  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
This Committee should also be cognizant that one of the best ways to keep guns out 
of the hands of those who have already been identified as likely to be dangerous if they have 
them is to ensure any guns they already have are appropriately relinquished to law 
enforcement at the time the defendant becomes prohibited. MCEDV, in partnership with the 
Maine Judicial Branch and Maine’s law enforcement community, has been working 
intentionally and collaboratively on this important need. In 2023, this will include quantifying 
the extent of the need across the state to address weapons storage issues at law 
enforcement agencies and providing resources to address these needs, as we work with our 
partners to remove practical barriers weapons removal from those who have become 
prohibited from possessing them.  
 
Because of the prevalent role firearms play in serious domestic violence assaults and 
homicides, as well as our participation on Maine’s Domestic Abuse Homicide Review Panel 
since its inception, MCEDV has a deep un derstanding of the laws and structures to address 
gun violence in our state and also where the gaps and challenges are. MCEDV and our 
member programs are happy to serve as a resource to this Committee as you continue to 
discuss these  important issue s.  
 
 
Contact Information:    
Andrea Mancuso, Esq.    
Public Policy Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 430 -8334   
Email:  andrea@mcedv.org    
 
 
 
 
  
 
