Ann Sawchuck
Cumberland ME
LD 22
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee.
My name is Ann Sawchuck and I am a resident of Cumberland, Maine.  I am a 
Mother and a Grandmother. I want Maine to be a safe place for my children and 
grandchildren. 
I support LD 22, An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to Prohibited Persons, 
which makes it a Class D crime for anyone to knowingly or intentionally sell or 
transfer a firearm to a person whom the seller/transferor either knows or has reason to 
believe is prohibited from having a firearm under 15 MSRA Section 393 (Possession 
of Firearms Prohibited for Certain Persons).  
This Bill follows a recommendation from the Maine Deadly Force Review Panel 
which found in its January 2022 report that in many cases where deadly force was 
used by responding officers, the individual against whom deadly force was used 
discharged a firearm at another person or at the responding officers. Many of these 
individuals had a prior violent criminal history and some were convicted felons, 
prohibited by federal and state law from possessing firearms. The Panel 
recommended the adoption of proposed Section 394 (Title 15), which is “intended to 
deter friends, acquaintances, family members, or other individuals from selling or 
otherwise providing a firearm to another person when that individual knows that the 
other person is prohibited from possessing a firearm for any of the reasons set forth in
Title 15 MRSA, Section 393.”  Title 15, Section 353, sets forth a lot of good reasons 
that a person shouldn’t have a firearm.
LD 22 seeks to ensure that legally prohibited persons cannot obtain firearms from 
persons who know they are not allowed to possess firearms. Private persons who 
either know of such a disallowance, or should reasonably know, will face criminal 
penalties if they provide a firearm to such a person despite having this information. 
LD 22 will help close the gap between laws applying to commercial sellers and 
private sellers and will keep Maine safer by making it harder for private persons to 
ignore potentially dangerous situations.  Please support LD 22 and the adoption of 15 
MRSA Section 394 - Prohibited sale or transfer of firearms to certain persons.  Thank 
you.

