 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 *Resident Board Representatives  
**
Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and distinguished members of 
the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety , my name is Joe Anderson.  I 
am a resident of Portland, a hospital -based pediatrician, and I sit on the Board of 
the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  I a m writing today in 
support of LD 22, An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to Prohibited 
Persons . 
As individuals in positions of leadership or influence in our communities, I’m sure you’ve been asked the question “What keeps you up at night?”  As a pediatrician, 
that issue is gun violence.  I have cared for children and teenagers who have suffered life -altering injuries or death as a result of firearms far more often than I 
care to admit.  Their injuries are seared into my memory and serve as a constant reminder of how unbelievably easy it is in this country for children and teenagers to have their lives interrupted by firearms, made possible by weak policies regarding gun safety.  
Gun violence is a public h ealth crisis in the US, where deaths by firearms have 
outpaced motor vehicle accidents as the leading cause of death for children and teens aged 1 to 19 in the United States.
1  There are significant opportunities to 
improve these statistics with gun safety  policies that are supported by a majority 
of Americans, and in many cases by most  gun owners  as well.    
LD 22  prohibits the sale or transfer of a firearm to a person who is prohibited from 
owning a firearm.  If an individual is prohibited from owning a firearm in the state of Maine, we agree that it should be a crime to sell or transfer a firearm to such a person.  
The American Academy of Pediatrics is committed to protecting children from firearm -related injury and violence.  We support specific measures to reduce the 
destructive effects of guns in the lives of c hildren and adolescents.  We urge each 
of you to consider the potential lives you could save as a result of supporting LD 
22. 
 Respectfully,  
 
Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Co-Chair, Advocacy C ommittee  
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics  
 
 
 
  

