 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony in support of LD 22 ‘An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to 
Prohibited Persons ’ 
 
Honorable Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury and Members of the 
Committee on  Criminal Justice and Public Safety, I am a Portland resident, a 
pediatrician, a member of the  Maine Chapter of the American Academy of 
Pediatrics (AAP) Committee on Gu n Safety, and a  concerned citizen. I am writing 
today on behalf of the Maine AAP. The AAP is committed to  protecting children 
from firearm related injuries and violence.  We support LD 22 and encourage the 
committee to vote ought to pass on the bill as refe rred.  
 This bill arises out of a specific recommendation of the 2nd Annual Report of the Deadly Force  Review Panel (the Panel) submitted to the Joint Standing Committee 
on the Judiciary in January  2022. In the report, the Panel noted that several of the 
individuals against whom deadly force  was used were prohibited from firearm 
possession under existing law but were in possession of a firearm at the time of 
the deadly force incident. Noting that the presentation of firearms  
increased the dangerousness of the  situation for the individual, responding law 
enforcement  officers, and bystanders, the Panel recommended passage of a 
statute “intended to deter  friends, acquaintances, family members or other 
individuals from selling or otherwise providing  a firearm to a nother person when . 
. . the other person is prohibited from possessing a firearm  for any of the reasons 
set forth in Title 15 MRSA, Section 393.”  (1) 
 
This bill is in alignment with Federal Laws regarding sale and transfer of firearms 
but is not  redundant to them. Maine can, and should, impose appropriate 
penalties on those who provide  dangerous weapons to people whom we, as a 
state, have determined should not have access to  such weapons. Expressly 
prohibiting this type of dangerous sale or transfer in both the Federal  and Maine 
State Laws will increase the deterrent force and provide for prosecutorial discretion . 
 The proposed Bill simply, but appropriately, imposes an obligation on individuals to decline to  sell or transfer firearms to prohibited individuals . Violators of this 
prohibition will be subject to  punishment as a Class D crime. This closes the gap 
between the laws applying to commercial  sellers and private sellers to keep Maine 
safer. In our view as pediatricians, increasing the  safety of our communities will 
increase the health and well -being of our children.  Please support LD 22 to keep 
firearms out of the hands of people who the state has already  decided should not 
be permitted to have them.  
 Kristine M. Pleacher, MD  
 
 
1 2021 Annu al Report of the Deadly Force Review Panel. Office of the Maine AG: News; Reports Accessed  
04/02/2023.  
  
