Gun Owners of Maine 
“Every citizen has a right to keep and bear arms, 
and this right shall never be questioned." 
Ma/ne State Constitution - A/tic/e 1, Sect/on 16 
ln Regard to: 
LD 22: An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to Prohibited Persons 
LD 60: An Act to Require a 72-Hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm 
LD 168: An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, 
Transfer or Exchange of Firearms 
My name is Laura Parker. I am the President of Gun Owners of Maine, and stand 
before you representing our Board of Directors, and our members who are unable 
to testify today. 
Gun Owners of Maine is an organization whose sole purpose is to ensure that the 
fabric of our State Constitution does not stray from our founders ’ intent: Every 
citizen has a right to keep and bear arms and this right shall never be questioned. 
We are resolutely non-partisan and have a membership composed of people from 
all walks of life. 
We are white and blue collar. We are nurses, welders, teachers, students, and 
retirees. We, more than any other entity in the state, join Mainers from Kittery to 
Madawaska under the banner of one cause: gun rights. 
We maintain: Gun rights are civil rights. Gun rights are women's rights. Gun rights 
are inalienable. 
For this reason, we oppose LD 22, LD 60 and LD 168.
In the interest of the committee's time, and of others wishing to make their voice 
heard, l will speak briefly to each of these bills. I welcome any questions, both 
today, or those directed to my email address listed below at a time convenient for 
you. 
The language of LD 22 is troublesome. Knowingly transferring a firearm toa 
prohibited person is already against federal law under 18 U.S. Code § 922 (cl). is 
the need to duplicate the law under state statute necessary in Maine? While the 
federal law uses the language ”knowing or having reasonable cause to beIieve" , 
this state bill uses the language ”knowingly or intentionally sell or transfer ” . The 
use of the word ”or” between knowingly and intentionally would mean that ifa 
person intentionally transferred a firearm to a person (any gun sale) they would 
be breaking the law even if they had no reasonable knowledge that the person 
receiving the firearm was prohibited. 
LD 60 is as equally troubling. Requiring law-abiding Mainers to wait 72 hours after 
legally purchasing a firearm does nothing to take guns out of the hands of 
criminals. In fact, it impedes, for example, a woman seeking to purchase a firearm 
for self—defense from doing so in a timely fashion. A man bent on perpetrating 
violence against her will not submit himself to the law. Why should we, as a state, 
prevent her from protecting herself? 
In addition to this, p.utting a 72-hour wait on the legal purchase of a firearm will 
harm small businesses in Ivlaine. This bill would effectively wipe out the gun sales 
of many rural gun shops, both at their storefronts and at gun shows. 
With regards to LD 168, l\/laine rejected Universal Background checks in 2016. The 
people of Maine have spoken with regard to this subject. This bill's ambiguous 
language with regards to "family members" and language that effectively 
encompasses almost all gun sales in Maine, does not embody the views of gun 
owners in l\/laine and should be rejected. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, 
Laura B. Parker, President 
laura@gunownersofmaine.org
