 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 22 (Opposed)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 22, An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to Prohibited  Persons  
 
DA: April 3 , 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 22.   
 
 Enactment of a new crime is not necessary  to criminalize the conduct described in the bill .   
The conduct at issue may be prosecuted under section 15 M.R.S. § 393 using an accomplice theory, 
in which case the  accomplice would be charged with the same crime as the principal actor.  17-A 
M.R.S. § 57.   https://legislature.maine.gov/legis/statutes/17 -A/title17 -Asec57.html .    Under 
appropriate circumstances, transferring or selling a firearm to a prohibited person may be 
considered a part of a conspiracy  to violate the law , and charged as conspiracy to vi olate 15 M.R.S. 
§ 393, which would be one class lower than the section 393 violation at issue.    17-A M.R.S. § 151.  
https://legislature.maine.gov/legis/statutes/17 -A/title17 -Asec151.html .  
 
 Should the Legislature go forward with this proposal, sub -section 2 of proposed section 394 
should be revised as follows  to eliminate an unnecessary reference to the permit and more clearly 
identify the applicable culpable mental st ates: 
 
 A person is guilty of prohibited sale or transfer of a firearm if that person intentionally or 
 knowingly sells or transfers a firearm to  another person , knowing or believing that other 
 person to be prohibited from possessing a firearm, and that other person is in fact prohibited 
 from possessing a firearm pursuant to Title 15, section 393 .    
  
 Violation of this section is a Class D crime.  
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9  members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three  sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Cou rt’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to crimin al 
justice processes.    
