Peggy MeGehee 
Fahnouth, Maine 
Good afternoon, Chairs Beebe-Center and Salisbury and Members of the Committee: 
I am Peggy McGehee, a resident of the Town of F almouth. I speak in support of L.D. 22, 
as a mother and grandmother in a gun-owning, military family. Our son is a U.S. Marine captain 
who has served active duty in Iraq. My daughter ’s son, my grandson, lives in rural Maine and is 
learning to shoot and hunt. We, and all the law-abiding and responsible gun owners here today, 
lose nothing if this bill, and all of today’s gun safety bills, pass. Our gun ownership will not be 
curtailed in any way. The bills do not violate our Second Amendment rights. As Justice 
Clarence Thomas himself said in last year’s U.S. Supreme Court decision in Bruen, the Second 
Amendment protects only “law-abiding and responsible ” persons. Non-law abiding and 
irresponsible persons have no Second Amendment right to bear arms. These bills only help 
prevent guns from going to persons already barred by court order from owning a gun. That is all. 
None of us here today want our children or grandchildren to be at risk of injury or trauma 
because we made it so easy, here in Maine, for non-law abiding and irresponsible people to get 
guns—with no required permit, no private sale background check, no waiting period, no 
penalties for selling or giving guns to criminals. If the Legislature passes these bills this year, 
unlike its failure to pass the same or similar bills in prior years, then we Mainers will have -- law 
by law~- done what we can to stop the ﬂow of crime guns——and made our loved ones safer. 
This bill will help that in at least two ways. It will gives friends and family a good reason to say 
“no” when a person, who by court order is prohibited from having a gun, asks the friend or 
relative to give him a gun any way. Instead of having to stand up to him and say “no I won’t 
give you a gun” this bill will enable the friend or relative to say, ““Sorry, I can’t give you a gun, 
because it is now a crime for me to do that.” 
The bill will also give pause to the corrupt seller of guns, who, knowing the buyer is a felon, still 
sells him a gun for the proﬁt. With this bill the seller will have to consider that she will be 
charged with a crime for knowingly selling the gun to the felon. That will slow down illegal gun 
trafficking. Corrupt retail dealers account for a higher volume of guns getting into the illegal 
market than any other trafficking channel. 
If you pair this bill with the private sale background cheek bill, L.D. 168, then the private dealer 
will have to do a background check, and when he learns that the buyer is prohibited by court 
order from having a gun, he will be deterred from selling it, to avoid his own criminal penalties. 
So this bill could help stop the ﬂow of crime guns both within Maine and out to other states 
when felons come here to get guns that the laws in their own states prevent them from getting. 
I ask the Committee to vote unanimously that L.D. 22 ought to pass. Thank you for your 
consideration. 
Peggy L. McGehee 
Pmcgehee4@gmail.com
