 
April 7, 2023 
 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta , ME 04333  
 
RE: LDs 22,  60, 168  
 
Dear Members of the CJPS Committee : 
  
I write in emphatic support of LDs 22, 60, and 168.  I implore you to take urgent action to 
advance these bills.  
  
My daughter's 7th birthday is approaching, and all I can think about is the parents in Tennessee, 
Texas, Florida, Colorado, Connecticut  - to name just a few - whose children will never celebrate  
a birthday  again.  
  
I close my eyes and see the bodies of dead children in a classroom.   Bodies of children the same 
ages as mine that were so mutilated by bullets that their parents had to submit DNA samples to 
identify their babies.   
  
When I was a kid,  my parents worried about stranger abductions; about razor blades in 
Halloween candy or contaminated Tylenol.   Baby Jessica fell down a well and it was news for 
months. Parents today send our kids to school feeling certain it’s just a matter of time before  a 
shooting happens in our neighborhood. (The playground of my kids' primary school abuts a 
road.   I wonder how many children would be able to get away should a gunman drive 
up?)  These massacres have become so commonplace that the news cycle moves on in d ays. 
  
I am a gun owner, married to a gun owner, in an extended family full of gun owners, living in a 
state with a longstanding history of gun ownership. I respect Maine’s sporting and hunting 
traditions.   I too have waxed nostalgic about the days of rifl es carried in the cabs of trucks for 
after-school deer hunts, and I believe in the value and importance of responsible gun ownership 
and teaching firearm safety.   
  
But that’s not enough anymore. The world has changed, the dangers facing our children have 
changed, and we need to change with them.  
 
It was once said that "as Maine goes, so goes the nation."   Let us uphold this tradition - and set 
an example for the rest of the country - by quickly and decisively acting to implement these 
reasonable, realisti c, and necessary gun regulation measures.    
 
Respectfully yours,  
 
Sarah Boone  
Scarborough, Maine  
