I\llOMSE% 
DEMAND ACTION FDR GUN SENSE IN AMERICA 
Testimony before the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee in support of 
I..D. 22 “An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to Prohibited Persons" 
April 3, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee, my name is Tara Williams and I am a resident of 
Cumberland and a mom of two children, one in elementary school and one in middle school. I 
am also a volunteer with the Maine chapter of Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America. 
Moms Demand Action is the largest grassroots organization dedicated to protecting our 
communities, families, and children from gun violence in all its various forms including mass 
shootings, homicide, unintentional deaths, and suicide by ﬁrearms. 
In an average year in Maine, 163 people die by guns.* I support L.D. 22, because this bill would 
make it a crime for anyone to knowingly or intentionally sell or transfer a ﬁrearm to a person 
whom they know or has reason to believe is prohibited by state law from having a ﬁrearm. This 
proposed legislation would help keep guns out of the hands of people with dangerous histories. 
It would help prevent gun violence in Maine. (In addition to holding those who knowingly give 
guns to prohibited people accountable, our state should also require background checks on all 
gun sales, as addressed in L.D. 168.) Common~sense gun laws, like the one proposed in this bill, 
help make our state and our communities safer places to live. 
I have spent many years working professionally on behalf of young children and families, 
teaching in child care programs and elementary schools, and working for nonproﬁts that focus 
on systems and policy changes to improve children's lives and their education in Maine and 
across the country. This week I am grieving with Nashville and everyone impacted by yet 
another senseless act of gun violence in our schools. School shootings like this are not acts of 
nature - no other peer nation allows children to be shot and killed in schools like this. But in 
America guns are the leading killer of our children. We need to put the safety of our children 
ﬁrst. We need to have gun safety laws like the one proposed in L.D. 22. 
We need to also address the epidemic of daily gun violence which plagues far too many 
communities across the country and that kids experience in their neighborhood and walk 
through on their way to and from school. The horrifying truth is that far more children 
experience gun violence at home or in their communities than at school. Every single instance 
of gunﬁre that children are exposed to impacts their ability to learn, grow, and develop. Our gun 
violence crisis is a preventable tragedy. I have had enough. I hope you have too. 
*Data Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. WONDER Online Database, 
Underlying Cause of Death. A yearly average was developed using four years of the most recent available data: 2018 to 2021.
