 
 
March 27, 2023  
 
 
LD 829  – Ought to Pass  
An Act to Improve Behavioral Health Support for Students in Public Schools  
 
 
Testimony  submitted  on behalf of NASW – Maine Chapter  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs, greetings. My name is Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW, and I am the Executive Director of 
the National Association of Social Workers, Maine Chapter.  
 
I applaud Representative Lydia Crafts, a fellow social worker, on her vision for LD 829.  It is not new 
information to any of you that Maine’s students are in the midst of a mental health crisis.  This committee knows 
all too well of the troublin g statistics here in Maine on youth mental health and wellness including rates of 
depression, suicidal ideation, and adverse childhood experiences facing students of all ages.  Wait times for 
community -based services such as outpatient counseling, medicati on management, case management, and in -
home behavioral health supports are at an all time high while youth can spend upwards of several weeks in their 
local emergency department waiting for one of just a handful of inpatient psychiatric beds to open up (a process 
that might happen more expeditiously if there were available options for step -down programs for youth leaving 
this level of care).  Whether we like it or not, schools have become some of the largest de facto  mental health 
centers in our state.  Thi s is a fact.  
 
LD 829 not only supports a more effective (and nationally recognized) ratio of students to school counselors but 
also introduces a  similar  ratio of students to school social workers…something our schools desparately need 
more of.  This bill c larifies the amount of time each of these professionals should be spending on direct and 
indirect services to students and requires evidenced -based training on behavioral analysis at the district level.  
These components of LD 829 represent the baseline of  what we must offer students and families to begin to 
address the immediately mental health needs impacting our youth.  I urge you all to unanimously vote “Ought to 
Pass” on this important bill so that we can continue to invest in our young people and get to work as we fight to 
keep our kids safe, healthy, and alive.  
 
Please know that you will have the full resources of NASW -ME in any subsequent work sessions or 
conversations you wish to have as we work together on this important issue.  
 
Thank you!  
 
 
Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW  
Executive Director  
NASW -ME Chapter  

