Good Afternoon!  To Sen. Rafferty & Rep. Brennan & to the Honorable Members 
of this Committee in Education & Cultural Affairs:
Deborah Parker Pres. Future Visions Youth Development FVYD 501c3 Non- Profit Org.-W. Rockport, ME.
I am in Opposition to LD 829:
This Maine Ed. Committee knows me well, I have been before you for 2 decades 
with work that would recover the kids who are troubled, anxious, and struggling 
within schools. This bill LD 829 suggested text is for a smaller ratio of Student to 
Staff i.e., this staff- a School Counselor &  with that staff having new professional 
opportunity with (6) Advanced Behavioral Analyst courses. I think advancing 
education is great. Meanwhile, our FVYD Org. and I have been here to resolve 
critical issues for Students in Maine Education for years. In fact, during this last 
decade the Maine Education door has not been opened for any of this 
Community Nonprofit Student Recovery work we offered-with that Evidentiary 
data you want! Again, we have the Answers you seek.  With a Masters MPS in 
Professional Studies in Human Relations & as a Maine Licensed Professional 
Counselor -conditional.  With experience in Youth Suicide Units, Adolescent Crisis 
units and Family Support - & for Program development in several Mental Health 
treatment settings…to include Dept. of Juvenile Justice DJJ. I suggest this bill LD 
829 is taking us in the wrong direction, once again.  Adding a Counselor is great 
help to schools --but it is not the right answer! Instead, you are only fueling the 
fire; and adding the “scapegoat for blame.”- When I suggest today that we can 
actually put the fire OUT, instead.    So, let’s do that instead! 
Lets Recover these 40% of troubled, anxious and failing Students’ today in their classrooms & 
with their Peers struggles- first!  Lets work for Wellness; instead of waiting for more ILLNESS. I 
prefer we directly Recover our Kids with their own Life Skills. I prefer a Well Health Promotions 
pathway- by offering that Educational future filled with new Learning Choices… instead of 
treatments. Kids are resilient. Then should mental illness treatments be still needed; those will 
be less in number. The LD 829 Professionals- our Social workers & Counselors -should be 
Advanced Behavioral Analysts in a year or so.  By then with our FVYD work done; they may well 
have a better chance to be direct, targeted and so much more effective. With this LD 829 bill- 
Offering for “More Hands on Deck” is always helpful, but; this bill is not the answer we need 
today! Today we need to RECOVER our 40% of stressed Students & Teachers still waiting back 
in the schools & barely breathing. They are looking for new Answers, today! We have them, 
today! Thank you, DP 
