.. 
Wwaq 
I 
Maine Education Association 
Em Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cote NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Support of 
LD 829 An Act to Improve Behavioral Health Support for Students in Public Schools 
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association While on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certiﬁed teacher. The MEA 
represents nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-l2 schools as well 
as in our institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine 
Community College System, along with students in teacher prep programs as well as many retired 
educators. 
I am here to testify on behalf of MEA in support of LD 829, An Act to Improve Behavioral Health 
Support for Students in Public Schools. 
It is difficult for me to ﬁnd the words to fully express the struggles that too many of our students are 
experiencing and how vitally important it is that We do more, so much more, for them. There are 
numerous studies and reports‘ about the extent of the issue. Increased misconduct, sometimes dangerous 
to self or others, outbursts, inability to self-regulate, disruptions in classes, large numbers of children and 
adolescents experiencing anxiety and/ or depression ——you can read something nearly every day about the 
crisis We are facing. Our educators are making a tremendous effort to promote social/emotional 
wellbeing--but more is needed. We hear from members all the time about the student behaviors they are 
dealing with and the needs of our students. I heard just recently about a district that was able to hire an 
additional school counselor —and the counselor ’s schedule was completely ﬁlled their ﬁrst day on the 
job! Every school counselor and social Worker I have spoken with this year has said they are racing non- 
stop to put out ﬁre after ﬁre and are having to miss time they planned to spend with students for work on 
supporting students and preventing troubling behaviors. 
LD 829 aims to increase the stafﬁng and the training that will help with addressing the extensive and 
more prevalent needs We are seeing in our students today. The key element of this proposal is 
recognition of the need for mental health professionals in our schools by decreasing the counselor to 
student ratios in grades preK-8, and by also including social Workers in the funding formula. These 
changes will help to better address the very challenging behaviors and the needs of our students. For 
children to be able to learn and grow, they must feel safe and Well. Our schools need more support for 
that to happen. The proposed funding formula changes may not provide all that‘ 
our students need, and 
We know that ﬁnding qualiﬁed professionals is a challenge. Nonetheless, LD 829 is an important part of 
the solution to help develop and provide the supports that are necessary to help more students. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 041736 I29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME-06106 
207-622~5866 I 207M888-2070 fax I wvi/w.mair1eea.org
While more may be needed to ensure we can help all students who are struggling, let’s at least pass and 
implement LD 829 to be sure we do what we can to move things in the right direction. With the 
increased support that LD 829 calls for, our students will be better able to be successful in their learning 
I’m sure you all agree that our students desewe that.p 
lhttgs I//n<:es.cd, gov‘wha1ts11egg1>1'ess _“_g"eleascs[Q7 __(.)(7mZ()22 ._z_;§;_p_ 
lhttps:s ’/' w\\/gy.Washingtonpost.comgggclucz1tign/ ’2(,)2_§Z./ l_Z/“()§_4’c1"isis-sjpcleilgglelital-l1ez1ltl1;is-inuch-\iQster¢ 
§lu111~\§;§_1eali;z,e/'
