 
 
Testimony on Behalf of the University of Maine System  
Provided by Jamie Pratt, Chair  and Associate Professor, University of Southern Maine 
Department of Educational and School Psychology  
In Support of LD 829, An Act to Improve Behavioral Health Support for Students in Public 
Schools (As Amended)  
March 28, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Represent ative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Educational and Cultural Affairs : 
 
On behalf of the University of Maine System and as  members of the faculty of the University of 
Southern Maine ’s Department of Educational and School Psychology , we write  in support of  LD 
829, as amended by the sponsor, Rep. Lydia Crafts . As graduate faculty in Maine’s only school 
psychology and applied behavior analysis training programs, w e fully support  legislation  like 
this to increase PK -12 students’ access to comprehensive school -based mental and behavioral 
health services . 
 
Maine’s children need support.  
 
Data from the National Survey of Children’s Health in 2019 -2020 showed that 29% of Maine 
children between the ages of 3 and 17 years had at least one emo tional, behavioral, or 
developmental condition1. Given that children with mental and behavioral health conditions 
experience increased risk for academic underachievement, social difficulties, suspension, 
expulsion, and school dropout, there is a pressing n eed for  policy and investment  to improve 
children’s access to quality care2. The provision of comprehensive mental and behavioral health 
services within the school setting mitigates multiple access barriers and therefore must be a 
priority3. In alignment w ith the positions of the National Association of School Psychologists 
and the Maine Department of Education  (DOE) , we believe that effective and equitable school -
based mental and behavioral services must be (a) integrated within multitiered systems of 
supp ort and (b) supported by sufficient numbers of qualified mental and behavioral health 
professionals4,5.  
 
Qualified school -based mental health providers include state -credentialed school counselors, 
school psychologists, school social workers , and other mental health clinicians . We support the 
focus of LD 829 on ensuring appropriate ratios of clinical mental health providers and school 
psychologists. School psychologists are trained to support prevention -focused mental and 
behavioral health initiatives (e .g., social -emotional learning, positive behavioral interventions 
and supports, violence prevention, and trauma -informed school programs), assist with mental 
and behavioral health screening, conduct comprehensive psychological evaluations and 
functional be havior assessments, consult with teachers and families on mental health and 
behavior support strategies, and provide direct therapeutic services. Research suggests that a 
ratio of one school psychologist to every 500 students is needed for school psycholog ists to 
provide these critical mental and behavioral health services; however, the ratio of school 
psychologists to students in Maine is currently 1:1 ,5016.  
 
With support from the Maine DOE  and grant funding awarded by the U.S. Department of 
Education’s O ffice of Elementary and Secondary Education, USM is  significantly increasing 
enrollments in our specialist and doctoral -level school psychology programs to address state 
shortage s. Forty -six students are currently matriculated in USM’s school psychology pr ograms, 
and we have extended admissions offers to 18 students for Fall 2023.   
 
Our ongoing collaborative project with the Maine DOE  specifically aims to recruit, train, and 
retain highly qualified school psychologists within the state. This project support s a clinical 
faculty member  responsible for establishing partnerships with local schools for field -based 
school psychology training, providing supervision to school psychology students during 
practicum and internship, and training current school psychologi sts in evidence -based clinical 
supervision practices.  
 
We also are collaborating with the Maine DOE  and local schools to implement the Maine School 
Psychology: Collaborative Affiliations in Rural Education (Maine School Psychology CARE s) 
project . This project aims to increase the number of credentialed school psychologists in rural, 
high-needs schools in Maine who reflect the diverse backgrounds of students within those 
communities and are uniquely qualified to provide effective mental and behavioral he alth 
services. We urge this Committee to support LD 829 to establish appropriate practice ratios for 
school psychologists and thereby advance these efforts . 
 
We also appreciate LD 829’s recognition of the value of preparing educators with expertise in 
applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA underlies the principles and practices of positive 
behavior interventions and supports (PBIS), and Board Certified Behavior Analysts (BCBAs) are 
uniquely prepared to provide assessment, intervention, and consultation se rvices to promote 
children’s skill development and address challenging behaviors that interfere with learning. ABA 
approaches therefore hold promise for reducing exclusionary disciplinary practices in schools, 
and ABA professionals play a key role in suppo rting educators with effective classroom behavior 
management7. Our department currently offers graduate certificate and master’s degree programs 
to support the preparation of BCBAs, and we are committed to expanding ABA services in 
Maine schools.  
 
If adeq uate supplemental funding  is provided , above the amounts already requested by UMS and 
recommended by the majority of this Committee to support ongoing university operations and 
expand affordable access to public postsecondary education and research, USM welcome s the 
opportunity to collaborate with the Maine DOE  to implement a pilot project that aims to  prepare 
educators with expertise in ABA. We are available to participate in subsequent work sessions to 
identify an approach that will be maximally impactful .  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Jamie L. Pratt, PsyD, BCBA -D 
Chair and Associate Professor, Department of Educational and School Psychology  
 
Mark Steege, PhD, BCBA -D 
Professor, Department of Educational and School Psychology  
 
1 Annie E. Casey Foundation (2022). Kids count data center . https://datacenter.kidscount.org/data /tables/10668 -children -who-have -one-or-more -
emotional -behavioral -or-developmental -conditions?loc=21&loct=2#detailed/2/21/true/1769,1696,1648/any/20457,20456  
2 Youth.gov (n.d). How mental health disorders affect youth. Retrieved March 28, 2023, from https:/ /youth.gov/youth -topics/youth -mental -
health/how -mental -health -disorders -affect -youth  
3 National Association of School Psychologists (2015). The impor tance of mental and behavioral health services for children and adolescents 
[Position statement]. Author.  
4 National Association of School Psychologists (2021b). School p sychologists: Qualified mental health professionals providing child and 
adolescen t mental and behavioral health services [White paper]. Author. 
5 Maine Department of Education (n.d). School -based mental health supports. Retrieved March 28, 2023, from 
https://www.maine.gov/doe/schools/safeschools/counseling  
6 National Association of School Psychologists (2023, March). State shortages dashboard. https://www.nasponline.org/about -school -
psychology/state -shortages -data-dashboard  
7Allday, R. A., Burt, J. L., & Haggard, K. N. (2021). Considering a functi on-based approach for reducing disproportional disciplinary practices. 
Preventing School Failure: Al ternat ive Education for Children and Youth, 65 (4), 332 -342. https://doi.org/10.1080/1045988X.2021.1937023   
 
 
 Garry Wickerd, PhD, BCBA  
Associate  Professor, Department of Educational and School Psychology  
 
Samantha Blair, PhD  
Clinical Assistant Faculty, Department of Educational and School Psychology  
 
