" Oﬁlcers" 
Dave McCluskev, President -' 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1“ Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"“ Vice- 
President 
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Aroostook Mental Health Center 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
" Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational Institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, inc. 
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Sewing Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health & Counseling 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, lnc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
TriC0unty Mental Health Services 
Wellspring, Inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Sen/ices H .' 
. - 
The uniﬁed voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers ' 
Alliance for Addiction andh/iental Health Services, Maine 
7 -~ 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 829_ 
An Act to improve Behavioral Support for Students m Mames
T 
T ‘ =' 
~ 
Public Schools ’ ’ ' 
_“ 
‘ 
Sponsored by Representative Lydia CraftsT 
T i ' 
March 28, 2023V 
Good afternoon Senator-Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and _ Cultural Affairs. I am Malory Shaughnessy, a 
resident of Westbrook, and the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and 
Mental Health, Services. The Alliance is the-statewide association representing the 
majority of Maine's safety net community based mental health and substance use 
treatment providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound 
policies and evidence —based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.'
V 
On behalf of the Alliance, l am here today to speak in support of LD 829, as well as 
to offer a few comments and possible amended additions. . 
This bill does the following three things that I would like to speak to: _ 
First, it requires that school social workers spend at least 80% of their time 
providing direct services to students. Our youth are suffering a mental health crisis 
and we need to be doing all that we can to help mitigate the crisis. Ensuring that 
school social workers have the time dedicated to focus on these issues it of utmost 
importance and the Alliance wholeheartedly supports this goal. 
The provisions set forth in this bill which amend Sec. 4. 20-A MRSA §15672 and Sec. 
5.-7. 20-A MRSA §1S679 would seem to do a great deal to increase school 
counseling and school social work personnel in districts and the total amount of 
school counselors and school social workers available time to work with students in 
need (which as stated above is vast and only increasing).' 
Secondly, the proposal also requires school administrative units to employ an 
educator at each school in the school administrative unit who has completed a 
national board-certified assistant behavior analyst training and provides that the 
State must pay all costs associated with the training and provide an annual stipend 
of $3,000 forup to 3 years for each educator who completes the training. 
Assistant Behavior Analysts are generally responsible for developing and 
monitoring individual behavior management protocols and behavior intervention 
plans, providing support, instruction, and feedback to families and caregivers with 
regard to managing challenging behaviorsand teaching replacement behaviors and 
to review program effectiveness, make recommendations, monitor data collection, 
and chart progress. These are skills that are badly needed to support the work 
required in our schools. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.521.8118 '" 
Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAllianceMaine.org
Finally, the bill provides that for the purpose of the calculation of salary and benefit costs in the school 
funding formula, the elementary school and middle school level student-to-guidance staff ratio is 
decreased to 250:1. it also adds a student-to-school social worker ratio of 250:1 for the elementary 
school, middle school and high school levels. These ratios are important as our students arrive at school 
with behavioral health issues that must be addressed in order to allow the student to meet educational 
goals.7 
l would also offer one amendment to consider in your work session discussions. Many schools, 
especially in rural areas, may struggle to recruit and retain social workers and counselors. Building in anA 
option that these services could be performed through contract or MOU with community based 
behavioral health agencies could help address the hours needed in our schools for these sen/ices. It also 
has an added beneﬁt that the child and family could become aware of other behavioral health sen/ices 
in the community that they might avail themselves of as needed. 
it is for all of these reasons i am urging committee members to vote ought to pass on LD 829. l’d be 
pleased to answer any questions you have for me.* 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 " Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 "’theAllianceMaine.org
