PO Box 7860  
  Portland, ME 04112  
  (207) 774 -5444  
  www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
1 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, Esq.  
 
LD 829 – Ought to Pass  
 
An Act to Improve Behavioral Health Support  
for Students in Public Schools  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 
March  14, 202 3 
 
 Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede, and I 
am policy counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization  
committed to advan cing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions through advocacy, education, and litigation. On behalf of our members, we urge 
you to support this bill  because it would help Maine address its youth mental health  crisis . 
 If passed, this bill would require that school social workers spend at least 80% of 
their time providing direct services to students , that every school administrative unit employ 
someone who has completed a national board -certified assistant behavior analy st training  
program, that the state must pay the costs of this training, and that  for the purpose of the 
calculation of salary and benefit costs in the school funding formula, the elementary school and 
middle school level student -to-guidance staff ratio is  decreased to 250 -to-1. 
 Maine’s children are facing a crisis. They walk into schools and classrooms 
burdened by a barrage of social, emotional, and psychological issues. The pandemic has only 
deepened this crisis. Today’s school children are experiencing record levels of depression and 
anxiety alongside multiple forms of trauma . School counselors  and s ocial workers  are a crucial 
part of the solution to this crisis.1 They assist with the various  barriers such as poverty, 
inadequate healthcare,  community violence, homelessness, domestic  violence, and other issues 
that impact students  and their performance in school. School social  workers also facilitate 
 
1 Cops and No Counselors How the Lack of School Mental Health Staff Is Harming Students , ACLU, 2019, available at  
https://www.aclu.org/report/cops -and-no-counselors . 
 
innovative prevention and  intervention programs in areas like substance  use, bullying, anger 
management, and more.  
 According to the American School Counselor Association (“ASCA”), Maine 
employ s 581 school counselors to serve 172,455 students.2 That works out to a student -to-
counselor ratio of 297 -to-1, which falls short of the ASCA’s recommended ratio of 250 -to-1. 
Compare this with New Hampshire’s student -to-counselor ratio of 208 -to-1 and Vermont’s 
ratio of 186 -to-1.3 According to the Hopeful Futures Campaign, the ratio of social workers to 
students in Maine is even worse, at 1 social worker for every 617 students .4 
 We must invest resources and serious attention to make headway against  the mental 
health , housing and overdose death crises Maine faces. This bill is one way to do just that. We 
urge you to vote ought to pass .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Student -to-School -Counselor Ratio 2020 -2021 , American School Counselor Association, available at 
https://www.schoolcounselor.org/getmedia/238f136e -ec52 -4bf2-94b6 -f24c39447022/Ratios -20-21-Alpha.pdf .  
3 Id. 
4 Maine , Hopeful Futures Campaign, available at  https://hopefulfutures.us/action -maine/ .  
