March 14, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 829 
An Act to Improve Behavioral Health Support for 
Students in Public Schools
Senator Joseph Rafferty, Representative Michael Brennan, and members of the
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:
My name is Stan Pelletier, I am a certified school (guidance) counselor and
licensed professional clinical counselor (LCPC), and have worked in Maine
Schools and communities for over 25 years. I am also the Public Policy Chair for
the Maine Counseling Association (MeCA), a state branch of the American
Counseling Association (ACA), an organization representing professional
counselors including school counselors. It is in this capacity that I express the
support of the MeCA Executive Board for LD 829, along with some comments and
requests for clarification of some points.
We are pleased that Maine Legislators are seriously considering ways to support
the mental/behavioral well-being of students and families by strengthening the
position of school counselors and school social workers to provide services. We
support the intent to revise Sec. 4. 20-A MRSA §15672 and Sec. 5.-7. 20-A MRSA
§15679 to improve the student to school counselor ratio in K-8 public schools to
250:1 from the current 350:1. This new figure would be congruent with the ratio
currently applied to Maine students in public high schools, and also consistent with
the recommendations of the American School Counselor Association (ASCA). We
also support the intent to codify a similar ratio with respect to school social
workers. We are interpreting the language disaggregating school social workers
from “guidance staff” in Sec. 4. 20-A MRSA §15672, sub-§11 as a mechanism
which facilitates funding with respect to comprehensive school counseling
(guidance) programs, and not to mean that school counselors, guidance directors,
MeCA is a state branch of the American Counseling Association
Past-President – Leslie Smith         President – Rena Lolar        President-Elect – Jessica Walker

and school social workers will cease to work collaboratively within the structures
developed by working comprehensive school counseling programs. Perhaps this
might be explicitly stated in a subsequent draft of the LD.
In regards to Sec. 1. 20-A MRSA §4008-A, sub-§2, we interpret the language of
80% direct and indirect student services to mean “counseling and social-work
services” specifically, not other duties sometimes associated with public schools.
The ASCA National Model suggests that “indirect services” specifically include
the professional activities of consultation, collaboration, and referral. The
guidelines set out in the ASCA model which have served to inform the above
referenced legislation, are suggestions as to minimum “best practice” allocations of
time by the professional school counselor. Note too, that ASCA recommendations
regarding the remaining (no more than) 20% of time be spent in “program planning
and school support activities” are specifically spelled out in the document
ASCA
National Model Executive Summary
and do not include
numerous other duties
involved with school functioning (such as supervision of classrooms or common
areas). We do not view the current wording within the statute as problematic and in
need of revision, provided that it is interpreted as outlined here. Although school
counselors and school social workers fulfill different roles within school
communities, we believe that insofar as the 80% direct and indirect services
allocation of time is concerned, any changes which would introduce disparity
between the allocated time of school counselors to students and social workers to
students should be carefully considered and modified only in response to
demonstrated need. The provisions set forth in this bill which amend Sec. 4. 20-A
MRSA §15672 and Sec. 5.-7. 20-A MRSA §15679 would seem to do a great deal
to increase school counseling and school social work personnel in districts and the
total amount of school counselors and school social workers available time to work
with students in need (which is vast and only increasing), and perhaps render the
suggestions put forth in Sec. 1. 20-A MRSA §4008-A, sub-§2 unneeded.
MeCA is a state branch of the American Counseling Association
Past-President – Leslie Smith         President – Rena Lolar        President-Elect – Jessica Walker

In closing, let me say that we welcome thoughtful attempts by the legislature to
assist with the implementation of comprehensive school counseling programs, and
to support school counselors and school social workers in carrying out their vital
functions in service to students and families in Maine public schools. We, the
members of the Executive Board of the Maine Counseling Association, are ready
to assist and consult with members of the legislature if called upon. We are
committed as an organization to upholding the standards of professionalism of
school counselors in service to Maine students, families, and schools. Thank you
for your time and attention, and for the opportunity to share our views with the
membership of the Joint Standing Committee.
Best regards,
Stan Pelletier, M.Ed., LCPC, NCC
School Counselor (Maine Certification #387643)
Public Policy Chair, Maine Counseling Association
public_policy@maineca.org
207-664-9044
MeCA is a state branch of the American Counseling Association
Past-President – Leslie Smith         President – Rena Lolar        President-Elect – Jessica Walker

