 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared on behalf of  
 
Submitted by: 
Guy Sharfman  
Vice President, Market Analytics  
 
5373 W Alabama St. 
Suite 400 
Houston, Texas 77056 
Phone: (281) 773-9371  
Email: guy.sharfman@intelometry.com  
Website: www.intelometry.com  
 
April 2023  
The Fallacies of the  Reform of Electricity Supply: 
CEP-Served Residential Retail Electric Market Study 
Report 
A Response to the Maine Office of Public Advocate 

  
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 23 
 
 
Table of Contents 
I. Introduction ..................................................................................... 2  
II. Failure to Address the Directives of LD318 ....................................... 3  
III. Fallacies of the OPA Consultant Report ............................................ 6  
A. Overview and Critique of the OPA Consultant Report ............................... 7 
B. Debunking the OPA Consultant Report: A Detailed Examination ......... 10 
1. CEP Customer Decision Making..................................................................... 10 
2. CEP Product Innovation ................................................................................. 12 
3. CEP Economic Contribution ........................................................................... 12 
4. Retail Electric Choice Can Offer Significant Savings Opportunity ................. 13 
5. CEP Pricing ..................................................................................................... 16 
6. The Gap Between Maine Utility and CEP Pricing .......................................... 20 
7. Renewable Products ...................................................................................... 21 
IV. Conclusion ...................................................................................... 23  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 23 
 
I. Introduction 
The report1 submitted by the Maine Office of Public Advocate (“OPA Report”) pursuant to LD318, 
“Resolve, To Direct the Office of the Public Advocate To Study Reforming Maine's System of Retail 
Electricity Supply To Provide More Options to Maine Customers and Support Maine's Climate Goals” 
(Public Law 2021, Chapter 164) includes a one-sided and biased report prepared by one of the OPA’s 
hired a consulting firms entitled the “ Reform of Electricity Supply: CEP-Served Residential Retail 
Electric Market Report ”2 (“OPA Consultant Report”). At its core, the OPA Consultant Report falsely 
claims that Maine residential customers “lose” $20 million per year taking service from competitive 
electric providers (“CEP”).3 The report perpetuates this false claim and other related claims to 
recommend the abolishment of the residential retail electricity market in the state of Maine despite 
the fact that most CEP electric supply offers currently posted on OPA’s rate comparison website 
offer significant savings over prevailing 2023 Maine utility Standard Offer Service (“SOS”) rates . For 
example, NRG’s retail brand affiliate, XOOM Energy offers 12- and 24-month residential fixed price 
products to all Maine residential customers that save them 26% over the Central Maine Power 
(“CMP”) SOS Small rate, 21% over the Versant Power (“Versant”) Bangor Hydro District SOS rate and 
13% over the Versant Power Maine Public District SOS rate in every month of 2023.4 If all residential 
customers currently served by CMP and Versant SOS took advantage of the XOOM Energy offers 
the total market savings would be nearly $190 million for 2023 alone .5 Hardly a $20 million loss as 
purported by the OPA Consultant Report! 
While the OPA Consultant Report proposed recommendation would clearly be deleterious to the 
state’s competitive retail electricity market, it would also infamously establish Maine as the first state 
in the nation to eliminate retail electricity choice - - a market that first began 23 years ago on March 
1, 2000. Further, the OPA’s recommendation regarding its proposed public policy determinant 
concerning retail electricity choice casts a chilling effect that impacts all competitive or private sector 
enterprises currently in Maine or desires to invest in the future. Today, the OPA is attacking the retail 
electricity supply industry, but its recommendation may similarly impact other private enterprises and 
 
1 State of Maine Office of Public Advocate - Retail Electricity Supply Study Report (February 1, 2023) 
2 Reform of Electricity Supply: CEP-Served Residential Retail Electric Market (February 1, 2023) prepared by Susan 
M. Baldwin and Timothy E. Howington. 
3 See OPA Consultant Report, page 1 
4 See section Retail Electric Choice Can Offer Significant Savings Opportunity  
5 See section Retail Electric Choice Can Offer Significant Savings Opportunity  
  
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 23 
 
related business sectors in the future, including home heating oil, telecommunications, cable 
television, etc. Moreover, the OPA’s study paternalistically presumes Maine residential customers 
lack the knowledge, judgment, or expertise to make informed buying decisions pertaining to their 
energy supplier and thus, their freedom to choose their supplier must be eliminated for their 
protection. This view is wrong-minded and suggests a degree of elitism. 
To be clear, competition is the key driver to obtaining beneficial savings, attaining new and innovative 
products and services, and enhancing service quality and value to end-use customers. Nevertheless, 
the OPA Study proposes to eliminate residential retail electricity choice in the State of Maine, ignoring 
both the letter and spirit of LD 318.  
II. Failure to Address the Directives of LD318  
Before addressing the core elements of the OPA Consultant Report, it is important to address how 
the overall OPA retail study failed to address the legislative directives set forth in the LD318 from the 
2022 legislative session. In this regard, OPA’s performance in this matter falls short.  
Firstly, in Sec. 1. of LD318, the “Resolve” states “ that the Office of the Public Advocate shall conduct a 
study of options for reforming the State’s current system of retail electricity supply in ways that will 
provide greater competition among retail electricity supply providers (emphasis added) and more 
options and protections for customers, including access to renewable and clean energy supply options. 
The office shall examine options relating to the State's standard offer system for facilitating the 
achievement of the State’s climate goals and beneficial electrification.”  
 Nonetheless, the OPA’s No. 1 recommendation calls for the discontinuance of the 
residential retail electricity market effective January 1, 2024. The OPA Study lacks any 
constructive recommendations and/or initiatives to enhance or provide greater 
competition among retail electricity supply providers.     
In Sec. 2. of LD318, the “Resolve” states the “ Authority to retain consultant with regard to study on 
reform of retail electricity supply. That, in conducting the study under section 1, the Public Advocate 
may retain one or more consultants, including, to the greatest extent possible, persons from 
academic or research institutions in the State for analysis and report preparation”  (emphasis 
added). 
 While the OPA is quick to publicly castigate many of the Competitive Energy Providers 
(“CEPs”) that may have headquarters based outside of the state of Maine (as though that 
somehow negates conducting business in Maine), the OPA did not fully disclose the two 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 23 
 
lead consulting firms that prepared the OPA Study are located out of state. SM Baldwin 
Consulting is in Boston, MA, and Exeter Associates is located in Columbia, Maryland. It is 
not entirely clear how these two consulting firms were selected and the OPA’s efforts to 
seek out persons from academic or research institutions in the State of Maine for analysis 
and report preparation.    
In Sec. 3. of LD318, the “Resolve” states that in conducting the study, the Public Advocate shall ensure 
that, at a minimum, the following issues are examined.  
1. The Public Advocate shall examine methods of protecting customer rights and interests 
including through the establishment of a public access website portal through which 
customers may obtain information on and shop for competitive electricity supply. The 
Public Advocate shall examine the feasibility of a publicly accessible website maintained by 
the Public Utilities Commission or by the Office of the Public Advocate that provides current, 
independent, and objective information that allows customers to compare terms, 
conditions and prices, and value-added service offers provided by competitive electricity 
providers, as well as any other information the Public Advocate or the commission 
determines would be useful to customers. The Public Advocate shall consider how to ensure 
customers may use the website to easily access external publicly accessible websites where 
customers may review offers and contract details and execute agreements electronically.  
 
 Despite the willingness and interests of CEPs to design and help implement a public access 
website portal that provides electricity consumers, especially residential consumers, with 
a consumer-friendly, easy to navigate shopping website that clearly discloses competitive 
rate plan offers, this important retail market enhancement receives limited consideration 
by the OPA .   
 
2. The Public Advocate shall examine the development and adoption of customer protections 
that include at least the following:  
A. Conditions for, or prohibitions on, any fees for residential customers seeking to 
change a product or pricing plan. 
B. Credits for excessive call center wait times. 
C. Education programs to inform customers about customer choices and protections 
and public service announcements by state agencies encouraging customers actively 
to shop for electricity supply options before winter and summer seasons when prices 
may be higher. 
D. Options for allowing retail electricity suppliers to bill for their electricity supply, value-
added services, and products along with the local distribution company’s regulated 
charges, as well as an examination of whether retail electricity suppliers should be 
allowed to collect electricity bills that include value-added services and products 
other than generation supply service and whether nonpayment of those portions of 
electricity bills should be subject to the threat of disconnection of service; 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 23 
 
E. Publication, at least annually, of a competitive electricity provider report card that 
includes, but is not limited to, levels of verified complaints filed with the Public 
Utilities Commission against electricity providers.  
F. Examining the advantages and disadvantages of variable-rate contracts for residential 
customers. 
G. Requiring renewable energy products marketed by retail electricity suppliers to be 
consistent with the State's renewable energy resources laws. 
H. Examining whether retail electricity suppliers should be allowed to conduct door-to-
door sales only if the individual personally attempting to make a sale is employed by 
and supervised by the retail electricity supplier and whether the State's existing 
consumer protection laws adequately protect the State's retail electricity consumers; 
and  
I. Programs to protect low-income customers that incorporate energy equity 
considerations, including but not limited to a hardship program that provides grants 
to qualifying low-income customers on an annual basis; a payment extension 
program that allows a qualifying low-income customer additional time to pay a bill 
without the threat of termination; a payment plan program that allows qualifying 
low-income customers to pay the balance owed in installments along with the regular 
monthly bill;  a bill discount program that provides qualifying low-income customers 
with a fixed discount on their monthly bill; and other programs designed to increase 
access to renewable energy for such customers. 
 
 While the OPA Consultant Report does indeed provide recommendations related to 
consumer protections, many of the proposed measures are presented in a highly punitive 
manner directed at CEPs and customers alike. For example, one recommendation called 
for the prohibition of variable rate products by CEPs. With the substantial investment of 
ratepayer dollars and deployment of advanced or smart meter technology throughout the 
CMP and Versant service territories, it seems short-sighted to remove the ability of a 
residential customer to obtain beneficial time-varying rate (“TVR”) designs, especially for 
those residential customers that have PV solar, electric vehicles, battery storage and/or 
heat pumps. CEPs like NRG can provide TVR products that can provide free nights and 
weekends or offer energy saving devices designed to help customers reduce or shift their 
energy loads to off-peak times when the price of electricity is less expensive.  
 
Another recommendation proposes to discontinue CEP service for those participating in 
energy assistance programs, despite beneficial savings that can be realized by these 
consumers. It is important to note that a similar recommendation was put forth in the 
state of Connecticut based on flawed assumptions and related methodologies provided 
by the author of the OPA Consultant Report that unfortunately led to the inability of 
economic hardship customers to shop for lower electricity rates offered by competitive 
retail suppliers. The action resulted in thousands of customers being denied their right to 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 23 
 
obtain lower electricity rates. Accordingly, House Bill No. 67246 was introduced in the 
Connecticut General Assembly this session to provide these customers some degree of 
rate relief. The pending legislation would allow customers who are designated “hardship 
cases” to enroll with a retail electric supplier for their electric generation service if their 
contracts with the suppliers are entered into on or after March 1, 2023, for the standard 
service rate or less.  
Short of the abolishment of residential retail electric choice in the state, as proposed by 
the OPA Consultant Report, companies like NRG are prepared to work within the 
legislative and regulatory arenas to develop and strengthen consumer protection 
measures as well as new retail market enhancements that protect and provide greater 
value to Maine’s electricity consumers.  
III. Fallacies of the OPA Consultant Report  
The OPA Consultant Report is a largely one-sided, opinion-based paper that masquerades as a serious, 
scientific analysis. However, the report is a highly sensationalized review devoid of critical analysis or 
research. The OPA Consultant Report draws upon data points from other jurisdictions and recirculates 
many anti-competition themes that have been repudiated and discredited based on flawed 
methodology and unsubstantiated data. For example, the OPA Consultant Report presents 
rudimentary Energy Information Administration (“EIA”) data, compares it to known Maine utility 
Standard Offer Service (“SOS”) rates from 2021 and falsely claims that proves Maine’s residential 
electricity market must be abolished. The report further accuses CEPs of providing “fraudulent” 
renewable or green energy products to their customers despite providing no evidence to support this 
claim. The report was drafted in a manner that offered little analytical or scientific methodology in its 
investigation of the Maine retail electricity market. Nevertheless, despite any analytical findings, the 
report assails CEPs with pre-conceived and unfounded conclusions resulting in recommendations that 
the competitive retail electricity market is harmful and needs to be eliminated in favor of a return to 
utility monopoly supply service. As this report will demonstrate, the OPA Consultant Report presents 
an elementary view of the Maine residential market, ignores the current state of SOS rates, and 
downplays the benefits of consumer choice. Accordingly, the report and its unprecedented as well as 
unsettling recommendations should not be used to deny Mainers their right to choose.  
 
 
6 House Bill No. 6724 at 18- https://www.cga.ct.gov/2023/FC/PDF/2023HB-06724-R000029-FC.PDF  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 23 
 
A. Overview and Critique of the OPA Consultant Report  
Notably, the OPA Consultant Report claims that Maine “policy makers should phase out the residential 
retail electric supply market”7. The reasoning the OPA Consultant Report puts forth is the following: 
1) CEP Customer Decision Making  – the OPA Consultant Report implies that Maine 
residential customers, and low-income customers in particular, lack the ability to make 
informed buying decisions and therefore, they should be denied the ability to purchase 
CEP electric products as an alternative to utility SOS. In other words, choice should be 
taken away from these customers for their own good. This highly paternalistic viewpoint 
demeans Maine residential customers, who make complex purchasing decisions every 
day without assistance. Further, the OPA Consultant Report appears to treat all residential 
customers as a homogenous class that makes uniform buying decisions as well as simply 
ignores or fails to appreciate the multi-faceted reasoning behind customer purchasing 
decisions. For example, three-fifths of Maine households use fuel oil as their primary 
energy source for home heating, a larger share than any other state in the United States8. 
Mainers are perfectly capable of making affirmative buying decisions when it comes to 
home heating oil. These energy consumers can lock into a fixed price contract for a fixed 
term of service or opt for a month-to-month variable priced contract. Nevertheless, the 
OPA Consultant Report suggests that there is a dramatic distinction between home 
heating oil and competitive electricity supply.  
2) CEP Product Innovation –  the OPA Consultant Report uses the word “innovation” multiple 
times to state that “there is no evidence of” CEP product innovation9, yet never defines 
the term “innovation” or explains what threshold must be met for a product to be 
considered “innovative.” As such, the OPA Consultant Report simply states an opinion 
unbacked by reason, analysis, or evidence of any kind, yet insists this opinion be 
considered by regulators as a key motive to abolish retail consumer choice. However, for 
innovation to flourish and thrive, it requires the appropriate business and regulatory 
environment to do so. As a member of the OPA Retail Study Stakeholder Advisory Group, 
NRG noted the types of product innovation that could be deployed in Maine - - products 
 
7 See OPA Consultant Report, page 4 
8 U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) - Maine State Energy Profile (September 15, 2022) 
9 See OPA Consultant Report, page 1 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 23 
 
that have already been placed into other markets. Beneficial products that are generally 
“bundled” with electricity supply such as community solar, residential battery storage, EV 
chargers, home energy management devices, home security technology, home warranty 
plans, to name of few. However, as stated above, to make the necessary level of capital 
investment to provide these innovative products and services, the business and 
regulatory environment need to remain stable and open to competition. The primary 
recommendation of the OPA Consultant Report which calls for the discontinuance of the 
residential retail electric market effective January 1, 2024, is the antithesis of a stable 
market environment. Contrarily, NRG believes that choice and competition benefit 
consumers. Moreover, NRG has a vision to help improve the retail electricity market 
through product innovation, competitive pricing, and enhanced consumer protection 
measures. 
3) CEP Economic Contribution –  despite having no analytical basis and citing only 
rudimentary data analysis, the OPA Consultant Report declares that the “ opportunity 
cost…of continuing the residential CEP market is substantial ”10 and that CEPs don’t 
contribute to Maine’s economy because “with one exception, the CEPs that serve Maine’s 
households are headquartered out of state”.11 The OPA Consultant Report clearly reflects 
a highly biased opinion that is only intended to discredit CEPs by suggesting that they 
need to be headquartered in Maine in order to provide value and quality service to 
Mainers.  However, leading companies like Walmart, Apple, Staples as well as countless 
others are not headquartered in Maine. Yet, CEPs are being held to a different standard 
despite providing electricity supply products that Mainers buy by their own choice. 
Finally, it is hypocritical of the consultant to publicly criticize CEPs for being 
headquartered out of state when she herself does not reside in the State of Maine and 
yet is all too happy to take Maine taxpayer funding dollars.  
4) CEP Pricing –  using only high-level data downloaded from the U.S. Department of Energy 
EIA, the OPA Consultant Report declares that CEPs charge more to serve residential 
customers than they should so Maine should return to the old utility monopoly model 
that was in place 23 years ago. The report once again suggests that a paternalistic and 
 
10 See OPA Consultant Report, page 1 
11 See OPA Consultant Report, page 16 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 23 
 
heavy hand must be imposed on residential customers for their own good and their right 
to make their own informed buying decisions should be eliminated. The OPA Consultant 
Report does this without any serious analysis of CEP product pricing and completely 
ignores the consequences of utility monopoly pricing. 
5) The Gap Between Maine Utility SOS and CEP Pricing – the OPA Consultant Report 
declares that the gap between CEP residential prices and utility SOS residential prices 
“increased in recent years.”12 Setting aside that this so-called gap is meaningless, even 
the OPA Consultant Report’s own debatable definition of “recent years” illustrates no 
such trend. Additionally, the most “recent years” we currently know of are 2022 and 2023 
which saw CMP residential SOS prices rise by a whopping 173% from 2021 and Versant 
prices rise by 165%. While the OPA Consultant Report conveniently omits 2022 and 2023 
from their CEP/SOS price gap analysis, it is highly doubtful the so-called increasing gap 
would have manifested in those years. Moreover, the OPA Consultant Report clearly 
demonstrates the analytical “gymnastics” the consultant used to arrive at a pre-conceived 
narrative based on a flawed methodological approach.  
6) Renewable Products –  the OPA Consultant Report declares that, despite not knowing the 
composition of CEP renewable or green energy products, such products do not meet the 
OPA Consultant Report’s measure of “green.” As such, no CEP green energy products 
actually exist, but the ones that do are overpriced. All of Section 6 of the OPA Consultant 
Report is pent either accusing CEPs of offering “fraudulent” green products or restating 
basic information about renewable energy standards, yet never offers evidence (much 
less proof) that CEP green energy products are anything other than what CEPs claim them 
to be. Moreover, instead of appropriately using the role of “consultant” as part of the 
OPA Retail Study Stakeholder Advisory Group, to objectively examine voluntary 
renewable energy products and the types of enhancements that can be made to better 
inform electricity consumers of green energy products, the author of the OPA Consultant 
Report chose to level false accusations against CEPs. NRG believes a constructive 
recommendation would relate to enhancing the customer-facing Environmental 
Disclosure Label to make the label contents easier to interpret and understand the type 
of product the customer is purchasing.  
 
12 See OPA Consultant Report, page 2 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 23 
 
Finally, noticeably absent from the OPA Consultant Report is any discussion of whether Maine 
residential customers want the right to choose their energy supplier abolished and discontinued in 
favor of utility monopoly supply service. After twenty-three years, the opponents of retail electricity 
competition want to deny the right of Mainers to make an affirmative choice. It bears reiterating that 
customers are free to remain on utility SOS service if they prefer to, and yet not all of them do. A 
competitive market exists precisely because different consumers have different preferences, needs, 
and motivations. It is not for the OPA Consultant Report to decide what is best for all residential 
customers in Maine.  
B. Debunking the OPA Consultant Report: A Detailed Examination 
1. CEP Customer Decision Making 
Opponents of retail electricity choice continually put forth a false narrative that choosing one’s energy 
supplier is too complicated and beyond the capacity of residential consumers. However, residential 
customer purchasing decisions, whether for electricity or other products and services, are based on a 
range of overlapping factors. Consumers routinely make everyday purchase decisions for common 
items such as food, clothing, consumer goods, electronics, etc. Customers also engage in more 
complex purchase decisions for things like insurance, lease and rental agreements, financial services, 
entertainment subscriptions, and mobile phone and internet service. Shopping for a CEP is no more 
complex than these other everyday purchase decisions that customers are accustomed to making. In 
making these everyday buying decisions, consumers are motivated by various factors. The snapshot 
below from a 2019 KPMG report13 summarizes some of the dimensions of consumer shopping 
decisions. This report summarizes the findings of a survey of thousands of customers worldwide. 
Diagram 3.1:  Results of KPMG Report 
 
 
13 Consumers reveal what keeps them coming back - KPMG Global  

  
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 23 
 
Of particular note, while price is an important factor in purchasing decisions, it is not the only 
important factor or even the most important factor according to the study.  
While it may be easy to presume that electricity service is homogenous, CEPs offer a range of products 
differentiated along the same consumer preference dimensions: 
Table 3.2 – CEPs Serve Consumer Preference Factors 
Consumer Preference Factors Differentiation Opportunities for Retail Energy Supplier 
Products 
 Product Quality / 
Consistency  CEP brand reputation 
 Complaint history 
 Ease of enrollment, billing accuracy, customer service 
quality 
 Value for money  CEP price competitiveness 
 Value of amenities, perks, etc. 
 Availability of fixed price options 
 Total bill management soluti ons (energy efficiency, etc.)  
 Customer service  Customer service experience for billing questions, renewal 
process, etc. 
 Complaint handling 
 Quality and type of ongoing customer communications 
(service portals, consumption analysis, expiration/renewal 
notices) 
 Easy shopping experience  Ease of enrollment process 
 Troubleshooting enrollment problems 
 Ease of price discovery and product comparison  
 Selection/product 
assortment  Availability of varying term lengths 
 Green energy options 
 Bundled products and services 
 Amenities/perks  
 Pricing  Competitiveness of supplier price versus other options (utility, 
other suppliers) 
 Term of service available  
 Competitiveness of renewal pricing 
 Availability of longer term, fixed price offers  
 
The OPA Consultant Report ignores the possibility that Maine residential customers can make rational 
buying decisions for themselves and simply assumes customers who sign up for higher priced CEP 
services are incapable of understanding CEP products. The consultant appears to dismiss that some 
customers may want a longer-term contract with a fixed rate plan that can provide a customer with 
price certainty and predictability for a 12-, 24- or 36-month term of service. Regardless, the OPA 
Consultant Report failed to examine or ignore a recommendation to develop new consumer 
educational and outreach initiatives that would constructively assist Mainers to make better and more 
informed buying decisions, e.g., fixed vs. variable rate plans, rate plan offers without early termination 
fees, seasonable buying opportunities, etc.  
  
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 23 
 
2. CEP Product Innovation 
Based on the Eco Watch website14 and data provided by XOOM Energy, as result of Maine’s electric 
market restructuring and retail choice, at the very least, the following CEP products are offered to 
residential customers that Maine regulated utilities do not offer: 
 Variable one-month products 
 Variable price products with two months fixed price 
 Variable price products with three months fixed price 
 6-month fixed price products 
 7-month fixed price products 
 12-month fixed price products at start and end dates different from the utility 
 18-month fixed price products 
 24-month fixed price products 
 100% renewable products 
 Green products (products with higher percentage green than the state required minimum) 
 Products that donate to charity 
 Products that provide airline miles 
In addition to the many products CEPs offer that utilities do not, CEPs also offer customer service 
different from the utility, technology such as customer web portals and other amenities that prove 
attractive to existing and potential customers. Every one of these things is an innovation that 
differentiates a customer experience from utility SOS service.  
In addition, Maine utility SOS itself, which is unbundled from delivery rates and sourced from a 
competitive wholesale market that is kept honest due to a competitive retail market, is an innovation 
of electric deregulation. Further, it is electric deregulation at the retail level that has been 
instrumental in the advent of solar, wind, hydrogen, fuel cells, and other technologies introduced 
across deregulated states, as CEPs connect with these technologies to bring them to their customer 
base. Furthermore, there are also demand side innovations such as smart thermostats and other 
energy saving devices that CEPs provide to their customers that reduce demand on the grid. To 
suggest, as the OPA Consultant Report does, that electric deregulation has resulted in no innovation 
simply ignores reality. 
3. CEP Economic Contribution 
Using no economic analysis, the OPA Consultant Report once again falsely claims that CEPs do not 
contribute to Maine’s economy because only one CEP serving Maine is headquartered in Maine.15 
 
14 https://www.ecowatch.com/electricity/rates/me  
15 See OPA Consultant Report, page 16 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 23 
 
Setting aside the absurdity that every CEP must be located in the state in order to contribute to a 
state’s economy, nowhere in the OPA Consultant Report is there a discussion of even basic economic 
questions such as:  
1) Do CEPs serving Maine pay taxes to the State of Maine? 
2) Do CEPs serving Maine employ Maine residents as direct employees or contractors? 
3) Do CEPs serving Maine employ companies in Maine such as marketing firms, sales firms, 
brokers, law firms, lobbyists, etc.? 
4) Do CEPs serving Maine rent or own office space or other real estate in the state of Maine? 
5) Do CEPs serving Maine provide products that Maine residents opt to buy by their own 
choice? 
6) Do CEPs serving Maine do business with Maine utilities and generators? 
 
The answer to every one of the questions above is yes, yet the OPA Consultant Report simply ignores 
these key economic considerations. 
The OPA Consultant Report also claims that CEP residential customers in Maine pay $20 million more 
for CEP service annually than they would with utility SOS. The OPA Consultant Report makes this 
assessment based on a highly simplified analysis that compared basic EIA data to 2021 utility SOS 
prices. The EIA data used by the OPA Consultant Report is high-level and does not break down what 
competitive supply products were opted for by any residential customer, when a given product was 
purchased, or how it compares to SOS prices for the term of the product. For example, did the 
competitive supply product include 100% renewable energy content, an extended term of service, 
smart devices, home warranty plans, rewards points, gift cards, etc.? It is highly likely that some 
residential customers saved money with CEP service, but regardless, customers opted for CEP service 
of their own volition. As such, claiming that there is a $20 million opportunity cost is erroneous on its 
face as rational customers signed up for CEP service by their own choice.  
The OPA Consultant Report’s $20 million figure also does not account for the high SOS price increases 
that occurred in 2022 and 2023. Again, the OPA Consultant Report conveniently ignored 2022 and 
2023 SOS price data to better support its anti-competition narrative as opposed to conducting a more 
balanced analysis of Maine’s retail electricity market. 
4. Retail Electric Choice Can Offer Significant Savings Opportunity 
XOOM Energy Offers Nearly $190 Million in Savings Opportunities Over Utility SOS in CY2023  
As of April 15, 2023, NRG retail brand affiliate, XOOM Energy offers 12- and 24-month residential fixed 
price products at a price of 12.99 cents per kWh available to any residential customer residing in CMP 
and Versant service areas regardless of zip code or customer income level. 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 23 
 
Table 3.3: XOOM Energy Residential Supply Offers taken on 4/17/202316 
 
By contrast, the SOS Small Customer Rate for CMP is 17.631 cents per kWh for 202317, while the 
Versant - Bangor Hydro District SOS Small rate is 16.438 cents per kWh for 202318 and the Versant - 
Maine Public District SOS Small rate is 14.879 cents per kWh for 2023.19 As such, the XOOM Energy 
rate offers CMP residential customers a savings of 4.641 cents per kWh or 26% over SOS, and offers 
Versant residential customers a savings of 3.448 cents per kWh or 21% in Bangor Hydro District and 
1.889 cents per kWh or 13% in Maine Public District for all of 2023.  
Taken across the 2023 calendar year, these savings are quite substantial. Using the same EIA data 
source as the OPA Consultant Report, residential customer counts and load are reported for CMP and 
Versant. The relevant data taken directly from EIA is provided in Table 3.4  below. 
Table 3.4: Maine IOU residential customer counts and load for 202120 
 
Using values from Table 3.3 and Table 3.4  above, the total savings for each residential customer that 
takes advantage of the XOOM Energy rate can be derived for CY 2023:  
Table 3.5: XOOM Energy Available Savings per Residential Customer in 2023 
Year Utility SOS Small Rate 
(in $ per kWh) XOOM Energy Rate 
(in $ per kWh) XOOM Energy 
Savings 
(in $ per kWh) Residential 
Customer 
Annual Usage 
(in kWh)21 2023 Residential Customer 
Savings with XOOM Energy 
Rate 
(in Total $) 
 
16 https://www.maine.gov/meopa/electricity/electricity-supply  
17 Standard Offer Rates for Central Maine Power - Residential and Small Commercial Customers | MPUC  
18 Standard Offer Rates for Versant Power - Bangor Hydro District - Small | MPUC (maine.gov)  
19 Standard Offer Rates for Versant Power - Maine Public District - Small | MPUC  
20 https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data.php#sales  
21 Figures are derived by dividing Sales (Megawatt-hours) by Customers (Count) in Table 2 

  
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 23 
 
2023 CMP $0.17631  $0.12990  $0.04641  7,171  $332.82  
2023 Versant - Bangor 
Hydro District $0.16438  $0.12990  $0.03448  6,370  $219.65  
2023 Versant - Maine 
Public District $0.14879  $0.12990  $0.01889  6,370  $120.34  
 
Consequently, if all CMP and Versant customers opted to take service under the XOOM Energy rate, 
the potential market wide savings would be approximately $190 million, as illustrated in Table 4.0 
below (see highlighted below) . Moreover, XOOM Energy is prepared  to offer this 12.99 cents/kWh 
rate offer to all residential customers in CMP and Versant service areas.  
 
Table 3.6: XOOM Energy Available Savings for Residential Market in 2023 
Year Utility 2023 Residential Customer Savings with 
XOOM Energy Rate 
(in Total $) Customers 
(Count)22 Total Residential Market Available Savings for 2023 
(in $) 
2023 CMP $332.82  503,190 $167,469,278  
2023 Versant  $170.0023 126,991  $21,587,978 
Total 2023 Available Savings $189,057,257 
 
CEP Regulation v Monopoly Utility Regulation 
The OPA Consultant Report also alleges that the Maine competitive market should be abolished 
because “Ensuring compliance with regulations (addressing consumer complaints and pursuing 
enforcement actions) is time-consuming and resource-intensive.”24 This claim is simply another 
unsubstantiated attempt by the consultant to discredit CEPs, as one only needs to examine the time 
and resources required to regulate monopoly utilities. Cost of service regulation of a monopoly utility 
where ratepayers are effectively paying for the electric distribution service requires that every change 
in policy, product, system, pricing, and rate tariffs must be thoroughly investigated and approved by 
regulators through a time-consuming regulatory process, oftentimes in the form of an extensive rate 
case. Conversely, CEPs are supported by shareholder dollars that financially underpin their business 
 
22 Based on EIA 2021 figures 
23 Figure derived by averaging the Table 3.0 figures for Bangor Hydro District and Maine Public District 
24 See OPA Consultant Report, page 1 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 23 
 
model. Moreover, CEPs make independent business and administrative decisions without burdening 
regulators and operate within the confines of state law and regulations.  
5. CEP Pricing 
The OPA Consultant Report claims that in 2021 “The rates that CEPs charged Maine households in 
2021 ranged between $0.0670 per kWh and $0.1708 per kWh”.25 This statement, however, is false 
and exhibits a lack of fundamental understanding regarding the EIA data that was relied upon. The 
OPA Consultant Report uses EIA data table EIA-861 schedule 4B for 202126. This data table, shows, 
among other things, the annual 2021 weighted average price charged by each CEP to residential 
customers in each state. It does not show  (emphasis added ) the high and low price charged by each 
CEP to residential customers, any specifics regarding CEP product term, product structure, green, add-
on services, etc. For example, the OPA Consultant Report claims that the lowest price charged by a 
CEP in 2021 was $0.0670 per kWh, but that is false. The $0.0670 per kWh price is the “weighted 
average” price of all 2021 prices charged by a single CEP. As such, this charge is an average of prices 
both higher and lower than the price reported, meaning the lowest price charged by this CEP, much 
less any CEP, cannot be derived from this EIA table. 
Additionally, the prices shown in EIA-861 schedule 4B encompass contracts that were entered into in 
previous years, as well as contracts entered in each month of 2021. It simply cannot be known how 
much any one residential customer benefited from any individual CEP product. Finally, there is no 
accounting in EIA-861 schedule 4B of additional value provided by any CEP product above the base 
commodity. For example, locking in a price for two years may require a premium, and add-ons like 
green or additional benefits may impact the product price as well. 
The bottom line is that the authors of the OPA Consultant Report fundamentally do not fully 
comprehend the EIA data sets that they are using in their assessment of the Maine retail electricity 
market yet are using this data to recommend the complete dissolution of the residential electricity 
market. Given the serious public policy implications, the impact on residential electricity consumers, 
and chilling message that Maine is not open to business, one would expect a study with more gravitas 
and scientific rigor before denying residential customers their freedom to choose their energy 
supplier.  
 
25 See OPA Consultant Report, page 1 
26 table12.xlsx (live.com)  
  
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 23 
 
Monopoly v Competitive Pricing 
Another key element ignored by the OPA Consultant Report is the change in Maine retail electricity 
pricing that took place as the result of deregulation. Chart 3.7  below shows the history of CMP 
residential monopoly electric service prices from 1981 through 1999, the year right before 
deregulation began. This data was obtained from the CMP website.27 Regrettably, we could not find 
equivalent data for Versant (BHE).  
Chart 3.7:  CMP Monopoly Pricing 
 
As shown in the chart, there was a consistent rise in the CMP monopoly price prior to deregulation. 
In fact, prices from 1981 to 1999 increased from $0.06668 per kWh in 1981 to $0.13391 per kWh in 
1999, an increase of 101% in just 18 years. This story is not unique to electric monopoly service across 
U.S. states, as, with few or no exceptions, monopoly utilities continually lobby regulators to approve 
rate increases over time. In 2000, when Maine deregulated, the CMP monopoly price split into a 
 
27 https://www.cmpco.com/wps/wcm/connect/cmpagr_account/account/nc_understandyourbill/pricing/historicalpricing  
$0.00000$0.02000$0.04000$0.06000$0.08000$0.10000$0.12000$0.14000$0.16000
1981198219831984198519861987198819891990199119921993199419951996199719981999CMP Residential Monopoly Pricing
1981 -1999
Assumes a residential customer using 750kWh per month
(in $ per kWh)
CMP Monopoly Pricing
(in $ per kWh)
  
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 23 
 
delivery service price and an SOS price. Although we were not able to obtain the residential SOS price 
for each year in the set below, Chart 3.8  shows how the CMP monopoly price prior to deregulation 
compares to the combined CMP residential delivery price plus SOS price (for the years we had data) 
from 2000 through 2021, a period of over twenty years. 
Chart 3.8: CMP Monopoly and Unbundled Pricing 
Note: CMP SOS prices for 2000-2001 and 2011-2014 could not be located. As such, no SOS prices ( denoted in blue ) for those 
years appear on the chart. However, this does not change the general point of the chart.  
 
As shown on the chart, for the next 22 years after deregulation began the total combined price of 
CMP residential service (delivery plus SOS) rose from the 1999 monopoly price of $0.13391 per kWh 
to the combined delivery plus SOS price of $0.15795 in 2021, an increase of only 18%. Forcing 
customers back to monopoly service will undoubtedly create a never-ending cycle of price increases 
as competition will not be there to keep utility prices in line. 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 23 
 
Price Increases in 2022 and 2023 
Beginning in 2020, changes in federal government energy policy, combined with geopolitical forces 
resulted in a steady increase of fuel prices that has not yet abated. This trend, in turn, caused 
electricity prices across the country to rise in 2022 and 2023. CMP residential default prices increased 
a whopping 89% in 2022, and another 29% in 2023. 
Chart 3.9: CMP Pricing with 2022 and 2023 Added 
Note: CMP SOS prices for 2000-2001 and 2011-2014. As such, no SOS prices ( denoted in blue ) for those years appear on 
the chart. However, this does not change the general point of the chart. .  
  
It is important to understand that energy price spikes caused by prevailing market conditions, federal 
government policy, geopolitics, or severe weather events like Winter Storm Uri cannot be simply 
wished away or negated by abolishing consumer choice. The key to dealing with energy price volatility 
is competition, which protects consumers with long run volatility hedges in the form of fixed price 
contracts, as well as drives innovative solutions that bring prices down in the long run.  

  
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 23 
 
Monopoly utilities across fifteen states lost billions of dollars because of Winter Strom Uri. The 
customers of those monopoly utilities are now being forced to pay for these losses so that monopoly 
utility shareholders are kept whole28. Conversely, the shareholders of CEPs impacted by Winter Storm 
Uri had to honor their customers’ fixed price contracts despite losing hundreds of millions of dollars. 
Maine CEPs are no different. Residential CEP customers that entered 12 and 24-month fixed price 
contracts in 2020 and 2021, before SOS price spikes began, have, and will get their price for the 
contract term regardless of how much money they save or how much money CEP shareholders lose. 
Further, unlike the electric distribution companies, CEPs that may lose money on these or any 
contracts, are not subject to cost-of-service recovery and must absorb these costs. The OPA 
Consultant Report appears to ignore this key market distinction entirely, focusing instead on a 
historical year deliberately chosen before Maine utility SOS price spikes began in order to amplify an 
anti-competition narrative.  
6. The Gap Between Maine Utility and CEP Pricing 
The OPA Consultant Report claims that there has been a growing gap “in recent years” between CEP 
prices and Maine utility SOS prices, but the notion of a universal gap between CEP pricing and utility 
SOS is erroneous on its face. Each Maine utility provides one residential SOS price for a single product 
and term with no add-on options. By contrast, CEPs offer an array of residential offers that encompass 
different prices for different products with different start dates, terms, levels of green, and an 
assortment of bundled service options. As such, any comparison between CEP and SOS should be 
based on overall value to the customer, which may or may not be based on price alone. A customer 
locking in a 100% green product for 24 months that also provides airline miles may opt for that product 
regardless of whether the prevailing SOS price is lower or not. However, to the OPA Consultant Report, 
consumer preferences are irrelevant, the product price comparison to SOS at the time of contract is 
the only thing that should ever matter.  
There is also no evidence that a trend of a widening gap between CEP prices and utility SOS rates has 
existed “in recent years” or ever. The OPA Consultant Report simply makes this up. The initial claim 
by the OPA Consultant Report is that the gap between CEP and utility pricing “increased in recent 
years” because “In 2018, on average, households paid between $150 and $200 more for electricity 
per year if they purchased from CEPs”, but in “2021, on average, households paid between $310 and 
 
28 See Beyond Texas Evaluating Customer Exposure to Energy Price Spikes: A Case Study of Winter Storm Uri, 
February 2021 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 23 
 
$340 more for electricity per year if they purchased from CEPs.”29 However, a chart provided in a later 
page of the OPA Consultant Report shows the so-called “overpayment” to CEP’s in 2019 was between 
$306 and $347 and in 2020 was between $269 and $309.30 In other words, even if the OPA Consultant 
Report’s values were blindly accepted, there is no indication of any trend. One could just as easily say 
that the gap between CEP residential prices and utility SOS residential prices decreased in recent years 
because the OPA Consultant Report’s CEP overpayment value is higher for 2019 than it is for 2021. 
The OPA Consultant Report also ignores the steep rise in Maine utility SOS prices in 2022 and 2023 
which would show any gap between CEP and SOS pricing decreasing. 
Other Markets 
The OPA Consultant Report claims that there are “examples of harm” in other jurisdictions in terms 
of consumer overpayment to CEPs with respect to utility default rates. The OPA Consultant Report 
lists six states and also a “Nationwide” category.31 However, the so-called “examples of harm” are 
nothing but subjective arguments, some even coming from the lead author of the OPA Consultant 
Report, which were refuted and not universally agreed upon. For example, the OPA Consultant 
Report’s “example of harm” in Maryland sites a paper titled “ Maryland’s Residential Electric and Gas 
Supply Markets: Where Do We Go from Here? ” prepared by Susan M. Baldwin and Sarah M. Bosley.32 
Much like the OPA Consultant Report, however, this paper was an opinion piece debunked under 
scrutiny33. Additionally, in the case of Illinois, one of the six states listed, no “example of harm” is even 
provided. Finally, it should also be noted that electric deregulation has not been abolished in any of 
the states listed, much less nationwide.  
7. Renewable Products 
Despite presenting no evidence or proof the OPA Consultant Report accuses CEPs of offering 
“fraudulent” green products and once again implies that Maine residential customers are not astute 
to shop for CEP service. The following are direct quotes from the OPA Consultant Report:  
 
29 See OPA Consultant Report, page 1 
30 See OPA Consultant Report, page 28 
31 See OPA Consultant Report, page 29 
32 See OPA Consultant Report, page 75 
33 https://www.resausa.org/new-analysis-reveals-flaws-in-recent-maryland-opc-and-the-abell-foundation-reports-
on-retail-energy-market-independent-study-finds-electric-suppliers-could-have-saved-maryland-consumers-more-
than-203/  
  
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 23 
 
  “The “greenness” of CEP products is ambiguous at best and likely based on out-of-region 
fuel sources.”34  
 “Consumers may not understand that standard offer service is the same “shade of green” 
as is CEPs’ basic products – because standard offer service is also based on a fuel mix that 
comports with Maine’s renewable portfolio standards.”35  
 “A CEP pitching a “green” product generally does not provide the basis for this labeling. It is 
not clear, for instance, whether it is asserting that its product exceeds the minimum RPS 
requirement or merely complies with it. Further, if a CEP is asserting that it exceeds the 
minimum requirement, the basis for such a claim may be inaccurate or misleading, for 
instance regarding whether their incremental purchases are compliant with Maine RPS 
certification requirements. As a result, a CEP claim that it is offering a “green” product could 
be misleading. ”36 
 “The electricity being marketed [by a CEP]  is not any “greener” than standard offer service, 
but consumers believe that it is.”37 
 “Consumers don’t realize they are paying a larger mark-up to purchase products marketed 
as renewable than they would for other equally (or more) effective climate-friendly 
options”38 
To summarize, despite presenting no evidence or proof, the OPA Consultant Report claims as fact 
that: 
1) CEP green products may not exceed Maine’s minimum green requirement. 
2) Utility SOS is just as green as CEP green products. 
3) Maine residential customers are not smart enough to shop for green products. 
4) CEP green products are overpriced. 
 
CEP “green” products are defined as those that provide two basic categories or levels of renewable 
or green energy: 
Level 1: The minimum state mandated requirements designed to meet Maine’s annual 
Renewable Portfolio Standards (“RPS”) compliance obligation.  
Level 2: Voluntary green energy above the minimum state mandated requirement. 
 
The OPA Consultant Report simply engages in speculation when stating that any CEP green product 
does not meet the definition stated above. Further, not a single example is provided that 
demonstrates how Maine CEPs buy renewable energy credits (“RECs”) or how much they pay for RECs. 
 
34 See OPA Consultant Report, page 2 
35 See OPA Consultant Report, page 2 
36 See OPA Consultant Report, page 39 
37 See OPA Consultant Report, page 48 
38 See OPA Consultant Report, page 48 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 23 
 
It is also speculation to suggest that CEP green products are “not any “greener” than standard offer 
service.” Maine utility SOS only provides the state mandated minimum RPS requirements, while CEP 
voluntary green products provide a substantially higher percentage of green than the annual RPS 
minimum.  
IV. Conclusion 
Making significant changes to the rules, market structure, or design of Maine’s retail electric market, 
much less abolishing it, should only be considered after a thorough analytical review and careful 
consideration of the public policy considerations and related consequences of such changes on 
customers. Accordingly, the unsubstantiated and prejudicial opinions provided in the OPA Consultant 
Report do not meet this critical threshold test and thus, should be dismissed as a valued resource, 
especially policies that may lead to the elimination of consumer choice in the State of Maine.  
 
