M Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street - Augusta, Maine 04330 = (207) 6228101 * Fax: (207) 622»-4343 ~ www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 1431, An Act Requiring the Public Utilities Commission to 
Adopt Rules Promoting Renewable Energy 
To the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
by Jack Shapiro, Climate and Clean Energy Program Director 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee, my name is Jack Shapiro, and I am the Climate and Clean Energy Director at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine (N RCM). NRCM has been working for more than 60 years 
to protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s environment, on behalf of our 25,000 members and 
supporters. l’m here today to testify in support of LD 143 l, An Act Requiring the Public Utilities 
Commission to Adopt Rules Promoting Renewable Energy 
This testimony focuses on three particular provisions in the sponsor’s amendment. The first two, 
sections five and seven, close two loopholes in Maine’s renewable energy portfolio standard. 
Maine’s renewable portfolio standard (RPS) serves two purposes. First, it ensures that we are 
continually increasing the proportion of Maine’s electricity consumption served by renewable 
energy so we can displace expensive and polluting fossil fuels and help avoid the worst impacts 
of climate change. Second, it provides a revenue stream for renewable energy producers through 
the sale of renewable energy credits, or RECs. 
It stands to reason that it is vital that this accounting and this incentive only include truly 
renewable energy. Right now, two sources of non-renewable energy are still included in Maine’s 
RPS: Burning municipal solid waste (MSW), or waste-to-energy, and landfill gas. This bill 
rightfully removes these two resources from Maine’s renewable energy portfolio standards. 
Municipal solid waste—our daily household and commercial trash—is made of finite resources 
that needed significant energy to create and ship to a disposal facility. When burned, these 
resources are destroyed, and they do not naturally renew. The combustion process generates air 
pollution along with the heat used to make electricity. Plastic is a particularly troubling fuel 
source since it’s made from fossil fuels. Methane from decomposing garbage is similarly finite. 
If we are going to be burning trash in Maine, then capturing energy should be the required best 
practice for this disposal option. Capturing methane at landfills also must be required—
especially since methane, pound for pound, is a more dangerous climate pollutant than carbon 
dioxide — and energy should be captured here as well. But neither should be considered a 
renewable resource receiving incentives. 
Our state’s energy policies should not be used to make disposal of waste at a landﬁll or waste-to- 
energy facility more attractive. Doing so runs counter to the purpose of our renewable energy 
policies, and it negatively impacts our ability to make the economics work in favor of waste 
reduction and recycling in our state and prevent us from ever reaching our goals in those areas. 
We are also in support of section ll, which would provide important information about the 
climate, cost, and reliability of biomass electricity generation to infonn future energy policy 
decisions. 
We ask that the Committee vote Ought to Pass on LD 1431, with particular consideration given 
to these important provisions, and I’m happy to answer any questions that you have. 
Thank you.
