64 Blueberry Road Portland, Maine 04102 
Testimony of James Bass, Soltan Bass, LLC on behalf of ecomaine before the 
Energy, Utilities, & Technology Committee in Opposition to LD 1431, An Act 
Requiring the Public Utilities Commission to Adopt Rules Promoting Renewable 
Energy 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, thank you for the 
opportunity to testify in opposition to this legislation. My name is James Bass of 
Soltan Bass, LLC and I am here on behalf of ecomaine, which is a quasi- 
municipal organization with more than 70 member communities in Maine. 
ecomaine owns and operates Maine’s largest recycling plant, a food waste 
recovery program, a waste-to-energy facility, and a landfill. 
Through its mission statement, ecomaine closely aligns its policies with the solid 
waste management hierarchy that is clearly defined in State Statute. This gives all 
of us a sound plan on how to best manage waste materials. 
It is in that light that I strongly urge you to oppose the amended version of LD 
1431, An Act Requiring the Public Utilities Commission to Adopt Rules Promoting 
Renewable Energy. The impact of this bill will be far reaching and extraordinarily 
damaging to Maine’s waste management industry and the hundreds ofjobs that 
depend on the businesses in it; it would create an environment in which Maine’s 
waste would cascade to landfills - the lowest, yet cheapest rung of the hierarchy; 
and it would serve to upend Maine’s renewable energy portfolio at a time when 
bolstering the portfolio should be the focus - not chipping away at it. 
Let me be perfectly clear. This is very bad policy for Maine in terms of both 
energy and solid waste management. 
Maine is home to three waste-to-energy plants, as well as about one dozen 
landfills, which, in total, employ hundreds of employees to operate and maintain 
them, including more than 40 at ecomaine in Portland. These employees are 
Mainers and many are Maine Maritime Academy graduates, who benefit from 
good-paying jobs in the engineering field. Maine is fortunate to have threeof
only about 70 waste-to-energy plants in the entire country to manage our waste in 
a sustainable way. 
Waste-to-energy generates electricity — in the case of ecomaine, about 100,000 
megawatt hours of it — by combusting Maine’s trash. We are able to then sell the 
electricity, which is one of ecomaine ’s major revenue streams, alongside the 
tipping fees charged to dump trash and recyclables, and the sale of recyclable 
goods to end markets. By selling electricity generated by trash, we realize 
renewable energy credits - Class ll RECs — that are a critically important part of 
Maine’s renewable energy portfolio. 
The revenue generated by the selling of RECs is fundamental to the operations of 
waste-to-energy plants like ecomaine ’s. It helps defray the costs associated with 
ongoing maintenance of the plant, including refurbishing key components that 
help with more efficient generation of this steady source of baseload power, 
which is an important part of Maine’s commitment to clean energy. In addition, 
the rigorous pollution control systems in place at Maine’s WTE plants are 
routinely well below aggressive state and federal limits. Furthermore, solid waste 
is a resource from which we can and should draw energy — and it is not going 
anywhere. 
As much as we might wish our waste away and try to promote policies that seek 
to push it further out of sight and mind, humans are producing waste and will 
continue to produce waste. While we work to promote responsible policies that 
reduce and divert waste, we need to realize that some portion of our solid waste 
stream is, in reality, as recurring an energy source as we have. 
If WTE is removed from Maine’s renewable energy portfolio, it will become more 
expensive to push waste up the solid waste hierarchy, leading to increased rates 
of landfilling at a time when our landfills are reaching capacity more quickly than 
previously anticipated. It will not reduce the amount of waste in Maine - it will 
merely make it more difficult to sustainably manage it. 
Additionally, LD 1431 will negatively disrupt our renewable energy portfolio - we 
have already recently seen the prices of Class ll RECs increase due to rapid shifts 
in supply and demand — to remove these sources of renewable energy would 
drive further instability. At a time when Maine is striving for 100% renewable
energy, we need more tools in our renewable energy toolbox - not fewer - again, 
this bill is a bad move. 
lt is important to draw a clarification between WTE and Class ll renewable energy 
resources and those in Class I. WTE is not seeking to compete with solar or wind 
energy - there is a recognizable difference between those resources in Classl 
and Class ll as Maine looks to build its portfolio of renewables. Indeed, the U.S. 
Energy information Administration calls WTE a “small but steady source of 
electric power in the U.S.,” and utilize a “reliable, inexpensive energy source as 
part of their role in helping to dispose of MSW1.” While WTE isn’t solar or wind, it 
isn’t trying to be - as a valuable part of the Class ll portfolio, WTE is creating 
energy from a resource that otherwise wouldn’t be used, as a benefit of a waste 
management strategy. 
Lastly, and not to be overlooked, ecomaine has demonstrated the key role waste- 
to-energy-generated electricity can play in our electrified future, using electric 
company vehicles and a new cargo van that all plug directly into the WTE plant- 
our cars, vans, and trucks of the future can be powered by trash! This is our 
clean electric future, and this is what WTE can provide. 
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify in strong opposition to this 
potentially very damaging legislation. l would be happy to answer any questions 
you may have. 
1 https://www.eia.gov/todavinenergv/detail.phb?id=559OO
