Testimony in Opposition to LD 1431 / Gould / Page 1 of 2
April 20, 2023
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1431
An Act Requiring the Public Utilities Commission to Adopt Rules Promoting
Renewable Energy 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology:
My name is Nathan Gould. I am a resident of Winterport. I am submitting this 
testimony in opposition to LD 1431, “An Act Requiring the Public Utilities Commission to
Adopt Rules Promoting Renewable Energy.”
I am not opposed to things like weatherization or heat pumps, but those who 
want such things ought to pay for them, not their neighbors. To “incentivize 
participation” often takes the form of subsidies. With inflation and rising prices, there is
enough financial burden without public money being spent on these projects.
There is a vagueness surrounding the term “social cost of carbon.” All the 
language I see around such a concept use words like “potential” and “illustrative 
estimate.” When an insurance adjuster evaluates damage to a vehicle, there is an actual
vehicle to observe, there are costs of parts and labor from which to base estimates, and
there is experience gained from past claims. It is not guessing the price of a car that 
might wreck a century from now. Social cost of carbon relies on models, and after 
decades of shifting deadlines I do not place enough confidence in those models to be 
comfortable using them to punish companies with fines based on what might happen a 
century from now.
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1431 / Gould / Page 2 of 2
It is tragic that there are many who let vague estimates trap them in a life of fear 
of the world’s imminent end, especially after decades of unfulfilled predictions. At the 
best, policymakers are swayed by that fear. At the worst, it would seem that there are 
those whose fear is disingenuous and whose intentions are ideological or self-serving. I 
am confused by all the climate alarmists with homes on Nantucket and Martha’s 
Vineyard, despite their warnings of rising sea levels, and are comfortable flying around 
in private jets.
It is irresponsible to punish electricity providers with energy prices as high as 
they are; these penalties, as with most fees, are passed down to the struggling 
ratepayer. We need responsible solutions that don’t harm working families.
We cannot hastily, blindly escape hydrocarbons and their incredible energy 
storage capacity, especially considering Maine’s heavy reliance on them. Rather than 
some future disaster, we face a more immediate energy crisis that threatens our food 
supply chain, our medical system, and our jobs, not just our standard of living.
In the Second World War, Germany and Japan were defeated, in large part, by 
our concentrated targeting of their oil fields and industries. I am concerned that we are 
saving our foes their bombers by letting bad policies do the damage for them.
I ask the Committee to vote Ought Not to Pass. Thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
