HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
pf 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Sophie Warren TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
P.O. Box1 
Scarborough, ME 04070 
Phone: (207) 450-0765 
Sophia.Warren@legislaturemaine.gov 
April 20, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Sophie Warren Presenting 
LD 1431, An Act Requiring the Public Utilities Commission to Adopt Rules 
Promoting Renewable Energy 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Good afternoon Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and fellow members of the Energy, 
Utilities and Technology Committee. My name is Sophie Warren, and I represent House District 
124. Thank you for the opportunity to present LD 1431, An Act Requiring the Public Utilities 
Commission to Adopt Rules Promoting Renewable Energy. 
This legislation seeks to create a broader, stronger, and more regulated market for renewable 
energy projects which explicitly reduces fossil fuel combustion, driving investment in the 
industry and incentivizing the development of more diverse options, local and small scale 
generation, and distributed generation projects. 
Often, we see CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion as our primary focus in assessing 
greenhouse gas emissions. Often, we are right to do so. However, this bill asks us to go further 
on our assessing GHG emissions, where additional GHGS, including N20 and CH4, are 
produced not only during the fossil fuel combustion process, but in combustion of renewable 
fuels, which also generates biogenic GHG emissions that must be considered in a true gross 
GHG inventory and in order to achieve our clean energy transition as a state. 
There are a few ways this bill seeks to address this: 
Overall, this legislation seeks to promote transformational energy projects by directing the PUC 
to develop policies and regulations that incentivize the CEPS, whether in the deployment of 
alternative renewable options, distributed energy resources or energy storage systems. 
The amendment before you today seeks to sharpen the definitions of renewable energy sources to 
capture a more meaningful measure of relevant combustion emissions and enviromnental 
impacts of certain energy fonns, to create clear regulations going forward, which I believe 
develops a regulatory framework for our CEPS to innovate in ways which produce a more 
resilient, affordable, and cleaner energy system for the state. 
At the same time, the development of the Sponsor amendment before you today seeks also to 
include in this bill acknowledgement that the transition period of renewable development and 
District 124: Part of Scarborough
incentivization of these projects must come with requirements and consumer protections to 
ensure customers in the State are adequately protected in this market should we seek to trust 
them in contributing in greater ways to achieving our state energy goals, which I believe we 
should do. 
Section l of this bill directs the PUC to incentivize CEPs in transformational energy projects 
which address energy issues related to climate change which aren’t just increasing energy 
efficiency but are literally, directly reducing the use of fossil fuels, including variable distributed 
energy projects, on-bill ﬁnancing of renewable and energy efficiency projects, time-of-use rates, 
and other methods to assist customers in reducing carbon emissions; and including how other 
supply options are used to assist in funding access to renewables, as deﬁned in the Maine 
Revised Statutes, Title 35-A, section 3210, subsection 2, paragraph C, for low income customers 
and Mainers experiencing fuel poverty. 
Section 2 directs the PUC to install a price cap on the CEP market so that comparable offerings 
to the Standard Offer are not greater than the SO. I hope the inclusion of this provision 
acknowledges those bad actors who have effected consumer trust in this market, and as 
articulated in the OPA’s Retail Electricity Supply Report presented last week to this committee. I 
see this piece as the beginning of a conversation and hope to see alternative consumer protection 
discussions as part of this bill ahead of a work session. I believe CEPs are a critical tool to 
address climate change, to incentivize a greater creativity and dynamism within this market, but 
it has seemed the risks home in this market have sometimes fallen on consumers, particularly 
those who can bear their burden the very least. 
Section 3 functions as an acknowledgement and reﬁnement of what is renewable energy and was 
a critical piece of this bill as-amended. The OPA’s recent Retail Electricity Supply Report 
brought this dynamic to light regarding CEPs, but the reforms as they are listed below apply to 
all regulated by renewable energy regulations, whether standard offer or CEPs — leveling the 
playing ﬁeld for all who are bound by state regulations on renewable resources or engage in the 
renewable retail energy market: 
A. This section removes waste-to-energy and landﬁll gas from sources of renewable energy 
and participation in RECs. Perhaps ﬁnancial or other support is important for these 
markets, but this should be addressed as part of the waste hierarchy. 
B. This section seeks to more sharply deﬁne renewable energy sources. In this committee, 
we have heard various claims on sources of hydropower, waste-to-energy, and biomass, 
to name a few. ‘While I do not seek to overly define future technological or regulatory 
advancements in this area, it does seem to me that it is wholly inappropriate that critical 
resources used to ﬁnancially support the development and use of renewables is to be used 
with sources that do not meet a deﬁnition of naturally regenerative and which produce 
greater harm to our environment in the ﬁght against climate change than they offer in 
return. 
In the ﬁnal section, this bill directs the PUC to analyze how biomass, as an electricity supply 
option, would help achieve the state emissions level goals under the Maine Revised Statutes, 
Title 38, section 576-A and the climate action plan under Title 38, section 577. Various concerns 
and beneﬁts have been claimed, but a 2016 report to this committee did not sufﬁciently 
investigate nor address the issues of emissions and related enviromnental impacts, but rather 
offered methods of developing the industry. This PUC analysis would offer the committee a 
chance to determine further regulatory considerations that may inform how we invest with 
District 124: Part of Scarborough
certain conditions for environmental impacts in renewable energy sources, mindful to carbon 
offsets and biodiversity effects alike. 
While this bill seeks to support the developments of important renewable sources and seeking to 
encourage their use in our state, while also putting forward a measure of consumer protection as 
a condition of that greater support, it also seeks to ensure we are investing in renewables which 
we know measurably decrease fossil ﬁaels and greenhouse gas emissions. 
I look forward to the dialogue I hope this bill will encourage, to empower the CEP market while 
protecting ratepayer interests in ﬁghting climate change in a more transparent and equitable way 
Thank you very much for your time and consideration of this legislation and its accompanying 
amendment before you this afternoon. 
District 124: Part of Scarborough
