Testimony of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group 
In Opposition To 
L.D. 1431, An Act Requiring the Public Utilities Commission to Adopt Rules Promoting 
Renewable Energy 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology: 
The Industrial Energy Consumer Group (IECG) has been representing medium and large 
sized consumers of energy in Maine for more than thirty—ﬁve years at the state, regional and 
federal level. We advocate for policies that reduce the cost of energy for our members and cost- 
effectively help Maine achieve its climate goals. 
IECG might have welcomed Section l of LD 1431, which would encourage competitive 
electricity providers and others to participate in energy transformation projects, but this section’s 
promotion of the competitive market is inconsistent with Section 2, which would effectively risk 
ending residential retail competitive choice. 
Sections 3, 4, 6, 8, and 9 of the bill would add new limits on renewable energy, to the 
subset of renewable resources that also meet a newly created standard, termed “naturally 
regenerative and certiﬁed green” . Sections 5 and 7 eliminate RPS eligibility for landﬁll-gas 
biomass and generators fueled by municipal solid waste in conjunction with recycling. Read 
together, the effect of these sections appears to be to exclude renewable resources like hydro and 
biomass ﬁ‘om participating in the Maine renewable portfolio standard. This is not the time to 
artiﬁcially reduce Maine’s existing supply of renewable energy. 
Section 10 directs the PUC to adopt standards for these resources, but then says the 
standards will be consistent with or rely on the Green-e standards. The Green-e program isa 
non-governrnental program whose certiﬁcation process is generally less rigorous than state 
standards like Maine’s. 
Section ll directs the PUC to study of the use of biomass as a substitute for fossil fuels as 
a source of electrical generation. IECG members have signiﬁcant experience using biomass in 
this manner, including with respect to emissions, cost, environmental impacts, reliability in 
Maine’s industrial sector, and the effect of changing environmental and weather conditions on 
the fuels’ availability and performance. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments. IECG is happy to answer 
questions now or at the work session. 
203673171
