Bobbi Bard
Richmond
LD 1513
Senator Baldacci, representative Meyer, and the Health and Human Services 
Committee, my name is Bobbi Bard.
Multiple years ago, Child Protective Services was given a $5.00 stipend through 
legislation and ICM’s are now asking to be made whole with them.  There is no 
denying that Child Protective Services is a very important service, but I hope after 
you have heard what we do, you will realize that Intensive Case Management is just 
as important, but in different ways.
For anyone that doesn’t know, there are four different types of ICMs.  There is 
inpatient, outpatient, jail ICMs and a new team called the justice team.  
As for me, I work as an ICM on the Outpatient team.  The team works with little over 
50 clients that have been found not criminally responsible (NCR) by reason of 
insanity as a result of mental disease or defect.  Out of 51 NCR clients, 16 have killed 
one or more people and an additional 24 clients have committed other violent offenses
including assault, aggravated assault, elevated aggravated assault, and attempted 
murder. The remaining 11 clients have committed child molestation, child 
pornography, visual child aggression, rape, criminal threatening, terrorizing, stalking, 
criminal mischief, and/or arson.  We, as ICM’s, are tasked with keeping the client and
society safe.  Team members monitor clients’ compliance with their court orders, 
support development of client skills and independence, and assess clients’ symptoms 
and safety.  As part of these responsibilities, it is the team’s duty to observe and 
supervise clients while they are in their homes and in the community - often while 
working alone and without nearby backup.   
This job is not for the faint of heart and can be dangerous at times.  I personally, was 
on the team when a client was shot in our lobby, and I have been assaulted.  A while 
ago I was tasked to drive close to two hours to pick up a client, in his own residence, 
that had an increase in paranoia and was refusing medication changes.  A peer and I 
went to get this client and to transport him back to RPC.  This client is in the NCR 
system because he took a life.  We, as ICMs, had no backup accept each other and 
911.   I am happy to say that this client went back into the hospital without incident.  
But as ICMs, we never know what will happen in these types of circumstance.   
I urge you to support this bill, LD 1513, and show all ICMs that the good work that 
we do is noticed and appreciated.
     Thank you for your time and consideration,                                             
Bobbi 

