Harry Ward
Augusta
LD 1513
Dear Congressional Leaders,
My name is Harry Ward and I am an Intensive Case Manager with Riverview 
Psychiatric Center Outpatient Services.  
Often times, it is said “you know what you signed up for” or “this is how you chose to
earn your pay”.  I know this after spending over 20 years in the military. In that area, I
have seen risk up close from a variety of perspectives. From almost a year 
deployment in Bosnia Herzegovina, 9/11, up to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. In all
of these periods, I was trained and afforded the tools for success. And I strongly feel 
the same for the Staff at Riverview Psychiatric Center. 
Staff at Riverview and RPC OPS work with a very complicated and sometimes 
dangers clientele. There have been many documented cases of where personal safety 
is at risk to do these jobs. For some of our employees, it is every day we work with a 
variety of human beings with severe and persistent mental illness. Some of these 
clients can be very dangerous, in presentation. We provide these clients with a 
continuity of care that maintain a level of balance for our clients. We facilitate safe 
intervention for these clients. We also have to work with these clients when they have
tragedy in their lives, get news they may not want to hear, or help them manage with 
any number of things they may have to cope with. We do these things often without 
physical protection but armed only with our wits, experience, education and supported
by training from our own experienced staff. 
This bill tells the staff at these facilities “thank you for your service and for what you 
do”. This bill reflects the value in the job that we do, but also recognizes that there is 
elevated risk and the state of Maine appreciates our sacrifice. 
This bill would also help with retention of talented staff members. Not just in terms of
compensation, but also as an acknowledgement of the time, effort, and risk assumed 
by every staff member associated with RPC.
I have been employed by RPC for almost 8 years. I have a distinctive trajectory as I 
began on the floor (where some of the most danger can occur as clients move to 
stability), worked up to Acuity Specials (who engages the safe intervention of 
complicated and often dangerous situations), and now I work as an Intensive Case 
Manager to help our clientele reintegrate into the community. Some of our clients are 
more ready for that than others. Some need more help dealing with the activity and 
responsibility of living skills and navigating the streams of everyday life. But all of 
them are successes waiting to happen. Often there are setbacks, but that is not the only
place peril can lurk. And we do this utilizing our talents and abilities, systemic 
checks, and with no ability to defend other than those tools. Often times, we achieve a
successful and safe intervention. But history has demonstrated that these are not a 
given on a day-to-day basis. 
I would ask that you please support This bill. This are just one way to show gratitude 
for those who work with some of Maine’s most complicated patients. 
Sincerely,
 
Harry Ward
5 Caldwell Rd
Augusta, Maine 04330

