  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso , on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
In SUPPORT of LD 113: “An Act to Provide Funding for Guardians Ad Litem”  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
Thursday , January 2 6, 202 3 
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary , I am writing o n behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)1 in support of LD 113, “An Act to Provide Funding for Guardians Ad Litem.”  
 
While protection from abuse orders can  and often do address short -term , exigent 
issues for survivors and their children, our family courts are where long -term safety and 
stability need s are addressed.  Maine’s  family courts have  long suffered from  insufficient 
resources across the board . There is very limited access to pro bon o legal representation . 
Our judges and magistrates suffer from high  caseloads , leading to limited availability to 
timely hear contested issues . There is insufficient time and resources to ensure  adequate 
train ing of  court personnel on the myriad of complex  issues the courts are confronted with. 
Though  guardian s ad litem  can be part of the solution  to this problem, they  are out of reach 
for families without significant financial means . Guardians as litem  are only available in two 
circumstances : when a family can afford to pay either an hourly rate or a set fee – often 
thousands of dollars; or where  a guardian ad litem  is willing to provide their services pro 
bono .  
 
A skilled  guardian ad litem  can help ensure judicial decision makers are presented 
with all of the facts they nee d to make an informed decision. In family court cases  involving 
domestic violence,  that will often  include info rmation from extended family members, the 
Office of Child and Family Services, health and mental he alth professionals, school 
professionals, and criminal justice records . A guardian ad litem  can speak to these contacts 
at length and report back to the court. More importantly, a guardian ad litem  can bring 
forward  a child’s experience and perspective  without that child needing to testify in a court 
proceeding.  
 
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than  12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year , including court  advocacy services in the civil and criminal courts . 
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
For survivors  of abuse , the  current practice of requiring private funding of guardians 
ad litem  comes with  an additional layer  of challenge . The  mere presence of any guardian ad 
litem is not going to necessarily have a positive impact.  Though many survivors identify the 
guardian ad litem  assigned in their case  as having helped them keep themselves or their 
child(ren) safe, for just as many other survivors, the g uardian ad litem  appointed in their case  
was experi enced by the survivor to undermine  their ability to achieve safety and stability . 
Survivors need access to w ell-trained, highly -skilled  guardians who understand the dynamics 
of abuse and its impact on families post -separation of the parents. Legal advocates at 
Maine’s domestic violence resource centers spend not an insignificant amount of time each 
year attempting to secure  a guardian ad litem  to take a survivor’s  family court  case pro bono 
or for a reduced fee. Most advocates have developed a relationship with a small handful of 
guardians ad litem  who have demonstrated a  trauma -informed approach and an  ability to 
understand the impact of abuse o n the adult victim’s ability to achieve safety and stability 
for themselves and their children.  However, u nderstandably, m any of these guardians are 
financially able  to take only one or two cases each year pro bono.  For those  families without 
great financial means, that effectively results in a very small pool of survivors statewide able 
to retain a well -informed, high ly skilled guardian working with their family .  
 
If payment for guardians ad litem  was no longer  the responsibility of the litigant 
survivor, guardians ad litem  with a particular aptitude and interest in working on cases 
involving domestic abuse and violence would be able to more frequently utilize their skills in 
these cases to help courts make more informed decis ions that appropriately attend to safety 
and stability needs of survivors and their children. Not only would more families benefit 
from having a guardian ad litem , more families would benefit from having the right  guardian 
ad litem  to help achieve outcomes that are in the best interest of children .  
 
As always, thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective.  MCEDV and our 
member programs look forward to continuing to engage with legislators and other 
interested parties on th ese important issues.  
 
 
Contact Information:    
Andrea Mancuso, Esq.    
Public Policy Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 430 -8334, Email:  andrea@mcedv.org    
