MAINE FAMILY LAW ADVISORY COMMISSION 
Report to Maine Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
On LD 113 
“An Act to Provide Funding for Guardians Ad Litem” 
Introduction 
The Maine Family Law Advisory Commission hereby reports to the Maine Legislature, 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, on LD 113 “An Act to Provide Funding for Guardians Ad 
Litem.” For the reasons set out below, FLAC supports LD 113. 
Discussion 
LD 113 provides a Judicial Department appropriation for ongoing funding for guardian ad 
lireml services in family matters cases in the annual amount of $1,000,000. LD 113 will 
signiﬁcantly make access to guardians ad litem more equitable for all litigants in the family court 
system with the ultimate beneﬁciaries being the children of Maine. 
Pursuant to 4 M.R.S. § 1554, the court may appoint a guardian ad litem to provide 
information to assist the it in evaluating the best interests of a child in the determination of parental 
rights and responsibilities. Under the current statutory scheme, the cost of this vital service to the 
court and children in family matter cases is (1) paid by the litigants on terms ordered by the court 
pursuant to 4 MRS §l 555(3) or (2) is waived or reduced if the court can secure a pro bono or low- 
fee guardian. Under the Rules governing guardians ad litem, Rule No. 2(b)(5) provides that any 
rostered GAL is expected to accept at least one Title 19-A pro bono or reduced-fee referral from 
the Judicial Branch per calendar year. While the rostered GAL’s fulﬁl this obligation, and in some 
cases go well beyond What is required, the need for GAL’s in family matters is greater than the 
capacity of the roster to meet it. This is particularly true in areas of the state where the roster of 
qualiﬁed GALs is thin. 
1 
A guardian ad Iiiem (or “GAL”) is a person appointed by the court during family matter litigation 
to protect the interests of a child. These cases include, but are not limited to, divorce complaints, parental 
rights and responsibility petitions, grandparent rights petitions, and guardianship petitions. The court 
maintains a roster of persons qualiﬁed to perform the duties of a. GAL. Guardians ad [item are regulated 
by statute, court rule, and orders issued in individual cases. The duties of a guardian ad [item in a family 
matters case are spelled out in the court’s order appointing the GAL. Common duties include interviewing 
the parties, the children, teachers, and therapists to make recommendations about parent-child contact and 
the cl1ild’s primary residence. Under current practice, the guardian ad Zitem is paid by one or both of the 
parties as speciﬁed in the appointment order. If the parties cannot afford to pay for a GAL, the court may 
secure a pro bono/reduced fee GAL or proceed with the case Without an appointment.
l
Too often, a GAL is not appointed regardless of the needs of the children or the case. While 
the court recognizes the need, it also must Work within the with the economic circumstances of the 
parties. This results in a system whereby one of the primary determinative factors on- whether a 
guardian ad litem is appointed is the economic status of the litigants and not what is necessarily in 
the best interest of the children or the efficient prosecution of the case. LD l 13 provides the funding 
necessary for a third option: a publicly funded option that elevates the needs of children over their 
parents’ economic circumstances. 
If a GAL' is appointed in a case in which the parties do not have the resources to pay for 
a GAL, it is because of a very small cadre -of volunteer guardians around the state who 
disproportionally and generously donate their time and expertise to the court Without 
compensation. Furthermore, judicial ofﬁcers are expending valuable time in identifying and 
securing pro bono/low fee GALs at the expense of other judicial duties. 
Whether warranted or not, the perception is unavoidable that the statutory GAL role 
designed to directly protect the interests of children in family matters is only available to those 
with means.‘ 
The role of the GAL is to assist the court in gathering reliable information to make best 
interest determinations. Among negative consequences to not having a GAL report and 
recommendations are: (1) the increased likelihood of children being required to testify; (2) the 
increased need to subpoena and require in-court testimony from ancillary professionals such as 
doctors, teachers, and therapists; and (3) the signiﬁcant increase in expenditure of judicial 
resources necessary to process a case through trial, stretching an already thin allocation of time 
available to family matters. Furthermore, in the growing number of cases in which neither party is 
represented by an attorney and who also face challenges of presenting proof as required by the 
Rules of Civil Procedure and the Rules of Evidence, teachers, doctors, therapists and even the 
children themselves are not being called as witnesses to inform the court about the lives of the 
children. 
LD I13’ will help ensure that family law decisions are made with the best possible 
information. An increase in better informed initial family law’ determinations may also serve to 
decrease the incidence of post-judgment litigation. 
FLAC also believes that LD 113 will address the geographic inequities inherent in the 
current system. In more rural areas of the state, there are very few rostered GAL’s, and the limited 
numbers cannot possibly cover the need, whether paid or pro bono. The availability of public 
funding will allow GALs to cover all areas of the state more fully without the court having to rely 
upon the generous donation of time by a small number of individuals to meet the need. 
Finally, there is a publicly funded GAL option in other areas of the law in Maine. In 
guardianship and non-child protective termination matters, county Probate Courts (and when 
applicable, the District Court) routinely pay for GAL services when the litigants cannot afford to 
contribute to the cost. Members of FLAC have found this absence of a barrier to GAL participation 
in a case to a be a tremendous aid to the administration of these cases and to the children involved. 
LD ll3 allows the ftuiding necessary to replicate these experiences in family court.
2
A cursory look reveals that other jurisdictions support a publicly funded GAL in family 
matter cases, including Massachusetts, Connecticut, and the District of Columbia. 
FLAC strongly supports the ongoing funding for guardian ad litem services in family 
matter cases. 
Conclusion 
For all these reasons, FLAC supports LD 113 as a necessary improvement to the equitable 
administration of justice for children and families in family matters. 
Dated: January 25, 2023 
Respectfully submitted:V 
Maine Family Law Advisory Commission 
Hon. John Martin, District Court Judge (Chair) 
Hon. Stephen Nelson, Superior Court Justice 
Hon. Steven Chandler, Family Law Magistrate 
Hon. William Avantaggio, Probate Comt Judge 
Christopher McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW 
Timothy E. Robbins, Esq., Executive Director, Kids First Center 
Edward S. David, Esq. 
Diane E. Kenty, Esq., Maine Judicial Branch, CADRES 
Catherine Miller, Esq. 
Linsey Ruhl, Esq., Pine Tree Legal Assistance 
Debby Willis, AAG., Maine Dept. of Health and Hmnan Services Appointee
3
