,. 
,,, 0 HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
,i 
§ 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
U it AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 2237-1400 
Margaret Craven TTY: Maine Relay 711 
41 Russell Street 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
(207) 783-1897 
Margaret.Craven@legislature.maine. gov 
January 26, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Margaret Craven introducing 
LD 113, An Act To Provide Funding for Guardians Ad Litem 
Before the Joint Standing-Committee on Judiciary 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and honorable members of the Judiciary Committee, 
my name is Margaret Craven, and I represent House District 93, which is part of Lewiston. I am 
here today to introduce LD 113 An Act To Provide Funding for Guardians Ad Litem. 
For those unfamiliar, a Guardian ad Litem, or GAL, is a person appointed by a Maine court to 
gather information and make recommendations concerning children involved in certain family 
matters and child protection cases. LD 113 is concemed with GALS involved in family matters, 
which can include matters of divorce, parental rights, grandparent visitation and guardianship 
cases. 
Guardian ad litem services are paid by one or both litigants in family matters. To determine 
which party pays or how to divide the cost between the two, the court reviews income, assets, 
property and other relevant factors. 
The bill before you would provide ongoing funding for guardian ad litem services in family 
matters and, speciﬁcally, would cover the costs of GAL services when litigants cannot afford 
those services themselves. 
As you will hear in testimony later today from the Family Law Advisory Commission, there is 
public funding for GALS in other Maine court proceedings when litigants cannot afford one. LD 
113 is not unprecedented, and it would make GAL services in family matters more equitable and 
efﬁcient. 
I am happy to answer any questions you may have, but there are experts here today who may be 
better suited to speak to the details of the GAL program. Thank you for your time and attention. 
District 93: Part of Lewiston
