miﬁhﬁllgﬂﬁs mlﬁai 
SEXUAL ASSAULT 
January 26, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on the 
Judiciary: 
My name is Melissa Martin and lam submitting testimony today on behalf of the Maine Coalition 
Against Sexual Assault (MECASA), the organization which represents and serves Maine's sexual 
violence prevention and response programs as well as Maine's Children's Advocacy Centers. 
MECASA initiates and advocates for victim-centered public policy; provides expert training, 
technical assistance, and resources for providers and partners; and funds the service providers in 
your communities. 
MECASA is here today in support of LD 113, An Act to Provide Funding for Guardians Ad 
Litem. Thank you to Representatives Craven, Cloutier, Perry, Reckitt and Stover and Senators 
Carney and Rotundo for introducing this legislation. 
Guardians ad litem (GALs) are an essential tool for family courts to be able to help families reach 
agreement without the need for a full court hearing, help the court hear the full range of evidence 
in a case, and allow children's voices to play a more central role in court proceedings. 
l am here today to talk about a particular type of case that benefits from GALs-—cases involving 
child sexual abuse. Currently in Maine, when there is a report of potential child sexual abuse to 
law enforcement or the Department of Health and Human Services, children are interviewed ata 
Children's Advocacy Center (CAC). This interview is conducted by a highly trained forensic 
interviewer who has completed a nationally recognized, evidence-based training and continues to 
receive ongoing support through training and peer review. This interview is conducted using non- 
leading, trauma informed questions in a neutral location. 
The CAC interview is currently used for investigative purposes for the Department of Health and 
Human Services and law enforcement to conduct their investigation, but pursuant to Maine law, 
the interview cannot be used as evidence in a family matter case. That means, even if the child 
disclosed abuse and even if there is an ongoing criminal case, the child may be forced to testify 
again in court in the family matter proceeding.
1
This is traumatizing and unnecessary for the child. The appointment of a GAL can help minimize 
the trauma in these cases by either allowing the GAL to review the forensic interview and use its 
contents to inform settlement agreements or allowing the contents of this interview to be shared 
at trial. Even in the cases where that is not possible, speaking privately with the GAL can help 
minimize the trauma of that child survivor from having to retell their story in open court. 
For all these reasons, funding GALs for families who cannot afford them is essential in a variety of 
cases, but it is especially important for cases of child sexual assault. 
Thank you for your consideration. We hope you will support LD 113 and would be pleased to 
answer any questions you might have. . 
About Maine's Sexual Assault Service Providers 
One in five Mainers will experience sexual assault at some point in their lifetime? Each year, 
14,000 Mainers will experience sexual violence? 
lViaine's sexual violence service providers provide free and confidential services across the state 
to victims/survivors of sexual harassment and sexual assault and those close to them, as well as to 
individuals who wish to increase their understanding of the issues. Just some of the services 
include a 24-hour statewide sexual assault helpline, crisis intervention and information, support 
groups, in~person accompaniment and advocacy through the medical and legal systems, and 
school- and community-based prevention education. Services are provided for a victim/survivor 
regardless of when they experienced sexual violence, and regardless of what type of sexual 
violence they experienced. Types of sexual violence include, but are not limited to, sexual 
harassment and gender~based bullying, child sexual abuse, elder sexual abuse, stalking, sex 
trafficking, and sexual violence within an intimate partner relationship. 
24/7 Confidential 
Maine Sexual Assault Helpline: 1-800871-7741 
1 
Dumont, R. & Shaler, G. (2015). Maine Crime Victimization Report: Informing public policy for safer communities. 
Muskie School of Public Service, University of Southern l\/laine. 
2 
lbid.
2
