Good afternoon and thank you very much for your consideration of LD 889 and for your service 
to Maine and its educational system.  
 
My name is Dr. Timothy Surrette. I’m an Associate Professor of Education at the University of 
Maine at Augusta and vice-chair of the Bangor School Committee. This testimony reflects my 
views and expertise alone and does not speak on behalf of the University of Maine System, the 
University of Maine at Augusta, the Bangor School Department, or any organization to which I 
belong.   
 
Most of us recognize that quality pK-12 education requires significant investment. That, of 
course, means money. If we want schools with up-to-date infrastructure, well-paid teachers, and 
high-quality curriculums, it means we need the funding to do that. But have we spent sufficient 
time thinking about how money is distributed to one school versus another and why some 
schools are able to spend considerably more money on their students than other schools?  
 
The answer is complicated and in Maine, it begins with the Essential Services and Programs (EPS)  
funding formula. According to the Maine Department of Education the EPS formula aims to 
“determine both the state and local share of funding needed for each school administrative unit 
(SAU) to have Essential Programs and Services. These Essential Programs and Services are defined 
as programs and resources that are essential for students to have an equitable opportunity to 
achieve the Maine Learning Results”.  
 
But what does equitable mean? Opinions obviously differ, but that question was on the minds of 
researchers at the Education Law Center (ELC), an educational advocacy organization based out 
of Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, PA, who released a report in 2021 titled ' Making the Grade: How 
Fair is School Funding in Your State'.  The authors discussed three metrics associated with fairness 
or equity of school funding: (1) Funding Level, (2) Funding Distribution, and (3) Funding Effort. As 
you'll see in Table 1, based on 2018 - 2019 funding data the state of Maine scored an 'A' or 
'Progressive' on metrics (1) Funding Level and (3) Funding Effort, however, Maine scored an 'F' 
or 'Regressive' on (2) Funding Distribution.  
 
Recent historic state-level investments  in overall funding for pK-12 public education in Maine are 
encouraging and important. However, the 2013 PICUS report , an exhaustive review of the EPS 
funding formula pointed to revenues from local property taxes as a driver of inequitable school 
funding distribution in Maine. The report stated, “the Maine school funding system overall has 
succeeded in designing a fiscally neutral distribution of revenues. However, the addition to the 
system of local property tax funding above the level required to fund the EPS introduced 
inequities into the system. The essential fiscal neutrality finding is that the Maine school funding 
system as planned would have achieved fiscal neutrality, but the differential abilities of districts 
with different levels of wealth (property and income) to raise local funds reduced the fiscal 
neutrality of the system”. Simply put, reliance on local property tax revenue, not the EPS funding 
formula, is a reason why significantly more money is spent on students in wealthy communities 
than in less wealthy communities in Maine.  
 
Unfortunately, several years after the release of the PICUS report, inequities in pK-12 school 
funding distribution in Maine persist. As an example, according to Maine Department of 
Education data , during the 2020 - 2021 school year per pupil spending (PPS) in the York school 
department was $20,945.88, while in the Lewiston school department PPS was $15,502.02. 
According to US Census Bureau data, in 2021 York, Maine ’s median household income was 
$101,352 and median value of owner-occupied housing units was $451,000. Whereas, in 2021 
Lewiston, Maine ’s median household income was $48,069 and median value of owner-occupied 
housing units was $157,500. These striking differences in wealth between the two communities 
contribute to the fact that nearly $5,000 more was spent on a student attending public school in 
York, ME than in Lewiston, ME during the 2020 – 2021 school year, which I argue is inequitable 
and unacceptable.  
 
LD 889  is aimed at mitigating the inequitable distribution of school funding that currently exists. 
If enacted, this legislation would secure an additional $25 million appropriation to be added 
annually to the normal 55% school aid subsidy for local school districts. This additional 
appropriation would be distributed as Education Opportunity Grants and would be directed, 
guided by rules developed by the Commissioner of Education and approved by the Governor, to 
go solely to school districts in the State of Maine where the average personal income is below 
the state average and awarded to specific programs in those school districts whose objective is 
to raise the educational standards generally of all students in the public schools in each said 
school district.  
 
These types of legislative steps are encouraging and deserve the attention and support of pk-12 
school stakeholders in Maine who are committed to equitable funding and opportunities for all 
children.  
 
Thank you.  
 
 
 
