Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing: My name is Tyler Backus and I am a resident of Oakland, Maine. I write to you 
today in opposition to LD 889, An Act to Better Support the Educational Attainment of 
Low and Moderate-income Communities by Providing Additional Funding to Certain 
School Administrative Units. 
Though the intent of the bill is understandable, the first reason I oppose this bill is that 
the design of the system to solve the problem will actually send millions of dollars that 
currently hold the capacity to raise additional funds, while continuing to leave 
impoverished school administrative units without funds they desperately need to 
provide an adequate level of funding, as described by the initial intent of the funding 
formula. Essentially, the program designed in this bill will fix some inequities, while 
making other inequities worse. 
The second reason I oppose is that Maine already tried to target funds for this exact 
problem during my tenure with the department, and in fact I wrote routine technical 
rules that never went into effect because it was determined there was no approach to 
determine programs that would meet the requirements and additionally there exists no 
way to ensure the funds were actually spent in the specified manner. 
The third and final reason I oppose this bill is simply because it goes against the spirit of 
the current Maine state funding formula. Essential Programs and Services is meant to 
determine how much funding is needed for schools to provide an adequate education 
for students, but leaves how that funding is spent up to the local school districts. I do 
realize this funding is in addition to the funding formula, but I also believe that if the 
state is to provide additional funding to Maine school administrative units, we should 
allow them how best to support their students. 
In response however, I submit the last, of a series of posts I made on my LinkedIn 
profile, about the current problem with the funding formula and a series of solutions to 
the current inequities of the formula.  
Over the past few weeks I have identified a problem that exists in Maine, that there is a 
large difference in the ability between communities to raise funds for education. These 
differences in ability to raise funds are affecting how much is being spent on education, 
especially in our neediest communities, and it is having an impact on outcomes. 
Although I am going to advocate in this post pushing more money into communities 
that do not have the ability to raise more funds, I do not do this lightly. Any dollar spent 
by the government should have some stated goal that is both measurable and tracked 
over time to ensure success of the program. I will note however that educational 
outcomes of students are extremely hard to measure, both short term and long term. 
This is because education is part of a social network, and the measurable outcomes (test 
scores) for students are affected by so many factors that are either not currently 
measured, or cannot be measured, it hard to say in any definitive way how much any 
single policy decision will have on the outcome of education. I will also note that test 
scores are but one lagging indicator in education and it does not appear to have much 
correlation at all for a student's success in life. Other surveys, such as the Maine 
Integrated Youth Health Survey may provide some insight into both why variations in 
test scores occur (leading indicator) and provide other long term indicators in 
combination with test scores as to how students are doing in life. What I do know 
though is that students that live in communities with greater property wealth are being 
provided a better educational opportunity that those coming from those communities 
with lower property wealth. So below are a number of policy suggestions around the 
funding formula, of which I will split these between cost factor changes and distribution 
changes. 
We have districts in Maine that border each other, which essentially sets up an arbitrary 
border between the two communities. If you fall on one side of this border you go to 
one set of schools, and if you live on the other side of the border you get to go to 
different schools. This second set of schools has 3 times the amount of property wealth 
per student to fund education for their students. With that they do spend more funds 
per student on education, $2,600 more per pupil on instruction alone. Part of this is 
accomplished because they are allocated more funds per student, $200 more per 
student in FY2023, even though the weighting in Section 2 of the formula is higher for 
the first district. This is accomplished by paying their instructional staff a higher rate, 
especially at the upper end of the scale, which thereby attracts the more experienced 
teachers that higher education beyond the minimum requirement. This plays out in the 
formula through Section 1 of the formula and we can see the average EPS salary in the 
first district is 8% lower than that of the second district, and then for labor market 
reasons the second district's salaries are inflated at a higher rate. Much of this is the 
funding formula working (though it needs to be updated), but it serves as evidence of a 
problem, that wealthy districts have a greater ability to raise and spend additional funds. 
The first step in giving districts with less property per student a leg up is to allocate 
more funds to them while keeping the mil rate even, otherwise by allocating more funds 
we will also be requiring them to raise more funds as part of the formula. I propose 2 
solutions that could be taken with some ease, even though I am sure some legislators 
will disagree, and I will explain why those legislators are incorrect. 
First, the weight for disadvantaged is too low. Tennessee in their landmark education 
funding reform bill put in place a weight of 25% of their base rate with an additional 5% 
weight for every student who attends a Title I school (not just the disadvantaged 
students at the school). For FY2023 Maine does have the same weighting for 
disadvantaged students, but that weight will return to 20% in FY2024 without legislative 
action. Also, Title I schools are our schools with the highest level of poverty and 
allocating more funding to those schools would go a long way towards evening the 
playing field. By allocating funding to students that attend a Title I school we are 
thereby allocating funding to students living in concentrated poverty. 
Second, the state has known for years that we are undercounting the number of 
disadvantaged students. The state has been, and will continue, to take steps towards 
getting better data for the federal programs, including the nutrition program. However, 
the state funding formula does not require the use of the federally collected data, it is 
used because of convenience. With little effort the department could use Maine's own 
income tax data. Now, as legislators will point out, it is not legal for MRS to share 
detailed level data with any other department, with a few exceptions. However, 
MaineDOE does not need detailed level data. MaineDOE only needs to know what 
percentage of dependents live in homes under a particular income threshold. That 
threshold could be set by the number of dependents in a household, and the only data 
provided by MRS to MaineDOE would be a single percentage for each school district. 
Although this would provide the number of dependents, which would include all 
children under 18, this actually is not a negative side effect. I honestly have no idea what 
these rates would come out to be, but they would be an accurate representation of the 
children in poverty in Maine. I also want to emphasize that this data is available, and 
sharing the data at the district level would not breach the restrictions of MRS data 
sharing set in statute. 
Third, the state could also utilize the hard work that was done in bringing about TISA. 
This includes the funding for special education students, though Tennessee combined 
them with other student groups and called it students with unique learning needs. For 
special education students, students were assigned a category with each category 
having a particular weight. Though the weights used in Tennessee may not work in 
Maine, their work provides a great foundation for Maine. The state could also link in 
other student groups, as Tennessee does, like English Learners or possibly calculate (or 
include) Gifted & Talented program funds in the same stream of funding. Maine has 
struggled with updating the special education funding formula, and Tennessee utilized 
the expertise of multiple personnel from EdBuild to design and advocate for the new 
funding formula.  
Here is the link to the law: https://publications.tnsosfiles.com/acts/112/pub/pc0966.pdf 
Here is the link to their unique funding crosswalk: 
https://www.tn.gov/content/dam/tn/education/2021-funding-
engagement/TISA%20Unique%20Learning%20Needs%20Crosswalk.pdf 
In the end though, given the fact that Maintenance of Effort calculation for special 
education is no longer in statute, Maine should put something in statute to strengthen 
the law. I want to emphasize that you read this last sentence correctly, in 2017 the 
statute for the Special Education MOE adjustment was removed from statute to pressure 
legislatures and educators to work together in coming up with a better formula. It didn't 
work, and the state has ignored the removal since that time. 
For reference: http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/statutes/20-a/title20-Asec15681-
A.html 
There are other supports that the funding formula could provide when calculating EPS 
rates, like a lower student to staff ratio for guidance, which is where social workers are 
included. We know this is an important role within our schools that need to be properly 
funded. 
As to the distribution side of the formula there are a couple of approaches that the state 
could take in ensuring districts with less property wealth are able to provide the same 
education to students as property wealthy school districts. 
The first is to do what Vermont and Wyoming already do. They collect the funding 
based on a mil rate from each community at the sate level, and distribute that funding 
(based on the state formula) to each school district. This inherently has two problems. 
First, it is not a politically viable solution. Property wealthy school districts will balk, and 
their legislators would never support such a proposal. It would also be such a drastic 
change for the state, and no mechanisms are currently in place to make it work. The way 
that Vermont accomplishes not overtaxing low income individuals in property wealthy 
communities would also increase the difficulties of Vermont's model. It would require 
household level data to be transmitted from MRS to other agencies, or to communities, 
and this level of data exchange would not be welcome to most taxpayers, or legislators. 
This solution also does not incentivize low spending districts to raise more, or high 
spending districts to raise less; it only would change how funds in the state would be 
raised. It essentially would do nothing to equalize the amount of funding that is raised 
to support students. I do want to note here when I say equalize amounts raised, I am 
speaking terms of the weighted EPS rates and not a flat per pupil amount. 
The other option is to directly attack the problem. Education is the most expensive 
program for municipalities to operate, at least in most cases. This is not lost on 
taxpayers, town officials, or school officials. It is also the best use of funding for 
municipalities as a better education system does provide trained personnel for the jobs 
in our state. We can also see that our communities with the lowest valuations per pupil 
also have some of the highest mil rates in the state because they must raise their mil 
rate so much more to raise the same dollars per student. By having higher mil rates it 
makes the community less attractive for those looking for a place to live, and because 
they are able to raise less for education, this further pushes possible home buyers away. 
In order to assist those communities with lower valuation per pupil I propose an 
adjustment under ยง15689. Adjustments to state share of total allocation that looks 
directly at district's valuation per pupil, which can be calculated using values already 
within the funding formula. We know based on the latest public data that the median 
additional local being raised is .30 of the weighted EPS rate and the average is .47, which 
tells us that some of those raising more are raising substantially more locally. Providing 
funding through ยง15689 has the benefit of be able to be outside the state and local 
share, and would be in addition to the state calculated allocation for the school district. 
The additional funding could also be weighted so that as the district's per pupil 
valuation goes up or down so does the weight applied to their weighted EPS rate. I will 
note though that providing .1 weight to every district with less than $1m per pupil of 
valuation would cost about $105m to the state, and this number would increase with my 
other policy decisions. 
However, I think it is important to ensure that every student has the opportunity to be 
provided the same opportunity to succeed, no matter where they live in the state. 
Currently, that is not the case in Maine, and legislative action is needed. 
 
 
