 
 
Any questions about this testimony should be directed to Hilary Schneider at hilary.schneider@cancer.org  or 207 -888-9826  
Testimony of Hilary Schneider, Maine Director of Government Relations  
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network  
 
In Opposition to LD 1252  “An Act to Ensure Choices in Health Insurance Markets by Limiting the 
Requirement to Offer Clear Choice Design Health Plans ” 
 
April 20, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry , and members of the  Health Coverage,  Insurance and Financial Services 
Committee , my name is Hilary Schneider,  and I am the Government Relations Director for Maine for the 
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network ( ACS CAN). ACS CAN, the nonprofit, nonpartisan advocacy 
affiliate of the American Cancer Society, supports evidence -based policy and legislative solutions designed to 
eliminate cancer as a major health problem. As the nation’s leading advocate for public po licies that are 
helping to defeat cancer, ACS CAN ensures that cancer patients, survivors, and their families have a voice in 
public policy matters at all levels of government.  
 
On behalf of ACS CAN, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to submit the following testimony in 
opposition to LD 1252 . This bill repeals parts of Public Law 2020, Chapter 653  (LD 2007) , legislation that sought  
to improve the affordability and understanding of coverage and out -of-pocket cost exposure for consumers 
who have private health coverage in the individual and small group markets . This law originated from a bill 
that was unanimously supported by this com mittee in 2020 , was enacted by both bodies of the legislature 
“under the hammer,” and signed into law by the Governor in March 2020.  Part of this law created what is 
called “clear choice design” for a set of health plans sold in the individual a nd small group market. This  
provision  requires the development of a set of plans to be offered that would generally have the same 
deductible, out -of-pocket limit, and copays for a set of commonly -used services. The goal of this provision is to 
make health insurance policies in the individual and small group markets easier to understand and easier to 
compare when shopping for coverage.  
 
As a result of this law, t he Bureau of Insurance convened a stakeholder group , which met throughout the 
summer and fall of 2020, to develop draft standardized benefit designs . ACS CAN was invited to participate in 
the stakeholder group , which met four times and concluded its work at its November 20, 2020 meeting. The 
Bureau of Insu rance  conducted a formal rulemaking  process to establish the set of “clear choice ” health 
insuranc e plans that would be offered for  sale, with effective dates of coverage on or after January 1, 2022 . 
Since then, the Bureau of Insurance holds a public meeting  to gather comments on the proposed  “clear 
choice ” plan  designs for the next plan year.  Comments  can be provi ded verbally at the meeting or during the 
written comment period.  
 
As Superintendent Cioppa noted in his testimony on LD 2007 , the clear choice designs are intended to 
“simplify deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments and allow consumers and small em ployers to make 
apples -to-apples comparisons between health plans.” ACS CAN supported the “clear choice benefit design” 
provisions as we see this as an opportunity to  allow those who purchase coverage on their own and through 
small employers  to focus on ne twork, price, and plan quality rather than complicated cost -sharing variations 
when shopping for coverage.  
 
 
Any questions about this testimony should be directed to Hilary Schneider at hilary.schneider@cancer.org  or 207 -888-9826  For most consumers, navigating the health coverage and health care system can be daunting and frustrating. 
For cancer patients, in particular, the stress of their diagnosis and prognosis is compounded by the challenges  
they face navigating a system that is  complex and confusing. Their cancer journey may involve appointments 
with multiple providers in multiple locations with different administrative and billing systems, involving 
multiple prescriptions and/or treatment regimens.  
 
While ACS CAN and partner  organizations that represent patients and consumers have pro vided comments to 
the Bureau each year  with our ideas to further imp rove  implem entation of this policy, we belie ve the policy 
continues t o have merit. Clear Choice plan design pro vides Maine with the opportunity to reduce the 
confusion and stress consumers often experience by making coverage more predictable and easier to 
understand. It has been well documented that most consumers struggle with health insurance literacy, lacking 
a clear understanding of insurance terminology outside of the terms premium and appeal.1 In addition, health 
insurance literacy is lower for racial and ethnic minorities, non -English speakers, and individuals who do not 
have a college education.2 
 
Each year, d uring the stakeholder meetings convened by the Bureau of Insurance, some stakeholders advocate 
for more plan design alternatives. Each year  in the comments A CS C AN and patient/consumer organization 
partn ers have submitted, we h ave expressed concerns with the number of plan options. As stated in our most 
rece nt comments  submitted to the Bureau, “In 2021, Maine consumers had roughly 30 plans available to them 
on the Marketplace. Today, individuals  may have up to 70 plan options, depending on where they live. In 
Kennebec County, consumers have 64  plans to choos e from on the Marketplace … An excessive number of plan 
options contributes to consumer confusion and decision fatigue, especially if carriers  are permitted to continue 
offering numerous plans options with only slight variations within a single Clear Choice or alternative benefit 
design. Dozens of options with minimal or nuanced variations between them offer anything but a clear choice 
to Maine consumers .” 
 
The bill you are considering today  removes the requirement of clear choice benefit designs for the small group 
market, limiting them only to the individual market. Challenges with health insurance literacy are not limited 
only to those who purchase health insurance in the individual market . Consumer confusion is widespread . 
Policy solutions that work to improve affordability and administrative simplicity of health coverage should be 
offered to as many Mainers as possible. As such, ACS CAN urges you to vote “ought not to pass” on LD 1252 . 
 
 
1 Consumers Union, University of Maryland College Park and American Institutes for Research, Measuring Health 
Insurance Literacy: A Call to Action, February 2012, available at  https://www.air.org/sites/default/files/Health -Insurance -
Literacy -Roundtable.pdf ; Paez K, Mallery C. “ A Little Knowledge Is a Risky Thing: Wide Gap in What People Think They 
Know About Health Insuran ce and What They Actually Know .” American Institutes for Research, October 2014, available 
at https://www.air.org/sites/default/files/Health% 20Insurance%20Literacy%20brief_Oct%202014_amended.pdf . 
2 Villagra V, Bhuva B, Coman E, Smith D, Fifield J, Health Insurance Literacy: Disparities by Race, Ethnicity, and 
Language Preference . Am J Manag  Care. 2019;25(3):e71 -e75. https://www.ajmc.com/view/health -insurance -literacy -
disparities -by-race-ethnicity -and-language -preference  
