 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Ca pitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 20 , 2023  
 
Senator Donna Bailey , Chair  
Representative Anne Perry , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1252, An Act to Ensure Choices in H ealth Insurance Markets by Limiting the 
Requirement to Offer Clear Choice Design Health Plans  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services , 
 
Thank you for the opport unity to provide this input in opposition to LD 1252, An Act to Ensure 
Choices in Health Insurance Markets by Limiting the Requirem ent to Offer Clear Choice Design 
Health Plans . LD 1252 would limit the requirement for Clear Choice design plans to individua l 
health plans on the Maine Health Insurance Marketplace, or CoverME.gov.  
 
As you know, CoverME.gov provides a platform for tens of thousands of Mainers to shop for 
and compare individual health insurance coverage. Over two -thirds of CoverME.gov consumers  
select and enroll in coverage without the help of a broker or Maine Enrollment Assister, instead 
choosing to utilize the online platform to independently choose their plan.  
 
As Maine planned to launch  its Marketplace, one of the most consistent points of  feedback  we 
received from consumer advocates and assisters was that the overabundance of choice in plans 
offered on the Marketplace, many with differences that could only be discerned in careful study 
of countless benefit summaries. This contributed to co nsumer co nfusion and frustration while 
shopping as well as when the person signs up and seeks health care it believes is covered. Those 
anecdotes are consistent with research findings, which show that “choice overload” can cause 
consumers to enroll in a su boptimal plan, feel less satisfied with their plan choice, and in some 
cases discourage them from enrolling at all.1  
 
Maine’s Clear Choice plans are designed to counteract that effect. Each Clear Choice design 
includes the same deductible, maximum out -of-pocket li mit, and cost -sharing structure for 
commonly -used services. Health insurance carriers already have significant input into the 
 
1 Chu et al., “Facilitating  Consumer Choice: Standardized Plans in Health Insurance Marketplaces,” December 28, 
2021; Office of Health Policy, Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services.  
https://aspe.hhs.gov /sites/default/files/docu ments/222751d8ae7f56738f2f4128d819846b/Standardized -Plans -in-
Health -Insurance -Marketplaces.pdf  
 
process of developing each year’s Clear Choice designs and can offer a selection of alternatives 
if they can demonstrate  that cons umers would benefit from the alternative plan designs. This 
allows consumers to review and select the level of coverage that best meets their needs, then 
compare equivalent plans based on cost of monthly premium and the provider network available . 
Allowing  consumers to effectively shop based on these factors not only simplifies their shopping 
experience, it also promotes competition by reducing the variables consumers have to consider 
when assessing plan value. In addition to standardizing element s of plan design, limiting the total 
number of plan designs available also benefits consumers by reducing choice overload.2   
 
Clear Choice plans have been successful in the individual market since their implementation. In 
the 2023 Open Enrollment Period,  over 90  percent  of CoverME.gov enrollees selected Clear 
Choice plans. Maine’s approach has also been adopted by the Federal government. Starting in 
2023, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services requires “Simple Choice” plans on 
HealthCare.gov, the federal ly-run Mark etplace. Other State -based Marketplaces do so as well. 
As such, insurers in 40 states, including Maine, now offer some version of standard plan designs.  
 
Given these concerns, we urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 1252 and maintain access to 
Clear C hoice plans for all consumers. Please feel free to reach out to the Department if you have 
additional questions.  
 
Sincerely,  
    
   Commissioner Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D  
   Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
 
2 Consumers  Union Health Policy Report, November 2012, “The Evidence is Clear: Too Many Health Insurance 
Choices Can Impair, Not Help, C onsumer Decision Making; https://advocacy.consumerreports.org/wp -
content/uploads/2012/11/Too_Much_Choice_Nov_2012.pdf  

