HOUSE 01-Y REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUsTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
i 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Caleb Joshua Ness 
126 Menotomy Road 
Fryeburg, ME 04915 
Phone: (207) 890-3 870 
Caleb .Ness@legislature.maine. gov 
Testimony of Representative Caleb Ness, presenting LD 381, "An Act to 
Increase School Bus Safety by Requiring Monitors." 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distguished members of 
the Transportation Committee, my name is Caleb Ness, and I have the 
distinct honor to represent House District 82, which includes the 
towns of Lovell, Fryeburg, Brownfield, Hiram, and Porter. 
l was contacted by a constituent just days after the election about 
the concept of this bill. My constituent is a 64-year-old man that has 
driven for a local fuel delivery company for 34 years. ln the past, he 
had held a bus driver's license, but let it lapse. Recently, he gained 
the license again to be able to help the school district by driving to 
sporting events. 
He has not taken up driving for the school district on a normal, 
everyday route because of safety concerns that he would like to see 
addressed. He is chiefly concerned about the reality of watching the 
road, as well as a bus load of excited kids at the same time on his 
own. He is very concerned with being able to do the job safely, 
especially since he cannot control other drivers. He mentioned to me 
about how when he would drive teams to sporting events, even though 
the kids would be excited on the way there and back (especially if 
they won), the fact that their coach was there to keep an eye on the 
kids allowed him as the driver to focus on the road and ensure the 
kids’ safety. His suggestion was to make it so there would be monitors 
on all the buses to help with this situation on a broader level. lt is 
his belief that if there were people on board to supervise the 
students, more drivers, especially those who are around retirement age 
looking for this kind of job, would snatch up this opportunity. This 
could help with the shortage of drivers that the school districts are 
facing state wide. Accountability of the drivers and the students 
would also be an added benefit.' 
District 82 Brownﬁeld, Fryeburg, Lovell, Hiram & Porter
I so appreciate the fact that I get the opportunity to represent 
people who have the safety of our kids at heart, and want to see 
action taken on making sure they get to school safely. He wants to 
continue serving his community, but has some reservations about it. 
I apologize for not actually having language for the committee today 
However, I will endeavor to have language for the work session. I 
appreciate the committee's consideration and suggestions. I will 
attempt to answer questions you may have. 
District 82 Brownﬁeld, Fryeburg, Lovell, Hiram & Porter
