 
19 Community Drive • Augusta, Maine 04330 • (207) 622 -7501 • Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the N ATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS    
12781773.1  
Testimony  in Support  of LD 802 
(“An Act to Increase  the Maine  Exclusion  Amount  for Estate  Tax Exemptions ”) 
J. Andrew  Cashman  on behalf  of the Maine  Association  of REALTORS®  
April  21, 2023 
Senator  Grohoski , Representative  Perry  and members  of the Joint  Standing  Committee  on 
Taxation , my name  is Andy  Cashman.   I am the Founder  of Resolve  Government  Relations , 
and we represent  the Maine  Association  of REALTORS®,  a professional  trade  association  
established  in 1936  with over 6,500  members  statewide.  REALTORS®  grow  Maine’s  
economy  and build  Maine  communities.  Our members  represent  buyers  and sellers  
involved  in both residential  and commercial  real estate  transactions.  Our membership  also 
includes  industry  affiliates,  such  as lenders,  closing  agents,  title agents,  appraisers,  
building  inspectors,  surveyors,  etc. The Maine  Association  is chartered  by the National  
Association  of REALTORS®  (NAR),  the largest  trade  association  in the country.   
The Maine  Association  of REALTORS®  supports  LD 802. The bill would  more  closely  align  
Maine’s  estate  tax exemption  with federal  law. We believe  this change  is warranted  
because  differing  tax thresholds  can lead to confusion  and unexpected  tax obligations.  The 
Maine  threshold  is low given  the high rate of inflation  and increasing  property  values.  
Moreover,  the transfer  of certain  generational  properties  could  easily  exceed  the threshold  
and should  not be subject  to tax obligation  due to market  changes  and inflation.    
 
Improvements to the estate  tax exclusion amount  would be welcome d to aid in preserv ation 
of Maine property owner’s legacies, and encouraging properties to remain in the hands of 
families who wish to keep them. Estate tax impacts people during an already difficult time  
in their life and  aligning with the federal standard would help in counter ing Maine’s 
reputation as  having  one of the highest income tax es in the country. Our high tax rates can 
deter  people and businesses from settling  or staying  in Maine and could  negatively impact 
Maine ’s economic sustainability .  
For these  reasons,  we urge you to vote Ough t to Pass  on LD 802. Thank  you for your time 
and consideration.   
 
 
 
 
 
