Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Opposition  
LD 802: An Act to Increase the Maine Exclusion Amount for Estate Tax Exemptions  
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Taxation Committee  
March  30, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Taxation Committee,  
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 e ducators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.  
 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in opposition to LD 802, An Act to Increase the Maine 
Exclusion Amount for Estate Tax Exemptions.    
 
LD 802 comes with a cost.  Lifting the amount someone can inherit and pay no state tax from the current 
$5.6 m illion to $12 million will have a cost to our state.  When evaluating this bill, or any legislation to 
cut taxes, especially for the wealthiest among us, we must consider the other priority needs for our state.  
Instead of lifting the amount excluded from the state income tax for inherited wealth, we ask the 
Committee to consider the other pressing needs of the state:  
 
• Our schools are facing tremendous workforce shortages.  Teachers are in high demand with little 
supply.  The same applies for ed techs and b us drivers.  Public sector wages, particularly wages 
for school employees, are not keeping pace with inflation or the private sector.  There are various 
bills this year to lift the minimum wage for school support staff and lift the minimum teacher 
salary.   
• Teachers and educators report deep concern about the overall health and well -being of students.  
Following the COVID pandemic, teachers report an increase in challenging student behaviors 
and mental health struggles for students.  A bill this session pro poses to increase counselors and 
social workers in public schools, in addition to more funding to provide more  mental health 
support s for students.   
• And of course, you have already heard me go on about the pension issues plaguing retired 
teachers.  Their cost-of-living increases have not kept pace with inflation and other changes have 
meant their benefits are sliding backwards in terms of purchasing power.  Pension f ixes are 
expensive but necessary to make sure we follow through on our commitments to retir ed public 
servants.   
 
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
• Many school buildings are showing their age and many school communities face drafty 
windows, lack of security, and other capital concerns.  There is no plan to address the backlog of 
capital needs our schools face.  What’s more, w ith federal subsidies soon to be available, now is 
the time for schools to transition to cleaner, greener energy sources.  But the state has no plan to 
augment its support for the capital needs of schools.  Instead, the current bonding capacity of the 
state funds less than ten projects every cycle, and the need is usually 8 times that number.   
There are additional needs Maine people and communities have.  With such needs, we think LD 802 is 
the wrong solution.  Instead, we encourage the Committee to consid er reducing the exemption of the 
inheritance tax so more is subject to the state income tax.  As you can see in the bill, prior to 2016, the 
exclusion amount was $2 million.  We suggest the Committee revert back to previous versions to make 
sure we can fun d the priorities of our students and our public schools.   
 
Thank you for your time and I will do my best to answer any questions you may have.   
 
 
