   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  Tel: 207.622.7381  
  www.mecep.org  
 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Grohoski and Perry, and all members of the Taxation 
committee. My name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing  Maine Center for Economic 
Policy. I am writing in opposition to LD 802, An Act to Increase the Maine Exclusion 
Amount for Estate Tax Exemptions, because it would exacerbate the already significant 
wealth inequality in our state and restrict Maine’s abilit y to provide services that benefit 
the entire state.  
 
The estate tax, paid only by the very wealthiest, is a critical tool for reducing inequality 
and investing in the things that create shared prosperity. But in the last decade, Maine’s 
estate tax has be en hollowed out, delivering a massive tax break to the ultra-wealthy  
while funding for our schools, communities, and health care fell behind.  
Mainers experience dramatic economic inequality. Between 1973 and 2015, the top 1  
percent  of Maine families captu red 42  percent  of all income growth, leaving just 57  
percent  for the remaining 99 percent  of Mainers. 1 That income inequality is correlated 
with inequality in wealth.2 
Wealth inequality is 10 times more concentrated than income inequality.3 Wealth for the 
poorest 10  percent  of Americans has actually declined over the past 50 years.4 Racial 
disparities in wealth today are as stark as they were in 1963, with white family  wealth 
seven times greater than Black family wealth and five times greater than that of Hispanic 
families.5  
It’s important to be clear about what we mean by “wealth.” While income is money 
coming into a family, wealth is a family’s assets — things like savings, real estate, and 
businesses — minus debt. Both are important sides of families’ financial security, but 
wealth cushions families against emergencies and gives them greater means to achieve 
economic stability.  
A staggering 60 percent of household wealth in the United States is owned through 
inheritance rather than direct labor.6 If our economy were a level playing field, all 
Mainers would have equal access to the foundations of success. Instead,  the 
generational dimension of wealth means one gener ation is passing its wealth inequality 
on to the next  in a snow balling fashion that  has contributed to white families owning 
more wealth than B lack families . These inequities make some families un able to access 
what they need for economic security such as safe housing, quality  education, and 
good -paying jobs.   
We all know that income inequality and wealth inequality are a problem. Our state’s 
estate tax exemption is making it worse . 
After several r ounds of estate tax cuts, t he carveout  for millionaire and multimillionaire 
estates in Maine is more than five times larger today than it was in 2011. Currently, 
Maine’s estate tax applies only to estates worth more than $5. 9 million for individuals, or 
$11.8 million for the joint estates of married couples. At this exemption level, just over 
20 Maine estates a year pay any tax.7  
Conversations about the estate tax inevitably turn to questions about who pays. The 
reality is that  most Mainers are lucky to earn $2 million dollars over an entire lifetime, let 
alone to have million -dollar estates to pass on to heirs .8 Inequality grows when our tax 
system is tilted in favor of the wealthiest, as it was when lawmakers  cut Maine’s estate 
tax. That inequality harms economic growth.9  
Our economy suffers from declines in labor productivity and consumer demand when 
access to education, health care, and capital is limited because  of inequality. At the same 
time, concentrated wealth typical ly yields unbalanced political power, leading to policy 
choices that favor wealthy people at the expense of investments that support economic 
mobility and reduce poverty. The Organization for Economic Co -operation and 
Development recommends increased acces s to education and higher taxes on the 
wealthy to reverse the loss of economic growth that stems from inequality.10 A more 
robust estate tax is part of the solution.  
LD 802  would take Maine’s estate tax in the opposite direction by more than doubling 
the estate tax exemption. This would only deepen the inequity created by previous 
increases to the state estate tax exemption and starve state agencies  of the funding they 
need to adequately meet the needs of Mainers.  It is not a prudent financial decision  to 
cut taxes when there are still deeply pressing unmet needs throughout our state , such as 
needs for housing, equitable access to health care, paid family and medical leave for 
workers, increased support for families with children, or improved working co nditions 
for direct care workers.  Investments in any of these areas would strengthen the 
resiliency of Maine’s economy, yet LD 802 would remove some of the funding necessary 
to make these investments.  
We urge the committee to lower Maine’s estate tax exemp tion, not raise it . A more 
robust estate tax will improve economic opportunity  and help  fund needed investment 
in Maine communities. A weakened estate tax, by contrast, would further exacerbate the 
extreme wealth inequality in our state and limit our ability to make these needed 
investments. Because of this, we urge this committee to vote no on LD 802.  
 
 
1 Sommeillier, Estelle, and Mark Price. 2018. The New Gilded Age: Income Inequality in the U.S. by State, 
Metropolitan Area, and County. Economic Policy Institute, July 2018.  
2 Urban Institute. Nine Charts about Wealth Inequality in America . October 2017. Available at: 
http://apps.urban.org/features/wealth -inequality -charts/   
3 Saez , Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. Wealth Inequality in the United States Since 1913: Evidence from 
Capitalized Income Tax Data. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper. October 2014. 
https://gabriel -zucman.eu/files/SaezZucman2014.pdf   
4 Urban Institute. Nine Charts about Wealth Inequality in America . October 2017. Available at: 
http://apps.urban.org/features/we alth-inequality -charts/   
5 Ibid.  
6 Alvaredo , Facundo, et al. “On the share of inheritance in aggregate wealth Europe and the United States, 1900 - 
2010” October 29, 2015. http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/files/AlvaredoGarbintiP iketty2015.pdf   
7 McNichol, Elizabeth. State Estate Taxes: A Key Tool for Broadly Shared Prosperity. Table 4. Center on Budget and 
Policy Priorities, March 2016. Available at: https://www.cbpp.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/5 -11-16sfp.pdf   
8 According to the Social Security Administration, the expected lifetime earnings of a woman at any education level 
is less than $2 million dollars and the expected lifetime earnings of men only exceeds $2 million for those with a 
bachelor's degree.  Available at: https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/research -summaries/education -earnings.html   
9 Dabla -Norris, Era et al. Causes and Consequences of Income Inequality: A Global Perspective. International 
Monetary Fund, June 2015. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2015/sdn1513.pd f  
10 Focus on Inequality and Growth: Does Income Inequality Hurt Economic Growth? Organization on Economic 
Cooperation and Development, December 2014. Available at: https://ww w.oecd.org/social/Focus -Inequality -and-
Growth -2014.pdf   
