 
1 
 
 
Testimony of Frank O ’Hara  
 
In Support of LD 1493  
An Act to Increase  Affordable Housing  
by Expanding T ax Incre ment Financing  
 
Commi ttee on Taxation  
 
April 26, 2023  
 
Senator Gro hoski, Representative Perry Members of the Committee on Taxati on: 
 
My name is Frank O ’Hara.  I am a long -time housing and community develop ment planner in 
Maine, and a resident of Hallow ell.  I am also currently the Chair of the MaineHousing board; 
however, I am here today in my capacity as a private citizen , and a m not speaking for the 
organization . 
 
Everyone in the Legislature is  aware that a shortag e of affordable housing i s jeopardizing  the 
future of our state.  Businesses can ’t attract employ ees.  Young families can ’t buy a first home.  
Homeless people can’t find a roof over their heads.  
 
In the Legislature this year, it ’s all hands  on deck to address the issue.  Some  committees are 
considering bond issues; some new Gene ral Fund revenue s; and some  reforms of zoning 
practices.  
 
This bill proposes the expanded use of Tax Increment Financing f unds.  This i s one more tool 
for the municipal toolbox.  T IFs can put money into affordable hous ing to supplement federal 
funds, or s imply as a stand -alone, to h elp promote workforce or moderate -income housing.  It 
costs not hing to the General Fund.  It allows municipalities to make their own choi ces about  
whether and how to invest in n ew housing.  
 
For these reasons I support LD 1493 .  But I also recommend the Taxation Committee go 
further .  Attached is a white paper   recommending fo ur reforms to the  Maine Affordable 
Housing TIF law that would expand its use dramatically.  Th e changes would simplify the 
district  requirements; simplify reporting; liberalize the length of th e desi gnation; and eliminate 
acreage requirements.  I am glad to meet with the Committee in work s ession to describe these 
reforms further .  Thank you.       
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2 
 
 
A Proposal for Expanding the Use of the  
Maine Affordable  Housing  Tax Increment Financing (TIF) Program  
To Build Moderate -income Workforce Housing  
 
Frank O'Hara  
frankomaine@gmail.com  
207-592-1788  
 
January 31, 2023  
 
Summary  
The following is a proposal to expand the potential use of Maine’s Affordable Housing Tax Increment 
Financing Program to build moderate -income workforce housing serving those with incomes up to 
120% of the area median, without any other public subsidies in volved.  This would meet a need 
currently not addressed in state programs in a way which allows maximum municipal control, and has 
no impact on the state general fund budget.  
 
The Need for Moderate -income workforce housing  
1. The national Up for Growth  organ ization estimates that Maine had a production gap of 9,000 
units in the most recent year  it measured (2019).  A production gap is identified as the 
difference between households and a healthy vacancy rate (5.0%) and the level of decent, year -
round housing available.1  Note that this calculation was made before the pandemic, during 
which time there has been a net in -migration to Maine.  
 
2. The Maine State Chamber and Maine Development Foundation have identified the production 
of workforce housing as one of its  top 6 goals for 2022 .2  The report states:  
Affordable housing is a workforce issue for each segment of the market, not just “affordable” or 
“low -income” as defined historically in government programs …  It is an issue that particularly 
affects entry -level workers, which ranked highly on the business leader survey, but it also affects 
middle -class workers such as those at BIW, as well as professional and technical employees at 
hospitals, banks, and law fi rm. 
 
3. In the last four years, MaineHousing has produced about 300 affordable rental units per year .  
This is a record level for the organization.  However, it is well short of the need .  Because rental 
production relies largely on federal tax subsidies, thi s level is unlikely to increase significantly 
in the years ahead.  
 
 
1 Housing Underproduction in the U.S. 2022 , Up For Growth.  https://upforgrowth.org/apply -the-vision/housing -underproduction/  
2 See file:///C:/Users/Owner/Downloads/mmw2022 -web%20(1).pdf  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  3 
 
4. M
aineHousing does not finance rental workforce housing for households in the middle income 
ranges , the kind of housing the Chamber is looking for. However, such  middle -class workforce 
housi ng does benefit lower income households indirectly .  When a household moves to a 
newly -built unit, it frees up a vacant unit that is then occupied by another household moving 
up, which in turn may allow another household to move up.  The exact upgrading ef fect differs 
in different market conditions, but a recent study estimated that “ 100 new market -rate units create 
70 equivalent units in neighborhoods with household incomes below the metro area median, and 39 in 
neighborhoods with household incomes from th e bottom fifth .”3 
 
5. Besides Maine businesses, Maine municipalities are also seeking to address affordable housing. 
The level of concern and interest is beyond anything I have experienced in my 40 years of 
planning in Maine.  According to Kate Dufour, the Maine Municipal Assoc iation Director of 
Advocacy and Communications, MMA is looking to the Legislature to increase the tools 
available to address housing at the local level4.  Specifically, Kate writes that MMA wants to:  
.. broaden the authorities found under the tax increment financing laws to accelerate the 
development and availability of affordable housing throughout communities. Additionally, the 
policy committee is proposing the implementation of a Pine Tree Housing Zone, designed to 
provide private sector develop ers the economic incentives necessary to build workforce housing . 
 
The Potential Tool: Maine Affordable Housing Tax Increment Financing . 
The Maine Affordable Housing Tax Increment Financing program is a tool with the potential to serve 
the gap of providin g an incentive to build workforce housing. The program has these advantages:  
 
1. The law exists already  in Maine and is well administered .5 
 
2. Municipalities are comfortable with tax increment financing  in economic development, so 
applying it to housing is an easy step.  MMA’s endorsement of expanding the law is an 
indication of that comfort.  
 
3. Like the economic development TIF law, the housing TIF allows the creation of districts that are 
larger than ind ividual projects and properties (though for reasons described below, few such 
districts are created).  
 
 
3 Evan Mast, “ The Effect of New Market -Rate Housing Construction on the Low -Income Housing Market ”, 2019, 
file:///C:/Users/Owner/Downloads/The%20Effect%20of%20New%20Market -Rate%20Housing%20Construction %20on%20the%20Low -
Inc%20(1).pdf  
4 Kate Dufour, “Supporting State Policy Priorities Via Collaboration,” Maine Town & City, December 2022.  
5 The law is contained in MRSA Title 30 -A, §5245 -5250 -G, found online at https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/30 -
A/title30 -Asec5247 -1.html  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  4 
 
4. T
ax increment financing does not place a direct cost on state government, and does not show up 
in the annual budget .  It basically involves a shifting of  revenues  within and  among state, 
county, and local governments . 
 
5. The program serves households with up to 120% of area median income, and thus is eligible to 
serve middle and moderate income households . 
 
6. It will take less subsidy cost per unit to create a partments and homes affordable to moderate 
income households , as compared to the level of subsidy required to build an apartment for a 
very low income tenant.  
 
Current Use  
1. The Maine Affordable Housing Tax Increment Financing program is currently being primarily 
used to provide supplemental subsidies to Low -Income Housing Tax Credit rental projects .  
These projects serve predominantly renters of low income ( at or below 60% of are a median  
income).  The “districts,” in these cases, are simply the lot lines for the individual projects.   In 
the last  4 years there have been  36 projects approved – a rate of about  9 per year.  
 
These supplemental subsidies are important to making individual projects feasible and  should 
continue.  But the potential for use is much greater.   
 
Obstacles to Expansion  
1. The creation of a district  requires specialized attorneys, consultants, municipal h earings, 
municipal approval, and MaineHousing approval.  The process takes months and costs $5,000 
or more .  It is not practical for any project under 25 -30 units .6 
 
2. In Maine’s economic development TIF l aw, it is possible to create a n umbrella  downtown 
district within which individual building owners and developers can benefit without each 
having to individually create a new state -approved districts.  In these cases, the municipality 
undergoes the expense of creating the district and obtaining state approv al; the developers and 
owners can then participate in the benefits by simply negotiating with the municipal 
government.  For these districts, small businesses  and owners of only a few units can participate 
in TIF benefits just like larger developers.   
 
Theoretically, such area -wide districts are possible under the Affordable Housing TIF law.  But 
practically, the requirements are so burdensome that only one or two municipalities have tried 
to do it.  The problematic district requirements include:  
 
6 Application and monitoring forms found on line at https://www.mainehousing.org/programs -services/housing -
development/developmentdetails/affordable -housing -tax-increment -financing -program  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  5 
 
a. T
he proposed district must be an area within which at least 33% of the residential units 
are affordable . 
b. The municipality must be able to guarantee that at least 33% of the units will remain 
affordable for the next 30 years  (for rental housing) or 10 years  (for owner housing) , and 
identify a mechanism for monitoring  progress annually.   
In short, to create a district that goes beyond a single development lot, the municipality must 
survey other apartment landlords and homeowners in the proposed area, determine how many 
homes or apartments are priced at affordable levels, and then obtain ag reements with owners 
and landlords representing 33% of all units in the district to maintain their units to be affordable 
for 10 -30 years.  These agreements would be needed even if the owners and landlords are not 
benefitting from the immediate TIF program .   Finally, the municipality must create a 
mechanism to monitor the affordability of all units annually in the district for the 10 to 30 year 
period .  
 
3. In housing TIF zones – as in economic development TIF zones – the period of TIF subsidy 
cannot exceed t he time limit for the district.  Districts are usually approved for 30 years.  If a 
project starts 10 years into the district’s life, then the subsidy can only extend for 20 years; in the 
last 10 years of a district’s life, annual subsidies can only contin ue for 10 years.  This is a 
problem in both housing and economic development districts, but it is a particular issue when a 
financer is looking for protection during the 30 -year life of the mortgage, and the subsidy 
cannot be arranged to match the mortgage  life. 
 
4. The subsidy from TIF revenues for an individual lot (i.e., a portion of expected property tax 
payments) is not sufficient to make a significant dent in property maintenance costs , in the 
absence of other subsidies.  If the property tax increment ca n be captured from a larger 
neighborhood, then the subsidy could make a difference; this only reaffirms the importance of 
making neighborhood TIF zones possible.  
 
Goal  of proposal  
To amend the Maine Affordable Housing TIF law to enable affordable housing districts to be created 
that are as easy to administer as downtown TIF’s  are under the Maine economic development TIF law .   
 
Proposed law changes  
1. Simplify district eligibility requirements.   The district should be simply:  
a. An area designated as a residential growth zone in a local comprehensive plan that is 
approved by the state government.  
b. In a community that has land use regulatory ordinances (zoning, etc.) that are in 
compliance with state affordable housing zoning requirements.  
 
There is no reason to restrict affordable housing developments to areas that already have a 
substantial amount of low -moderate income residents.  Research is very clear on this – lower 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  6 
 
incom
e children have the highest chance to succeed  in life  when they l ive in neighborhoods with 
families of higher incomes.7  There is no reason to limit affordable housing to neighborhoods 
like Tree Street in Lewiston or Sand Hill in Augusta, while providing no incentive for affordable 
housing in towns like Cumberland or C amden.  The current requirements are not just a burden 
for applicants to document; they are contradictory to good public policy.  
 
2. Simplify monitoring requirements.   Likewise, there is no need to require that entire districts 
have a certain percentage of a ffordable housing.  Only projects that receive a subsidy should be 
required to maintain affordability for 10 years (owner) or 30 years (rental), as is currently the 
case.    This will simplify monitoring requirements for municipalities.  And again, it is g ood 
public policy; children with lower income backgrounds benefit from living in a neighborhood 
with higher -income families.  
 
3. At the lapsing of a TIF district (either housing or economic development), allow existing 
eligible projects to continue receiving benefits for the remaining years of their deals.  Currently 
TIF districts become less attractive over time; a district with only 8 years of eligibility remaining 
can only issue benefits for 8 years.  The law should be changed to allow a developer to still gain 
up to a 30-year  benefit (if needed)  -- but only for property tax revenues from the developer’s 
parcel, not from the district as a whole .   This might be combined with shortening the district 
life from 30 to 10 years, while allowing renewals.  Once the district lapses, of course, no new 
developers can enter the program.  
 
4. Exempt area -wide housing TIFs from the municipal acreage limitations.   This is the same 
treatment that is given to downtown TIF districts.  
 
In other respects, the district requirements for uses of funds, income eligibility, planning, etc., 
would remain the same.   
 
The net effect might be that dozens of municipalities around Maine could create affordable housing 
districts and  promot e housing affordable not just to low -income but to middle -income families.  It 
would encourage local creativity in addressing Maine’s housing crisis.  
 
7 “Groundbreaking Studies: Good Neighborhoods Help Low -Income Children Succeed ,” Douglas Rice, May 4, 
2015 – see https://www.cbpp.org/blog/groundbreaking -studies -good -neighb orhoods -help-low-income -children -succeed  
 
