TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: April 26, 2023, at 9:30 A.M. 
L.D. 1493 — “An Act to Increase Affordable Housing by Expanding Tax Increment 
Financing ” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good morning, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither for Nor Against L.D. 1493, 
“An Act to Increase A ﬂordable Housing by Expanding Tax Increment Financing. ” 
This bill would authorize the creation of Pine Tree Housing Zones to allow 
retained value resulting from tax increment ﬁnancing districts withina 
municipality to be used to purchase, rehabilitate, or establish affordable rental or 
workforce housing anywhere in that municipality. Like the existing Pine Tree 
Development Zone program, this bill would create a sales tax exemption and 
reimbursement for associated purchases of goods, services, and electricity used by 
or sold to a “qualified project” within the Pine Tree Housing Zone. 
My testimony today is limited to providing information speciﬁc to Sections 
5 and 6 of the bill, with a comment for consideration regarding Section 4 of the 
bill. As to Section 4, the bill would require the Department of Economic and 
Community Development to promulgate rules to implement the Pine Tree Housing 
program, including rules for determining and certifying eligibility of a qualiﬁed 
project. For clarity and ease of administration, terms such as “qualiﬁed project, ” 
“affordable rental housing, ” and “workforce housing” should be deﬁned within the
1
statutory text of the bill, rather than through the rulemaking process. The 
deﬁnition of “Qualiﬁed project” should also be clariﬁed to identify the type of 
entity able to receive the sales tax beneﬁts — as drafted, it is unclear whether the 
intended beneﬁciary is a property manager of the workforce housing, the owner of 
the land area containing the workforce housing, or the contractor of the housing 
project. 
Next, the sales tax exemption proposed in Section 5 is limited “to sales 
occurring within a period of 10 years of the beginning of construction of the 
qualiﬁed project. ” Yet, the bill’s summary refers to the “purchase, rehabilitation or 
establishment ” of affordable housing in relation to a qualiﬁed project. It is 
therefore unclear whether the exemption only applies to newly constructed 
projects, or if projects previously constructed also qualify. 
Note that the exemption may not be necessary after completion of a project; 
electricity used in individual affordable housing units would be residential and 
likely purchased directly by the tenant, not by the qualiﬁed project. Note also that 
the bill does not speciﬁcally require that the units be occupied. 
Finally, in addition to tangible personal property installed into realty that is 
owned by or sold to a qualiﬁed project, Section 6 of the bill would reimburse sales 
tax paid on all sales of tangible personal property to a qualiﬁed project regardless 
of whether the property is used for the project. Assuming the exemption and 
reimbursement benefits are available only after a project becomes “qualiﬁed,” the 
proposal should limit the refund’s application to tax paid between the date of 
application for the program and the date of ﬁnal certiﬁcation.
2
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
