 
 
 
Office of the City Manager  
 
City Manager: Steven R. Buck  
City Council: Becky A. Brink , Mayor | Maura A. Herlihy , Deputy Mayor |  
Robert  G. Stackpole  | Ayn  M. Hanselmann  | Peter E. Tranchemontagne  | Jonathan Martell  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1493  
An Act to Increase Affordable Housing by Expanding Tax Increment Financing  
 
Senator  Nicole Grohoski , Chair  
Representative Joseph Perry, Chair  
Members, Committee on Taxation  
 
I am Steven Buck, City Manager of Sanford, Maine, and I offer Testimony in support of LD 1493.   
 The City of Sanford has three major initiatives for the development of our City.  Economic Development, Workforce Development, and H ousing Development for the workforce.  Great stride s 
have been  achieved  through public -private par tnerships for economic development and workforce 
development .  The most difficult of these  three initiatives  has been supporting W orkforce Housing 
Development, also a State recognized universal  need.   
 The City ha s partnere d on eight (8) Workforce and or Low to Moderate Income Housing Projects  to 
date by establishing a T ax Increment Financing (TIF) District around the Pro jects and extending a 
Credit En hancement Agreement ( CEA ) for Projects that could not be built otherwise .  The Credit 
Enhancement Agreement examines the Revenue to Debt on the Project, establ ished by Banks, typically 
1.25 to 1.35 R evenue versus annual debt service, and returns a portion of the tax on the Newly 
Captured Assessed Value ( CAV) on the Project to meet the le nding requir ements.  A well -developed 
CEA reduces over time as the revenue ver sus carrying costs  of the Projects becomes more favorable  
with maturity.   
 Since COVID, the impacts on cost of building materials and labor expense has escalated the overall cost of  construction to levels that even given a TIF District and aggressive  Credit Enhancement 
Agreement, the revenue to debt ratios cannot be met on many workforce housing projects .  Even with 
lenders now mo ving from 25 to 30- year financing options, the requirements for lending are difficult to 
achieve in Cit ies such as Sanford having a large manufacturing workforce .  That is where the 
establishment of the  Pine Tree Housing Zone would aid to further close the gap in financing these 
needed housing projects.  By reducing the next cost to construct  by 5.5% on materials and then to 
reduce the overall electrical costs for Qualified Projects, the revenue to debt is more attainable w hen 
combined again with a TIF District and CEA.   
 This would represent a Public -Public -Private Partnership towards construction and availability of 
much needed Workforce Housing.  The Municipa lity would forego property taxation in the short ter m 
to gain Workforce Housing, a localized workforce reduci ng traffic, green house gas emissions, and 
increasing the economic multiplier of the associated economic development and workforce payroll.  The State would forego the Sales Tax, in the short  term, for all of the sa me long-term benefits of the  
 
 
 
   economic development potential and jobs ma de possible by the availability  of increased Workforce 
Housing.   
 Tax Increment Financing , pursuant to Title 30- A Chapter 206, has been a n effective tool to encourage 
workforce  housing development  in the City of Sanford , especially as an economically impacted service 
center community. Pine Tree Development Zones to encourage jobs cr eation  has also been a successful  
State tool for workforce and economic devel opment in these same areas. Combi ning these time proven 
Progr ams towards Workforce  Development is a next logical step .  
 The short  term extension of tax shelter s using  Tax Increment Financing  and Pin e Tree Zone credits  
combined for Workforce Housing  redirects property an d sales taxes to achieve our Municipal and State 
objectives  as a public -private partnership for our long term economic benefit.  LD 1493 will become 
another means in combination with other pending Housing Leg islation to create greater ho using 
opportunities . A wise economist once said,  “all economic development is dependent upon hous ing.”  
Please consider passage and thereby creating a working relationship of combined M unicipal and State  
incentives for our State ’s common good, Workforce Housing.   
 Respectfully Submitted,  
 Steven R. Buck  
City Manager  
Sanford, Maine   
 
