 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN SUPPORT  -  LD 1580 ‘An Act to Help Maine Small Businesses with Increasing Costs by Removing the Annual 
Cost -of-living Adjustment for the Minimum Wage ’ 
 
Dear Senator Tipping , Chair, Representative Roeder , Chair, and Members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing , 
 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food Producers 
Association  (MGFPA). MGFPA is a business trade association representing more than 200 businesses within 
Maine’s food community; Main Street businesses including independently owned and operated grocery stores 
and supermarkets, food and beverage producers and processo rs, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, and 
supportive service companies.  
 
Similar  to LD 998, we speak in support  LD 1580  to provide predictability for our business members. 
Independent grocers work within very tight profit margins to stay in business, approximately 1 -2% annually. Any 
increase in costs can have a very real and significant impact on a grocery store’s viability.   
 
Over the last two years, managing inventory, inflation and demand has compressed stores’ margins. According 
to the 2022 edition of the Independent Grocers F inancial Survey,  “Expenses rose to 28.7% of sales, back to 
2019 levels, with labor and benefits  averaging 15% of sales. Many retailers also experienced increases in 
utilities.” The changes that our grocers, markets and producers have had to make to remain  viable are real. In 
an effort to adjust to the most recent incremental increases businesses have reported that they have reduced 
staff hours, stopped paying weekend premium pay, reduced the number of paid days off, raised prices, stopped 
and or reduced of fering paid dental, short -term and long -term disability insurance, life insurance, and have had 
to stop capital improvements. “ Services such as floor care, weekly sales flyers, advertising, donations, repairs, 
and any other costs are now regularly evaluate d.”  
 
As you heard during testimony  directly from an independent gro cer on April 30th on LD 998 , small , rural 
storefront s face a pa rticular bu rden as their purchasing power is less than larger, box stores. Independent 
store s have to be particularly mindful  of raising their prices to compensate for in creasing costs of doing 
business.  The minimum wage i ncreases continue to minim ize the gap between  entry -level positions  and lon g-
term staffers  and has a detrimental  effect  on employee morale .  We express concerns for policies that may 
create additional  food deserts  and further complicating the lan dscape  for food -insecure Mainers.  
 
In Maine’s 10 -year Economic Development Strategy, it is noted that the best way to increase wages is to 
increase the v alue of the products and services that we produce by developing new products. “This can be done 
through research and development conducted by public, private, and nonprofit agencies; by increasing capital April 20, 2023  
   
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  04330    |    207-622-4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  
 investment and entrepreneurship; and by increasing the skills and education of the workforce.”  MGFPA stands 
supportive of efforts that offer consistency. Maine’s 10 -year EDS specifically states that a key strategy for 
ensuring a diverse and sustainable economy is to “maintain a stable business environment. ” The future is in 
talent, innovation and developing infrastructure not raising the minimum wage .  
 
We would l ike to reiterate  the need for businesses to know as soon as p ossible the next ye ar’s minimum wage. 
In 2022 , the August  Cost of Living Indexing  information was released mid-September , yet the Maine 2023 
mini mum wage was not announced  officially  by the ME DOL until December 1 3, 2022. It is important  that 
businesses are a ble to prepare in advance of the anticipated minimu m wage increase  as early  as possible.  
 
We must be cautious of the economic cycles and put tactics in place to add security for our state ’s staple 
businesses.  Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.   
 
 
Christine Cummings   
Executive Director  

