.3}; sure or MAINE 
-- 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR - - (Z 
54 sr/we HOUSE STATlON 1-_\_ .-*» 
_. 
an AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0054 All 
Janet T4 Ming Laura A. Fortman 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Mike Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards 
Maine Department of Labor 
In Opposition to LD 1580 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, April 20, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. I'm Mike Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards at the 
Maine Department of Labor. l’m here today to testify in opposition to LD 1580, An Act to Help Maine 
Small Businesses with Increasing Costs by Removing the Annual Cost-of-living Adjustment for the 
Minimum Wage. , 
LD 1580 seeks to entirely remove the procedure by which Maine's minimum wage is adjusted annually 
to any increases in the cost of living as measured by the Consumer Price Index. Instead, it would set 
the wage at its current rate of $13.80 per hour without prospect of regular adjustment. We believe 
that would be a mistake and an affront to the voters who approved the current system by referendum. 
Cost of living adjustments help workers maintain the purchasing power of their paychecks as the prices 
of necessities increase. Removing the annual adjustment, as LD 1580 proposes, would revert Maine to 
relying on the highly variable preferences of legislative majorities and governors, rather than the more 
regular and predictable mechanism provided by the current system. 
We believe the current system has worked well and as intended by the voters when it was adopted in 
2016. Consistent with our position on all bills seeking to adjust the minimum wage, we urge you to 
vote against LD 1580. 
l would be happy to answer any questions you may have at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to serving Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth. 
Fll()NE:[207)623-7900 TTY users call MaineRela _y7‘l1 FAX:(2l]'/') Z87-5292 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity ll'l eiriploynicril and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals Vfilh Cll$3lJlllLlE_ ’S
