TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 977 
“Resolve, to Study the Gasoline Tax Allocations for Nonhighway Recreational Vehicles 
and Make Recommendations for Change" 
Presented by Representative LANDRY of Farmington. 
Cosponsored by Representatives: GREENWOOD of Wales, THORNE of Carmel. 
DATE OF HEARING: April 19, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Tim Peabody, Deputy Commissioner of the Department 
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in support of L.D. 977. 
This resolve directs the Department to study the distribution of gasoline tax revenue for 
nonhighway recreational vehicle programs as described in the Title 36, section 2903-D. The 
department must invite the participation of interested parties identified by the department. The 
study must explore changing the distribution of gasoline tax revenues among programs 
supporting the various types of recreational vehicles so that those programs are supported 
proportionately based on registration numbers of each type of recreational vehicle. The 
department must submit a report and any recommended changes to the Joint Standing 
Committee on lnland Fisheries and Wildlife no later than December 6, 2023. 
A similar study was conducted by the University of Maine Margaret Chase Smith Center for 
Public Policy (MCSC) at the request of the Maine Legislature's Commission to Study Equity in the 
Distribution of Gas Tax Revenues Attributable to Snowmobiles, A/I-Terrain Vehicles and 
Watercraft in 2001. This Commission was created to collect and analyze information to 
determine an equitable distribution of gas tax revenues used in the enforcement and 
enhancement of programs supporting off-road vehicle use in Maine. The results of this 
Commission informed the current gas tax percentages that are distributed today and support 
the ATV and snowmobile trail funds within DACF and the ATV Enforcement Grant Program, and 
snowmobile program general revenue in DIFW. For watercraft the tax is distributed to DMR for 
research and development and the DACF Boating Facilities Fund. 
The Department supports the focus of this resolve as there have been changes over the past 20 
years in the use of and technology of boats, ATV’s and snowmobiles, for example ATV
registrations numbers have doubled and more four stroke snowmobiles are on the trails since 
the 2001 study was done. 
I have been in contact with the Director of the Margaret Chase Smith Center for Public Policy, 
Dr. Jonathan Rubin, who co-authored the 2001 report. Dr. Rubin and I discussed several ideas 
that the Committee could consider meeting the spirit of this resolve. I will present some options 
in no particular order and indicate a possible fiscal impact for each one: 
Option: The Center would be willing to redo the 2001 study to reflect current use across all 
categories of recreational vehicles. To get fresh data they would want to survey user groups ina 
seasonal manner such as in the spring after snowmobile season and in the fall for watercraft and 
ATV's. So, a full report would not be available until mid-year 2024. Dr. Rubin estimated the cost 
of surveying all three user groups in a similar manner to the 2001 study to be approximately 
$200,000. 
Option: Explore the use ofa 2021 Federal Highway Administration Report that was directed by 
the US Senate to "determine the best available estimate of the total amount of non-highway 
recreational fuel tax received by the Secretary of Treasury" . A preliminary look at this study 
indicated data was used from all (50) states for 2016-2018 and was applied to a statistical model 
to estimate fuel use by the various categories of vehicles. This report provides data on 
snowmobiles and ATV's but not watercraft. Dr. Rubin indicated that he would be available for 
work session to explain his knowledge on the background of the model that was used to create 
this report, and the timeline for updating the model that was used for the report. If the 
Committee wishes to consider this option, there would be costs to having an appropriate 
analysis done. 
Option: Use the 2001 report from the Margaret Chase Smith Center and apply 2022 registration 
numbers for watercraft, snowmobiles, and ATV's. Essentially keeping the same use patterns and 
engine technology from (20+) years ago. If the Committee wishes to consider this option, I 
recommend having Dr. Rubin's group do the analysis. Costs for this option are to be determined. 
These are just three options for this Committee to consider and the Department feels thata 
professional assessment of modeling methods and data inputs would be a first step of informing 
this Committee and the broader legislative body on this important economic issue. 
I would be glad to answer any easy questions at this time or complicated ones during the work 
session when Dr. Rubin is available.
