1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Support to L.D. 1119,  
An Act to Clarify the Criminal Statutes with Regard to Assaults on 
Emergency Medical Services Persons 
April 24, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
distinguished Committee on Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey. I am the 
Chief of the Cumberland Police Department, and President of the Maine Chiefs 
of Police Association. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine Chiefs 
of Police Association in support to LD 1119.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
Under current law, a person is guilty of a Class C crime if that person 
intentionally, knowingly or recklessly causes bodily injury to an emergency 
medical care provider, as that term is defined in the law, while the provider 
is providing emergency care.  This bill amends the law by specifying that it 
is a Class C crime if the bodily injury is to: 
1.  A person licensed pursuant to the Maine Emergency Medical 
Services Act of 1982, regardless of the location where the 
emergency medical care is provided; or 
2.  A person employed or contracted by a hospital and the injury 
occurs in the hospital's designated emergency room. 
The bill also amends the law governing elevating the class of a crime to 
include assaults on emergency medical services providers. 
The bill also makes a technical change to the definition of "emergency 
medical care provider" in the law governing emergency blood-borne 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 pathogen testing. Currently, that term is defined by providing a cross-
reference to a term the bill repeals.  
The Maine Chiefs support LD 1119 because we want our fellow public service 
employees to feel safe in their jobs. Emergency Medical Services providers respond 
to calls every day with us and are assaulted while simply trying to provide care to 
our community.  This isn’t fair and they do not deserve to be treated this way. LD 
1119 would provide necessary protections for them so they can continue to serve 
our community without fear of being harmed with no recourse.  
We want to thank the bill sponsor for bringing forward this important piece of 
legislation. And we would ask you to support LD 1119 and vote ought to pass 
on this bill. On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to 
thank the committee members for your work on this Committee.  
