April 24, 2023 
 1 Testimony of Emily Mott Resident of Portland, Maine  Testimony in Opposition of L.D. 1119  Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and esteemed members of the Committee On Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Emily Mott, and I am a resident of Portland. I am a third-year student at the University of Maine School of Law, I have worked as a student attorney at the Cumberland Legal Aid Clinic, and I am here today in my personal capacity to offer testimony in opposition of L.D. 1119.   As someone who has worked in various jobs and externships where safety was a priority, I understand the importance of protecting our healthcare workers. I value their safety and do not believe that violence should be an expected part of their job. I believe that no one should ever be subjected to violence. However, L.D. 1119 is not the answer.  It is crucial to consider the perspectives of those who will be affected by this legislation. I encourage you to read the attached articles published in the Sun Journal in August of 2022, as they were written by mental health advocates and patients who have been treated in emergency rooms.   As a student attorney with the Cumberland Legal Aid Clinic, I represented a wonderful person who had experienced trauma throughout their life and sought emergency mental health treatment regularly. In order to receive the mental health treatment my client sought, my client would either go to, or be brought to, the emergency room. During that time, they would be forcibly restrained, and their trauma-response would kick-in, causing them to flail around.   My client’s attempts to seek treatment led to re-traumatization and several Class D assault charges. The 60+ days of incarceration my client experienced without adequate mental health treatment only served to make things worse. It did not give my client coping strategies or access to more/better resources, that is not what the criminal justice system does. It was the people outside of the criminal justice system who supported my client by finding housing and treatment. Now, my client will have to disclose their criminal conviction and cope with the collateral consequences on top of everything else for the rest of their life.   Increasing the criminal penalties in these scenarios to a Class C felony, as proposed in this bill, will have unintended consequences. Any criminal conviction carries consequences that have a lasting impact on individuals, but felony convictions have greater collateral consequences. Collateral consequences hinder employment opportunities and access to housing programs and mental health treatment programs. Research shows that harsh penalties do not prevent crime or increase public safety. In fact, these penalties disproportionally impact vulnerable populations, such as individuals with mental health issues or those experiencing homelessness, without effectively addressing the underlying causes of the behavior. This bill will result in further harm and criminalization of already marginalized individuals, exacerbating existing social and economic disparities.  
April 24, 2023 
 2  In conclusion, I strongly urge you to vote “ought not to pass.”   Thank you for your time and consideration. I am happy to be available for any questions you may have.   Sincerely,  Emily Mott emily.mott@maine.edu   
By Emily BaderAugust 21, 2022Focus should be on fixing system, not punishingpatients for hospital violence, mental health advocatessay
sunjournal.com/2022/08/21/focus-should-be-on-fixing-system-not-punishing-patients-for-hospital-violence-mental-health-advocates-say/
Jenny McCarthy of Raymond, a certified intentional peer support specialist, sits earlier this month in thelavender garden she planted. She plans to have a large garden of lavender where people can relax.Andree Kehn/Sun Journal fileTo prevent violence in hospitals, the state should focus on fixing the mental health system’sfailures, not on punishing individuals, according to those who have experienced mentalhealth challenges and sought treatment at hospital emergency departments.The individuals who spoke to the Sun Journal, most of whom are certified intentional peersupport specialists, said they are deeply concerned about the legislative task force studyingthe issue of violence against health workers and the process by which criminal cases may bebrought against those perpetrators.Nearly a dozen doctors, nurses and administrators from area hospitals interviewed by theSun Journal this year said they are frequently physically or verbally assaulted by patients orthe people who accompany them. They said it is of particular concern for workers inemergency departments, intensive care units and psychiatric units.
When patients became violent with them, the hospital workers said, often, but certainly notalways, the patients are there for a psychiatric or behavioral reason, including drug oralcohol intoxication.They said when an assault turns physical, staff are generally hesitant to call law enforcementor pursue charges “because of the milieu in which they work,” one hospital president said.When they do pursue charges, the providers said oftentimes law enforcement will decline toelevate the case to the district attorney, or the district attorney will refuse to prosecute. Thereasons why are unclear and leaves them with little recourse, they said.This “frustration” with the criminal justice system is why the task force is examining possiblecriminal remedies to violence in health care settings, task force Co-chairman Sen. NedClaxton, D-Auburn, said this month.“The criminal focus (is) really more a concern about the process that exists now and how it’sinstituted and less about adding criminal categories or charges,” he said. The task force heldits first meeting this month.But the possibility of an enhanced criminal response to those who commit violence againsthealth care workers concerns mental health advocates.“It just seems like a very counterproductive approach to be taking for such a complicatedissue,” Carly Mahaffey, 40, of Lewiston said.RelatedPeople with mental health challenges say they’re being left out of theconversation about hospital violenceMahaffey and the others interviewed by the Sun Journal instead described the ways in whichMaine’s mental health system can be improved to reduce violence in health care settings,particularly in emergency departments.They said they are being left out of the conversation about hospital violence and worry thatwithout their input, the solutions being considered at the state level could make the situationworse.They called for nonclinical alternatives to emergency departments for people in crisis, formore training on how to care for people experiencing a psychiatric emergency, and for peersupport specialists to be embedded in every emergency department in the state.MORE TRAINING, PEER SUPPORT NEEDEDThe individuals interviewed described the loss of a sense of control they felt when theyentered an emergency department for help during a mental health crisis. It’s an experience“that strips you of your dignity and your rights,” said Jenny McCarthy, 46, of Raymond.
“There’s so much expectation on the patients to remain calm and civil and do as they’re toldand not speak up and not saying anything,” she said. “But the environment in itself is reallytraumatizing to be in.”“We expect (health care providers dealing with) mental health emergency crisis situations tobe trained in trauma-informed practices,” but they’re not, said Julie Potter, 44, of Gray.
Julie Potter sits with her two cats in her home in Gray this month. She finds the cats calming. Potter is acertified intentional peer support specialist. Andree Kehn/Sun JournalTrauma-informed care describes a clinical and organizational framework for care developedby the federal Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.According to the administration: “A program, organization or system that is trauma-informedrealizes the widespread impact of trauma and understands potential paths for recovery;recognizes the signs and symptoms of trauma in clients, families, staff and others involvedwith the system; and responds by fully integrated knowledge about trauma into policies,procedures and practices, and seeks to actively resist re-traumatization.”One key element to a trauma-informed approach is peer support.“It’s hard to understand something that you don’t have an experience about, which is whypeer support is so important,” Potter said.Peer support can describe any connection between people with shared experiences. Whenreferring to peer support or peer support specialists, the people interviewed for this story arereferring to a Maine-specific program where individuals with lived experience with mental
health challenges can receive training and certification from the Office of Behavioral Healthto work in hospital emergency departments.Peer support specialists “utilize training and lived experience to help individuals in crisis byproviding support to de-escalate acute situations, assist individuals in self advocacy andprovide a connection to recovery supports in the community,” according to the Office ofBehavioral Health website.Peer support “takes us seriously,” and is able to de-escalate a situation, or prevent anescalation from happening in the first place, by helping guide a person through theiremergency department visit, said Joe Bennett, 56, of Hiram.A Penobscot County woman in her 50s, who asked to remain anonymous for privacyreasons, said when she was involuntarily admitted to a psychiatric unit on multiple occasionsbeginning in her 30s, providers “never asked me about any trauma, they never addressedmy trauma.” At the time, she was in an abusive relationship, she said.Earlier this year – two decades since her first hospitalization – she was finally diagnosed withpost-traumatic stress disorder.In the absence of a diagnosis and proper treatment, she said peer support is what gave herthe tools to heal from that trauma.“I learned how to be independent. I learned how to think for myself,” she said.Seven hospitals in Maine contract with the Office of Behavioral Health to provide peersupport services: AR Gould Hospital in Presque Isle, Central Maine Medical Center inLewiston, Mid Coast Hospital in Brunswick, Northern Light Eastern Maine Medical Center inBangor, Northern Light Mercy Hospital in Portland, St. Mary’s Regional Medical Center inLewiston and York Hospital.McCarthy said she’s frustrated by hospitals which “speak out about the violence,” but don’toffer peer support specialists in their emergency departments.RelatedHospital workers are expected to ‘tolerate a level of abuse’ unacceptableanywhere elseShe and Bennett said Maine Medical Center in Portland, which has one of the largestemergency departments in the state, “refuses” to contract with the Office of BehavioralHealth for peer support.“Behavioral health patients have unique needs that require a robust continuum of care inorder to be treated effectively,” a spokesperson for MMC said in a statement to the SunJournal. “Peer support services should be part of that continuum of care and madeaccessible in a setting that works for both patients and other health providers.
“MMC utilized certified intentional peer support specialists in its emergency department forseveral years,” according to the statement. “Following an evaluation at the end of thecontract period, MMC determined it should pause the deployment of these resources in itsemergency department, which is the state’s only Level I trauma center. Maine BehavioralHealthcare currently provides MMC’s emergency department with one-call peer support aspart of its substance-use recovery coach program.”The statement also said MMC staff receive regular training for how to provide care forbehavioral health patients in the emergency department and “encourages continuedinvestment in the continuum of behavioral health services across Maine and New England.”ALTERNATIVES TO EMERGENCY DEPARTMENTSThe peer support specialists all said Maine needs alternatives to emergency departments forpeople experiencing a mental health crisis.“Too many people (are) using the ED when they’re not supposed to,” Mahaffey said. “It’sbecause they have no one else to talk to or they have nowhere else to go.”Having more community-based and peer-led alternatives to an emergency department willalso help reduce the crunch on hospitals, she said.M.T. said her first experience being hospitalized for a mental health emergency was in 2005,a few months after she said she was sexually assaulted by a co-worker.The 41-year-old, who asked only to be identified by her initials for privacy reasons, saidemergency department providers and staff are not “adequately trained to deal with patientsexperiencing psychiatric issues and frequently add fuel to the fire.”While not a peer support specialist, M.T. said she has about a decade of experience as anemergency medical technician.“Patients deserve to be heard (and) properly diagnosed and treated by adequately skilledproviders,” she said. “All providers who interact with behavioral health patients,” whetherthey be medical, law enforcement or fire and rescue professionals, need to be better trained.Last year, she said she attempted to kill herself. While waiting for a bed at an inpatientpsychiatric unit to become available, she said she sat in the emergency department atStephens Memorial Hospital in Norway for four days.The only placement available to her was at Northern Maine Medical Center in Fort Kent, anAroostook County town at the tip of northern Maine and a 5 1/2 hour drive from her home inSouth Paris.Having a patient sit in an emergency department for days at a time waiting for a bed to openup is a “recipe for disaster,” said Mark Joyce, the managing attorney for Disability RightsMaine’s mental health advocacy program.
Maine needs more peer-led crisis respite centers, Joyce and others said. These arenonclinical settings where anyone can go and speak to a peer support specialist, learn abouttreatment resources or “just take a break,” in Mahaffey’s words.“I think it would lessen that number of people ending up in the ED and having to go throughthose traumatic experiences,” Mahaffey said.Earlier this year, Portland-based Spurwink, a behavioral health and education agency, inpartnership with Maine’s Department of Health and Human Services opened the LivingRoom Crisis Center at 62 Elm St. in Portland. It’s the first of its kind in the state, Gov. JanetMills said when it opened in March.“If it’s not the right environment for them, they can leave,” said McCarthy, who wants to seemore crisis centers like the Living Room throughout the state.“That violence is taken away because they can leave,” she said.‘THAT’S A TREATMENT FAILURE’The legislative task force is only looking to charge violent individuals who have the legallydefined mental capacity to be held responsible for their actions under Maine laws, Claxton,the co-chair, said this month.Related‘A huge chasm for folks’: Task force studying hospital violence lays outsystem’s complexitiesThat’s not much reassurance for Joyce, who has worked 21 years at Disability Rights Maine,the state’s designated advocacy organization for people with disabilities, and also serves asthe class counsel for the Augusta Mental Health Institute consent decree.If the task force is only focused on individuals not being hospitalized due to their psychiatricdisability, “that’s one thing,” he said.But he wondered if it will “bleed over” to individuals who are hospitalized for their psychiatricdisability and who become violent as a result of their disability.“I’ve talked to a number of individuals throughout my career who have been blue papered(involuntarily admitted) being charged with crimes,” Joyce said.Under Maine law, to involuntarily admit a patient, meaning they cannot leave on their freewill, a medical practitioner must certify that they pose “a likelihood of serious harm” either tothemselves or others, as demonstrated by recent suicidal, homicidal or violent behavior, orbehavior that demonstrates an inability to avoid risk or injury.“If you bring a person to the ER for any of these three particular reasons, involuntarily, andthey’re stuck there for two or three days, I mean, that’s a recipe for disaster,” Joyce said.
If a patient is in an emergency department for an extended period of time after a doctor hascertified that the patient is at risk of harm to themselves or others — and they cannot leavethe emergency department for that exact reason — “and then they act on it because of thefact that they aren’t in the correct treatment environment, that’s a treatment failure. That’s atreatment failure for that person,” he said.“The whole reason behind the law is that we’re saying at the beginning (that) we don’t wantto charge you with a crime (for harming yourself or others), we want you to get treatment . . .and then if the end point is they get charged with a crime, that just turns the whole . . . system on its head,” Joyce said.« PreviousNonprofits to host back to school event at Lewiston parkNext »In their own words: Nine Mainers talk about their medical billing nightmares© 2023
By Emily BaderAugust 14, 2022People with mental health challenges say they’re beingleft out of the conversation about hospital violence
sunjournal.com/2022/08/14/people-with-mental-health-challenges-say-theyre-being-left-out-of-the-conversation-about-hospital-violence/
Carly Mahaffey is a peer support specialist who works as a mental health advocate for Disability RightsMaine. Andree Kehn/Sun JournalPatients treated in emergency departments for mental health crises say they’re being left outof conversations about violence in health care settings and worry that, without their input, thesolutions being considered at the state level could make the situation worse.A group of certified intentional peer support specialists told the Sun Journal that theirexperiences receiving care for a mental health crisis in hospital emergency departments hasbeen uneventful at best and extremely traumatic at worst. The individuals, who have livedexperiences with mental health challenges, receive training from the Maine Department ofHealth and Human Services to serve as patient advocates in various clinical settings,including in some hospital emergency departments.“There (are) no other medical reasons out there, that when you enter an emergency room,that strips you of your dignity and your rights than for mental health,” Jenny McCarthy, 46, ofRaymond said.RelatedHospital workers say they experience assault, threats of violence nearly
every dayHospital officials and providers told the Sun Journal that while the issue of violence in healthcare settings, particularly in emergency departments, predates COVID-19, the pandemic andits “ripple effects” have contributed to the increasing frequency and severity of verbal andphysical assaults from patients or visitors against health care workers.The peer support specialists who spoke to the Sun Journal have all gone to an emergencydepartment at a Maine hospital at least once — voluntarily and involuntarily — for help with amental health crisis. Most have been to an emergency department multiple times for mentalhealth care.They all described the same situation when entering an emergency department for abehavioral reason and are “blue papered” — Maine’s legal term for an involuntary admissionfor a psychiatric reason.“The first thing they do is they take things away from you,” Carly Mahaffey, 40, of Lewistonsaid.“They take away your clothes, they make you change into their paper scrubs. They takeaway your shoes, you know, no shoelaces. They take away your phone,” she said.Sometimes, if you have someone with you, like a friend or a family member, the ED staff willnot allow them to come with the patient.“It’s like right off, you go there for help and they send you the message that, ‘Oh, you’re bad.You’re sick. You can’t even handle, you can’t even handle your clothes or your phone. Sogive them to us,’” Mahaffey said.
Jenny McCarthy, a certified intentional peer support specialist, sits Wednesday in the lavender garden sheplanted in Raymond. She plans to have a large garden of lavender where people can relax. AndreeKehn/Sun JournalA patient who is blue papered is not allowed to leave the hospital and that in itself sets up a“power dynamic” and a “dangerous scenario,” McCarthy said.“And I’m in no way saying that violence is ever OK. I’m not. But from the view of a patient, itis extremely scary to be stuck in a position where, in a place where there is this powerdynamic . . . You’re powerless (and) there’s nothing you can say or do to change thatdynamic.”RelatedHospital workers are expected to ‘tolerate a level of abuse’ unacceptableanywhere elseHospital workers told the Sun Journal there is a “learned helplessness” among health careproviders and  they do not have the same level of protections that workers in other publicplaces have because of their job. They also said that when an assault turns physical, staffare often hesitant to call law enforcement or pursue charges against a patient “because ofthe milieu in which they work,” one hospital president said.Julie Potter, 44, of Gray said, “Violence in any workplace is not something that we shouldhave to tolerate. But I also believe that, you know, the system that is in place for crisisservices” in Maine is not working. Potter said that with few, if any alternatives to emergencydepartments for individuals experiencing a mental health crisis, an ED environment canactually “escalate” situations.
Potter and others said they do not necessarily see it as the fault of the providers and staff,who they acknowledge are working in a high-stress environment and may lack the propertraining or tools to handle psychiatric emergencies.‘IT WAS HUMILIATING’“(The) nurses at the ER, they’re overworked. They’re overwhelmed,” said Joe Bennett, 56, ofHiram. “They’re doing stuff that they’re not trained to do.”Bennett, who works with Mahaffey on the Intentional Peer Support Advisory Committee, agroup of peer support specialists who advise and support DHHS on intentional peer supportmatters in the state, said he was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis, a chronic diseaseaffecting the central nervous system, in late 2016 following a “horrific” process.
Joe Bennett stands Tuesday on his front porch in Hiram. Bennett has multiple sclerosis and did not feelthat he has always received appropriate care during hospital visits. Bennett is a certified intentional peersupport specialist. Andree Kehn/Sun JournalHe said his many visits to emergency departments, mostly for MS-related medical concerns,have taught him to “walk on eggshells” when speaking with providers. It wasn’t until hebecame a peer support specialist that Bennett said he learned how to self-advocate in anED.The biggest learning moment came about a year before his MS diagnosis, when he went tothe York Hospital Emergency Department with symptoms of a heart attack. Bennett said thiswas one of a string of such visits where he presented with symptoms of a heart attack,stroke or anxiety attack, which he later learned were presentations of his MS.
But this was before his providers had figured that out and Bennett said that he was onceagain feeling frustrated and disheartened because although he was in a serious amount ofpain, he was medically cleared to go home. When he told the on-call doctor this, using someperhaps ill-conceived humor to play off how uncomfortable he was, it was like a flip switched,he said.The doctor decided to blue paper him, administered the sedative Ativan, and the next thingBennett said he remembers is waking up in a locked behavioral health unit in Biddeford. Hewas there for 40 hours before his primary care physician was able to get him out.“My experience in that locked ward was humiliating,” Bennett said. “It was pretty scary. Youcan’t call nobody. And it’s like, they rip all your rights away from you. … It was humiliating.”York Hospital spokesperson Jean Kolak said that while privacy laws prohibit the hospitalfrom discussing a specific patient’s care, “we confirm that the mental health and safety of ourpatients is at all times a priority.”‘I FELT TRAPPED’Potter, who now works at a mental health agency in Auburn, said an experience at theEmergency Department at Central Maine Medical Center in Lewiston forced her to drop outof her master’s degree program for social work.Potter said she has a “pretty extensive trauma history” and first interacted with the mentalhealth care system when she was 14. Officially, she said she has a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder, which “creates a way of being in the world that sometimes looksvery different to others, and it’s hard to understand.”
Julie Potter sits Wednesday with her two cats in her home in Gray. She finds the cats calming. Potter is acertified intentional peer support specialist. Andree Kehn/Sun JournalIn 2017, she was dealing with a flurry of circumstances that she said brought flashbacks,nightmares and insomnia. Then, she began to experience dissociative episodes, ordissociative amnesia, or what she called “losing time.”“Although I was functional throughout my day, I wasn’t emotionally conscious,” Potter said.“So I was going through getting things done and I, like, the last time I would remember, itwas 9 o’clock in the morning and then I look at the clock and it’s 3 o’clock and I’m sitting inmy car with a haircut and I have no idea what happened.”After this happened a few times, Potter said she was “very anxious and scared so I decidedto go to the ER.”But what she experienced there was the opposite of helpful. Potter said she was treated witha lack of transparency and with coercion.“Suddenly, I felt trapped,” she said.Potter said the nurses told her they wanted to make her more comfortable by bringing her toanother part of the hospital. As they were walking over, she realized that she was being ledto a room with no windows, padded walls, cameras and a single bed with no sheets.She froze. Then she remembered that the nurses asked her to turn over her belongings. Butthe one thing she refused to hand over were her keys.
“I said I felt I needed a sense of empowerment because I felt like my world was out ofcontrol, so I chose not to give them my keys,” Potter said.When she refused, Potter said CMMC called Lewiston police. When she froze and turnedaround to leave, two “very large” uniformed cops were behind her. One of the officers put hishands on both of her shoulders and shoved her into the room. That’s the last thing sheremembered before waking up on a hospital bed with a nurse tending to her, with signs ofbruising and stinging, a red mark on her neck that was sore to the touch. One officer washolding the other back, who was shouting that she had assaulted him.“I had no idea what was going on. I was terrified,” Potter said.Later, the nurse told her that the police officers had stunned her twice with a Taser andwrestled her to the ground, which explained the bruises and the burn. She only recentlylearned that her mother came to the hospital and they spoke, none of which she said shecan recall.“While Central Maine Healthcare is not able to comment on a specific patient, we can saythat the safety of patients and our team members is our top priority,” CMH spokesperson JimCyr said in response for a request for comment.“Regarding involuntary commitment, Central Maine Healthcare acts in accordance withMaine state law,” Cyr said.After that experience, Potter was admitted to an inpatient psychiatric unit and although “all Icould think of is this cop who kept saying ‘assault of a police officer,’” the providers there toldher it would be fine, and she decided to focus on her recovery.One day, after she left the inpatient unit and returned home, she was pulled over by a policeofficer who informed her there was a warrant out for her arrest for failure to appear in courton a summons. She found out that the police came to her apartment to serve the summons,but she wasn’t there; she was in the inpatient unit. Potter spent two days in jail.She was charged with assault on a police officer, a crime that is punishable by up to fiveyears in prison and a $5,000 fine.Court records reviewed by the Sun Journal confirm these details.She was in the second year of her master’s degree program and had to drop out while thecharges were pending.The court sent her for a psychiatric screening, which confirmed her PTSD and dissociativedisorder diagnoses. Still, Potter said, she felt the court thought her diagnoses were“convenient.”After what she said was a two-year court battle and a year of “good behavior,” during whichshe was monitored by a psychiatrist, the charges were dropped.
‘IT’S A BIG MISTAKE’“As soon as you get that psychiatric label, that diagnosis on your record, you’re treateddifferently,” Mahaffey said.Though it’s been 20-something years since she said she was blue papered while seekingcare at Eastern Maine Medical Center in Bangor, Mahaffey has been working off-and-on as apeer support specialist at Health Affiliates Maine and Mid Coast Hospital in Brunswick andnow works as a community mental health advocate at Disability Rights Maine. Although herprofessional experiences inform her perspectives, Mahaffey said her comments do notrepresent that of her employer.The legislative task force created to study the process in which criminal cases can bebrought against perpetrators of violence against health care workers “seems like a verycounterproductive approach to be taking for such a complicated issue,” Mahaffey said.“It’s like, why aren’t we looking at the things that are causing this violence to happen?” sheasked.Stemming from a bill introduced by Rep. Walter Riseman, I-Harrison, last year, the 12-member task force was formed earlier this summer. In June, the group’s co-chairman, Sen.Ned Claxton, D-Auburn, said he would like the task force to answer three main questions:How to protect staff from violent incidents, how to take into consideration a patient’scircumstances when deciding whether to pursue charges and how to make the criminalprocess more transparent, especially for the victims.The task force is expected to submit its report and recommendations to the Legislature’sJoint Standing Committee on Justice and Public Safety in November.Related‘A huge chasm for folks’: Task force studying hospital violence lays outsystem’s complexitiesAt its first meeting earlier this month, the task force laid out the foundation for its study. Thediscussion among the group of lawmakers, hospital officials, law enforcement officers anddeputy district attorneys made at least one thing clear: There are gaping holes in the matrixof Maine’s health care, legal and judicial systems when it comes to balancing patient care,provider safety and criminal justice.Bennett fears the task force, which has representatives from the Legislature, the majorhealth care networks, law enforcement officials and members of the judiciary system — butno patient advocates — “is a big mistake.”“We need a seat at that task force and a voice,” he said. “That’s the only way. The waythey’re trying to set it up (is) as a Band-Aid that’s going to create more chaos and trauma —trauma for our workers and the patients.”McCarthy said in no way does she think that the issue of violence in health care settings,particularly in emergency departments, is inflated.
“But I think we’re missing the point of why it’s happening,” she said.« PreviousJ&J to end sales of baby powder with talc globally next yearNext »Lyme disease rebounding in Maine this year© 2023
