p/V 
Maine Hospital Association 
MAlNE'S LEADING 
VOICE FOR HEALTHCARE 
COMMENTS OF THE MAINE HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION 
In Support Of 
LD 1119 - An Act to Clarify the Criminal Statutes with Regard to Assaults on Emergency 
Medical Services Persons 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representatives Salisbury and members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Jeffrey Austin and I am presenting this testimony in support of LD 
1119 on behalf of the Maine Hospital Association. 
The Maine Hospital Association (MHA) represents all 36 community-govemed hospitals 
including 33 non-proﬁt general acute care hospitals, 2 private psychiatric hospitals, and 1 acute 
rehabilitation hospital. 
I want to thank Senator Bemiet and all the co-sponsors for brining this bill forward. I also want to 
thank all of the members of the task force who spent their valuable time on this issue. 
There is no single solution to the persistent problem of violence against hospital workers. We wish 
there were. However, this is a major problem and one that needs public policy attention. 
This bill clariﬁes a point of confusion that was discussed among law enforcement and prosecutors 
during the task force. 
Current law covers “emergency medical care providers ” who are deﬁned in law as “hospital 
personnel assisting in an emergency. ” See the stricken language in lines 10-13 in section 1. 
The point of confusion is whether hospital employees such as security guards, janitors, 
administrative staff or others who are physically in the emergency room are “assisting ” in an 
emergency. Some law enforcement and prosecutors thought yes, others thought not. 
This legislation clariﬁes the issue by removing the hospital setting from current law entirely 
(section l of the bill) and creating a new provision speciﬁcally for hospital personnel in section 2 
of the bill. 
Despite the fact that there are more assaults against healthcare workers than any other workers, 
there are very few cases brought today under this statute and there is no credible argument that 
there will be too many more. 
However, clarity on this point is needed. Thank you for your consideration of this legislation.
