 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1119 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1119, An Act to Clarify the Criminal Statutes with Regard  to Assaults on Emergency 
Medical Services Persons  
 
DA: April 24, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1119.    
 
 CLAC acknowledges the vulnerable position in which medical providers and hospital 
personnel may find themselves when called upon to care for a n unpredi ctable or violent patient, or 
when confronted by a distraught  family member.   However, t he proposed amendments do not 
increase the likelihood that as saultive conduct in a hospital or emergency care setting will be 
prosecuted with any greater frequency .   The conduct at issue is  already subject to pr osecution under  
existing laws.    The December 2022 “Report of the Task Force to Study the Process fo r 
Bringing Criminal Cases in Situation s of Violence Against Health Care Worker s” identified a 
number of other factors that likely affect whether such incidents lead to criminal charges and 
conv iction.    
 
 As a gener al matter, depending on the level of injury to the victim and other circumstances 
of the crime, assaultive conduct can be prosecuted as assault under section 207 (Class D) or 
aggravated assault under section 208 (Class A or B), without regard to status of the victim or 
location of the conduct.  Even without new specialty crimes, the c ircumstances of an assault —for 
example, the fact that a vi ctim is particularly vulnerable or trying to assist the off ender, or that other 
hospital  personnel or procedures are affected —are all factors tha t can be taken into consideration at 
the time of se ntencing .  
 
 Current section 752 -C, Assault on an emergency medical care provider (C lass C),  applies 
regardless of location —the attendant circumstances that must be proven have to do with whether 
the victim is providing emergency medical care (which could be anywhere), and whether th e victim 
is an emergency medical care provider (who could be hospital personnel or licensed EMS 
providers).  Thus a ssaults described as occurring in a hospital’s “designated emergency room” 
(proposed section 752 -F) are already subject to prosecution pursua nt to the current version of 
section 752 -C.  
 
 If the policy goal is to increase the classification of crime if the victim is a person 
“employed or contracted by hospital” but not necessarily providing medical care, existing section 
752-C could be expanded by including more roles  within the defined set of potential victims 
 
 without creating a new specialty statute limited to a specific treatment area of  a hospital .   Thus 
section 752 -C might be expanded so that it applies to an assault against any licensed emergency 
medi cal personnel while providing emer gency medical care  (this would apply in any locatio n), as 
well as  to anyone employed by the hospital who is assaulted while performing their official duties at 
the hosp ital (hospital -based, but not limited  to license d personnel) .   
 
   The very specific location identified in proposed section 752 -F would limit whether assault 
(resulting in bod ily injury) on hospital employees or personnel could be prosecuted as a Class C 
crime, even though emergency medical assistance may be provided to patients throughout the 
hospital setting , and even though medical providers may be assaulted while providing any type of 
medical care (i.e., not just emergency care) on any unit .  This increasing specialization of criminal 
statutes rests upon policy decisions that gives certain persons or locations special or different 
treatment than others   
 
  
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
