  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F. McKe e 
 
Secreta ry 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
 April 23, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
RE: LD 1119  --  An Act to Clarify  the Criminal  Statutes  with Regards to 
Assaul ts on Emergency  Medical Persons  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Represe ntative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice  and Pu blic Safety Committe e: 
 
MACDL oppose s LD 1119.  
 
This bill would  make a person a felon if they assaulted  any hospital personnel  while  
in an emergency room . This bill is part o f a never ending expansion to add more 
felony crimes on Maine’ s books. It is apparently  not enough  that a person who 
commits  assau lt can  go to jail for up to 364 days . It is apparently  more appropriate  to 
make these same people  convicted felon s and subject to prison  sentences of up to 5 
years.  
 
This very idea is anathema to our criminal justice  system and society  as a wh ole. We 
do not need to have  more people convicted of f elonies and wearing that  scarlet  
moniker for the rest  of their lives. We certainly do no t need it when there are already  
sever e penaltie s for people  who assault  others . And yet this bill wants to make sure 
that a person who assaults  a person in one particular  place – the emerg ency room  – is 
treated differently , and somehow  worthy of being  a felon. 
 
I think we can all agree that those wh o go to emergency  rooms are  not having  their 
best da y. Emergency  rooms are places where people  go because  they are having an 
emergency  medical or psychological  situation that requires  immediate care. These 
people  are in unmanageable  pain or suffering  psychological  trauma  and everyone  
understands  that when you are in this situation  you are never in your best state of 
mind, and your behavior  will sometime s present itself  in a way that you would  never 
imagine. Making a person ’s actions on that da y result in their being a convicted  felon 
forever  is a terrible idea . Do not allow this to happen by passing  this bill. 
 
If the goal of this bill i s to, as is often  poorly said, to g ive “prosecutors more tools ,” 
then be assured that prosecutors  have more than enough  tools right now to deal w ith 
people  who are acting  inappropriately  in emergency  room. No prosecutor  can say that 
they “need this tool ” to make sure ER personnel will be safer , and no pr osecutor who 
can say that people  are truly going  to act any differently  because  (usually  
unbeknownst  to the  patient ) they wi ll be a con victed felon if they act out. It j ust is not 
so. 
 
Bear in mind that this bill expands  the number  of people  who are considered  victims  
for purposes  of felony crimes to ever y person  who works at or is connected  to the 
hospital . They do not have to be provid ing care; they just have to have  a hospital  
connection . Why  there should  be different  treatment  for assault  on a person in the 
ER, as opposed to a whole host of other potential victims  100 feet from the ER is not 
clear, probably  because it does n ot make any s ense.  
 
Do not pass this b ill. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this issue.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F. McKee  
Chair, Legi slative Committee  
