 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN SUPPORT – LD 1262 An Act to Amend the Law Governing the Credit Card and Debit Card Surcharge Prohibition and LD 
1324 An Act to Allow Credit and Debit Card Surcharges  
Dear Senator Bailey , Chair, Representative Perry , Chair, and Members of the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services , 
 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association.  
Originally from Augus ta, I now live in Sidney. I grew up working at my father’s convenience store , and coincidently  I now 
advocat e on many of the  same  issues  that affect ed my father’s  business  and other businesses alike. The Maine Grocers 
& Food Producers Association is a business trade association representing more than 200 businesses within Maine’s 
food community; main street businesses including independently owned and operated grocery stores and supermarkets, 
food and b everage producers and processors, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, and supportive service 
companies.  
 
We hear regularly from our members that costly and nonnegotiable swipe fees are a priority issue. When new members 
join the association, we ask  them what their top -four issue s of interest are and addressing swipe fees consistently ranks 
as a top issue. This legislation would simply allow a business , at their discretion , to implement a nominal surcharge for 
transactions made via credit or debit car ds. Both Senator Guerin and Representative Woodsome’s bills seek to achieve 
the same goal, permitting the surcharge, aligning Maine with the nearly 40 other states that currently permit this 
practice.  
 
Credit card swipe fees average around 2% but can be as much as 4% for some premium rewards cards and vary 
according to a merchant’s card volume and other factors. “Swipe fees for Visa and Mastercard credit cards average 
2.22% of the transaction. NRF (Natio nal Retail Foundation) noted that small retailers with a few dozen transactions a day 
pay a higher rate than national retailers with millions of transactions, and fees are higher for e -commerce transactions, 
which have escalated amid the shift to more onli ne shopping triggered by the pandemic.  NRF said Nilson Report data 
show that swipe fees charged to merchants by Visa and Mastercard credit cards hit a record high of $77.5 billion in 
2021, up 26% year over year and 180% over the previous decade. ”1  To put  this in context, a small independently owned 
retailer here in central Maine generated $2.3M in annual sales and the expense to offer electronic payment services cost 
nearly $50,000 in swipe fees.  
 
To understand the business of credit card processing, a recent vide o from the Wall Street Journal, “Why Using Your 
Credit Card Is Getting More Expensive” explains the current landscape well.2 While cash is preferred, it’s not feasible to 
think that customers are always going to pay  with  cash. The credit card fee system works between the bank and the card 
networks with various fees along  the processing pathway.   The largest fee is the ‘intercha nge fee’ which helps fund the 
credit card rewards programs.  This “swipe fee” is in turn processed  as a part of th e checkout transaction, paid for by the 
retailer to run the card , and is as a total of the full  purchase  price (including sales tax).  
 
 
1 https://www.supermarketnews.com/issues -trends/fmi -nga-nrf-speak -out-against -higher -swipe -fees-senate -testimony  
2 https://www.wsj.com/video/series/wsj -expla ins/why -using -your -credit -card -is-getting -more -expensive/07DC2C66 -80E4 -491A -A87F -6C653D089EDD   April 11, 2023  
   
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  04330    |    207-622-4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  
 High card fees inhibit a grocer’s ability to grow, invest in jobs and results in higher food prices for everyone. The food 
retail industry is hyper -competitive with under a 3% profit margin. Retailers negotiate the wholesale price for goods and 
various services i n order to keep prices low for their consumers and grow their business. Credit card swipe and network 
fees are non -negotiable, and retailers must pay the price centrally set by Visa and Mastercard  (Visa and Mastercard 
together control 85% of the market ). From the local, mom -and-pop small business to the largest national retail 
corporations, all merchants are beholden to the rules, fees, and standards set down by the card networks.  
 
The food industry is committed to serving all of our customers bu t in today’s competitive market merchants do not have 
the option to no longer accept cards, however, they still cannot negotiate any terms of acceptance or cost due to the 
size and market strength of these two companies.  Recently, the severity of this issu e was further compounded because , 
“On April 22, 2022, both Visa and Mastercard increased the fees retailers pay, and they also created new categories of 
fees. ” 
 
This is simply adding another tool into the retailers’ kit to do business (within the restricted environment of accepting 
electronic payment s). While we do not think this practice will be widespread, in the instances in which it would be used , 
MGFPA believes businesses should  have clear signage to ensure  there is  no confusion before the tra nsaction.  We ask the 
Committee to find a path forward towards a solution for Maine’s businesses seeking relief on swipe fees.  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.  
 
 
Christine Cummings   
Executive Director  
 
 
 
 

