 
 
   
 
LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.  
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333  
(207) 621-0087   Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)  
www.mainelse.org   
April 11, 2023 
Testimony of John Brautigam, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in opposition to 
LD 1262 and LD 1324. 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services: 
On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer a few words to explain our 
opposition to LD 1262 and LD 1324. Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a nonprofit 
legal services organization with the mission of providing free legal assistance to Maine’s 
older adults when their basic human needs are threatened. 
For 42 years Maine has prohibited surcharges on credit card consumers, and for 12 years 
Maine has prohibited surcharges on debit cards. Section 8-509(1) of Title 9-A.1 
LD 1262 and LD 1324 would roll back those protections. LD 1324 would entirely repeal this 
section, and LD 1262 would have a similar effect by exempting a broad category of retail 
sellers in Maine. This would occur at a time when the number of Mainers using cards rather 
than cash – including those using public benefit programs – is at an all-time high. 
As a practical matter these bills would only change the rule regarding surcharges on debit 
card transactions. That is because federal law also prohibits surcharges on most debit card 
transactions.  
Why did previous legislatures ban these surcharges? Current law was enacted to protect 
those who are on fixed incomes and those who have the least flexibility and fewest options 
when making purchases. This includes a large number of older Mainers. The use of 
surcharges would operate like an additional tax on this population, except instead of 
benefiting the state as a whole, the surcharge would benefit private parties. 
Debit cards and credit cards offer advantages and convenience. Retailers benefit from having 
 
1 Maine is not alone among states in banning these surcharges. See, e.g., Okla. Stat. tit. 14A, §2-
417 (1977) (“No seller in any sales transaction may impose a surcharge on a cardholder who elects to use 
a credit card or debit card in lieu of payment by cash, check or similar means.”).  
 
2 
 transactions processed efficiently, offering a known and convenient option for customers. 
There is also a tendency of purchasers to spend more when using a card. A vendor is free to 
weigh whether those advantages or disadvantages are favorable to that vendor. 
Of all the different players in this picture – local retailers, banks and financial institutions, 
the large card networks, and the individual consumers – it is the consumer who has the least 
ability to influence the terms of these transactions. That is why Congress and multiple 
previous legislatures in Maine have decided to establish these prohibitions.  
Passing either bill would result in some consumers getting hit with unexpected fees at the 
point-of-sale. LSE frequently hears from consumers who are frustrated by hidden fees 
because financial surprises are difficult to accommodate within their tight household 
budgets.  These bills could also hinder the Maine economy which has benefited from the 
protections afforded to consumers under current law and works best when consumers are 
able to purchase goods and services at reasonable cost and at desired times.  
Thank you for letting us share our thoughts on the importance of the protections in current 
law, and we ask that you vote ought not to pass on LD 1262 and LD 1324.  
