l\/lciine Credit Union Leoigue
A 2 Ledgeview Drive - 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Mailing Address: P.O. Box 1236 ~ 
Portland, ME 04104 
207-773-5671 - 
1-800-442-6715 
www.mainecul.org 
ln Opposition to LD 1262 & LD 1324 
An Act to Amend the Law Governing the Credit Card and Debit Card Surcharge 
Prohibition; An Act to Allow Credit and Debit Card Surcharges 
Committee on Health Coverage, insurance and Financial Services 
April 11,2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members ofthe Committee 
on Health Coverage, insurance and Financial Services, 
My name is Krista Simonis, and I am the Director of Governmental Affairs at the Maine Credit Union 
League. The Maine Credit Union League is the trade association for Maine's 50 credit unions and over 
725,000 members statewide. We respectfully submit the following testimony in opposition to both LD 
1262 and LD 1324. 
Maine credit unions have roots in the Thrift movement that embodies a do-it~yourself mentality, self- 
reliance, and frugality. Our credit unions teach financial literacy to high schoolers and educate their 
members on a variety of issues including personal budgeting and credit scores. Maine credit unions 
put Mainers first but LD 1262 would prioritize the business community over Mainers. 
One of the fundamental needs from today's financial services marketplace is the availability of debit 
and credit card—based programs that allow consumers access to their funds on deposit and lines of 
credit. Card-based transactions provide an easy and convenient payment option, enhanced loss 
protection, and a way for consumers to build credit. 
When a credit union member makes a purchase with a debit or credit card, the merchant is paid 
almost immediately. The credit union that issued the card guarantees payment to the merchant, is 
responsible for collecting from the borrower, and primarily assumes the risk on losses due to fraud. 
Many opponents of interchange costs claim that prices are too high. However, the reality is that 
interchange fees are not keeping pace with the rise in fraud and security costs in the network. Credit 
card transactions log money — on average, credit union credit card costs are $0.23 higherper 
transaction than the revenue that is produced from interchange ‘ . For debit cards, interchange is 
governed by the 2010 Durbin Amendment and barely covers program costs. 
These are not ”get rich” schemes for credit card processers. They are the necessary costs of providing 
a safe and secure payment system, where credit unions are essentially providing insurance for 
merchants by assuring payment for goods, regardless of fraud or bounced checks. 
Currently the law permits merchants to offer a discount for customers who wish to pay with cash or 
check, but it prohibits a surcharge for card usage. The difference may seem trivial in concept but in 
practice it may mean that a person can no longer afford the necessities that they need. 
‘ (CUNA Interchange Survey Results, January 2023)
Maine Credit Union League 
For example, say you have $25 in your account and need to buy diapers. The price tag reads 
$23.69. Under the current law, that means that the final price will be $23.69 plus tax. Witha 
surcharge, the total would come to $25.61, a small increase, but enough to cause your card to 
be declined and you to return home without the diapers.2 
Consumers deserve to be able to shop with conﬁdence knowing that the price on their item is what 
they will have to pay. Maine's credit unions believe that small businesses are the backbone of the 
economy and provide an invaluable service to the people of Maine. Ultimately, allowing card 
surcharges would harm the consumer and not benefit businesses. Nationally, among consumers who 
were charged an extra fee by merchants, 46% chose to shop at a competitor rather than pay the fee or 
pay in cash. We understand that this legislation is intended to help small businesses. But when large 
retailers like Amazon, Walmart, or Target do not charge surcharge fees, business will flow away from 
local shops, harming our communities and contributing to the decline of Main Street. 
Card spending is increasing every year and has resulted in an increased need for network security and 
fraud services. Credit unions, which often have operating budgets similar to the small businesses they 
support, are paying for these services. 
Allowing businesses to charge consumers extra based on payment method is inequitable and further 
harms those who must rely on credit to make ends meet. Credit unions have a mission to serve the 
underserved and a long history of advocating against legislation that would hurt consumers. We 
cannot support shifting the costs of a voluntary program, from which merchants benefit significantly, to 
consumers across the State. 
The League thanks the committee for hearing our viewpoints and we would urge the committee to 
vote ought not to pass on LD 1262. 
2 Assumed 5.5% tax rate and 2.5% surcharge fee
