 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
April 11, 2023  
 
In Support of LD 1324,  “An Act to Allow Credit and Debit Card Surcharges” 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Health Care, Insurance, and 
Financial Services Committee: My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf of HospitalityMaine 
representing more than 1,200 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across the state. 
HospitalityMaine is testifying neither for nor against LD 1324, “An Act to Allow Credit and Debit Card 
Surcharges.” 
 
We appreciate Senator Guerin for bringing this legislation forward. LD 1324. We regularly hear from our 
members that swipe fees are costly and unfairly nonnegotiable. This legislation would allow a business—at 
their discretion—to implement a nominal surcharge for transactions made via credit and debit cards, putting 
Maine in line with nearly 40 other states that allow this practice.   
 
In the restaurant and lodging industry, the single highest line-item expense, not including food costs or 
labor can be credit card processing fees. Though it may be hard to believe, sometimes these costs exceed 
those of energy or property taxes or in lodging, booking costs associated with Online Travel Agents, so any 
attempt to keep these costs down and give the consumer the choice of reducing their outlay by paying 
with cash should be encouraged. As you have heard by now, 40 other states allow for the surcharging of 
credit and debit cards and Maine should join the ranks of these states.  
 
Currently we are not allowed to advertise a single price and add a surcharge for a credit or debit card 
transaction. Businesses could do this based on their own business model, some would choose to do so, 
and others would not. ln the hospitality industry, it is the big and small transactions that fall into this 
category. For example, a larger transaction: An innkeeper member recently booked a $10,000 wedding 
and after the negotiations, the customer decided they wanted to pay with a credit card, even though the 
price for the event was arrived at based on a cash payment or a check. The innkeeper was more than 
willing to accept the card but would have also liked to have been able to add a surcharge to the card and 
offer the guest a cash (check) discount for the transaction. ln most cases big ticket items like a wedding, 
the purchase of an automobile or appliances can cost the merchant a tremendous amount in processing 
fees. Consumers are usually trying to increase their rewards points, thereby using their highest yielding 
rewards card with the highest processing fees, because everyone on this committee knows that merchants 
not credit card providers pay for rewards. A smaller transaction: Interestingly enough, profits can erode 
fairly easily at the low end as well. A cup of coffee that retails for $1.50 could be subject to a 21-cent 
processing fee if a debit card is used or a 14% additional expense that would likely eat most of the profit 
on this item. The merchant could restrict this activity if it were a credit card, but not with a debit card. A 
surcharge of 25 cents would make the coffee either $1.75 for debit or credit and $1.50 for cash allowing 
the consumer to make the choice. At this time, we can only offer one price so the merchant eats the fee. 
Increasing the price to the higher amount is unfair to the consumer paying cash and it makes the merchant 

less competitive for this transaction. In the case of the wedding, it was almost a 5% charge, which 
translates into a $500 fee paid on an event that may gross much more than that. This is simply adding 
another tool to the toolbox to allow businesses to thrive as we compete regionally and nationally. 
  
Thank you for your consideration. Please vote LD 1324 ought to pass and give businesses equal rights our 
counterparts enjoy in most other states.  
 
 
 
