LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 1 of 30 May 2 , 2023 . 
Belgrade Lakes, ME  
 
Senator Rafferty, Senate Chair  
Representative Brennan, House Chair  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
131st Maine Legislat ure, First Special  Session  
2 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0002  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, Representative Lyman and Distinguished Members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee:  
 
Testimony OPPOSING both  LD 1567  and LD 1571 : An Act to Create a Training Program  
for School Board Members and Establish School Board Meeting Standards  – May 2 , 2023  
 
My name is Sara Languet,  and I am one of the two  Belgrade RSU#18 School Board (SB) Director s (member) .  I also 
represented the Town of Belgrade in the 2022 RSU#18 Cost Sharing Formula (CSF) committee  besides being Chair of 
Belgrade Budget Committee .  Presently, I am on my second term as a School Board Director ; and can directly and 
strongly related to the powerful testimony forwarded by R epresentative Chad  Perkins  from Dover -Foxcroft  in the 
fact that School Board members seem to just consistently and blindly agree with the suggestions of the 
Administration .  I think that happens due to the lack of education of the School Board members.  
 
I originally testified on Tuesday  May 2 testifie d in favor of this LD -1567 and LD 15 71.  But since then,  ON MY OWN I 
CHANGED  MY POSITION after fulling reading the language in the two LDs.  I had been in contact with my School 
District State legislators  since mid -January of 2023 about different concerns  within  School Districts.  The staff and 
legislators  (no matter their alliance) had been very helpful in guiding my path to have my concerns heard.  Just by 
reading the title of th ese LDs, I thought I had spot in to channel my views .  So, I rushed in !  I firmly believe in School 
Board reform but mostly through  education of its board members while adding basic requirements to engage in this 
public service position.   As it is, the present laws that for the School Board positions  are beautifully crafted and 
should stay like so.  
 
As regard as these two LDs :  I sincerely think that it will be a significant step back  to install executive sessions where 
any School Board member can be literary lynched by the School Board peers .  School Board members are selected by 
their communities,  and it is up to their communities to hold  them  accountable at the voting booth . Again, such a 
violation rule held under executive session will create high uncertainty among School Board members. When on the 
contrary, even  with opinions on extreme ends, School Board members  must develop a high degree of respect and trust 
for each other.  The ability to have such an executive session will deteriorate this School Board post resulting in lower 
interest to serve when presently municipalities struggle to get candidates for it.  Additionally, presently  the School 
Board  top leadership can set time li mits on public comments.   School Board meetings have general agendas that 
incorporate a section for public comments.   Overall,  such limits are not enforced, at least, in my School District; but 
when controversial issues ring the community (and there is a s ignificant number of concern constituents), time limits 
let everyone pitch in their views while considering time schedules and other responsibilities of all the present.   
Meetings should be run efficiently, and constituents should come prepared to speak wh ile avoiding filibustering.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 2 of 30 Reaching agreements among members of any legislative body is always a challenge; but it is a process at the core of 
our democratic system of government.  It is primordial and very important that the integrity and validi ty of such 
legislative bodies are preserved  and conserve starting by giving them  a set of authentic  and threshold requirement s 
and qualifications  for members,  who in turn  host the very same meetings that this bill like to set standards for .    
 
Here are my recommendations after three years of service as a School Board (SB) Director  (member)  at RSU#18:  
(a) TERM LIMITS:   A maximum of three consecutive  terms  should be set.   This will give you an incumbent  SB 
Director  9 years (close to a decade) to do re asonable work and see started initiative s go through .  I realize that 
in small towns this can be a difficult requirement to fulfill.  However, if no candidates besides the incumbent SB 
Director step forward, then the seat can revert to the incumbent SB Director to continue beyond their  third 
term.  
(b) No work  nor family relationships among SB Directors.   Directors in the same School Board should not be 
filially  related nor have any kind of close family relationships nor professional working relationships  (meaning 
working for the same outfit nor direct working relationship) should exist .  Such relationships create  
unnecessary emotional awkwardness and personal outbursts when school business disagreements flare like 
naturally happens in every contested  deba te.  If a School Board Director  has an opposite  argument with one of 
the two related Directors , almost by default the second related Director will jump in the debate to support the 
first related Director  or at least be visibly upset about the situation .  Even when the emotions will not flare, 
99% of the time related Directors will vote as a block.  It is human nature to defend our own kind  by being 
supportive. E ven when the two related SB members would possibly and undeniable agree  with total honesty 
beyond  their relationship; there is always the lingering sense of unfairness  of experiencing  and witnessing a 
ONE Director versus the TWO  related Directors dialogue  (what so call TWO on ONE dialogue scenario) ; where 
the TWO  related Directors  has memories and eng agements that definitively bind them outside of the School 
Board.  
(c) No Conflict of Interest (COI) Income:   School Board Directors (member)  should not derive income nor benefits 
from a source of revenue (an institution  or organized group ) that the RSU or School Unit depends on.  For 
instance, a firefighter in Waterville should not be a Waterville School Board member as his/her income (salary) 
comes from the same source that the Waterville School district gets part of its operational reven ues.  Here the 
share  funding source is property taxes of the City of Waterville.    
SCENARIO:  Let pretend that a firefighter in the community becomes a school board member.  In a financial  
crisis year, the town decided  to raise the Fire Department salaries  by 5% but the School Board decided to 
negotiate no more than 3% for the teachers.  Even when the salary decision makers are separated and in 
different boards/councils; still an employee of the town is deciding on the salary of an indirect employee of the 
town using the same source of revenue.  Within the same company, d oes an employee from one department 
can decide the salary of another employee in a different department?   No!  In a year where everyone  is 
fighting for  extra income from the same money pocke t, it can be awkward  specifically when we are talking 
about taxpayer’s money  to support essential services.  
Presently, SB Directors  cannot be married to an employee or contractor of the School District.  Note that SB 
Directors , even when they do not have to directly negotiate contracts  (in some cases they do), they are 
consulted by the ir superintendent when their  team is negotiating raises.  So, a SB Director  would be i ndirectly 
helping and possibly bene fiting their home’s income if their spouse were  part of the School District payroll  
with public money .  Public servants cannot be involved in benefiting  themselves directly or indirectly from 
taxpayers’ money.  In the pri vate sector, nepotism is routine and generational  practice , but the funding comes 
from  private owners/investors  not taxpayers.  Th at is a big difference.  To maintain and strengthen public trust 
and confidence such boundaries  are set and should be maintain ed. 
(d) General Financial Education and Experience:  Prior to running for School Board candidates should be able to 
demonstrate having pertinent education and /or experience with pre -algebra concepts (like calculating 
percentages), simple accounting and financia l knowledge.   
Presently, the ONLY REQUIREMENTS for a School Board member is to be a USA citizen resident in the ir School 
District  (but not an employee of it)  and 18 years old or older.  That ’s it! 
I realize that such  academic and experience  qualifications  are a high standard ; but if you are approving 
warrants and budgets such understanding is basic.  Additionally, and once elected , training on ED -279 reports 
and finance training should be completed before being allowe d to vote in any budget session. These standards  
should not be optional but mandatory.  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 3 of 30 (e) Training about Maine Statutes related to School  Board duties and responsibilities .  Training must be 
completed within 120 days after an elected official takes the oath of office.   That is the same time window 
within which  they must  complete Freedom of Access Training.  Interestingly there are School Board units’  
policies that call for su ch training,  but they are not enforced .  And this n eeds to be enforce d, possibly by 
tracking  a School Board training record at their own town office which will be handled, custode and 
maintain ed by their town’s clerk -- who will keep  a folder collecting cer tificates of training completion.  If the SB 
member is not compliant by the time to turn in papers  for re -election , then the SB member cannot re -run. 
The MSBA/MSMA/MSSA do provide great training.  However, School Board members training and 
participation in  their MSMA conferences is only allowed if the Superintendent approves.  Usually,  independent 
School  Board members  are accepted but not really welcomed  if the School Administration does not sponsor 
them.  Educated School  Board members make  better decisions .  Their town should pay for their training if not 
sponsored by the School Unit.  
As a footnote on this topic, it is VERY FRUSTRATING  to be in a School Board where some members are in tune 
with state law and others  are not.   Consensus becom es conflicting process as Directors start relying on senior 
members that many times are not in tune with the law. It is incredible and appalling to witness that not even 
School Administrators have a clue about  it.  Again, education about Maine Statue is ve ry important and 
should be compulsory and mandatory to even qualify School Administrators —NOT OPTIONAL.  
(f) ACCOUNTABLITY:   Well, educated School Board members hold each other accountable by knowing the Maine 
State statutes and their District policies.  Ultima tely, t he electorate holds the School Board member 
accountable.  
As a footnote on this topic, this committee should be aware that there is a leading Maine state law firm that 
teaches and foster among school districts using the Shaw vs Small  Maine law case a s legal evidence that 
School Board Directors (Members) first and only  priority  are the students and the staff of the schools.   
I have serious concerns with that teaching as a School Board Director job must assist in balance the students’ 
needs and the ability for communities to pay and ensure that every taxpayer penny is used correctly and as 
intended and not a penny more nor a penny less is charged to them.  I have heard administrators an d a 
particular lawyer specifically say to me that School Board me mbers can forget about the taxpayers as they start 
their service at the Board.   In my opinion, that is not the right thing to teach.  
In the Shaw vs Small  Maine law case basically a School Board went down a rabbit hole to satisfy some 
taxpayers demands and in doing so they breach Maine state law.  So in my concurrence, such School Board 
members were missing education about Maine State statue  more than anything ; and that is not to say that 
they will simply forget about the taxpayers’ concerns.  This is why th is bill is vouching for correct and authentic 
education for our School Boards based on and starting with its legal foundation in the Maine Law.  
 
I am originally from Puerto Rico.  My fellow citizens there DO NOT HAVE  any of so well -articulated Maine Statue s that 
define a School Boards units with the duties, responsibilities, and powers of its members.  Mainers are so lucky to have 
such framework detailing duties for the School Board members.  
 
MAINE STATUE  (I have included a copy of it at the end of this tes timony) : 
Title 20 -A EDUCATION  
Part 2: School Organization  
Chapter 101: General Provisions  
Subchapter 1: School Boards  
Section 1001: Duties of School Boards  
 
The framework is beautiful and elegantly set up with the above  Maine Statue being the bigger umbrella under which 
local School Unit policy  is guarded , while not allowing it for venture away from the umbrella .  In my School District, we 
have policies  (I have included a copy of it at the end of this testimony)  that reframe that same Maine Statue : 
(a) Policy  BBA: School Board Powers and Responsibilities  
(b) Policy BBAA: Board Member Authority and Responsibilities  
(c) Policy BBBA: Board Member Qualifications  
(d) Policy BCA: Board Member Code of Ethics  
(e) Policy BDEH: Publ ic Participation at Board Meetings  
Other applicable policies are BDA, BDD, BDE, BDE -R 
 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 4 of 30 Reform is needed as related to School members threshold qualifications  with mandatory training .  That by 
itself will  help frame up the dynamics and flow of more producti ve public School Board meetings.  
 
School Districts certainly are the center pilar of our communities.  School Districts  are the trunk  of the tree, and our 
School Boards are the roots of that tree.  One top notch previous Maine School Superintendent once shared  in a 
training that our communities are as good as our School Boards , and I do believe it.  So, please help our state fortified  
those roots, so in turn they can hold th at tree grounded .   
 
Please, feel free to reach out to me via email any time.  At your discretion, I will welcome a future invitation to answer 
any further questions or concerns.   
 
Thank you for your consideration and your time devoted to th ese causes  that foster the educatio n of our children as 
they are the future of our state and our country .  Thank you for your service.  
  
Sincerely,  
 
Sara H Languet  
Email: slanguet@gmail.com  
 
Enclosures follows.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 5 of 30 MRS Title 20 -A, §1001. DUTIES OF SCHOOL BOARDS  
 
§1001.  Duties of school boards  
School boards shall perform the following duties.  [PL 1981, c. 693, §§5, 8 (NEW).]  
1. General duties.  They shall have the duties prescribed to them in this Title. [PL 1981, c. 693, 
§§5, 8 (NEW).]  
1-A.  Adoption of policies.  They shall adopt policies that govern the school administrative units. [PL 2001, c. 
588, §4 (NEW).]  
2. Management of school property.  They are responsible for the management of the schools and 
shall provide for their custody and care, including repairs and insurance on school buildings and all school 
property in the school administrative units.  
[PL 2001, c. 588, §5 (AMD).]  
3.  Selection of superintendent.  They shall select a superintendent in accordance with section 1051 to carry 
out the duties specified in  section 1055.  
[PL 2001, c. 588, §5 (AMD).]  
4. No prohibition on use for political activity.  The use of school buildings may not be denied to a person 
solely because use is requested for a political activity. [PL 1981, c. 693, §§5, 8 (NEW).]  
5. Insurance premiu ms and employee benefits.  They may:  
A. Pay the premiums on life, health, dental, disability, accident, hospitalization, major medical and such 
other types of insurance as may be provided to employees and their families from time to time;  [PL 1989, c. 
425, § 1 (NEW).]  
B. Provide direct reimbursement of the costs incurred by employees and their family members pursuant 
to a direct reimbursement plan for dental costs, including endodontic, periodontic and orthodontic costs, except 
that reimbursement of orthodontic c osts is limited to 60% of the plan participant's costs.  
(1) Prior to the commencement of operation of any such direct reimbursement plan or program, the school 
board shall adopt guidelines that embody a funding mechanism adequate to the financial needs of the 
plan or program and shall provide for the fixed costs of operations of the plan for the first prospective 
fund year.  A reasonable amount sufficient to satisfy immediate claims costs must be held in a segregated 
account to be used solely for this purpose.  
(2) The school board or other legal entity establishing a plan or program for the purpose of direct 
reimbursement pursuant to this paragraph, whether or not a body corporate, may with respect to the 
plan or program sue or be sued; make contracts; hold and disp ose of real property; borrow money, 
contract debts and pledge assets in the name of the plan; and perform such other actions incidental to 
this subparagraph as necessary.  
(3) The plan or program may be established as a separate legal or administrative entity.  
(4) The legal entity that establishes a plan or program that provides coverage for more than one school 
administrative unit with respect to the benefits authorized in this paragraph shall adopt a plan of 
management that, at a minimum, pr ovides the following:  
(a) The means of establishing and maintaining a governing authority of the program, including the 
selection of a governing authority, which must be a board of directors or trustees for the plan, a 
majority of whom must be from the partici pating school administrative unit or units;  
(b) That the governing authority has the responsibility with regard to fixing contributions to the plan, 
maintaining reserves, levying and collecting assessments for deficiencies, disposing of surplus and 
administeri ng the plan in the event of its termination, liquidation or insolvency;  
(c) The identification of funds and reserves by the type of benefit provided and exposure area;  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 6 of 30 (d) The basis upon which new members may be admitted to and existing members may leave the plan;  
(e) That any member of a group plan or pool established for more than one school administrative unit 
shall prepay to the plan administrator an initial deposit equal to 25% of the annual contribution 
before coverage is effective;  
(f) Other provisions as necessary or desirable for the operation of the plan;  
(g) A provision that if the assets set aside in any group plan for more than one school administrative unit 
are at any time determined to be insufficient to enable the plan to discharge its legal liabilities and 
othe r obligations and to maintain sound reserves for the provision of the employee benefits 
provided by the plan, the governing authority shall within 90 days satisfy the deficiency or levy a 
prorated assessment upon the participating school administrative uni t or units for the amount 
needed to satisfy the deficiency.  The agreement among school administrative units in the group 
plan must provide sanctions for failure to comply with a mandatory assessment under this 
subparagraph;  
(5) Prior to the operation of any g roup or pool plan for more than one school administrative unit, the 
governing authority shall adopt underwriting guidelines that embody rate charges to prospective members 
at a level adequate to its financial needs and shall provide for the fixed costs of operations for the first 
prospective fund year.  An amount sufficient to reasonably meet immediate claims costs must be held in a 
segregated account to be used solely for this purpose.  Funds determined to be necessary to fund the 
program on an ongoing bas is must also be held in a segregated account;  
(6) Each group plan or pool established for more than one school administrative unit shall file with its 
members, by the last day of the 6th month following the end of the fiscal year, audited financial statements 
certified by an independent certified public accountant.  The financial statement must include, but is not 
limited to:  
(a) Appropriate reserves for known claims and expenses associated with those claims;  
(b) Claims incurred but not reported and expenses associated  with those claims;  
(c) Unearned contributions; and(d)  Reserve for bad debts.  
The audited financial statement must include information concerning the adequacy of the plan.  This 
report must result from a charge by the directors to the plan's actuary and auditor and must address 
excess insurance, charges for coverage to members, service agents' costs and costs of administration of 
the program.  
Two additional copies of the audited financial statements must be filed with the Superintendent of 
Insurance.  
If a group plan or pool established for more than one school administrative unit fails to provide for the 
audited financial statements required, the Superintendent of Insurance shall perform or cause to be 
performed the audit.  The group plan or pool shall rei mburse the Superintendent of Insurance for the cost 
of the audit; and  
(7) Any reimbursement plan or program for the provision of the employee benefits established and 
operated pursuant to this paragraph is not an insurance company, reciprocal insurer or insure r under the 
laws of this State and the development, administration and provision of such plans and programs does not 
constitute doing an insurance business;  [PL 2011, c. 395, §1 (AMD).]  
C. Pay premiums on liability insurance for employees and school official s; and  [PL 1989, c. 425, §1 
(NEW).]  
D. Provide such other employee benefits, directly or indirectly, to their employees as any school board 
determines from time to time, upon such terms and conditions and in such manner as the school board 
determines, subjec t to the requirements of all applicable laws.  [PL 1989, c. 425, §1 (NEW).]  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 7 of 30 Nothing in this subsection or subsection 14 prohibits a school board from arranging for and offering a choice of 
optional health or dental insurance plans to employees and their fa milies that may vary in benefits provided and 
costs.  
[PL 2011, c. 395, §1 (AMD).]  
5-A.  Public self -funded pools.  They may participate in a public self -funded pool created under Title 30 -A, 
chapter 117.  
[PL 1989, c. 878, Pt. B, §17 (AMD).]  
5-B.  Workers' compensation self -insurance.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, they may 
participate in or cause their school administrative unit to participate in a selfinsurance program or plan for 
workers' compensation established under and operated in accordance with the Maine Workers' Compensation Act 
of 1992, Title 39 -A, chapter 9. [PL 1991, c. 885, Pt. E, §20 (AMD); PL 1991, c. 885, Pt. E, §47 (AFF).]  
5-C.  Coverage under group health insurance plan for spouse and dependents after death of teacher .  If the 
spouse or other dependents of a teacher as defined in Title 5, section 17001, subsection 42 are covered by a policy 
of group health insurance provided by the school board and the teacher dies while employed by the board, the 
board shall provide a n opportunity for the spouse or dependent to continue coverage under the group policy after 
the death of the teacher by making the premium payment for the cost of that coverage.  In the case of underage 
dependent children of the teacher, coverage must be a vailable at least until the dependent children reach 19 years 
of age.  
[PL 2001, c. 471, Pt. D, §17 (AMD); PL 2001, c. 471, Pt. D, §18 (AFF).]  
5-D.  Group self -insured options.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, they may arrange for a 
group self -insurance program to provide health or dental insurance for employees and their families, including a 
group self -insurance program established through an interlocal agreement with other school administrative units 
or municipalities established purs uant to Title 30 -A, chapter 115.  The following restrictions apply to self -insured 
group health or dental programs.  
A. For purposes of this subsection, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the 
following meanings.  
(1) "Program" means a group self -insurance health or dental program.  
(2) "Program provider" means a school administrative unit that has arranged for a program under this 
subsection or collectively those school administrative units or municipalities that have entered an 
interlocal agreement to arrange for a program under this subsection.  
(3) "Qualified actuary" means an actuary who is a member of the American Academy of Actuaries qualified 
as to health reserving methodologies.  [PL 2011, c. 395, §2 (NEW).]  
B. To the extent the progr am provider assumes the risk with respect to any program provided under this 
subsection, the program provider shall maintain a reserve at least equal to the sum of:  
(1) An amount estimated to be necessary to pay claims and administrative costs for the assumed risk for 2 
1/2 months; and  
(2) The amount determined annually by a qualified actuary to be necessary to fund the unpaid portion of 
ultimate expected losses, including incurred but not reported claims, and related expenses incurred in 
the provision of benefits for eligible participants, less any credit, as determined by a qualified actuary, 
for excess or stop -loss insurance.  
If the program provider self -insures for more than one program, a reserve meeting the requirements of this 
paragraph must be maintained for  each program.  [PL 2011, c. 395, §2 (NEW).]  
C. The program provider may purchase excess or stop -loss insurance for any program, with attachment 
levels and limits as recommended by a qualified actuary.  [PL 2011, c. 395, §2 (NEW).]  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 8 of 30 D. Paragraph B does not apply to a program in the first 2 years after the program is changed from a fully 
insured program to a fully or partially self -insured program.  Before a program may begin its first year of 
operation:  
(1) The reserve fund must contain a reserve at least equal to the  amount estimated to be necessary to pay 
the claims and administrative costs with respect to the assumed risk for one full month; and  
(2) The rate structure of the program, as certified by a qualified actuary, must be designed to enable the 
fund to attain the following reserve levels:  
(a) By the end of the first year of the program, the reserve required by paragraph B, subparagraph 
(2) and an amount estimated to be necessary to pay claims and administrative costs for the assumed 
risk for 2 full months; and  
(b) By the e nd of the 2nd year of the program, the reserve required by paragraph B, subparagraph 
(2) and an amount estimated to be necessary to pay claims and administrative costs for the assumed 
risk for 2 1/2 full months.  
If the program provider purchases stop -loss or excess insurance with respect to the risk, the required reserve is 
reduced by the credit specified in paragraph B. A self -insurance program may not continue if the reserve fund 
with respect to that program does not contain the amounts set forth in subpa ragraph (2) by the time limits 
established.  [PL 2011, c. 395, §2 (NEW).]  
E. The program provider may not enter into  a contract with a 3rd -party administrator that has not 
demonstrated compliance with all applicable state laws and that is not, at the time of entering into the contract, 
administering a health plan or providing health care coverage for a total number of l ives equal to the number 
that would be covered by the program provider contract.  [PL 2011, c. 395, §2 (NEW).]  
F. Every applicant to provide service as a 3rd -party administrator for the program shall file a fidelity bond 
in favor of the program provider execu ted by a surety company for the benefit of the program provider or 
beneficiaries of the program and shall maintain the fidelity bond in force while representing the program.  The 
bond must be continuous in form and in one of the following amounts, up to $1 ,000,000:  
(1) For an administrator that collects contributions and premiums for a program but does not administer or 
pay claims, the greater of $50,000 and 5% of contributions and premiums projected to be received or 
collected for the following plan year from the program provider or from persons covered by the program;  
(2) For an administrator that administers and pays claims but does not collect premiums and contributions, 
the greater of $50,000 and 5% of the claims and claim expenses projected to be held for the following year 
to pay claims and claim expenses for persons covered by the program; or  
(3) For an administrator that collects premiums and contributions and administers and pays claims, the 
greater of the amounts determined under subparagraphs (1) and (2).  
This paragraph applies only if no other applicable state law requires bonding of 3rd -party administrators.  [PL 
2011, c. 395, §2 (NEW).]  
G. Any contract entered into by the program provider must provide for coverage that meets the same level 
of benefits as those  that would be required by state law if the coverage were provided by a health insurance 
plan governed by Title 24 or Title 24 -A.  [PL 2011, c. 395, §2 (NEW).]  
H. If a group self -insurance program is established through an interlocal agreement with other scho ol 
administrative units or municipalities established pursuant to Title 30 -A, chapter 115, the group self -insurance 
program must be approved by the Superintendent of Insurance as a multipleemployer welfare arrangement 
pursuant to Title 24 -A, chapter 81.  [PL 2011, c. 395, §2 (NEW).] [PL 2011, c. 395, §2 (NEW).]  
6.  Courses of study.  They shall adopt the courses of study in alignment with the system of learning results as 
established in section 6209 and in accordance with the requirements of this Title.  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 9 of 30 [PL 2001, c. 588, §6 (AMD).]  
7.  Tuition payment for attendance by those resident on territory ceded to United States.  They shall 
prescribe the tuition for attendance of persons of the required age, resident in territory the jurisdiction of which 
has been c eded to the United States, included in or surrounded by the administrative unit.  
[PL 1981, c. 693, §§5, 8 (NEW).]  
8.  Operate public preschool programs, kindergarten and grades one to 12.  They shall either operate 
programs in kindergarten and grades one t o 12 or otherwise provide for students to participate in those grades as 
authorized elsewhere in this Title.  To the extent the State provides adequate start -up funding, they may operate 
public preschool programs or provide for students to participate in s uch programs in accordance with the 
requirements of this Title.  They shall determine which students attend each school, classify them and transfer 
them from school to school where more than one school is maintained at the same time.  If a school administr ative 
unit neither maintains a school nor contracts for school privileges pursuant to chapter 115 and a student who 
resides in the school administrative unit is unable to enroll in another school administrative unit, the school board 
shall direct the super intendent of the school administrative unit where the student resides to make a written 
request to the commissioner to designate a place of enrollment for the student, pursuant to section 254, 
subsection 19.  
[PL 2015, c. 448, §2 (AMD).]  
8-A.  Due process s tandards for expulsion proceedings.  Following a proper investigation of a student's 
behavior and in accordance with the districtwide disciplinary policies adopted by the school board pursuant to 
subsection 15 -A, a school board that intends to consider exp ulsion shall ensure proceedings include the following 
due process provisions.  
A.  Before a hearing on the expulsion, the superintendent shall:  
(1) Provide written notice to the parents and the student of:  
(a) The date, time and location of the hearing;  
(b) A description of the incident or incidents that occasioned the expulsion hearing;  
(c) The student's and parents' right to review the school records prior to the hearing;  
(d) A description of the hearing process;  
(e) An expla nation of the consequences of an expulsion; and  
(f) A list of available free and low -cost legal services, which must be created and updated annually by 
the department; and  
(2) Invite the parents and student to a meeting prior to the expulsion hearing to discuss th e 
procedures of the hearing.  [PL 2021, c. 295, §§1, 2 (AMD).] B.  At a hearing on the expulsion:  
(1) The student has the right to present and cross -examine witnesses;  
(2) The student has the right to an attorney or other representation; and  
(3) Witnesses must be swor n in and the chair of the hearing has the authority to swear in witnesses.  [PL 
2011, c. 614, §3 (NEW).]  
C.  After a hearing on the expulsion, the school board shall provide written notice of its decision to the parents 
and the student by certified mail.  The notice of the school board's written decision may include a reentry plan 
developed in accordance with subsection 9 -C.  [PL 2011, c. 614, §3 (NEW).]  
[PL 2021, c. 295, §§1, 2 (AMD); PL 2021, c. 320, §1 (AMD).]  
9.  Students expelled or suspended.  Followi ng a proper investigation of a student's behavior and due process 
proceedings pursuant to subsection 8 -A, if found necessary for the peace and usefulness of the school, a school 
board shall expel any student, except a student who is enrolled in grade 5 or below:  
A. Who is deliberately disobedient or deliberately disorderly;  [PL 1993, c. 157, §1 (NEW).]  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 10 of 30 B. For infractions of violence;  [PL 1993, c. 157, §1 (NEW).]  
C. Who possesses on school property a firearm as defined in Title 17 -A, section 2, subsection 12 -A or a 
dangerous weapon as defined in Title 17 -A, section 2, subsection 9 without permission of a school official;  
[PL 1997, c. 298, §1 (AMD).]  
D. Who, with use of any other dangerous weapon as defined in Title 17 -A, section 2, subsection 9, paragraph A, 
intentio nally or knowingly causes injury or accompanies use of a weapon with a threat to cause injury; or  
[PL 1993, c. 157, §1 (NEW).]  
E. Who possesses, furnishes or trafficks in any scheduled drug as defined in Title 17 -A, chapter 45.  [PL 1993, 
c. 157, §1 (NEW).]  
A student may be readmitted on satisfactory evidence that the behavior that was the cause of the student being 
expelled will not likely recur.  The school board may authorize the principal to suspend students up to a maximum 
of 10 days for infractions of s chool rules, except that the school board may not authorize the principal to issue an 
out-of-school suspension to a student who is enrolled in grade 5 or below except as provided under subsection 9 -A 
or unless the principal determines that there is an immi nent danger of serious physical injury to the student or 
others and less restrictive interventions would be ineffective. An out -of-school suspension for a student who is 
enrolled in grade 5 or below may not exceed 3 days.  The school board may authorize th e superintendent or 
principal to modify, in writing, the requirement for expulsion of a student on a case -by-case basis.  In addition to 
other powers and duties under this subsection, the school board may develop a policy requiring a student who is 
in viol ation of school substance use or possession rules to participate in substance use disorder services as 
provided in section 6606. Nothing in this subsection or subsection 9 -C prevents a school board from providing 
educational services in an alternative setti ng to a student who has been expelled. [PL 2021, c. 295, §3 (AMD); 
PL 2021, c. 320, §2 (AMD).]  
9-A.  Students expelled or suspended under the requirements of the federal Gun -Free Schools Act.  The 
school boards shall adopt a policy for expelling a student  who is determined to have brought a firearm, as defined 
in 18 United States Code, Section 921, to school or to have possessed a firearm at school and for referring the 
matter to the appropriate local law enforcement agency.  
A.  A student who is determined  to have brought a firearm to school or to have possessed a firearm at school 
under this subsection must be expelled from school for a period of not less than one year, except that the 
school board may authorize the superintendent to modify in writing the requirement for expulsion of a student 
on a case -by-case basis.  A decision to change the placement of a student with a disability must be made in 
accordance with the federal Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, 20 United States Code, Section 1400 et 
seq.  [PL 2021, c. 320, §3 (AMD).] B.  Nothing in this subsection prevents a school board from:  
(1) Offering instructional activities related to firearms or from allowing a firearm to be brought to school for 
instructional activities sanctioned by the schoo l board and for which the school board has adopted 
appropriate safeguards to ensure student safety; or  
(2) Providing educational services in an alternative setting to a student who has been expelled.  [PL 2009, 
c. 614, §1 (AMD).]  
C.  In accordance with the pro per investigation and due process provisions required in subsection 9, a principal 
may suspend immediately for good cause a student who is determined to have brought a firearm to school or 
to have possessed a firearm at school under this subsection.  [PL 2 009, c. 614, §1 (AMD).]  
[PL 2021, c. 320, §3 (AMD).]  
9-B.  Disciplinary sanctions for children with disabilities.  They retain the authority to sanction a child with a 
disability as defined in section 7001, subsection 1 -A for misconduct that violates schoo l rules.  Notwithstanding the 
duties of school administrative units as described in section 7202, the school board may authorize the 
superintendent, principal or assistant principal to enforce this subsection by allowing the superintendent, principal 
or as sistant principal to suspend a child with a disability up to a maximum of 10 days individually or cumulatively 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 11 of 30 for infractions of school rules.  When a child with a disability is suspended for 10 days or less individually or 
cumulatively within a school ye ar for a violation of school rules, the school board is not required to provide a tutor, 
transportation or any other aspect of the student's special education program.  Discipline of children with 
disabilities must be consistent with the requirements of th e federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 20 
United States Code, Section 1415(k).  
[PL 2005, c. 662, Pt. A, §6 (AMD).]  
9-C.  Reentry for students after expulsion.  Upon making a decision to expel a student in accordance with 
procedures set fort h in subsections 8 -A and 9, a school board may exercise one of the following options in 
expelling a student:  
A. The school board may expel the student for a specific period of time not to exceed the total number of 
instructional days approved by the school bo ard for the current school year; or  [PL 2011, c. 614, §5 (NEW).]  
B. The school board may expel the student for an unspecified period of time  and authorize the 
superintendent to provide the expelled student with a reentry plan that specifies the conditions that must be 
met in order for the student to be readmitted to school after the expulsion.  If a school board authorizes the 
superintendent t o provide the expelled student with a reentry plan, the school board shall ensure that the 
student who has been expelled is provided with a reentry plan in accordance with this paragraph.  
(1) The reentry plan must be developed by the superintendent or the supe rintendent's designee in 
consultation with the student and the student's parents to provide guidance that helps the student 
understand what the student must do to establish satisfactory evidence that the behavior that resulted 
in the expulsion will not lik ely recur.  
(2) The superintendent or the superintendent's designee shall send a certified letter, return receipt 
requested, or hand deliver a letter to the parents of the expelled student giving notice of the date, time 
and location of a meeting to develop a r eentry plan for the student.  
(3) If the student and the student's parents do not attend the meeting under subparagraph (2), the reentry 
plan must be developed by school staff.  
(4) The reentry plan must be provided to the parents and the student in writing.  
(5) The sup erintendent shall designate a school employee to review the student's progress with the reentry 
plan at intervals of one month, 3 months and 6 months after the meeting and at other times as 
determined necessary by the designated school employee.  
(6) The reentr y plan may require the student to take reasonable measures determined by the 
superintendent to be helpful to establish the student's readiness to return to school. Professional 
services determined to be necessary by the superintendent must be provided at t he expense of the 
student and the student's parents.  
(7) The superintendent may, as appropriate, notify an individualized education program team for a child 
with a disability who has been expelled by a school board.  
(8) The superintendent shall annually report dat a on the number of students who are expelled from school 
and the number of students who are readmitted to school after expulsion to the commissioner's 
consultant on truancy, dropouts and alternative education under section 5151.  [PL 2011, c. 614, §5 
(NEW) .] 
[PL 2011, c. 614, §5 (NEW).]  
9-D.  Professional services after expulsion for a child with a disability.  Nothing in subsection 9 -C may be 
interpreted to require payment from the parents of an expelled student for professional services determined by 
the superintendent to be necessary to establish the student's readiness to return to school if:  
A. The student is a child with a disability who has been determined to be eligible for a free, appropriate 
public education in accordance with 34 Code of Federal Regul ations, Section 300.530, Paragraph (d); or  [PL 2011, 
c. 614, §6 (NEW).]  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 12 of 30 B. The school administrative unit did not have knowledge that the student was a child with a disability prior 
to taking disciplinary measures against the student and, based on a subseque nt evaluation, the student is 
determined to be a child with a disability who is eligible for a free, appropriate public education in accordance 
with 34 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 300.534, Paragraph (d).  [PL 2011, c. 614, §6 (NEW).] [PL 2011, 
c. 614, §6 (NEW).]  
10.  Physiology and hygiene.  
[PL 1983, c. 859, Pt. C, §§2, 7 (RP).]  
10-A.  Educational materials.  They shall adopt a policy governing the selection of educational materials and 
may approve educational materials. [PL 2001, c. 588, §7 (AMD) .] 
11. Persons not immunized excluded. [PL 1983, c. 
862, §52 (RP).]  
11-A.  Exposure to communicable disease.  They shall adopt a policy for enforcement by the superintendent 
to safeguard the health of any student or employee who has contracted or been exposed to a communicable 
disease, in accordance with sections 6301, 6351 -A and 6551, and Title 22, chapter 251.  
[PL 1983, c. 661, §2 (NEW).]  
12.  Salaries of persons absent.  They may adjust the salaries of teachers, principals and other persons  legally 
employed by them who are compelled to be absent from their school duties.  No reduction in pay may be made if 
absence is caused by the bona fide observance of designated holidays in the church of their faith.  This subsection 
and section 13604 sha ll apply only in cases of persons who are employed on yearly contracts or on tenure of 
service and who hold the legal qualifications necessary for the positions.  
[PL 1981, c. 693, §§5, 8 (NEW).]  
13.  Nondiscriminatory hiring.  They shall develop a nondiscr iminatory hiring practice for positions requiring 
administrator certification.  That hiring practice must include:  
A. Creation or reassessment of job descriptions;  [PL 1989, c. 889, §6 (NEW).]  
B. Clearly stated criteria for positions; and  [PL 1989, c. 889, §6 (NEW).]  
C. An interview format that includes questions based on job descriptions and stated criteria.  [PL 1989, c. 889, 
§6 (NEW).]  
[PL 1989, c. 889, §6 (NEW).]  
14.  Insurance purchase by competitive bidding.  Except as otherwise provided by waiver, a school board shall 
oversee the purchasing of insurance by competitive bidding.  On each insurance policy, a competitive bid must be 
sought at least once every 5 years.  To take advantage of commercial package policies in the marketplace, a school 
board shall grou p qualifying lines of insurance into a single competitive bid process.  Each policy secured by 
competitive bidding must be issued with a 3year policy term or, if this is not possible, a commitment for 3 one -year 
policy terms must be secured with an option for 2 additional one -year policy terms, subject to annual review and 
adjustment. A.  The requirement of competitive bidding may be waived by a school board when:  
(1) In the opinion of the school board, an emergency exists that requires the immediate procuremen t of 
insurance.  The emergency may include the premature cancellation of an existing policy or acquisition of a 
risk that can not be added to an existing policy, including the signing of a lease.  However, at the next renewal 
of the policy, procurement of insurance is subject to competitive bidding;  
(2) After reasonable investigation by the school board, it appears that the required insurance is procurable 
from only one source;  
(3) It appears to be in the best interest of the school board to negotiate for the procu rement of an excess 
insurance line;  
(4) The line of insurance is workers' compensation or an employee benefit such as life, disability or health 
insurance in accordance with subsection 5; or  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 13 of 30 (5) The school board is in a municipal school unit and school insurance and municipal insurance are 
purchased as a package through competitive bidding by the municipal government.  [PL 1993, c. 423, §1 
(NEW).]  
B.  A registry of bidders must be maintained by th e school board.  Invitations to bid or proposals must be sent 
to a registry of bidders on file with the school board.  Insurance agents or brokers licensed by the Bureau of 
Insurance and risk pools authorized under Title 24 -A or Title 30 -A, chapter 117 des iring to have their names 
entered on a registry of bidders shall submit to the school board in writing a request for such action.  The 
name of a bidder entered in a registry who fails to submit a bid on 3 consecutive proposals or invitations to bid 
may be removed from the registry at the discretion of the school board.  [PL 1993, c. 423, §1 (NEW).] C.  
"Competitive bidding" means the following multistep process.  
(1) At least 4 months before the expiration date of the policy for which bids are being solicited, a  
prequalification questionnaire, referred to in this paragraph as the "questionnaire," must be developed by 
the school board for the purpose of prequalifying bidders.  The questionnaire must contain at a minimum:  
(a) Questions on the bidder's insurance knowled ge, educational background, licensing, errors and 
omissions insurance, experience with public entities, experience with school systems and number 
of years in business.  The questionnaire must state that qualified bidders must be insurance agents 
or brokers  licensed by the Bureau of Insurance or duly authorized risk pools under Title 24 -A or Title 
30-A, chapter 117;  
(b) The evaluation criteria and relative scoring weights to be applied in the prequalification evaluation 
process;  
(c) A statement that bidders are subj ect to prescreening and may not approach an insurer or reinsurer 
until given permission by the school board to do so since markets are allocated by the school board.  
The questionnaire must state that failure to comply with this restriction automatically d isqualifies 
the bidder.  The questionnaire must state that the school board reserves the option to require a 
personal interview at any time in the process; and  
(d) The address and contact person to which the questionnaire must be submitted and the opening 
date  and time, which may not be less than 3 1/2 months from the expiration date of the policy or 
policies being sought.  The questionnaire must state that:  all proposals are publicly opened at the 
date, time and place noted; a questionnaire received after the  date and time specified is rejected, 
but retained and not evaluated or considered further; and proposals are not available for inspection 
until after the bid is awarded.  The questionnaire must state that the school board reserves the right 
to reject a qu estionnaire and does not accept responsibility for costs incurred by a bidder in the 
preparation of a questionnaire.  The questionnaire must state that bidders are notified of the 
outcome in writing no later than 10 days after the closing date.  
(2) In the same  time frame, the school board shall approve a request for proposal, referred to in this 
paragraph as the "proposal."  The proposal must contain at a minimum:  
(a) The line or lines of insurance for which bids are being solicited and a clear definition of minimu m 
coverage required, minimum limits required, deductibles, policy forms and endorsements required 
and policy term required.  If coverage identical to the expiring coverage is being sought, a copy of 
the expiring policy or policies and all endorsements may be enclosed to meet this requirement;  
(b) Basic underwriting information, such as named insured, mailing address, nature of risk, actual 
locations, schedules of buildings, business personal property, vehicles or any other property for 
which insurance is being sought, if applicable;  
(c) At least a 3 -year and preferably a 5 -year company -generated loss run;  
(d) A clear definition of the services, if any, required of both the bidder and the insurer;  
(e) The minimum A.M. Best rating and financial size category acceptable to the  school board;  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 14 of 30 (f) The evaluation criteria and relative scoring weights to be applied to the proposal.  Cost of the 
insurance coverage must be included in the evaluation criteria and must be given a minimum of 50% 
of the total weight of all criteria;  
(g) The addre ss and contact person to which a bid must be submitted and the bid opening date and 
time.  The proposal must state that:  all proposals are publicly opened at the date, time and place 
noted; bids received after the date and time specified are rejected, but  retained and not evaluated 
or considered further; and proposals are not available for inspection until after the bid is awarded.  
The proposal must state that the school board reserves the right to reject a bid and does not accept 
responsibility for costs  incurred by a bidder in the preparation of a proposal.  The proposal must 
state that all bidders are notified of the outcome in writing no later than 20 days after the bid closing 
date;  
(h) The name, address and optionally a facsimile number of a school board  contact person to whom 
written questions may be addressed.  The proposal must state that the school board will reply to 
questions submitted in writing before a specified deadline with copies of the questions and answers 
to be provided in writing to all bi dders; and  
(i) A statement that the successful bidder must present an insurance binder to the school board within 
5 days of the award and no later than the expiration date of the existing policy.  Failure to do so 
disqualifies the award and the award is then m ade to the next highest -rated bidder who was in 
compliance with the proposal.  The proposal must state that all decisions regarding the award are 
final.  
(3) Each bidder on the registry of bidders must be provided with a questionnaire and proposal 4 months 
befo re the expiration of the policy or policies being sought.  Each bidder must complete and return the 
questionnaire before the stated date and time as specified in the questionnaire.  In addition, a bidder must 
state in the order of preference the insurers t hey prefer to solicit on the school board's behalf.  The school 
board shall then have 3 persons independently review a questionnaire on the basis of the established 
criteria.  The reviewers shall document the scoring and select all qualified bidders, but n o more than the 5 
highestrated, to participate further in the process.  
(4) The school board shall allocate to each selected bidder at least one insurer from which to solicit a bid.  
This market allocation must be made on the basis of awarding the bidder's firs t choice to the bidder.  If there 
is a conflict, an incumbent broker is given preference over the school board's incumbent insurer.  Allocation 
is then made on the basis of highest -qualifying score.  Once market allocation is complete, a new bid closing 
date must be set for 30 days before the policy expiration date for submission of insurer bids.  
(5) The school board shall have 3 persons independently review each submitted bid on the basis of the 
established criteria.  The reviewers shall document the scoring a nd substantive information that supports 
the scoring and make the award decision.  Interviews may be considered within the review.  Award must be 
made to the highest -rated proposal that conforms to the proposal.  Tie scores must be resolved on the basis 
of factors considered by the school board to serve the best interests of the school system.  Minor 
negotiations not affecting the bid price more than 5% after notice of award are allowed and, if agreement 
can not be reached, the proposal may be rejected and the award made to the next highest -rated bidder who 
is in compliance with the proposal.  Written records must be kept by each person reviewing or ranking 
proposals.  The award of the bid must then be announced publicly.  All bidders must be notified in wri ting 
no later than 5 days after the award is made.  The successful bidder shall submit, in accordance with the 
proposal, a written binder of insurance within 5 days of the award and no later than the expiration date of 
the expiring policy.  All decisions r egarding awards are final.  [PL 2001, c. 588, §9 (AMD).]  
D. In order to facilitate the competitive bidding process in procuring health insurance for a school 
administrative unit’s employees  under this subsection, the administrator for an individual school plan or for a 
group plan for a multiple -school group shall seek and obtain competitive bids through a request for proposal 
process from qualified insurers at least once every 5 years commen cing July 1, 2012.  The administrator for any 
such group plan shall make the request for proposal responses available to requesting school administrative 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 15 of 30 units, excluding any portions of the request for proposal responses considered to be confidential prop rietary 
information by the submitting insurers.  If any such individual school plan or group plan is subsequently self -
insured, in whole or in part, the school board shall compare the overall cost of such a self -insured plan, including 
projected claims, al l administrative expenses and reinsurance expenses, to the cost of insured products at least 
once every 5 years commencing July 1, 2012.  [PL 2011, c. 249, §1 (NEW).]  
REVISOR'S NOTE: (Paragraph D as enacted by PL 2011, c. 395, §3 is REALLOCATED TO TITLE 20 -A, SECTION 
1001, SUBSECTION 14, PARAGRAPH E)  
E. (REALLOCATED FROM T. 20 -A, §1001, sub -§14, ¶D) In order to facilitate the competitive bidding process 
in procuring health insurance for a school administrative unit's employees under this subsection, a school 
administrative unit may request from the insurer providing health insurance coverage to its employees and 
retirees loss information concerning all of that school administrative unit's employees and retirees and their 
dependents covered under the school admi nistrative unit's policy or contract pursuant to Title 24 -A, section 
2803-A.  The school boards of the alternative organizational structure's member school administrative units may 
authorize the governing body of the alternative organizational structure to  contract for a single health insurance 
policy that is offered to all eligible employees and retirees of the alternative organizational structure and its 
member school administrative units and their dependents in one or more employment classifications.  If  an 
alternative organizational structure contracts for a single health insurance policy that is offered to all eligible 
employees and retirees of the alternative organizational structure and its member school administrative units 
and their dependents in on e or more employment classifications, the governing body of the alternative 
organizational structure shall provide notice to the insurer of the alternative organizational structure's election 
to contract for a single health insurance policy at least 6 mont hs before the effective date of the policy.  The 
alternative organizational structure may not revoke a single health insurance policy under this paragraph for a 
period of 5 years after the effective date of the policy and shall provide notice of revocation  at least  
6 months before the effective date of the revocation.  [PL 2015, c. 420, §1 (AMD).] [PL 2015, 
c. 420, §1 (AMD).]  
15.  Adoption of student code of conduct.  With input from educators, administrators, parents, students and 
community members, they sh all adopt a districtwide student code of conduct consistent with the statewide 
standards for student behavior developed under section 254, subsection 11.  The student code of conduct must:  
A. Define unacceptable student behavior;  [PL 1999, c. 351, §2 (NEW).]  
B. Establish standards of student responsibility for behavior;  [PL 1999, c. 351, §2 (NEW).]  
C. Prescribe consequences for violation of the student code of conduct, including first -time violations, when 
appropriate;  [PL 1999, c. 351, §2 (NEW).]  
D. Describe approp riate procedures for referring students in need of special services to those services;  [PL 
1999, c. 351, §2 (NEW).]  
E. Establish criteria to determine when further assessment of a current individual education plan is necessary, 
based on removal of the studen t from class;  [PL 1999, c. 351, §2 (NEW).]  
F. Establish policies and procedures concerning the removal of disruptive or violent students or students 
threatening death or bodily harm to others from a classroom or a school bus, as well as student disciplinary 
and placement decisions, when appropriate;  [PL 2005, c. 307, §1 (AMD).]  
G. Establish guidelines and criteria concerning the appropriate circumstances when the superintendent or the 
superintendent's designee may provide information to the local police or othe r appropriate law enforcement 
authorities regarding an offense that involves violence committed by any person on school grounds or other 
school property;  [PL 2021, c. 295, §4 (AMD).]  
H. Establish policies and procedures to address bullying, harassment and se xual harassment as set forth in 
section 6554;  [PL 2021, c. 295, §4 (AMD).]  
I. Provide that recess may not be withheld as a consequence of a violation of the student code of conduct by 
any student enrolled in grade 5 or below, except that when there is no alt ernative time available, recess time 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 16 of 30 may be used for restorative interventions as defined in section 1001, subsection 15 -A, paragraph B related 
to the student's behavior;  [PL 2021, c. 295, §4 (NEW).]  
J. Establish that an out -of-school suspension or expulsion  may not be issued to a student in grade 5 or below 
except as provided under subsection 9 or 9 -A or unless the principal determines that there is an imminent 
danger of serious physical injury to the student or others and less restrictive interventions woul d be 
ineffective; and  [PL 2021, c. 295, §4 (NEW).]  
K. Establish that an out -of-school suspension for a student in grade 5 or below may not exceed 3 days.  [PL 
2021, c. 295, §4 (NEW).]  
The school board is responsible for ensuring that school officials inform students, parents and community 
members of the student code of conduct.  
[PL 2021, c. 295, §4 (AMD).]  
15-A.  School disciplinary policies.  When revising the prescribed consequences f or violation of the student 
code of conduct pursuant to subsection 15, paragraph C, a school board shall consider districtwide disciplinary 
policies that:  
A. Focus on positive interventions and expectations and avoid focusing exclusively on unacceptable stude nt 
behavior.  For the purpose of this subsection, "positive interventions" means instructional and environmental 
supports that are designed to teach students prosocial alternatives to problem behaviors with high rates of 
positive feedback;  [PL 2011, c. 61 4, §7 (NEW).]  
B. Focus on positive and restorative interventions that are consistent with evidence -based practices rather 
than set punishments for specific behavior and avoid so -called zero -tolerance practices unless specifically 
required by federal or state laws, rules or regulations.  For the purpose of this paragraph, "restorative 
interventions" means school practices that are designed to strengthen relationships, improve the connection to 
school and promote a strong sense of accountability and that help st udents learn from their mistakes, 
understand the impact of their actions on others and find opportunities to repair the harm they have caused 
through their misbehavior;  [PL 2011, c. 614, §7 (NEW).]  
C. Allow administrators to use their discretion to fashion a ppropriate discipline that examines the 
circumstances pertinent to the case at hand; and  [PL 2011, c. 614, §7 (NEW).]  
D. Provide written notice to the parents of a student when a student is suspended from school, regardless 
of whether the suspension is an in -school or out -of-school suspension.  [PL 2011, c. 614, §7 (NEW).]  
The school board shall ensure that administrators inform students, parents and school personnel of the 
districtwide school disciplinary policies.  
[PL 2011, c. 614, §7 (NEW).]  
16.  Comprehen sive health and safety and emergency management plan.  Each school board shall annually 
approve a comprehensive health and safety and emergency management plan developed by the school unit 
administration working with school teachers and staff and local, co unty and state public safety officials, fire -
fighting personnel, emergency management officials, mental health officials, law enforcement officials, school 
nurses, physicians and public health staff to identify and deal with all hazards and potential hazar ds that could 
reasonably be expected to affect a facility or unit under the authority of the school administrative unit.  The 
approval of a comprehensive health and safety and emergency management plan under this subsection is public 
information.  At the r equest of any school board member or full -time school employee, the school board shall form 
a steering committee composed of school employees, school board members, parents and others.  A majority of 
the school employees must be chosen by the local represe ntatives of the applicable bargaining unit if the school 
employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement.  The steering committee shall regularly review and 
refine the comprehensive health and safety and emergency management plan.  The following  information 
pertaining to a comprehensive health and safety and emergency management plan is public information:  
A. A description of the scope and purpose of the comprehensive health and safety and emergency management 
plan and the process used for developin g and updating the plan;  [PL 2021, c. 464, §1 (AMD).]  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 17 of 30 B. General information on auditing for safety and preparedness;  [PL 2007, c. 408, §1 (NEW).]  
C. Roles and responsibilities of school administrators, teachers and staff and the designated chain of command 
during an emergency; and  [PL 2007, c. 408, §1 (NEW).]  
D. Strategies for conveying information to parents and the general public during an emergency.  [PL 2007, c. 
408, §1 (NEW).]  
Except as provided in paragraphs A to D, release of the contents of a comprehensive health and safety and 
emergency management plan approved under this subsection is subject to the limitations set forth in Title 1, 
section 402,  subsection 3, paragraph L.  
[PL 2021, c. 464, §1 (AMD).]  
17.  School bomb threat response policies.  Beginning with the 2002 -2003 school year, each school board in 
the State must have adopted a school bomb threat policy that is consistent with the prototyp ical policies 
developed by the commissioner under section 263.  
[PL 2001, c. 67, §2 (NEW).]  
18.  Bomb threat information in student handbooks.  Beginning with the 2002 -2003 school year, each school 
board shall include in its student handbook a section that addresses in detail the school's bomb threat policies and 
protocols.  The section of the handbook must contain an explanation of the portions of the policies and protocols 
relevant to students and their families and explain to the students the educational and legal consequences of 
making a bomb threat to a school.  
[PL 2001, c. 67, §2 (NEW).]  
19.  Adoption of policy to manage concussive and other head injuries.  Beginning January 1, 2013, the school 
board of each public school and the governing body of each private school enrolling more than 60% of its students 
at public expense in this State shall adopt and implement a policy on the management of concussive and other 
head injuries in school activities and athletics that is consistent with the model policy developed by the 
commissioner in accordance with section 254, subsection 17.  
[PL 2011, c. 688, §2 (NEW).]  
20.  School board meeting public comment period.  A school board shall provide the opportunity for the 
public to comment on school and education matters at a school board meeting. Nothing in this subsection restricts 
the school board from establishing reasonable standards for the public comment period, includ ing time limits and 
conduct standards. For purposes of this subsection, "school board meeting" means a full meeting of the school 
board and does not include meetings of subcommittees.  
[PL 2019, c. 293, §1 (NEW).]  
21.  Communication with school employees an d the public.  A school board shall regularly communicate with 
school employees in the school board's school administrative unit and members of the public who reside within 
the boundaries of the school administrative unit.  
[PL 2021, c. 281, §1 (NEW).]  
REVI SOR'S NOTE: (Subsection 21 as enacted by PL 2021, c. 471, §1 is REALLOCATED TO TITLE 20 -A, SECTION 1001, 
SUBSECTION 22)  
22.  (REALLOCATED FROM T. 20 -A, §1001, sub -21) Workplace bullying.  A school board shall adopt and 
implement a policy to address the neg ative effects of bullying of school employees by administrators, school 
employees, parents, students or any other individuals associated with the public school and to ensure the safety of 
employees and an inclusive environment for all employees and student s in the public school. The policy must 
include, but is not limited to:  
A. A provision identifying the responsibility of all school employees to comply with the policy;  [PL 2021, 
c. 471, §1 (NEW); RR 2021, c. 1, Pt. A, §15 (RAL).]  
B. A clear statement that bull ying, harassment and retaliation for reporting such behavior are prohibited;  
[PL 2021, c. 471, §1 (NEW); RR 2021, c. 1, Pt. A, §15 (RAL).]  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 18 of 30 C. A provision outlining the responsibility of a superintendent to implement and enforce the policy;  [PL 
2021, c. 471,  §1 (NEW); RR 2021, c. 1, Pt. A, §15 (RAL).]  
D. A procedure for school employees to report incidents of bullying;  [PL 2021, c. 471, §1 (NEW); RR 
2021, c. 1, Pt. A, §15 (RAL).]  
E. A procedure for promptly investigating and responding to incidents of bullying, in cluding written 
documentation of reported incidents; and  [PL 2021, c. 471, §1 (NEW); RR 2021, c. 1, Pt. A, §15 (RAL).]  
F. A statement that any rights under the policy do not exclude access to or limit any other right or remedy 
under the law.  [PL 2021, c. 47 1, §1 (NEW); RR 2021, c. 1, Pt. A, §15 (RAL).]  
If an affected school employee is covered by a collective bargaining agreement, the policy under this subsection is 
subject to the dispute resolution process of the collective bargaining agreement.  
For the pur poses of this subsection, "bullying" includes cyberbullying as defined in section 6554, subsection 2, 
paragraph C.  
[PL 2021, c. 471, §1 (NEW); RR 2021, c. 1, Pt. A, §15 (RAL).] SECTION HISTORY  
PL 1981, c. 693, §§5,8 (NEW). PL 1983, c. 661, §§1,2 (AMD). PL 1983, c. 806, §10 (AMD). PL 1983, c. 
859, §§C1 -C3,C7 (AMD). PL 1983, c. 859, §§K3,K7 (AMD). PL 1983, c. 862, §52 (AMD). PL 1985, c. 
713, §3 (AMD). PL 1989, c. 425, §§1,2 (AMD). PL 1989, c. 708, §1 (AMD). PL 1989, c. 878, §B17 (AMD). 
PL 1989, c. 8 89, §6 (AMD). PL 1991, c. 885, §E20 (AMD). PL 1991, c. 885, §E47 (AFF). PL 1993, c. 157, 
§1 (AMD). PL 1993, c. 423, §1 (AMD). PL 1995, c. 322, §5 (AMD). PL 1997, c. 298, §1 (AMD). PL 1997, 
c. 594, §1 (AMD). PL 1999, c. 351, §2 (AMD). PL 1999, c. 424, §A1 ( AMD). PL 2001, c. 67, §2 (AMD). PL 
2001, c. 341, §2 (AMD). PL 2001, c. 454, §7 (AMD). PL 2001, c. 471, §D17 (AMD). PL 2001, c. 471, 
§D18 (AFF). PL 2001, c. 588, §§4 -10 (AMD). PL 2001, c. 644, §1 (AMD). PL 2005, c. 307, §§1 -3 (AMD). 
PL 2005, c. 662, §A6 (AM D). PL 2007, c. 408, §1 (AMD). PL 2009, c. 614, §1 (AMD). RR 2011, c. 1, §25 
(COR). PL 2011, c. 249, §1 (AMD). PL 2011, c. 395, §§1 -3 (AMD). PL 2011, c. 614, §§3 -7 (AMD). PL 
2011, c. 659, §2 (AMD). PL 2011, c. 688, §2 (AMD). PL 2013, c. 581, §2 (AMD). PL 2 015, c. 420, §1 
(AMD). PL 2015, c. 448, §2 (AMD). PL 2017, c. 407, Pt. A, §57 (AMD). PL 2019, c. 293, §1 (AMD). PL 
2021, c. 281, §1 (AMD). PL 2021, c. 295, §§1 -4 (AMD). PL 2021, c. 320, §§1 -3 (AMD). PL 2021, c. 464, 
§1 (AMD). PL 2021, c. 471, §1 (AMD). RR 2021, c. 1, Pt. A, §15 (COR).  
The State of Maine claims a copyright in its codified statutes. If you intend to republish this material, we require that you  include the following 
disclaimer in your publication:  
All copyrights and other rights to statutory text are reserved by the State of Maine. The text included in this publication reflects changes made 
through the Second Regular Session of the 130th Maine Legislature and is current through October 1, 2022. The text is subject  to change without 
notice. It is a version that has not been officially certified by the Secretary of State. Refer to the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated and 
supplements for certified text.  
The Office of the Revisor of Statutes also requests that you send us one copy of any statutory publication you may produce. Our goal is not to 
restrict publishing activity, but to keep track of who is publishing what, to identify any needless duplication and to preser ve the State's copyright 
rights.  
PLEASE NOTE: The Revisor's Office cannot perform r esearch for or provide legal advice or interpretation of Maine law to the public. If you need 
legal assistance, please contact a qualified attorney.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 19 of 30 REGIONAL SCHOOL UNIT NO. 18  
  
File:  BBA  
  
SCHOOL BOARD POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
  
The School Board shall have general charge of all the public schools of this Unit and shall exercise such other 
responsibilities as specifically provided by law.  
  
The Board shall concern itself primarily with b road questions of policy rather than with administrative details.  The 
application of policies is an administrative task to be performed by the Superintendent and his/her staff, who shall be 
held responsible for the effective administration and supervision  of the entire School Unit.  
  
The Board, functioning within the framework of laws, court decisions, attorney generals’ opinions, and similar 
mandates from the state and national levels of government, and recognizing the authority of the state, fulfills it s 
mission as the governing body of a political subdivision by acting as follows in the execution of its duties:  
  
A. Enacts policy;  
  
B. Selects, employs and evaluates the Superintendent;  
  
C. Provides for the planning, expansion, improvement, financing, construction and maintenance of the physical 
plant of the School Unit;  
  
D. Prescribes the minimum standards needed for the efficient operation and improvement of the School Unit;  
  
E. Requires the establishment and maintenance of records, accounts, archives, management methods and 
procedures incidental to the conduct of school business;  
  
F. Approves the budget, financial reports, audits, major expenditures, payment of obligations, and policies 
whereb y the administration may formulate procedures, regulations, and other guides for the orderly 
accomplishment of business;  
  
G. Estimates the funds necessary from taxes for the operation, support, maintenance and improvement of the 
School Unit;  
  
H. Adopts cours es of study;  
  
I. Provides staff and instructional aides;  
  
J. Evaluates the educational program to determine the effectiveness with which the schools are achieving the 
educational purposes of the School Unit;  
  
K. Provides for the dissemination of information r elating to the schools necessary for creating a well -informed 
public; and  
  
L. Approves/disapproves personnel nominations from the Superintendent and determines  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 20 of 30 (where appropriate via collective bargaining) compensation and working conditions of all staff.  
  
Legal Reference:  20-A MRSA § 1001  
  
Date of Adoption:  February 26, 2009  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 21 of 30 REGIONAL SCHOOL UNIT NO. 18  
  
File:  BBAA  
                      
BOARD MEMBER AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
  
Members of the Board have authority only when acting as a board legally in session.  The Board shall not be bound in 
any way by any action or statement on the part of any individual Board member except when su ch statement or action 
is in pursuance of specific instructions from the Board.  The responsibilities of the Board members should include but 
not be limited to:  
  
1. To familiarize himself/herself with the by laws, state school laws, regulations of the       State 
Department of Education, unit policies, rules, and regulations.  
  
2. To take advantage of the various training opportunities which are offered locally,       regionally, 
and nationally for Board members.  
  
3. To have a general knowledge of educational a ims and objectives of the unit.  
  
4. To work harmoniously with other Board members, and with town officials without       trying either 
to dominate the Board or neglect his/her share of the work.  
  
5. To vote and act in the Board meetings impartially for the good of the Unit.  
  
6. To accept the will of the majority vote in all cases and give wholehearted support to       the 
resulting policy.  
  
7. To represent the Board and the Unit schools to the public in  such a way as to       promote both 
interest and support.  
  
8. To refer all suggestions and complaints to the Superintendent and/or Board and to       abstain 
from individual counsel and action.  
  
Legal Reference:  Title 20A MRSA, Sec. 1001 -1003  
  
Date of  Adoption:  February 26, 2009  
 
 
 
 
 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 22 of 30 REGIONAL SCHOOL UNIT NO. 18  
  
File:  BBBA  
                      
BOARD MEMBER QUALIFICATIONS  
  
A person is legally qualified to become a member of the Board if he or she is a United States citizen, a resident of the 
State, a qualified voter in the Unit town in which he/she resides, and at least 18 years of age.  
  
Elections shall be nonpartisan.  Ca ndidates' qualifications, residency requirements, and proper nomination procedures 
shall be the same as for candidates for other elective offices in Unit towns.  
  
No member of the Board or spouse shall be employed in any public school within the School Un it.  
  
Statutory  
  
Legal References:   Title 30A MRSA, Sec. 2526  
      Title 20A MRSA, Sec. 1002.2  
  
Date of Adoption:  February 26, 2009  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 23 of 30 REGIONAL SCHOOL UNIT NO. 18  
  
File:  BCA  
  
BOARD MEMBER CODE OF ETHICS  
  
Having accepted the challenge of service on this School Board, I accept the principles set forth in the following code of 
ethics to guide me in helping to provide free public education to all the children of my school unit wi thin the State of 
Maine.  
  
A. I will view service on the School Board as an opportunity to serve my community, state, and nation because I 
believe public education is the best means to promote the welfare of our people and to preserve our 
democratic way of l ife.  
  
B. I will at all times think of children first and base my decisions on how they will affect children, their education, 
and their training.  
  
C. I will make no disparaging remarks, in or out of the Board meetings, about other members of the Board or 
their opinions.  
  
D. I will remember at all times that as an individual I have no legal authority outside the meetings of the Board, 
and that I will conduct my relationship with the school staff, the local citizenry, and all media of 
communications on the basis  of this fact.  
  
E. I will recognize that my responsibility is not to operate the schools but to see that they are well operated.  
  
F. I will seek to provide education for all children in the community commensurate with their needs and abilities.  
  
G. I will listen to all citizens but will refer all complaints to the proper authorities, and will discuss such complaints 
only at a regular meeting after failure of administrative solution.  
  
H. I will support a decision made by the majority of the Board graci ously.  
  
I. I will not criticize employees publicly, but will make such criticism to the Superintendent for investigation and 
action, if necessary.  
  
J. I will make decisions openly after all facts bearing on a question have been presented and discussed.  
    
K. I will refuse to make promises as to how I will vote on a matter that should properly come before the Board as 
a whole.  
  
L. I will not discuss the confidential business of the Board in my home, on the street, or in my office, the place for 
such discussion b eing the School Board meeting.  
  
M. I will confine my Board action to policymaking, planning, and appraisal, leaving the administration of the 
schools to the Superintendent.  
  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 24 of 30 N. I will welcome and encourage cooperation and participation by teachers, administr ators, and other personnel 
in developing policies that affect their welfare and that of the children they serve.  
  
O. I will endeavor at all times to see that schools have adequate financial support within the capabilities of the 
community and state, in orde r that every child may receive the best possible education.  
  
P. I will resist every temptation and outside pressure to use my position as a School Board member to benefit 
myself or any individual or agency apart from the total interest of the School Unit.  
  
Q. I will endeavor to attend every regular and special Board meeting, recognizing that my presence means 
representation for my town or city.  If I find that this is not possible for an extended length of time, I will give 
consideration to resigning from my position on the Board.  
  
R. I will recognize at all times  that the School Board of which I am a member is an agent of the state, and as such, 
I will abide by the laws of the state and the regulations formulated by the Maine Department of Education and 
by the State Board of Education.  
  
Date of Adoption:  Februa ry 26, 2009  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 25 of 30 REGIONAL SCHOOL UNIT NO. 18 File:  BDD  
  
BOARD -SUPERINTENDENT RELATIONSHIP  
  
The Board believes that exercising its legislative function through policymaking is its most important responsibility.  The 
Board is also responsible for setting the direction for the School Unit and evaluating progress toward goals.  
  
The management of t he schools is the function of the Superintendent.  The Board holds the Superintendent 
responsible for complying with all applicable laws, rules and regulations; for administering Board policies and 
decisions; for the operation of the schools and educationa l program; for the system of supervision and evaluation of 
staff; and for keeping the Board informed about school operations, problems and opportunities.  The Board recognizes 
that the Superintendent may delegate certain responsibilities to other personnel .  Such delegation does not relieve the 
Superintendent of the final responsibility for actions taken.  
  
The Board, collectively and as individual members, shall:  
  
A. Recognize the Superintendent as the educational leader of the School Unit;  
  
B. Provide dire ction for the Superintendent through written policies, objectives and goals for the School Unit;  
  
C. Give the Superintendent full administrative authority and support for properly discharging his/her professional 
duties, while holding him/her responsible fo r acceptable results;  
  
D. Hold all Board meetings in the presence of the Superintendent, except as otherwise permitted by law or when 
the Superintendent voluntarily excuses him/herself at the request of the Board  
  
E. Refer complaints, criticisms, and requests to the Superintendent or other appropriate personnel and discuss 
them at Board meetings only after administrative solutions have been exhausted; and  
  
F. Evaluate the Superintendent and provide appropriate opportuni ties for the Superintendent to share his/her 
perceptions regarding the working relationship between the Board and Superintendent.   
  
Legal Reference:  1 MRSA § 401 et seq.  
      
  20-A MRSA §§ 1001 et seq.; 1051 et seq.; 13201; 13301  
Cross Reference:  BBA - School Board Powers and Responsibilities  
      BCA - Board Member Code of Ethics  
      CB - School Superintendent  
      CB-R - Superintendent Job Description  
      
  CBI - Evaluation of the Superintendent  
Date of Adoption:  August 19, 2009  
  
Policies/RSU No. 18 Policies/B – Board Governance and Operations/BDD – Board Superintendent Relationship  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 26 of 30 REGIONAL  SCHOOL  UNIT  NO.  18  
  
File:  BDE   
  
BOARD  STANDING  COMMITTEES   
  
The Board believes that standing committees can be useful to its decision -making process and in the transaction of 
Board business.  The Board may establish such standing committees as it deems necessary to facilitate School Unit 
governance and address ongo ing School Unit needs.  A standing committee has only such authority as specified by the 
Board.    
  
All standing committees shall be comprised of less than a majority of the Board.   
  
All standing committee meetings are open to the public except as provi ded by the Freedom of Access Law and the 
Municipal Public Employees Labor Relations Law.   
  
Establishment and Functions of Standing Committees   
  
The following provisions apply to the establishment and functions of standing committees.  
  
A. All standing com mittees shall be established by vote of the Board.  A motion to establish a standing committee 
shall state the purpose and responsibilities of the committee (the  
“charge”) and set the number of members comprising the committee.  
  
B. The Board Chair will ap point members to a standing committee from among the membership of the Board.  
For existing standing committees, appointments will be made at or as soon as practicable after the School 
Board’s annual organizational meeting.    
  
C. The Board Chair may also make appointments to standing committee vacancies on standing committees that 
occur prior to the Board’s next organizational meeting.  
  
D. The term of appointment to a standing committee shall be until the next organizational meeting .  
  
E. Each standing committee will elect its own chair.  
  
F. The Board Chair shall be an ex officio (voting) member of all standing committees.  (Reference:  RONR (11th 
ed.), 483, II 25 -30 also 497, II 20 -30).  
  
G. Any Board member may attend standing committee  meetings, but only members of the committee may vote.   
  
H. Except as authorized by law or Board action, a standing committee may research issues and make 
recommendations for Board action, but may not act for the Board.  
  
I. A standing committee may be abolis hed at any time by a vote of the Board.   
  
J. The number of members on a standing committee and/or the responsibilities of a standing committee may be 
modified at any time by a vote of the Board.  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 27 of 30 K. Each town in RSU 18 shall be represented on at least one Boar d committee.  
    
  
Authorization/Appointment of Standing Committees   
  
The Board shall have the following standing committees:  
  
  Budget and Finance  
  Educational Programming  
  Policy  
            Extracurricular  
  
The Board may establish other standing committees it deems necessary in accordance with this policy.  
  
Legal Reference:  1 M.R.S.A. § 401 et seq.     
  
Date of Adoption:  March 26, 2009  
Date of Revision:  October 21, 2015  
Date of Revision: December 6, 2017  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 28 of 30 REGIONAL SCHOOL UNIT NO. 18  
  
File:  BDE -R  
  
STANDING  COMMITTEE  OPERATING  PROCEDURES  
  
A. Each standing committee shall meet at the call of its chair at a time and place to be designated in the call of 
the meeting.  Standing committee meetings shall be scheduled monthly.  Additional meetings may be 
scheduled as needed.   
  
B. The chair of a standing committee, in collaboration with the Superintendent/designee, w ill establish the 
agenda for each meeting to promote the orderly flow of information and the effective operations of the Board 
and its standing committees.  
  
C. Notice to the public of the date, time and place of a standing committee meeting and the  
agenda for the meeting shall be provided at least three days in advance and in a manner consistent 
with the Board’s policy and practice concerning notification of Board meetings.  
  
D. The Superintendent may designate administrators or staff to serve in a liaison or  advisory capacity and/or to 
provide information and/or resources.    
  
E. Any member of the Board, staff or public may attend a standing committee meeting, but may speak only at the 
discretion of the chair.   
  
F. The presence of a majority of the members of a standing committee shall constitute a quorum for voting 
purposes.  Only the members of the standing committee may vote on agenda items.  
  
G. In the event that the chair of a standing committee is unavailable for a scheduled committee meeting, the 
members of the standing committee will elect one of the members in attendance to act as chair for the 
duration of the meeting.  
  
H. For any matter on its agenda, a standing committee may by majority vote of members present, or by 
consensus, agree to make recommendation s to the full Board.   
Recommendations may be in the form of a proposed motion and/or a report.  A standing committee 
may also forward a matter under discussion to the full Board with no recommendation.    
  
I. Standing committee reports will be included as a n agenda item for all regular Board meetings.  
  
J. Any item referred to a standing committee by the Board shall be reported on at the next  
regular Board meeting.  The standing committee’s report should indicate work completed or progress 
made to date.  The report may include the recommendation for continued standing committee study.    
  
K. Standing committee minutes, if prepared, are public inf ormation, subject to the Freedom of Access Law.  
  
Legal Reference:  1 M.R.S.A. § 401 et seq.  
  
Date of Adoption:  March 26, 2009  
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 29 of 30 Date of Revision:  October 21, 2015  
Date of Revision:   December 6, 2017  
  
Policy/RSU No. 18 Policies/B – Board Governanc e and Operations/BDE -R – Standing Committee Operating Procedures   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD-1567 : Training and Standards for SB Directors    Testimony: Sara H. Languet  5/2/2023 1PM --Page 30 of 30 REGIONAL SCHOOL UNIT NO. 18                     
 
File: BEDH  
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AT BOARD MEETINGS  
 
The School Board conducts meetings to carry out the official business of the School Unit. The Board  
recognizes the value of public comment on educational issues. To permit fair and orderly expression of such  
comment, the procedures described in this policy will be followed.  
 
Reques ts to add items to the agenda must be made in writing to the Superintendent and must set forth the  
specifics of the subject to be addressed. When appropriate, the Superintendent will consult with the Board  
Chair to consider placing such requests on the agenda. The Board will not entertain public comment about  
specific individuals. Such matters should be  referred to the appropriate administrator.  
 
The Board Chair is responsible for ensuring the orderly conduct of Board meetings. Individuals wishing to be  
heard by the Board will be recognized by the Board Chair. After identifying themselves, speakers may m ake 
brief comments. A speaker will not be recognized for a second time on a particular item unless time remains  
after all have been heard. Speakers must limit their comments to the item under discussion. Speakers should  
not expect the Board or the Superint endent to answer questions during the comment period. Speakers may  
refer questions to the Superintendent during regular business hours. All speakers must observe rules of  
common etiquette. The Board Chair may set a time limit on the length of public commen t and/or a time limit  
for individual speakers. The Board Chair will stop any public comment that is contrary to these rules. Persons  
who disrupt a Board meeting may be required to leave in order to permit the orderly consideration of the  
matters for which the meeting was called.  
 
Except in an emergency, the Board will not take action on an issue before the Superintendent has had an  
opportunity to research the issue and make recommendations to the Board.  
 
Cross Reference:  BE – School Board Meetings  
KEB – Complaints About School Personnel  
 
Date of Adoption: March 26, 2009  
Policies/RSU No. 18 Policies/B – Board Governance and Operations/BEDG – Public Participation at Board Meetings  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
