HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
€““ TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Sheila A. Lyman 
14 Lyman Lane. 
Livermore Falls, IVLE 04254 
Residence: (207) 320-0588 
Sheila Lyman@legislature.maine. gov 
TESTIMONY IN FAVOR OF LDs 156 
An Act to Create a Training Program for School Board Members and Establish 
School Board Meeting Standards 
An Act to Provide Meaningful Public Participation at Local School Board 
Meetings 
May 2"“ , 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and colleagues on the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee — 
My name is Sheila Lyman and I proudly represent the people of Jay, Livermore 
and Livermore Falls in the Maine House. Thank you for taking the time to listen to 
my testimony in favor of LDs 1567 & 1571. 
So here lies the problem. I have put two bills before you today that are 100% 
related and should most likely be folded into one bill. For that reason I will offer 
this testimony that will also include a submission from a current teacher in the 
Bangor area,I was ﬁilly aware that trying to address the challenges being 
expressed by concerned constituents and active board members was going to be 
difficult. 
However, I did not expect to have people fearful of having their voices heard. It 
seems that political positioning truly ﬁnds it way down the rungs of the ladder. I 
only wish that the voices that impact the direction and determinations of the 
education of our children began at the foot of the ladder and Worked their way up. 
I have been questioned about Why I would present bills that are already a 
reﬂection of the Maine Constitution and in statute. I found it more than a little 
frustrating that some at the top of the political ladder use the Maine Constitution 
and statute to justify their actions regarding the function of the school board and 
House District 76 Jay, Livennore (part), & Livermore Falls
the role of its members, yet ignore the state’s Constitution in regards to free 
education for all Maine’s children. 
So let me refer back to the position that the Maine Constitution “affords control 
over Education to the Maine legislature. School boards are creatures of statute. ” 
This was passed on to me as a memorandum from the Assistant Attomey General 
from January 2020. It also included. . .. “the (school) committee acts as a public 
board. It in no sense represents the town.” So let us take a pause right here and 
analyze this statement. The state of Maine is a Democratic Republic which means 
a “people’s” government. Wouldn’t that mean that the elected officials at every 
level of our state’s government right from the governor, to the senators, to the 
legislators and all hired positions there in are representing the town citizens 
throughout our state? I absolutely believe that our government is of the people, by 
the people, and for the people. That would mean at any level, the people’s voice 
matters. Those voices on the ground, at the very bottom of the ladder of power, are 
its guide. They represent the wants of their communities and set the direction for 
those working for them at every level of that ladder. 
Here is some more of the quote regarding board members. . .. “Its members are 
chosen by the voters of the town, but after election, they are public ofﬁcers 
deriving their authority from the law and responsible to the state for the good faith 
and rectitude of their acts.” I guess some may interpret this as saying that they are 
Working for the state, not their town. I would challenge that any elected ofﬁcial in 
the state of Maine are working for its people. So rather an individual is a board 
member, or in the legislative or executive branch, they are put there by the citizens 
standing at the base of the ladder of its elected ofﬁcials. Honestly, this process of 
putting these bills out for consideration has reinforced for me that the best training 
for any board member may be no training at all. Those untrained folks will move 
forward with the understanding that the hard workers’ tax dollars from their 
community allocated for education will be under their watch. 
I have only shared with you a few statements that are passed on to board members 
once elected. It is no wonder why local citizens feel frustrated that their elected 
ofﬁcials are not listening to them or representing them. These are the board 
members that have been directed by the state’s interpretation of the statute. 
So what happens when statute works against its people? What happens when 
elected ofﬁcials are so far removed from the bottom of that political ladder that the 
local voice has been distanced out? Some might say submit a bill. Create more 
layers of government. Maine is govemed by its people. Local voices matter. Local 
decisions meet community needs. Maine is not a one size ﬁts all. A town’s elected 
officials need to be representatives for their community! 
Now it is important that I share the voice of a licensed counselor, a 22-year 
veteran teacher, a mom of 4, and a voice at the base of our educational ladder. 
House District 76 Jay, Livermore (part), & Livermore Falls
“I would like to speak about the importance of district school boards and their 
benefits for educators and community members. 
One of the main advantages of district school boards is that they can foster strong 
relationships between educators and community members. This relationship, 
however, must be built on a foundation of trust, loyalty, and open 
communication. With the school board, educators can work collaboratively with 
community members to develop and implement policies that align with the needs 
of the local community. 
School boards can also provide a platform for open communication between 
educators and community members. This allows for constructive feedback, ideas, 
and concerns to be shared openly and addressed in a transparent manner. This 
level of transparency and open communication builds trust between educators and 
community members, which is essential for creating a supportive and 
collaborative learning environment for students. 
Accountability to community members, who by the way elected these board 
members, is an important aspect of district school boards. As representatives of 
the local community, school board members should be accountable to their 
constituents and must prioritize the needs and interests of students, families, and 
educators in their decision-making. 
This accountability to the community is crucial because it ensures that the school 
board is working in the best interests of local students and families, rather than 
simply responding to the directives of government or superintendent entities. By 
being accountable to the community, school board members are more likely to 
make decisions that reﬂect the values and priorities of the local population, and 
that support the educational needs of students. 
In contrast, superintendents or government entities, may not have the same level of 
connection with community members and may not fully understand the unique 
needs of the local population. This can lead to decisions being made that do not 
beneﬁt the community as a whole. T his further supports the fact that our local 
school board members need to be careful about listening to and responding to the 
one sided narratives of government or administrative entities that do not have the 
best interests of our students or the community in mind. 
In our school district, we are seeing ﬁrst hand, the devastating eﬂects of a school 
board whose decision-making is based solely on the manipulated narrative our 
superintendent displays for them. Community members have come in droves to 
school board meetings, called school board members personally, and sent 
countless emails begging to be heard on our current budgetary process. Staﬂ‘ 
members alike have voiced their concerns at meetings, sent emails, and had face 
to face conversations about the destructive nature of the decisions being 
made. All this to no avail. The school board basically accosted everyone for 
voicing their concerns and reminded us, decisions were made by them. 
House District 76 Jay, Livermore (part), & Livermore Falls
The outcome of these events has included a total loss of trust between stajj’ and 
community members and the school board They are now seen as an entity that 
does not support educators, community members, or the best interests of their 
students. They have shown staﬁ’ members that they do not value the expertise they 
bring to the table, and they have shown their constituents that what they feel is 
important is not what matters in their decision making process. If communities 
and school staﬂcan not trust those who were elected to have their best interests at 
heart, then who can they turn to? 
It is imperative that we remind school board members who they have been elected 
by and of their accountability to their constituents in order to best encourage 
supportive and collaborative learning environments for students and their 
families.” 
Thank you for your consideration of these bills and I would be happy to answer 
any questions you may have. 
House District 76 Jay, Livermore (part), & Livermore Falls
