m §“$l'i'l§,i 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
BOARDS Telephone: (207 622-3473 Fax: 207 626~2968 
l\$$0C|ATl0N .
_ 
PUBLIC EDUCATION ADVOCATES WebS1te' wwwimsmaweblcom II 
MaineScl|oolSupcrinlendcxitsmsodalion 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 1571 
AN ACT TO PROVIDE MEANINGFUL PUBLIC PARTICIPATION 
AT LOCAL SCHOOL BOARD MEETINGS 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Superintendents Association and Maine School Boards 
Association in strong opposition to L.D. 1571. 
Title 20-A, §l0Ol, sub-§20 was adopted in 2019 and provides the opportunity for the public to comment on 
school and education matters at a school board meeting. This statute does not require public to be deﬁned as 
taxpayers or residents of the community(ies) that make up the school district. 
As a result, during 2022-2023 school boards have seen traveling groups of the public attending school board 
meetings throughout the state. Based on the content provided by some members of the public, school boards 
have needed to place structures and protocols in place that help retain the intent and the meaning of the 
scheduled school board meetings to allow for them to conduct their business. These can be seen in Policy 
BEDH, which has been updated two times since sub-§20 was added to statute in 2019. 
School boards craft speciﬁc and meaningful agendas in order to conduct the important work of the district. 
School board meetings are meetings in the public, for the public (in accordance with the FOAA), but they are 
not meetings of the public. School board meetings are scheduled to allow the members of the board to do their 
business, which is the only time they have authority to do their work. 
Additionally, public comment is both allowed and invited for members of the public to share information, ask 
questions, or make statements for members of the board to hear in public session. 
It generally is the nature and protocol of the board to receive questions or comments and get back to the 
person making the comment either through a phone call, an email or at the next school board meeting. Oftena 
question or a comment may take time or other resources to research or explore before an infonned response 
can be provided. 
School board members and superintendents operate with a “no surprise ” rule and part of the reason for this 
“rule” is so that information needed for a response can be made ready when it is time to share that information 
in public session. 
There are times, typically during an agenda item, when members of the public may be invited to share 
information or ask questions when responses may be offered or provided. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
I have shared with the sponsor that I have both seen times and opportunities when a special/workshop school 
board meeting might be scheduled to provide a public forum, either on a speciﬁc topic or to do a check in 
with the public on certain issues that have been of interest in the community. I have seen these work around 
the topic of redistricting or school closures or transportation and especially during the budget development 
process. 
Striking the language “nothing in this subsection restricts the school board from establishing reasonable 
standards for the public comment period, including time” is a bad idea. Given what has been the experience of 
school boards across the state Within the past 18 months, this could only continue to invite and incite 
controversy and out of control behaviors. We see the proposed legislation as potentially resulting in 
individuals seeking to disrupt and to hijack a meeting to prolong meetings and derail the board’s agenda. An 
issue could be meaningful to one person, even though it is irrelevant to the issues being decided. 
Including the language “time limits and conduct standards established by the school board may not limit 
meaningful public comment or participation at the meeting” reduces the right of the school board to 
implement controls so as to avoid disruption, to minimize the risk that they will be sued for defamation for 
providing a platform for speakers to attack employees, and to minimize the risk that they could be sued for 
defamation for providing a platform for permitting complaints to be heard in a manner that blindsides 
employees. 
L.D. 1571 appears to be at odds with the goal of keeping educators in the ﬁeld — the teachers, educational 
technicians, the administrators we have been trying to recruit and retain. Who would want to work in 
education when they are accused of grooming children because one person of the public wants to ﬁlm 
themselves trying to score political points by raising issues they consider to be “meaningful. ” 
MSSA and MSBA strongly urge the Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs to vote ONTP on 
L.D. 157l.
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA Code: BEDH 
[NOTE: School Boards are required by current law to provide an opportunity for 
public comment, limited to school and education matters, at full meetings of the 
Board (20-A MRSA § 1001(20). Boards may impose reasonable time, place and 
manner restrictions on expressive activity during the public comment period to 
ensure that the Board’s business meeting is not disrupted and to ensure compliance 
with conﬁdentiality and privacy laws. 
Boards should check other related policies (such as those pertaining to agenda 
preparation, Board meetings, agenda format, etc.) to ensure that there are no 
inconsistencies with revisions to this policy, and update those policies and all cross 
references as necessary.] 
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AT SCHOOL BOARD MEETINGS 
The primary purpose of School Board meetings is to conduct the business of the Board 
related to Board policies, programs, and operations. The Board encourages residents to 
attend Board meetings so that they may become acquainted with the operations and 
programs of the schools. 
The Board also recognizes the value of public comments on school and educational 
matters. To permit fair and orderly expression of public comments at Board business 
meetings while still allowing the Board to conduct its business efficiently, the Board has 
established the procedure below for regular business meetings. 
At special, emergency, or workshop meetings, public comments will be limited to the 
topic(s) of the particular meeting. 
[NOTE: The public comment law simply refers to “full meetings of the board,” 
without making a distinction between the various kinds of meetings that are 
typically held. MSMA/DWM believe that it is acceptable to limit public comment at 
special, emergency, and workshop meetings to the topic(s) for which the meeting is 
held. Boards may delete the above sentence if they wish to allow general comments. 
The law makes it clear that public comment is not required at subcommittee 
meetings.] 
In addition to speaking during the designated public comment portion of the agenda at 
Board meetings, members of the public are welcome to submit written comments on 
school and educational matters to the Board and Superintendent, or to submit requests to 
have items placed on a Board agenda, in accordance with applicable Board policies. 
[NOTE: The law does not specify where the public comment period should be 
placed on the agenda or how much public comment should be allowed. For 
efficiency, it may make sense to place the public comment early in the agenda. 
Page 1 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: BEDH 
1. The Board will include a public comment period, not to exceed 30 minutes [Or: ___ 
minutes] on the agenda of its regular business meetings. Comments by individuals are 
limited to a maximum of three (3) minutes [OR: __ minutes] at a meeting. Individuals 
may not relinquish a portion of their allotted time to another speaker. The time limits in 
this paragraph may be modiﬁed at a particular meeting at the discretion of the Board. 
[NOTE: Boards have the option of prioritizing comments from residents of the 
school unit. There are two options below that Boards may wish to consider. 
MSMA/DW suggest having a sign-in form for individuals to speak, which includes 
the individual ’s name and town/city of residence. Boards may also choose not to 
have a sign-in form, or only to use one in circumstances where there are many 
individuals wishing to speak at a regular meeting.] 
2.[OPTION 1] Individuals who wish to speak during the public comment period are 
required to ﬁll out the sign-in form available at each Board meeting, prior to the 
beginning of the public comment period, and to review a copy of this policy. Each 
individual will be required to state their name and town/city of residence before 
beginning their remarks. 
[OPTION 2] The Board will hear public comments from residents of the school unit 
ﬁrst. If there is time remaining in the public comment period once all residents have had 
the opportunity to speak, the Board will permit comments from non-residents. Individuals 
who wish to speak are required to ﬁll out the sign-in form available at each Board 
meeting, prior to the beginning of the public comment period, and review a copy of this 
policy Each individual will be required to state their name and town/city of residence 
before beginning their remarks. 
3.The Board Chair is responsible for ensuring the orderly conduct of Board meetings and 
for ensuring compliance with this policy, including the following rules of order: 
a. Speakers will be recognized by the Board Chair, and comments should be 
addressed to the Board Chair. Requests for information or concems that require 
further research may be referred to the superintendent for further action, if 
necessary; 
b. Speakers are expected to follow rules of common etiquette and decorum, 
including refraining from using vulgar and/or obscene language, yelling, 
threatening others using words or by other actions, making defamatory 
comments, or otherwise engaging in any activity that disrupts orderly meeting 
progress. Examples of disruptive conduct include, but are not limited to, 
exceeding the allotted time limits, talking over or interrupting others, offering 
repetitive comments, and offering comment on matters unrelated to the school 
unit’s programs, policies, or operations.l 
Page 2 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: BEDH 
c. Discussion of personnel matters is not permitted during the public comment 
period due to the privacy, conﬁdentiality and due process rights of school unit 
employees. For purposes of this policy, “discussion of a personnel matter” 
means any discussion of job performance or conduct of a school unit 
employee, including complaints about them. 
d. Discussion of matters involving individual students are also not permitted 
during the public comment period due to the privacy, conﬁdentiality, and due 
process rights of the school unit’s students. 
e. Any concerns about persomrel matters and/or student matters should be 
directed to the Superintendent or another appropriate administrator outside of 
Board meetings so that they can be addressed through an alternative channel 
and in a manner consistent with privacy, conﬁdentiality, and due process rights 
of the individuals involved. 
f. The Board Chair Will stop any public comment that is contrary to these rules. 
g. Individuals who disrupt a Board meeting may be asked to leave in order to 
allow the Board to conduct its business in an orderly manner. The Board Chair 
may request the assistance of law enforcement if necessary to address disruptions 
or safety concerns. 
Legal Reference: 20-A MRSA § l00l(2O) 
20-A MRSA § 6101 
l MRSA § 405 
Cross Reference: BE — School Board Meetings 
BEDB — Agenda 
BEDB-R — Agenda Format 
BEC ~ Executive Sessions 
KE — Public Concerns and Complaints 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reﬂect ofﬁclal Association policy. They 
are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a starting point for a board's policy development on 
speciﬁc topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA 
recommends a careful analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and suitability 
to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are not intended asa 
substitute for the advice of a board's own legal counsel. 
Page 3 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
