Janet T. Mills "Q11 Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
Governor _,>',@ ,,__T,'-I ‘;l.: _ *5; Commissioner ’s Office 
ll State House Station 
0' .‘-‘Li .-”1""’-‘-I' + 109 Ca itol Street 
J M. L b Ph.D. 5“ ,»A-IP 
Ceﬁztissionzrl raw’ Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 
* 
Tel: (207) 287-3707; Fax: (207) 287-3005 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of the Office of Aging and Disability Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
In Support of LD 523 Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 5, Section 63: Home 
Based Supports and Services for Older and Disabled Adults and Chapter 11: Consumer Directed 
Personal Assistance Services, Major Substantive Rules of the Department of Health and Human 
Services, Oﬂice of Aging and Disability Services 
Hearing Date: March 15, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services, I am Karen Mason, Associate Director of the Ofﬁce of Aging and Disability 
Services (OADS) in the Department of Health and Human Services. I am here today to speak in 
suppoit of the repeal 14-197 C.M.R. ch. ll and repeal 10-149 C.M.R. ch. 5, Sec. 63, and the 
replacement of the two rules with a single rule, l0-149 C.M.R. ch. 5, Sec 63. 
Section 63 and Chapter ll programs provide similar home and community-based services. These 
programs support eligible consumers to avoid or delay institutionalization and foster independence, 
consistent with the consumer's circumstances as identiﬁed in their authorized plan of care. If passed, 
the new single rule will continue to include provisions for both consumer direction and agency 
directed models of service. In addition, Chapter 11 members transitioning onto the new Section 63 
rule, will have access to a wider service menu such as nursing and home modiﬁcation services. This 
merger of the two programs will reduce administrative complexity for the Department, Service 
Coordination agencies and provider agencies, and make programs easier for consumers to 
understand and navigate. 
In May 2019, the Department hosted a Convening on Aging and Long-Term Services and Supports ‘ 
with stakeholders to establish priorities for aging and long-term services and supports (LTSS) reform. 
This rulemaking implements one of the priorities recommended by stakeholders which was to update 
LTSS policies to bring programmatic inconsistencies into alignment and streamline policies where 
appropriate. 
In July 2022, the Department held a “listening session” with various stakeholders to receive 
comments and suggestions regarding the streamlining of the two rules. Stakeholders included 
providers, consumers, the service coordination agencies, prospective sub-contractors, and the Long- 
Term Care Ombudsman Program. Stakeholders expressed support for the Department ’s plan to 
merge the rules. If passed, the rule will take effect on October 1, 2023. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and 
to make myself available for the work session. 
‘ https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/ ﬁles/inline- ﬁles/Aging-LTSS-Reform-Report-2019.pdf
