TESTIIVIONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
JUDICIARY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
LD 336: “ANACTREGARDING STATE RECOGNITION 
OF NATIVE AMERICAN T RIBES” 
March 15, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Kirk Mohney and I am both the Director of 
the Maine Historic Preservation Commission, and the Maine State Historic 
Preservation Officer. I am providing Written testimony today that is neither for nor 
against LD 336. 
LD 336 directs the Maine Historic Preservation Commission to prepare a list of 
candidates for membership on the proposed Maine Commission on Native 
American Affairs; it directs the State Historic Preservation Officer to provide 
administrative support to the commission, including assisting the commission as 
needed with each of the duties under subsection 5; and in section 26003, 
subsection 3.E. it directs the State Historic Preservation Officer to appoint a 3- 
member panel if the applicant and the Commission are unable to agree on the 
membership of the review panel. 
The Maine Historic Preservation Commission was established by the Legislature in 
1971 to implement State policy to “preserve the architectural, historic and 
environmental heritage of the people of the State, and promote the cultural, 
educational and economic benefits of these resources. . . .” 
The Commission ’s primary focus is the administration of the program of the 
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 in Maine. In carrying out this program 
the Commission: 
0 Maintains an inventory of the state's historic and archaeological resources. - 
0 We nominate buildings, structures, sites, objects, and districts to the 
National Register of Historic Places. 
0 Commission staff review and comment on federally funded, licensed and 
permitted undertakings in Maine. 
0 The staff assists the owners of income producing historic buildings to obtain 
federal and state historic rehabilitation tax credits. 
1 The Commission is responsible for developing.and maintaining a statewide 
historic preservation plan. We also provide historic and archaeological 
resource data to municipalities engaged in local comprehensive planning.
0 The Commission administers the Certiﬁed Local Government program, 
Which supports municipal historic preservation programs with technical and 
ﬁnancial assistance. 
0 The Commission holds and monitors covenants on historic properties that 
receive federal and state preservation grant funds. 
0 We provide historic preservation education by means of Workshops, 
conferences, lectures, and publications; and 
0 We provide technical assistance relating to historic preservation to the 
public, non-proﬁt organizations, and governmental agencies at the local, 
state and federal levels. 
LD 336 imposes new responsibilities on the Maine Historic Preservation 
Commission that are not Within its established purpose or its members’ expertise in 
historic preservation. Furthermore, LD 336 imposes new responsibilities on the State 
Historic Preservation Ofﬁcer, and I do not have the stafﬁng or funding to assume 
those responsibilities. In sum, neither the Maine Historic Preservation 
Commission nor the State Historic Preservation Ofﬁcer are qualiﬁed or set up to 
implement the tasks that Would be assigned to them under this bill. 
Thank you for your consideration of the Maine Historic Preservation 
Commission ’s comments on LD 336.
