Maine Human Rights Commission 
V # 51 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333‘-0051 
Physical location: 19 Union Street, Augusta, ME 04330i 
Phone (207) 624.-6290 - Fax (207) 6248729 - TTY: Maine Relay 711A 
wwwmrzine. govjmhrc 
J. 
Amy M. Sneirson 5 
Barbara Archer Hirsch 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 1 
COMMISSION COUNSEL 
March 8, 2023 
The Honorable Anne Carney, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Matthew Moonen, House Chair\ 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 (
l 
------ -- -Re: An Actto Update the Maine Human Rights Act with Respect to Gender Identity, LD 707 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
The Maine Human Rights Commission (”MHRC") is Maine's quasi-independent, neutral, apolitical State 
agency charged with enforcing our state anti-discrimination law, the Maine Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S. §§ 4551, 
et seq. (”MHRA" or the "Act"). The MHRC is statutorily charged with the duties of: investigating, conciliating, and 
at times litigating sex and other protected-class discrimination cases under the (MHRA; promulgating rules and 
regulations to effectuate the Act; and making recommendations for further legislation or executive action 
concerning infringements on human rights in Maine. 5 M.R.S. § 4566(7), (11). With those duties in mind, the 
MHRC is pleased to provide this testimony in favor of LD 707. .V 
Since 2005, the MHRA has included protection from discrimination based on a person's actual or perceived 
sexual orientation (who they love or attracted to), gender identity (their innate sense of their own gender, or 
male- or female-ness), and gender expression (how they present their gender identity), with all three 
characteristics included in the MHRA statutory definition of ”sexual orientation" even though they are distinct 
factually and legally. In particular, the subsuming of gender identity in the MHRA definition of sexual orientation 
led-to significant confusion for MHRA-covered entities and individuals. The Legislature addressed this confusion 
several years ago by adding a definition of gender identity to the MHRA, and then amending the protected class 
itself to be ”sexual orientation or gender identity" . These amendments changed nothing about who was protected 
by the MHRA but did help clarify the existing MHRA protections. LD 707 will further clarify the characteristics that 
the MHRA has protected since 2005, which will benefit people who seek the Ml HRA's protections as well as 
Maine's providers of employment, housing, education, public accommodations, and extension of credit. 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 1334. The Commission would be 
pleased to discuss these issues with you at your convenience, including at the work session on this matter. 
Sincerely, 
>Ai:1v<’3/l>l»'t.g' ”~'§\1*:*1~ ’“»$*’“‘-~
l 
' " 
‘Amy M. Sneirson, Executive Director 
Cc: Commissioners 3
