 
Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
 
Staff 
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org  Testimony of Deborah Hagler MD, MPH on behalf of  the Maine Chapter of the 
American Academy of Pediatrics in Favor of LD1305  Resolve to Design and 
Implement a Community Based Model of Care for Adolescent Mental Health 
 
 
Good morning, Senator, Baldacci and Representative Meyer and esteemed members 
of the committee on Health and Human Services.  My name is Dr. Deborah Hagler. I 
reside in Harpswell. I have practiced general pediatrics for over 25 years in Brunswick 
and I am the immediate past president of the Maine Chapter of The American 
Academy of Pediatrics I am offering testimony in favor of LD 1305. 
 
The Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics is the professional 
organization representing Maine’s pediatricians. The Maine AAP believes that all 
children and adolescents deserve access to quality mental and physical healthcare 
and that this is a sound investment in the future of families and our communities. 
 
Most of us  have an ideal vision that involves enjoying our children as they grow up at 
creating memories in the community, they grow up in.  However,  many families 
of  youth with severe mental illness and cooccurring substance use disorders may 
struggle to realize this ideal because these children require high levels of care 
often necessitating inpatient services and residential care. It is estimated that up to 
60% of youth admitted with substance use disorders have a co-occurring mental 
illness. Upon discharge from this type of care,  these youth must have coordinated 
connection to evidenced based care  available in their communities or within 
reasonable distance to make a smooth transition home. However, these supports can 
be tremendously challenging for families to find. Many youths with these complex 
needs often will be involved with both child welfare and/or the juvenile justice  system.1 
As noted in a 2020 review of Maine’s Juvenile Justice system- a key ongoing need for 
this population is to “ develop a robust continuum of community-based services by 
developing an ongoing mechanism to provide flexible funding for community-based 
services and supports”.  
 
Whether or not youth with complex behavioral and mental health needs  are involved 
with juvenile justice, care for this population  in the community remains an enormous 
challenge. Identifying evidence-based community services and providing the 
necessary Mainecare funding to keep these programs operational is key to supporting 
these youth. LD1305 asks  DHHS to create a plan for community-based treatments 
and programs to support youth with complex mental health and substance use  needs 
utilizing the most evidence informed options available and identify the appropriate 
Mainecare rates to support this system. The Maine Chapter strongly encourages the 
support of these efforts and urges passage of LD1305. 
 
1.Urban Institute Data Snapshot of Youth Incarceration Maine -2020  
 
2.Center for Children’s Law and Policy et al. (2020). Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment 
 
 
  
