POSITION STATEMENT lN SUPPORT 
LD 1305 Resolve, to Design and Implement a Community-based Model of Care for Adolescent Mental 
Health 
Presented to Maine's Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
As the state's largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, ‘NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of Resolve, to Design and implement a Community-based Model of Care forAdolescent Mental Health. 
NAMI Maine and other mental health advocates have attended multiple hearings and work sessions 
before this committee's esteemed colleagues sitting on the Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Committee regarding very similar issues and concerns. Research indicates that as many as 70% of 
justice involved youth have a diagnosable mental health condition. Limited access to evidence-based 
treatments often results in many of these young people receiving minimal, if any treatment. We strongly 
support any and all work that is being done. This data indicates that 40% of the young people who 
participated in the survey reported that they required substance use treatment and they did not receive 
it. Those who do receive treatment are often either held at higher levels of care awaiting community 
care, causing a bottleneck of services, or sitting on waitlists awaiting treatment. 
There are a number of evidence-based services and resources that have been found to be impactful in 
supporting young people in their communities. Many of these young people are involved in multiple 
systems, all service providers attempt to do their best within their scope, however struggle to address 
the complex needs. Developing a plan and programming, based on these researched and proven 
effective treatments, will provide the services and resources for young people to remain or return to 
their communities, families and supports. Building a solid foundation and framework, based on research 
and with sustainable funding, will allow our state to support high risk youth. 
NAMI Maine supports the work and initiatives of this committee in ensuring that the investments of this 
committee will provide critical resources and allow for the best possible outcomes for our children. 
Maine has struggled with the weight of substance use disorders for a considerable amount of time. 
Investing in treatment for young people will assist in the long-term health and well-being of our state. 
ABOUT NAM! MAlN E: Incorporated in 1984, the National/illliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) is the state's largest grassroots 
mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone 
impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state's mental 
health system through collaboration and education. 
l_EGlSLATlVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community POSITIONS & POUCY AGENDA 
Programs www.namimaineorg/advocacy 
(207) 622-5767 O HannahL@namimaine.org
