295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers
       Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
Testimony in Support of  LD 1305  
"Resolve, to Design and Implement a Community -based Model of 
Care for Adolescent Mental Health " 
Sponsored by Representative Gramlich  
April 21, 2023  
Good morning  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and esteemed  members 
of the Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy 
and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community based mental health and substance use treatment providers , 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance 
advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system.  
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 1305 , 
“Resolve, to Design and Implement a Community -based Model of Care for 
Adolescent Mental Health .” First, I’d like to thank Representative Gramlich 
for her continued work regarding Maine’s young people.  
This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human  Services to design 
and implement a community -based model of care that addresses the acute 
mental health needs of adolescents with co -occurring disorders.  It 
appropriates one -time funds of $965,000 for this purpose.  It directs the 
Department of Health an d Human Services to, no later than December 3, 
2025, submit to you, the members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, a report demonstrating the efficacy of the model of care and 
sufficient data to aid in the development of a future MaineCare 
reimbur sement rate.  
As you’ve already heard, Representative Gramlich worked with Day One 
CEO, and Alliance member, Greg Bowers, to create this resolve. Importantly, 
Day One has been providing services to young people for almost 50 years. 
They have the experience needed to understand Maine’s complex 
“conundrum of care” for youth. Additionally, Mr. Bowers served alongside 
me as a member of the Maine Juvenil e Justice System Assessment & 
Reinvestment Task Force .  
The Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment & Reinvestment Task Force 
report states that, “Maine has had for some time, or has recently 
established, several community -based programs and services, man y of 
which are excellent. However, one of the most common statements we  
~ Officers ~  
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
~ Board Members ~  
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org heard throughout Maine, from youth and adults, from those inside and outside the juvenile 
justice system, was that the state still lacks a continuum of community-based programs and 
services to provide effective supervision of young people without resorting to incarceration.”1 
Young people from all over Main e are in need of substanc e use disorder treatment, man y times 
due to polysubstanc e use, and often with accompanying menta l health support need s as well . 
There are enormou s gap s in ou r stat e when it co mes to providing th e kind of integrated efforts 
that are required to meet th e comp lex need s of youth , especially in those servic es that will 
provide opportunities for successful integration back into the community with a new 
opportunity to set a different life trajectory.  
The Alliance providers would agree with some of the concerns of Director Landry and OCFS 
that the time frame might be too short to accomplish the goals in the pilot of this model of 
care. We would agree that extending it and adding additional funding for the training that 
would be involved would assure a more successful outcome.
This resolve is a very real step you can take toward providing a remedy for the struggles Maine 
youth are facing across our state. I urge members to vote ought-t o-pass and would be pleased 
to answer any questions you have for me.  
1 Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment report. Prepared by the Center for Children’s Law and Policy, the  
Juvenile Justice Research and Reform Lab at Drexel University, and the Center for the Study of Social Policy  
February 2020. https://www.mainejjtaskf orce.org/  
