 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 21 , 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1305, Resolve, to Design and Implement a Community -based Model of Care for 
Adolescent Mental Health  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 1305 , Resolve, to Design and Implement a 
Community -based Model of Care for Adolescent Mental Health . This resolve directs the 
Department to design and implement a community -based model of care that address es the acute 
mental health needs of adolescents with co -occurring disorders. The bill includes one -time 
funding of $965,000 for this work. The Department is also required to report by 12/3/25 to this 
Committee on the efficacy of the model of care and provi de sufficient data to aid in the 
development of a future MaineCare reimbursement rate for the service.  
 
While OCFS is generally supportive of the concepts outlined in this bill , we have some concerns 
as well. The evidence -based practice named in this bill, the Assertive Continuing Care (ACC) 
protocol, is a subset of the service, Adolescent Community Reinforcement Approach (ACR -A) 
and, as such, practitioners must first be trained and certified in ACR -A prior to being trained and 
certified in ACC. The Department is currently partnering with Chestnut Health to offer ACR -A 
training to providers at no cost. T o date, Maine has had 16 clinicians certified in ACR -A and one 
trained but not  yet certified in ACC. To accomplish what this bill is asking, the Department  
believes  that eligible clinicians should be both trained and certified in ACC prior to delivering 
services.  
 
Chestnut Health has confirmed that in order to be certified in ACC, the clinician must first be 
certified in A -CRA at the first level, complete the online ACC course, submit a vignette about 
how to use the model during care, and demonstrate that they’ve provided ACC services to a 
client. On average, it takes around six mon ths for a clinician to be certified. This poses an issue 
as this bill propose s one-time funding in SFY24. This time-limited funding would not provide  
enough time to ensure staff are certified in the model and delivering services through a pilot with 
a mean ingful amount of time to assess program effectiveness. The Department would 
recommend increasing the length of time of funding to account for a full year or more of a pilot 
in order to report meaningful data on pilot effectiveness.  
 
 
  
 
Adequate funding wo uld be needed to both train clinicians in the ACC model (the Department’s 
current funding is only to support A -CRA)  and should support service delivery in designated 
areas. To adequately cover the cost of the training, including reimbursing for clinician t ime 
completing the training and certification process, and running a pilot for a full year prior to 
considering sustainability through MaineCare, the Department would recommend funding at a 
similar level as its budget initiative on Multi -Dimensional Family  Therapy (MDFT) (CA -7731) 
at $1.5 million. MDFT  is another evidence -based practice supporting youth with co -occurring 
substance use and mental health disorders.  
 
While MDFT, A -CRA, and ACC are treatment modalities geared towards youth with co -
occurring dis orders and can be used after discharge from residential care, they can also serve as a 
community -based model to provide services when residential care is not available. Nevertheless, 
OCFS does have some concern with the language in the bill around resident ial care not being 
desired by the adolescent or their family. To be successful, these treatment modalities require 
willingness to participate from both the youth and the family.  
 
The bill also references the “Assertive Continuing Care protocol” but does n ot require use of this 
particular protocol. OCFS would also draw the Committee’s attention to the account referenced 
for the funding. There appears to be an error in that the funding is directed to OBH when it 
should be directed to OCFS.  
 
We wanted you to  be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dr. Todd A. Landry  
Director  
Office of Child and Family Services  

