 
 
 
PO Box 5257 | Augusta, ME | 04332  
 
 
 
March 2, 2023  
 
The Honorable Donna Bailey , Chair  
The Honorable Anne Perry , Chair  
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
RE: Testimony  in favor of LD 3 51 A n Act to Increase Access to Birth Control by Making Cer tain Contraception Available 
Over the Cou nter  
 
Dear Senator  Bailey , Representative Perry  and members of the Health Coverage , Ins urance  and Financial Services 
Committee :  
 
My name is Amelia Arnold  and I a m a resident  of Winthrop, Maine, a lic ensed pharmacis t employed b y 
Comm unity Pharmacies and  the Le gislative Liaison  for the  Maine Pharmacy Association.   The MPA  is the state pharmacy 
organization that addresses  the advocacy, continuing education and professional needs of all licensed pharmacists, 
pharmacy te chnicians and student phar macists in Maine . Our mission  is to promote public health by advocating for the 
profession of pharmacy.   On behalf of  the Maine Pharmacy Assoc iation, I am testifying  today  in favor of LD 35 1. 
 
The bill in front of you today asks y ou to consider adding Maine to a list of growing states, a t the last count twenty , that 
allow some ver sion of pharmacist prescriptive  authority of  hormonal contracepti ves.  California was the first state to 
introduce this in 2013, so you can see that  this has become a n increasingly popular option to offer  patients to access 
contrace ptive care .  The most recent state to add this was South Carolina, and according  to the American S ociety of 
Health -System  Pharmacist s, ther e are approxim ately an additional 10  states that similar legi slation in the works.  
 
While th is is not the type o f legislation  that should be undertaken  lightly, the Maine Pharmacy Association belie ves with  
appropriate  input from stake holders and future rule making by the B oard of Pharmacy, Main e could join the list  of states 
removing barriers for patients to access contraceptives.  
 
Items that we encoura ge to addres s during the work session would include:  
• This bill limits the type of hormonal contraceptives to two t ypes - a patch and “self-adminis tered oral hormonal 
contraceptive ” which is defined  as a combination of hormon e products .  Should other types such a s a vaginal 
ring , the injectable  or progesti n-only pills be added ? 
• As a pharmacis t, I know t hat I would need time to appropriate ly evaluate and counsel a patient in order to 
prescribe  birth control - even if they can s how evidence of being on it before.  I would ask why there is a 
prohibition of requiring an appointment?  Allowing for  at least the option of an appointment may allow a 
pharmacy t o schedule  patients when there is appropriate staffing  to meet the needs of this type of consultation.  
• Any legis lation we encourage to address requirements for  a treatment  questionnaire, algo rithm, record keeping, 
notification s and follow -ups to en sure pa tients are still accessing  regular follow -up care with a primary care 
provider or women s’ health provider and are not lost to routine care.   We hope th ese items would  be developed 
by looking to other states legislation as well as taking input from Maine pha rmacists.  
 
The M aine Pharmacy Association  is happy to answer any questions and work with the committee on this leg islation . 
Thank you fo r your time and consideration.  
 
Most Sincerel y,  
 
Amelia Arnold, PharmD  
Legislative Liaison  | Maine Pharmacy Associatio n 
