V ‘l 
552;)I 
Eric L. Brakcy 131*‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 351, An Act to Increase Access to Birth Control by 
Making Certain Contraception Available over the Counter 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services 
March 2, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services: I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people 
of Aubum, New Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Thank you for your presence today asI 
present L.D. 351, An Act to Increase Access to Birth Control by Making Certain Contraception 
Available over the Counter 
The legislation before you would allow pharmacists to prescribe and dispense hormonal 
contraceptive patches and oral hormonal contraceptives to an individual who has previously been 
prescribed one of these forms of contraception by a practitioner. After several years of trials, the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the ﬁrst oral contraceptive pill in 1960. With over 
half a century of use, the effects and risks are well known. 
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) made the recommendation 
in December of 2012 that oral contraception be available over-the-counter. An excerpt from that 
recommendation stated:' 
“Unintended pregnancy remains a major public health problem in the United States. 
Over the past 20 years, the overall rate of unintended pregnancy has not changed and 
remains unacceptably high, accounting for approximately 50% of all pregnancies. 
The economic burden of unintended pregnancy has been recently estimated to cost 
taxpayers $11.1 billion dollars each year. According to the Institute of Medicine, 
women with unintended pregnancy are more likely to smoke or drink alcohol during 
pregnancy, have depression, experience domestic violence, and are less likely to 
obtain prenatal care or breastfeed. Short inter-pregnancy intervals have been 
' 
associated with adverse‘ neonatal outcomes, including low birth weight and' 
prematurity, which increase the chances of children ’s health and developmental 
problems. 
“Many factors contribute to the high rate of unintended pregnancy. Access and cost 
issues are common reasons why women either do not use contraception or have gaps
in use. Although oral contraceptives (OCs) are the most widely used reversible 
method of family planning in the United States, OC use is subject to problems with 
adherence and continuation, often due to logistics or practical issues. A potential way 
to improve contraceptive access and use, and possibly decrease the unintended 
pregnancy rate, is to allow over-the-counter access to OCs.” 
So those are some of the problems identiﬁed by the ACOG that could be aided with 
over-the-counter birth control, but is there actual interest in using over-the-counter birth control? 
The College reported: 
“A 2004 national telephone survey of... Women aged 18-44 years found that 68% of 
women at risk of unintended pregnancy would utilize pharmacy access... Also, 47% of 
uninsured women and 40% of low-income Women who were not using [these forms of 
birth control] said they would start using those methods if they were available from 
pharmacies Without a prescription. In another survey of... Women aged 18-49 years, 60% 
of Women not currently using a highly effective contraceptive method said they would be 
more likely to use OCs if they Were available over-the-counter. A national survey of... 
pharmacists found that 85% were interested in providing honnonal contraception... ” 
So there seems to be strong interest from both surveyed Women and surveyed pharmacists in 
over~the-counter birth control, but of course, what about safety? 
“Without the current doctor ’s prescription, how might that impact health outcomes? The 
College wrote: No drug or intervention is completely without risk of harm. For example, 
common nonsteroidal anti-in ammatory drugs, such as aspirin, have documented adverse 
effects, including gastrointestinal bleeding. These effects may occur even at doses used 
for prophylaxis of cardiovascular disease . Additionally, over-the-counter use of 
acetaminophen is linked to serious liver damage. Safety concerns about OCs frequently 
focus on the increased risk of [blood clots]. However, it is important to understand that 
the rate of [blood clots] for OC users is extremely low (3-10.22 / 10,000 Women-years) 
and to put this risk in context by recognizing the much greater risk of [blood clots] during 
pregnancy (5-20 / 10,000 women-years) or in the postpartum period (40-65 / 10,000 
Women-years). Overall, the consensus is that OC use is safe.
“ ...Despite the safety of OC use, one frequently cited concern regarding over the counter 
provision of OCs is the potential harm that could result if Women with contraindications 
use them. However, several studies have shown that women can self-screen for 
contraindications. In one study that compared current family planning clients‘ 
self-assessment of contraindications with clinical assessment, 392 of the 399 participants 
(females aged 15-45 years) and health care provider pairs obtained agreement on medical 
eligibility criteria (greater than 90%) (18). Similar findings were seen in general 
populations of women, although in one study approximately 6% of the 1,271 women 
aged 18-49 years had unrecognized hypertension. Both studies showed that in cases of 
discrepancy, Women were more likely to report contraindications than were health care 
providers. A study conducted in the United Kingdom replicated the findings that women 
take a more conservative approach compared With clinicians and also demonstrated that
none of the 328 women studied would have incorrectly used OCs based on 
self-screening. Another study found that women obtaining OCs from phannacies were no 
more likely to have contraindications than those who got OCs from a clinic... 
This recommendation was made over ten years ago, and ACOG has even broadened their 
recommendations until then, but Maine has not acted. This bill would beneﬁt women in many 
different walks of life - from young women in college, to mothers caring for children at home, to 
the working woman deep in her career. 
A number of states have acted to authorize pharmacist-prescribed birth control. Some require a 
prior prescription from a physician while others simply require a health screening bya 
pharmacist before providing the contraception. Additionally, over-the-counter contraceptive pills 
are available in over 100 countries. 
I would note that I brought this bill before the Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic 
Development committee during the 128“ Legislature. The bill was voted Ought Not to Pass as 
the committee felt we should wait for action at the federal level. However, it has been six years 
and While other states have moved forward, oral contraceptives still are not available 
over-the-counter in Maine. I don’t think we should wait any longer on the federal government. 
This policy is in our hands to decide. 
I appreciate your consideration of this proposal. I hope you will agree with me that it is time we 
make oral contraceptives more accessible.
