 
43 Gabriel  Drive, Post Office  Box 587 
Augusta , ME 04332- 0587  
 t: 207.622.7524 | f: 207.622.0836  
www.MaineF amilyPlanning .org 
info@MaineF amilyPlanning.org  
 
 
 
 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against   
LD 351, An Act to Increase Access to Birth Control by Making Certain Contraception Available O ver the 
Counter   
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services   
March 1, 2023   
  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services, my name is Evelyn Kieltyka, I’m a board -certified 
women’s health nurse practitioner and family nurse practitioner, and I am the Senior Vice President for 
Program Services at Maine Family Planning. I am writing on behalf of Maine Family Planning neither for nor 
against LD 351, for we would not stand in its way, but nor do we believe that it is the right solution to the 
problem of limited access to contraceptio n.   
 The bill title refers to making contraceptive methods available “over the counter” but that is not 
actually what it purports to do. It proposes to empower pharmacists to prescribe these methods at the pharmacy to individuals who can document a similar pres cription from a health care provider. True over 
the counter access would mean that these methods are available to any consumer without a prescription on the pharmacy shelf, along with aspirin, Tylenol and cold medicines. Oral contraceptives are currently 
available over the counter in more than 100 countries around the world. That is what we are working 
towards, and we are closer than ever to achieving that goal.    
 Leading medical groups, including the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, th e 
American Academy of Family Physicians, and the American Public Health Association, support making oral 
contraceptives available over the counter. The federal Food and Drug Administration is currently reviewing 
a progestin -only oral contraceptive for over the counter use, and we expect a decision by this summer.    
 
Reducing barriers to contraception improves all people’s ability to control their reproductive lives, 
and we are excited to see folks get involved in the work to increase access. As experts in t he field of sexual 
and reproductive health, and as members of the Free the Pill coalition, we invite lawmakers to join us in 
thinking more expansively about what meaningful access looks like, and the best legislative and policy 
vehicles to get us there.    
 
Thank you.  
