 
P.O. Box 261 Augusta, ME 04332 | 207-204-8800
March 2, 2023
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair
Representative Anne Perry, Chair
Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee
RE: Testimony, LD 351 Resolve, An Act to Increase Access to Birth Control by Making 
Certain Contraception Available over the Counter
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health Coverage and Financial 
Services Committee:
My name is Matthew Marston, I am a resident of Hampden and the Legislative Liaison on the Maine 
Society of Health System Pharmacists Board of Directors. Today I am submitting testimony on 
behalf of the Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists, an organization that has more than 300 
members statewide and primarily represents individual Pharmacists, Technicians and students who 
practice in a health-system setting. I am testifying today in support of LD 351 with the following 
amendments as outlined in this testimony.
Today pharmacists represent one of the most accessible healthcare providers with the majority of 
patients living closer to their local pharmacy than the nearest physician practice.  With provider 
shortages ever present in the State of Maine accessibility to timely healthcare services represents a 
challenge for many and bills such as LD 351 recognizing the enhanced access to care that 
pharmacies can offer represent opportunities to address these challenges.
A recent study presented at the American Society of Health System Pharmacists Midyear Annual 
Meeting of 500 women in New York demonstrated that nearly three quarters of correspondents 
reported that they would be comfortable getting a prescription for contraception from a 
pharmacist.  Additionally, 20 other States in the United States already have legislation authorizing 
pharmacists to provide prescriptions for contraceptive medications.  Maine Society of Health-
System Pharmacists is eager to support joining these other States in provided enhanced access to 
contraceptives for women in Maine.
It is our recommendation that the committee consider the removal of the requirement that 
patient’s must have had a prior prescription from a practitioner for contraception in Section 2.  
Instead we would recommend requiring pharmacists to provide patients with written resources on 
where they can seek routine follow-up care from a primary care physician or women’s health 
provider with a limitation that contraception may only continue to be prescribed for up to 3 years 
without having a practitioner identified as responsible for their ongoing follow-up.  This is 
consistent with the approach taken in Colorado as requiring evidence of a provider visit presents 
barriers to women not already connected with a healthcare provider.  New Hampshire currently 
does not require a visit with a healthcare practitioner as a condition for prescribing either.  We do 
however agree that routine healthcare screening is critical for population health and should be 
encouraged by this process rather than replacing it.
Also, in Section 2 regarding Authorization the committee should consider any age limitations on 
provision of contraception within a pharmacy setting.  In the State of Maine, parental consent is not 
 
P.O. Box 261 Augusta, ME 04332 | 207-204-8800
required for minors seeking access to contraceptives.  Some States have included a limitation of 18 
years of age or older, however access to contraception is still a challenge for many minors who may 
not feel comfortable or be able to seek out an appointment with a healthcare practitioner.  We 
recommend including in Section 5 regarding rulemaking that the Board provide guidance on ages 
that are to be covered by the standard procedures they are to establish on prescribing.  
I would also urge the committee to consider payment along with the prohibition of requiring 
appointments for these services in Section 4.  Labor shortages in pharmacy currently have 
widespread impact on pharmacies across our State and these services require an in depth patient 
assessment, patient interview, and review of a patient’s concurrent medications to safely prescribe 
contraceptives as would be done by another healthcare practitioner.  These services are currently 
not reimbursable in a pharmacy environment, which will not allow for additional resources to be 
provided to support this change in scope of practice.  We support the desire to eliminate the need 
for appointments as a means to improve access, but would recommend that the committee 
consider provisions for payment for these clinical assessments to allow adequate resourcing to 
provide these services.  Reimbursement for contraceptive medications alone will not be enough to 
cover these intended services.
We also recommend amending section 5 regarding rulemaking to include a timeline for this 
rulemaking to occur as well as to state “establish standard algorithms and procedures” for 
prescribing.  New Hampshire’s Board of Pharmacy has produced a standard algorithm to guide 
clinical decision making in contraceptive selection.  This would be invaluable to ensure that these 
services are delivered safely and consistently across all pharmacies providing the service.
The Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists would be happy to work with the committee in 
any way we can on LD 351. Please reach out if we can be of service and we would be happy to share 
any of the materials from other States that we have gathered for reference.
Kind Regards,
Matthew Marston, PharmD, MBA, BCPS, BCOP
Legislative Liaison| Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists
