122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  Neither For Nor Against : 
LD 351: An Act to Increase Access to Birth Control by Making Certain Contraception Available over the 
Counter  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Room 220, Cross State Office Building  
Thursday, March 2, 2023  
 Good afternoon, Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services . My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident 
of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communit ies, and we take that 
responsibility seriously.  MPHA is neither for nor against LD 351: “An Act to Increase Access to Birth Control by Making Certain Contraception Available over the Counter.” The proposed bill authorizes pharmacists to prescribe and dispense 
“hormonal contraceptive patches” and “self -administered oral hormonal contraceptives” ( terms defined in the 
bill) to patients who already have previous prescriptions  for these products . 
 Nearly half of pregnancies in reproductive -aged women in the U nited S tates are unintended.
1 Methods to 
prevent pregnancy include non- hormonal contraception ( e.g., c ondom, s permicide, diaphragm, s ponge, c ervical 
cap) and hormonal contraception ( e.g., intrauterine device , oral hormonal contraceptive , vaginal ring, 
contraceptive injection , contraceptive implant , contraceptive p atch). Non -hormonal contraception is less 
effective at preventing pregnancy than hormonal contraception (non- hormonal 76% -87% efficacy vs.  hormonal 
99%-100%  efficacy ).2 Thus, i ncreasing access to high -quality hormonal contraceptives is an effective tool to 
prevent unintended pregnancies.  
 Extensive research has shown that oral contraceptives are safe, with rare complications, and the benefits outweigh the risk of complications for most people. For instance, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist s’ Committee on Gynecologic Practices stated the risks associated with venous thromboembolism 
(blot clot s) are higher during pregnancy (5- 20:10,000 women/year) and the postpar tum period (40- 65:10,000 
women/year) than with taking combined ( progestogen and estrogen) oral hormonal contracepti on (3 -9:10,000 
women/year).
3 This committee also reported  research  demonstrates  that individuals are capable of self -
screening for hormonal contraceptive use, without involving a clinician.3 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  An over -the-counter  (OTC) drug is defined as a medicine that can be bought without a prescription, such as 
aspirin or acetaminophen.4 Globally, more than 100 countries implement OTC access to hormonal 
contraceptives.5 In the United State s, 22 states  allow  pharmacists to prescribe hormonal contraceptives.6 
Leading medical and public health organizations , including The A merican College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists , American Academy of Family Physicians , American Medical Association , and American Public 
Health Association , support making oral contraceptives available OTC . 
 
We believe the proposed legislation is limited in terms of true OTC  access  to contraception. The bill proposes to 
empower pharmacists to prescribe certain contraceptive methods at the pharmacy; however, only individuals 
who can document a previous  prescription from a health care provider  are eligible . We believe expanded access 
would include access for individuals without a prior prescription. 
 Further, we are unclear about the implementation method for the bill. W hile the bill’s title  refers to making 
contraceptive methods available “over the  counter ,” the bill does not establish  hormonal contraceptives as an 
OTC  drug. The U.S.  Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is the entity that must approve the OTC  distribution 
of hormonal contraceptives. The FDA is currently reviewing a progesterone -only oral contracepti ve for OTC  
use, and a  decision is expected  in May 2023.
7 
 
We are supportive of removing restrictions to accessing birth control methods. Indeed, improving access to 
contraceptive s improve s all people’s ability to plan whether and when to have children. We encourage the 
committee to consider amending the bill so that a prior prescription is not needed. Thank you for consider ing 
our testimony. 
 
 
 
1 Kost K. 2015. Unintended pregnancy rates at the s tate level: Estimates for 2010 and t rends since 2002 . New York: Guttmacher 
Institute.   
2 Cleveland Clinic. 2023. Birth control options . 
3 The Ameri can College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 2019. Over -the-counter access to hormonal contraception . Number 788 
(Replaces Committee Opinion Number 544, December 2012. Reaffirmed 2021) . 
4 National Cancer Institute. Definition of over -the-counter . 
5 Grindlay K, Burns B, Grossman D. 2012. Prescription requirements and over -the-counter access to oral contraceptives: A global 
review . Contraception;88(1):91 -96. 
6 National Alliance of State Pharmacy Associations. 2022. Pharmacist prescribing: Hormonal contraceptives . 
7 Long M, Frederiksen B, Ranji U, Diep K & Salganicoff A. 2022. Interest in using over-the-counter oral contraceptive pills: Findings 
from the 2022 KFF Women's Health Survey . Kaiser Family Foundation Women’s Health Policy.  
