I 
SAM ILA 
205 Church Hill Road, Augusta, ME 04330 
David Trahan, Executive Director 
david@sam0fmaine.org 
www.sarniIa.org 
Testimony in Support 
LD 629, An Act to Improve, Protect and Defend the Individual Civil Right to Bear Arms Through Exemption of 
Firearms and Ammunition from Taxation 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Presented by David Trahan, Executive Director of the SAM Institute for Legislative Action 
March 9, 2023 
The Honorable Senator Grahoski, Rep. Perry, members of the Taxation Committee, My name is David Trahan, 
I am the Executive Director of the Sportsman ’s Alliance of Maine-Institute for Legislative Action, testifying in 
support of LD 629, An Act to Improve, Protect and Defend the Individual Civil Right to Bear Arms Through 
Exemption of Firearms and Ammunition from Taxation with what we hope will be a friendly amendment. 
As a former Senate Chair of the Taxation Committee, I realize the importance of using tax policy to reinforce 
public policy. I suspect this bill will be controversial, anything to do with guns and ammunition usually is. 
Instead of what might be a lengthy ﬁght and questionable result, I would like to present a change to this bill,a 
concept that might gain bi-partisan support. 
In I93 7, congress passed the most signiﬁcant conservation program ever proposed, the Pittman-Robertson (PR) 
Act, a I0 and ll percent excise tax on guns, ammunition and archery equipment, I have supplied you witha 
detailed article describing the structure of the Pitman-Robertson Act. In summary, the PR Act funds wildlife 
agencies around the country, wildlife habitat restoration, hunter education, etc. 
When I saw the title of this bill, I approached the sponsor, Rep. Ardell, and inquired whether the he would 
consider amending this bill to direct the sales tax generated on items like ﬁrearms, ammunition and archery 
equipment to the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to fund the state side match for Pitman-Robertson 
ﬁlnding. Doing so would create a stable source of revenue for wildlife habitat purchase and improvement, 
public access upgrades, enhanced hunter safety education and other support for conservation that beneﬁts non- 
game species. 
If this committee endorses this new policy, it would mean the new revenue source for Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife would also receive Constitutional protections as it would become a fee directly connected to the 
department ’s mission. 
Maine is unique, we have some of the last remaining strong holds for naturally reproducing Brook Trout, we are 
over 90 percent wooded with some of the most amazing wildlife habitat left in Maine. Stable funding that 
supports conservation of these special natural resources has never been more important. 
1|Page
>
3 
We ask the committee to allow the Sportsman ’s Alliance of Maine-Institute for Legislative Action, the sponsor 
of the bill and other interested parties to develop an amendment that creates a mini Pitrnan-Robertson Act and 
bring the amendment back for your review. 
2|Page
The Pittman-Robertson Wildlife 
Restoration Act explained 
The Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act (16 U.S.C.A. 669 et seq) was passed 
in 1937. The legislation took an existing excise tax on ﬁrearms and reallocated the 
proceeds to a grant fund for state wildlife agencies. lt established a program of 
matching federal grants to the states for “wildlife restoration projects." The Pittman- 
Robertson Act required states, as a condition of receiving funding, to enact laws 
prohibiting the “diversion" of license fees paid by hunters for any purpose other than 
administration of their state wildlife agency. Every state did as required. While this 
established a reliable funding source for state wildlife agencies, it also created an 
incentive for the agencies to maximize hunting license sales. 
The impetus for the Pittman-Robertson Act was a marked decline in certain game 
populations. The Pittman-Robertson Act was intended to promote the preservation 
and restoration of wildlife habitats. The Pittman-Robertson Act deﬁnes “wildlife ” 
broadly to include “any species of wild, free—ranging fauna including ﬁsh." Note that 
this deﬁnition includes invertebrate and non—game species. However, in 1956 the U.S 
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) issued regulations that restricted the use of Pittman- 
Robertson Act funds to birds and mammals, probably because these are the taxa of 
most interest to hunters and wildlife managers. That restriction is still in place, and 
presumably open to a legal challenge. 
During the 2019 comment period on proposed revisions to the federal rg-gulations 
implementing the Pittman-Robertson Act, this is how the FWS responded toa 
suggestion that the deﬁnition of wildlife be expanded: 
“Comment 5: The Service should use funds under the Wildlife Restoration Act 
for management of all species of wildlife. The Act was written for species that 
are imperiled and not just for those that are hunted. 
Response 5: State ﬁsh and wildlife agencies may use their Wildlife Restoration 
funds for species under their control that meet the deﬁnition of “wildlife ” at50
CFR 80.2. This deﬁnition limits eligible species to birds and mammals. [italics added] 
Some States have asked that we expand the deﬁnition to include species that 
are hunted in that State, but are not birds or mammals, as these species often 
need a management plan and those who purchase licenses to hunt those 
species contribute ﬁnancially when they purchase a license. The topic of 
deﬁning wildlife will continue to be considered, and we appreciate this public 
input." 
Where does the money come from? 
Pittman-Robertson Act funds are derived from federal excise taxes collected from 
manufacturers and importers on the following items: 
- Handguns (10 percent of wholesale price) 
- Other Firearms (11 percent) —includes any portable weapons such as: 
o Riﬂes 
<> Carbines 
o Machine guns 
<> Shotguns 
o Fowling pieces 
o Antique ﬁrearms 
- Shells and cartridges (11 percent) 
- Firearm parts or accessories (11 percent) 
- Archery equipment (11 percent) 
The revenues generated from these taxes vary year to year both in total and by 
speciﬁc type of taxable item, but in general the total amount collected has increased 
over time. Based on annual averages, FWS _@|:LoLd gross Pittman-Robertson Act 
receipts generated as follows: 
~ Ammunition: 34% 
- Firearm: 32% 
- Pistols and revolvers: 25% 
- Archeryequipment: 9% 
Note that taxes on guns and ammunition accounted for nearly all (91 percent) of the 
revenues.
Where does the money go? 
These taxes are deposited into a “Wildlife Restoration Account” administered by the 
FWS and dispersed for the following purposes: 
1. Program administration 
2. Traditional multistate conservation grants 
3. “R3” (“Recruit, Retain, Reactivate") multistate grants (see below) 
4. Enhanced hunter education and safety grants (section 669h-1) 
5. Basic hunter education and safety grants (section 669c(c)) 
6. Wildlife restoration grants (section 669c(b)) 
Up to $8 million annually is reserved for “Traditional multistate conservation grants" 
that beneﬁt multiple states, and up to $5 million of the total excise taxes collected 
from certain archery equipment is set aside for “R3 multistate conservation grants" 
to promote a national hunting and shooting sport recruitment program. 
Then $8 million annually is set aside for "Enhanced Hunter Education" programs, 
which can include R3 activities. Half of the excise taxes collected on handguns and 
archery equipment are allocated for Basic Hunter Education and Safety programs, 
which can also be used for R3 activities. Grants for both types of hunter education 
programs are apportioned to the states using the same formula, based on the ratio of 
their population to the U.S. total population. No state can receive more than3 
percent or less than 1 percent of the total funds available. 
The remaining funds in the account are apportioned to the states for Wildlife 
Restoration activities according to a formula based half on the ratio of their land area 
to the total U.S. land area, and half based on the number of paid hunting license 
holders in the state compared to the total number of paid hunting license holders in 
the U.S. The latter obviously creates an incentive to maximize hunting license sales to 
obtain more Pittman-Robertson Act funding. No state can receive more than5 
percent or less than 0.5 percent of the total funds available for the Wildlife 
Restoration Program. 
By far the Wildlife Restoration Program receives the largest share of apportioned 
funds. In FY2022 a total of $1.1 billion was apportioned to the states and territories. 
ln FY2021, those funds were apportioned as follows:
~ Wildlife Restoration grants: 79 percent, 
~ Basic Hunter Education grants: 20 percent 
- Enhanced Hunter Education grants: 1 percent 
- Traditional multi state grants: $8 million 
~ Administration: $12 million 
According to 2019 FWS regulations, the following are activities eligible for funding 
under the PR act: 
Wildlife Restoration program: 
- Restore and manage wildlife for the beneﬁt of the public. 
- Conduct research on the problems of managing wildlife and its habitat if 
necessary to administer wild life resources efﬁciently. 
- Obtain data to guide and direct the regulation of hunting. 
- Acquire real property suitable or capable of being made suitable for: 
0 Wildlife habitat; or 
o Public access for hunting or other wildlife —oriented recreation. 
~ Restore, rehabilitate, improve, or manage areas of lands or waters as wildlife 
habitat. 
- Build structures or acquire equipment, goods, and services to: 
o Restore, rehabilitate, or improve lands and waters as wildlife habitat; or 
<> Provide public access for hunting or other wildlife-oriented recreation. 
- Operate or maintain: 
<> Projects that the State ﬁsh and wildlife agency completed under the Pittman- 
Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act; or 
o Facilities that the agency acquired or constructed with funds other than those 
authorized under the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act if these 
facilities are necessary to carry out activities authorized by the Pittman- 
Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act. 
~ Coordinate grants in the Wildlife Restoration program and related programs and 
subprograms. 
- Provide technical assistance. 
~ Make payments in lieu of taxes on real property under the control of the State ﬁsh 
and wildlife agency when the payment is: 
0 Required by State or local law; and
<> Required for all State lands including those acquired with Federal funds and 
those acquired with non-Federal funds. 
Wildlife Restoration — Basic Hunter Education and Safety subprogram: 
- Teach the skills, knowledge, and attitudes necessary to be a responsible hunter. 
- Acquire real property suitable or capable of being made suitable for ﬁrearm and 
archery ranges for public use. 
~ Construct, operate, or maintain ﬁrearm and archery ranges for public use. 
Enhanced Hunter Education and Safety program: 
- Enhance programs for hunter education, hunter development, and ﬁrearm and 
archery safety. Hunter—development programs introduce individuals to and 
recruit them to take part in hunting, bow hunting, target shooting, or archery. 
~ Enhance interstate coordination of hunter-education and ﬁrearm- and archery- 
range programs. 
- Enhance programs for education, safety, or development of bow hunters, archers, 
and shooters. 
- Enhance construction and development ofﬁrearm and archery ranges. 
- Update safety features of ﬁrearm and archery ranges. 
- Acquire real property suitable or capable of being made suitable for ﬁrearm and 
archery ranges for public use. 
Hunter and Recreational Shooter Recruitment: 
Congress made an important change to the Pittman-Robertson Act in 2019 by 
passing the “Modernizing the Pittman-Robertson Fund for Tomorrow's Needs Act” as 
part of a larger appropriations bill (H.R. 1865). The amendments eliminated the 
prohibition on states using Pittman-Robertson funds for “R3” activities intended to 
offset the decades-long decline in hunters nationwide, as well as the prohibition on 
using Pittman-Robertson Act funds for "public relations. ” The law speciﬁcally added 
an additional purpose to the WR Act to include providing ﬁnancial and technical 
assistance to the states for the "promotion of hunting and recreational shooting, ” 
including by: 
- Outreach and communications as a means- 
<> (i) To improve communications with hunters, recreational shooters, and the 
general public with respect to hunting and recreational shooting 
opportunities;
o (ii) To reduce barriers to participation in these activities; 
0 (iii) To advance the adoption of sound hunting and recreational shooting 
practices; 
o (iv) To promote conservation and the responsible use of the wildlife resources 
of the United States; 
0 (v) To further safety in hunting and recreational shooting; 
- Providing education, mentoring, and ﬁeld demonstrations; 
~ Enhancing access for hunting and recreational shooting, including through range 
construction; 
- Providing education to the public about the role of hunting and recreational 
shooting in funding wildlife conservation. ” 
These changes had long been a top priority of the Association of State Fish and 
Wildlife Agencies (ASFWA), and hunting and gun groups. States may now use their 
Basic Hunter Education and Enhanced Hunter Education funds for R3 programs, 
including those aimed at promoting trapping and “other forms of hunting activities," 
as well as “guided and mentored hunts," according to FWS guidance. (Note: as of this 
writing, the Pittman—Robertson Act regulations had not been updated to reﬂect these 
changes.) Although the Modernizing Pittman—Robertson Act only speciﬁes 
recruitment and retention, not reactivation, FWS’ position is that reactivation 
activities are covered as well. 
In addition, Pittman-Robertson Act funds may now be used for grants that promote a 
national hunting and shooting sport recruitment program. Nongovernmental 
organizations are eligible to obtain these grants, as long as they can certify that no 
part of the funding will be use " 
in whole or in part, for an activity, project, or program 
that promotes or encourages opposition to the regulated hunting or trapping of 
wildlife or to recreational shooting activities." 
|\/lost Pittman-Robertson Act funds are generated 
by nonhunters 
It is often said that “sportsmen ” pay for wildlife conservation in part through their 
purchase of items that are taxable under the Pittman-Robertson Act. In fact, although 
excise taxes paid on guns and ammunition account for the bulk of Pittman-Robertson 
Act revenues (more than 90 percent of the total), most guns and ammunition in the 
U.S. are not purchased for use in hunting. A 2021 my by Southwick Associates
estimated that about one-quarter (25.8 percent) of all ﬁrearms and ammunition sold 
in 2020 were purchased for hunting. 
One implication of this fact is that while the number of hunters in the U.S. has been on 
the decline both in absolute and relative numbers for decades, Pittman-Robertson 
Act revenues have generally increased over the years, with some notable year-to- 
year ﬂuctuations. They tend to spike after a mass shooting or presidential election 
when fears rise about restrictions on gun ownership. Through their purchase of guns 
and ammunition, nonhunters are already making a substantial contribution to state 
wildlife agency budgets. 
'5 
. ‘i’ ’“‘ " ‘d '’ l‘§\f\‘\=’/ if 31:1;’ ~; §:1~*' §~- 2-1 iy’ /L1» ii 1 
1 \ lj Li'
~ 
._, L‘ 
w_ 4- L l_,_,| 3-.’-J                
l*1Ke-‘<a2*i\./i$;i0i ‘iirag ‘tf'\§'il{l§l'l:<;: if-;<;';-\»<e@ ‘mmi:<¢e 
5-*<>li=;:<w =12; on -¢;c<, i.‘*
l 
' i -“ "~. > * it = Q 2 l ~‘ . ‘Y . :' 
, ' ./‘H’ -"Y -“"{' 
l‘l{,;l\»“l§.:_ l\.-~.l E; J 1&1. *‘ = 1 W §i_.l",.l “% £55’ '.1.;l~t E}--\.r,Z 
I 
s /i\l
