 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  (MMA)  
In Opposition to  
LD 629, An Act to Improve, Protect and Defend the Individual Civil Right to Bear Arms 
Through Exemption of Firearms and Ammunition from Taxation  
 
March 9, 2023  
 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in opposition to LD 629 on behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s Legislative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest.   
Muni cipal officials are confused  as to the intent of the legislation, and without additional 
information can only conclude that the sponsors of the bill are seeking an exemption  from the 
individual personal property tax that  is very limitedly  assessed , if at all, on firearms and 
ammunition . If that is the case, the changes proposed in LD 629 might not be necessary.   
As provided for  in 36 MRS § 655  sub-§1(P), generally, the first $1,000 of individually 
owned personal property is exempted from taxation.   With respect to the inventory held by a 
related retail establishment, 36 MRS § 655  sub-§1(B) already extends an exemption on stock -in-
trade, which includes “inventory held for resale by a distributor, wholesaler, retail merchant or 
service establishment. ” 
Additionally , municipalities cannot create local tax es.  That is an authority reserved for 
the state and bestowed upon local government via legislative  action .  The broad preemption of 
local rules relating to firearms (25 MRS § 2011) also prohibit s the assessment of  any potential 
municipal fee .  
If the Committee elects to move forward, at the very le ast, LD 629 should be amended to 
add firearms and ammunition to the list of personal property exempt from taxation and  include  a 
fiscal note to reimburse  municipalities for 50% of the lost property tax revenue  pursuant  to 
Article IV, Part Third, Section 2 3 of Maine ’s Constitution .    
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  If you have any 
questions about our position, plea se contact me at kdufour@memun.org  or 592 -4038.   
 

