TESTIMONY OF » 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Thursday, March 9, 2023 
LD 629 — “An Act to Improve, Protect and Defend the Individual Civil Right to 
Bear Arms Through Exemption of Firearms and Ammunition ﬂom Taxation ” 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 629, “An Act to Improve, 
Protect and Defend the Individual Civil Right to Bear Arms Through Exemption of 
Firearms and Ammunition ﬁom Taxation. ” 
This bill would prohibit the State Tax Assessor from assessing a sales or use 
tax on ﬁrearms or ammunition sold or possessed in the State. The bill would 
further prohibit municipalities and county ofﬁcers from assessing a tax or fee on 
ﬁrearms or ammunition sold or possessed in the State. Last session, the 130th 
Legislature enacted a sales tax exemption for ﬁrearm safety devices. 
With respect to sales and use tax, it appears the intent of the bill is to createa 
sales and use tax exemption. But the language used in the bill — “may not assess” 
— makes this unclear and raises questions of its intended application. In 
particular, it is unclear whether the phrase “may not assess” is intended to create an 
exemption or instead only prohibit the assessment by the State Tax Assessor of 
unreported sales and use tax If the intent is to exempt ﬁrearms and ammunition 
from the sales and use tax, this proposal should be enacted as a new sales tax 
exemption under 36 M.R.S. § 1760.
1
Furthermore, both “ﬁrearms” and “ammunition ” are undeﬁned in the bill. 
Without additional language, it will be difﬁcult to determine whether certain 
afﬁxed, component and specialty items ~ such as ﬂare guns, antique/replica 
ﬁrearms, silencers/muf ﬂers, ﬁreworks or bullet casings — are exempt. 
If the ﬁrst two sections of the bill addressing municipalities and counties are 
intended to exempt ﬁrearms and ammunition from property tax, those items should 
similarly be deﬁned and added as express exemption in 36 M.R.S. § 655. Such an 
exemption would overlap to some extent with the existing property tax exemption 
for all items of individually owned personal property with a just value of less than 
$1,000. Note, however, that the proposed language of the bill is not limited to sales 
and use tax and property tax; it would also prohibit municipal and county 
“assessment ” of fees and any other authorized municipal or county taxes. Please 
also note that this bill would not have an impact on the imposition or collection of 
federal ﬁrearm taxes. The bill should also include an effective date provision. 
Lastly, the Administration opposes this bill because it will further narrow an 
already narrow sales tax base. A preliminary revenue estimate is a loss of $6 
million, which could increase depending on how expansive the exemption is. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
2
