MAINE 
BEER & WINE March 28' 2023 DISTRIBUTORS ASSOCIATION 
DELIVE NG QQALHY AND CHOIE 
LD 972 — Resolve, Directing the Departmentvofi ﬁiwimmmental Protection to Evaluate Strategies for 
lm proving the Returnable Beverage Container Laws 
Good Morning, Senator Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and 
Natural Resources committee. I am Cheryl Timberlake, a resident of Mt. Vernon. l’m here today on 
behalf of the Maine Beer Wine Distributors (MBWD) and the Maine Beer Wine Commingling Group, LLC 
(MBWCG); family owned and operated local beverage companies who are the front lines of the bottle 
redemption since the inception of the law. You have heard from one of our members and other 
industry stakeholders explaining the economics and logistics of the system. 
SUPPORT 
MBWD wants to thank Rep. Gramlich for sponsoring the Resolve in LD 972 and the Department for 
recognizing that the system needs to be modernized. 
After more than 40 years, it's time to assess the program and undertake a comprehensive review. Let's 
evaluate opportunities to improve the efficiencies in the program. 
l hope the committee will defer any final decision on the bills before you today until after such time as 
the other bottle bill proposals are printed. Rep. Hepler and Rep. Crockett have LR’s that address some of 
the necessary changes to the program to improve efficiencies and hold down costs. 
Commingling of containers from multiple initiators of Deposit (lOD)- allows beverage containers for |ODs 
to be sorted together by like product group, material and size. Commingling groups effectively transfer 
the burden of multiple physical sorts of containers from redemption centers to the |ODs who instead 
allocate costs via an accounting exercise. 
As you have already heard, the number of sorts required of redemption center is still substantial and 
continues to increase as program scope is expanded or new brands enter the beverage market. The 
estimate range as high as 500 sorts required, thought they are generally not all in use at the same time. 
ln addition, the committee has heard numerous references about Oregon. Oregon's system was 
aspirational and creative from the start, making beverage distributors operationally and financially 
responsible for the packaging they put into the marketplace, but also allowing industry to get creative 
and improve the system over time. The result is a modern Bottle Bill that is woven into the fabric of 
Oregon and is broadly supported by consumers today. 
Oregon's Bottle Bill is a "producer responsibility" system. That means beverage distributors in the state 
are collectively responsible for running the operations of the program, managing the flow of deposits 
and refunds, collecting empty beverage containers from retail partners and consumers (through the 
BottleDrop network) and ensuring that materials are processed for high quality domestic recycling — all 
at no expense to taxpayers. Beverage distributors don't just contribute funding for the program, they 
also run it and are responsible for making sure it is convenient and relevant for Oregonians. 
Maine Beer and Wine Distributors Association 
96 State Street, Suite 2 I PO Box 615 I Augusta, ME 04332-0615 
Fax (207) 621-0175 I Phone: (207) 623-5245 
wwwmainebeerandwine. org
MBWCG is participating in various stakeholder conversations. We believe in a Modernization Plan to 
update the beverage redemption program. 
Let us continue to keep the state of Maine clean by preventing litter while also protecting the interests 
of Maine consumers. I hope to be a resource to the committee as you process/evaluate the proposals.
