  Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources:  I’m Heather Sanborn, co-owner of Rising Tide Brewing Company in Portland and Chair of the Maine Brewers’ Guild’s Legislative Committee. On behalf of the Maine Brewers’ Guild, which represents the interests of the craft beer industry in Maine, including brewers who brew 99.9% of all beer brewed in Maine, I would like to offer testimony in support of LD 972, Resolve, Directing the Department of Environmental Protection to Evaluate Strategies for Improving the Returnable Beverage Container Laws.  The members of the Maine Brewers’ Guild support producer responsibility and recognize the positive impact the “bottle bill” has had over the decades by helping our state reduce litter, conserve resources, and save energy.   With that said, the current system is outdated and very inefficient, requiring as many as 600 individual brand sorts. LD 972 directs the Department of Environmental Protection to convene a stakeholder group to develop recommendations to improve Maine’s laws governing the recycling of returnable beverage containers. We need to streamline and rationalize the system rather than just throwing more money at it year after year. We believe there is a clear path to ending manual brand sorting of containers and instead simply sorting containers by their materials – aluminum, glass, or plastic. This would dramatically reduce the complexity and the cost of the system.  We urge the committee to hold off on making any decisions about fee increases until reform proposals that would reduce these inefficiencies and modernize the system can be brought forward either in additional legislative proposals during this session or through the stakeholder group contemplated by this resolve.   We thought it would also be helpful to the committee to lay out the role of small breweries in Maine’s current system. For breweries that use a distributor, the distributor is the initiator of deposit, which means brewers don't collect any nickels on their wholesale beer sales. The handling fees for wholesale sales are charged back to brewers through distributor margins. When brewers sell cans through their tasting rooms, they charge the nickel to customers and then are required to send all of those nickels, as well as a 4.5 cent handling fee for each can sold, over to the distributor. Because of the way shelf prices are calculated by distributors and retailers, a 1.75 cent increase in the handling fee would be very tough for brewers to pass along to consumers. Instead, Maine’s small brewers are likely to shoulder the cost of this increase themselves.  The Maine Brewers’ Guild believes there is a more efficient way to execute Maine’s redemption program that would avoid the need for continual fee increases by modernizing the process. LD 972 provides a path for bringing those proposals forward. Thank you for consideration of our testimony, and please note we would be happy to discuss this matter further at any time. 

