Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street Q Augusta, Maine 04330 a (207) 622-3101 Q Fax: (207) 622-4343 Q www.nrcm.org 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 972, 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Enviromnental Protection to Evaluate Strategies for 
Improving the Returnable Beverage Container Laws 
Sarah Nichols, NRCM Sustainable Maine Director 
March 29, 2023 
Senator Brermer, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Sarah Nichols, and I am the Sustainable Maine 
Director for the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). I appreciate this opportunity to 
speak to you neither for nor against LD 972. 
Maine’s Bottle Bill is our state’s most successful litter reduction and recycling program, which 
not only helps to protect Maine’s environment but saves valuable tax dollars in our 
municipalities. The Bottle Bill supports hundreds of businesses, thousands of jobs, and is a vital 
source of charitable giving. The Bottle Bill program has become part of Maine’s culture. It has 
served our state well in the past 45 years, and we believe it will continue to in the future. 
However, the program needs urgent attention this session by Maine lawmakers to address key 
1SS1l€S. 
A lot has changed since 1976, and there have been changes to the Bottle Bill statute over time to 
address these changes, which has resulted in an effective, yet somewhat clunky system that is not 
as efﬁcient as it needs to be. NRCM believes that the speciﬁc issues, potential solutions, and 
points of contention are well known. We do not believe that further study through a stakeholder 
process is needed. Here is an overview of the systemic problems that exist today that warrant 
prompt legislative action this year: 
The current handling fee of 4.5 cents does not provide enough revenue to cover the rising 
costs for redemption centers, which threatens jobs and the viability of the Bottle Bill 
program. 
, 0 Potential solution: Increase handling fee to reﬂect inﬂation; identify ways for' 
redemption centers to reduce operating and labor costs. 
o Point of discussion: Beverage manufacturers, distributors, and other initiators of 
deposit (IODs) are generally opposed to paying higher handling fees in 
perpetuity, but everyone seems united in ﬁnding ways to reduce overall costs. 
Proliferation of beverage brands and types has significantly complicated sorting and has 
led to other inefﬁciencies: 
0 Potential solution: Require commingling of all beverage containers so that containers 
only need be sorted by material type and size, through the creation of a single 
commingling group instead of ﬁve distinct groups plus hundreds of other brands that 
don’t commingle.
o Points of discussion: Required commingling means that the State would no 
longer receive “unclaimed deposits ” from non-commingled containers, resulting 
in an estimated $3.5 million loss in revenue from the general fund; some pick-up 
agents primarily serve non-commingled beverage manufacturers as part of their 
business; and this approach would require all beverage manufacturers and 
distributors to work together to share costs, which is not impossible but must be 
careﬁilly constructed. 
The statute does not reﬂect the existence of account-based bag-drop redemption programs, 
and technology used by CLYNK, which plays a vital role in the Bottle Bill. 
0 Potential solution: Add a deﬁnition to Maine law for this method of redemption that is 
parallel to the requirements for reverse-vending machines. Allow for CLYNK’s 
automated system to provide baled and market-ready materials back to initiators of 
deposit and be acknowledged for the level of service they provide to the IoDs. 
o Point of discussion: The statute allows for IoDs to require loose, whole 
containers from redemption systems, and some want to reserve the right to do so 
into the future even though it severely disrupts CLYNK’s automated technology 
and leads to storage and trucking inefficiencies. 
Inequitable use of “unclaimed deposits ” where the larger beverage companies keep the 
unclaimed money, and smaller beverage companies that are unable to commingle must 
send unclaimed deposits to the Maine Revenue Service once a month to be part of Maine’s 
General Fund. 
0 Potential solution: Establish that all unclaimed deposits belong to the Bottle Bill 
program and must be used to support the redemption centers, the solid waste hierarchy, 
and ways to make the program more efﬁcient and cost-effective for all. 
o Points of contention: The commingling groups have been able to keep the 
unclaimed deposits they have collected since 2003, and the State is accustomed 
to accumulating these funds in the General Fund. 
LD 972 would delay Committee action on this important program, which would compound 
current challenges the program is facing and create unnecessary uncertainty for the businesses 
that are anticipating decisive legislative action this year. We understand that there are other bill 
titles that could serve as the legislative vehicles that the Committee needs this session to address 
both the immediate issue of raising the handling fee and the longer-term adjustments necessary 
to optimize the effectiveness of the Bottle Bill going forward. 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments. Strengthening the Bottle Bill program isa 
top priority for NRCM, and I offer myself as a resource to the Committee as you work through 
this important issue. I’d be happy to answer any questions.
