 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
in support of  
LD 1799, An Act to Expand Maine ’s High- quality E arly Learning and Care for Children by Increasing Public 
Preschool Opportunities  in Communities  
 
Amy Winston, Senio r Policy Director  
May 10, 202 3 
 
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan , and honorable  members of the Committee:   
My name is Amy Winst on and I live in Edgecomb . I am testifying  in support of  LD 1799 on behalf of 
Coastal Enterprise s, Inc. ( CEI). CEI is a nonprofit community development corporation (CDC) and 
community develo pment finance institution (CDFI) . CEI works to build a just, vibrant,  and climate -
resilient future for people and communities in Maine and other rural regions.  We do this by integrating 
finan ce, business expertise and policy so lutions to make the economy work more equitably.   
For 4 6 years, CEI has provided specialized financing and free, sector -specific advice on starting  a 
childcare  business, expanding licensed capacity,  or transition ing a business to a new childcare  provider.  
During this time , we have loaned $13 million to more than 200 family - and center -based  childcare  
business start -ups, including for - and non-profit businesses and cooperatives, that have created or 
retained over 7,200  childcare  slots. Our accrued expertise in this industry has helped care entrepreneurs 
navigate the challenges and opportunities that are unique to this sector  to improve the ir profitability 
and long- term business viability , to create and maintain childcare  slots and quality jobs, and  enable 
more parents to work full time or return to school.  
In 202 0, CEI created the Child Care Business Lab  (CCBL) , a 6-month  group -based  program that pr ovides 
entrepreneurs with the tools they need to open a successful business , from small business start -up 
education  to childcare management instruction  and coaching through the l icensing process . Our curr ent 
class includes  3 cohorts : a family childcare  group, a facility  or center -based childcare  group and a group 
of English language learne rs. To date, 16 Mainers have opened financially sustainable childcare 
businesses servin g over 330 children and enabling 69 parents to start full time jobs.  
CEI envisions  a childcare  industry where childcare  providers are educators who are paid a living wage 
and there is  high -quality , affordable ca re available to every Maine child under age 5 . To a dvance  this 
vision, w e partner with the State Office of Child and Family Servic es, Maine Roads to Quality 
Professional Developme nt Network , Maine Association for the  Education of Young Children and Family 
Child Care Association of Maine to  strengthen  the childcare  ecosystem . We advocate for pragmatic 
solutions that reduce barriers to del ivering high -quality care  and to expand opportunities for people in 
Maine  who are  interested in owning their own childcare  business.   
CEI applauds the work the Department of Education and Department of Health a nd Human Services, 
Office of Child and Family  Services have been doing to provi de pa rents with ch oices for publicly funded  
pre-K that include licensed childcare  provi ders.  LD 1799 proposes a pragmatic  process for developing a  
plan to expand integration of childcare , including family -based  care,  into public education  to provide  
flexib le and affordable options  for working  families  while assuring high -quality care and education  by 
streamlining funding and coordinating professional development a nd credentialing for early  childhood 
educators . Once implemented, with future funding this initiative will promote  full day options that 
 
expand opportunities for childcare providers  to collaborate with school systems  and lay the groundwork 
for publicly funded childcare . We would like to thank Senator Vitell i and the sponsors for bringing this 
bill forward. We feel it elevates and al igns work that is underway in the Departments of Education and 
Health and Human Services  for the benefit of consu mers . CEI supports LD 1799 . Thank you for 
considering our testimon y. 
