 
 
 
Contact: Casey Clark Kelley, CEO, Central Lincoln County YMCA  
P: 207.563.9622 E: cclarkelley@clcymca.org 
 
Testimony of Casey Clark Kelley before  
the Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs  
in support of 
LD 1799: An Act to Expand Maine's High-quality Early Learning and Care for Children 
by Increasing Public Preschool Opportunities in Communities 
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Casey Clark Kelley and I’m CEO of the Central Lincoln 
County YMCA. I support LD 1799: An Act to Expand Maine's High-quality Early Learning and 
Care for Children by Increasing Public Preschool Opportunities in Communities. 
 
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve 
thousands of children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, 
and summer camp. These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, 
and are a critical component of our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our 
economy.  
 
Unfortunately, the childcare system is under incredible strain. The Ys have extensive waitlists of 
families trying to access care for their children. This leaves parents to make incredibly hard 
decisions around placing their children in unlicensed care, cutting back their work hours, or 
leaving the workforce altogether. Despite our best efforts, the system is failing Maine families.  
 
The childcare system needs public investment to meet the needs of Maine families. LD 1799 
would expand access to publicly-funded pre-K that better aligns with the needs of working 
families by leveraging the existing network of childcare programs across Maine. This is an 
efficient use of resources that also helps minimize disruption of care for children. 
 
Our YMCA serves approximately 50 children in the preschool and pre-K age groups with full-day 
care. Some of these children are with us as early as 6:30 in the morning and as late as 5:30 at 
night. While these are long days for kids, these are crucial hours for the parents who need to 
maintain their own work schedules. The Y is providing these early education programs to support 
working families and to provide a nurturing and stable educational environment for the children. 
It is important that the Y be included in this model to continue providing this care, and to 
increase access to full-time care for working parents. We serve 10 towns, and there are simply 
not enough full-day care options for families that need it. We all must work together to ensure 
that Maine families have access to safe and quality care so parents can work and children can 
thrive.  
 
I urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 1799. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Casey Clark Kelley, CEO 
Central Lincoln County YMCA 
