Testimony of Chrissie Davis  
In support of  
LD 1799 An Act to Expand Maine's High -quality Early Learning and Care for Children by 
Increasing Public Preschool Opportunities in Communities  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee , my name is Chrissie Davis and I am a family childcare provider in 
Skowhegan . Currently I  serve 6 children under the age of 5 and 2 school -age children.  My hours 
of operation are 6:00 AM to 4:30 PM.  Children often enter my program as infants and continue 
through 8 or 9 years old.  I also have had many siblings in my program, as is one of the many 
benefits of family childcare.  The group  includes mixed ages which is another benefit.  All 
children explore, create, discover, learn and develop together, each at different levels.  Often 
younger children learn from their older peers which not only b enefits the youngest in the group, 
but also reinforces skills for the older children.  The dynamics of family childcare are amazing 
and the reason I have been in this profession for 22 years.  
 
 My program is an Early Head Start partner and nationally accre dited. I work hard to make sure 
the services I provide for children and families are high quality.  Bouncing Bubbles is a Gold Site 
with 5210 Let’s Go!, has a Star 5 rating with Maine’s Quality Rating System and is a Nature 
Explore Certified Outdoor Classr oom.  I am an appointed member of the Children’s Cabinet 
Early Childhood Advisory Council and a Go NAPSACC consultant with Maine Roads to Quality 
Professional Development Network.  In addition, over  the past 22 years, I have earned an AS in 
Early Childhood  Education, Maine’s Inclusion Credential, Maine’s Youth Development Credential 
and Maine’s Infant Toddler Credential.  My extensive training has earned a Level 6 on the Career 
Lattice with Maine Roads to Quality Professional Development Network.  All of th ese increase 
my knowledge and expertise  in the field of early childhood education.  
 
Other testimony will provide you with the benefits of PreK.  I have been providing a PreK 
education  for 22 years and quite effectively.  I utilize Creative Curriculum which  is an evidence -
based curriculum, create weekly lesson plans and conduct observations and assessments for all 
children in my care.  Unfortunately, although you can see my list of qualifications is extensive,  I 
don’t have a Bachelor Degree and, therefore,  cannot obtain  the required certification  to be 
considered by the State of Maine as a provider of PreK services.   
 
The families in my care now must make a choice when their child turns 4 years old:  they can 
enroll them in Public PreK and likely lose their c hildcare services with me or keep them enrolled 
at Bouncing Bubbles so they can maintain a continuity of care.  Because licensing ratios include 
4 year old  children in the younger age group rather than considering them in the school -age 
group, if a child i n my care were to attend Public PreK and then use my services for before and 
after care, I would need to charge the family a full time ra te, which seems unfair, but , from a 
financial perspective , I have no choice.  Our school district doesn’t offer bussing  for PreK 
students, so families often must  disrupt their workday to transport children to and from PreK 
which adds another level of stress for them.   As an example, I currently have had a family in care 
for over 11 years with 3 different siblings.  The mid dle child attended Public PreK in our district 
and, quite honestly, didn’t do well as he wasn’t emotionally ready for that step.  Mom had to go 
to work late to be able to take the child to school and then had a grandparent transport the 
child after school to my home.  When his younger sister was able to attend PreK, the mom 
informed me that her daughter would remain in my care and not attend Public PreK because 
“she will learn more with you and I don’t have to worry about lining up transportation”.  
 
I ask you to support LD 1799 and recognize childcare providers as a viable option for delivering 
PreK services.  Thank you.  
 
