 
MAINE 
 
 
 
4 Jersey Circle / Topsham, ME 04086 / 207.725.5946 
 
 
May 10, 2023 
 
Re:   LD 1799 "An Act To Expand Maine’s High-Quality Early Learning and Care for 
Children by Increasing Public Preschool Opportunities in Communities" 
 
Dear Chairs Rafferty and Brennan, and Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, 
 
I am writing in support of LD 1799, a bill proposing to help expand voluntary public PreK across 
Maine. 
 
Some of you on these Committees will be familiar with my reasons, which other Mission: 
Readiness members have expressed at previous public hearings on the various public PreK 
proposal both in your committee and before the Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Committee.  
 
Mission: Readiness. Mission: Readiness is a national bi-partisan organization of more than 750 
retired admirals and generals, 27 of whom are here in Maine, working to ensure that today’s 
young people are prepared for successful lives with many career options, including serving our 
nation in or out of uniform. 
 
I offer my comments as a Mission: Readiness member, and also as a private citizen, one with 
more than 36 years of service in the Army and  Maine Army National Guard, commanding at the 
company, battalion, and brigade levels and finished my military career as the MeNG Director of 
the Joint Staff. I am an Iraqi Freedom Veteran and previously served as Director of Facilities and 
Engineering for the State of Maine and the Maine Army National Guard.   In 2022 I was honored 
to be appointed Maine State Director of the Selective Service System.  I am also a father and 
former middle school boys and girls coach, so I have a very personal stake in the education of 
our youngest Maine students.   
 
As public policy makers, I would like you to see a connection that may not be readily apparent:  
why early education is so important not only for the young children who attend, but also for the 
future of our country.  
During the summer of 2022, the U.S. Department of Defense shared preliminary details from its 
Qualified Military Available (QMA) study showing the ineligibility rate for 17- to 24-year-olds 
in our nation has climbed from the previously reported 71% to 77% nationwide.  While we are 
 
MAINE 
 
StrongNation.org/MissionReadiness awaiting the release of the full QMA study that will provide additional details and state-level 
data, the initial results indicated that several factors contributing to the root causes of ineligibility 
have grown worse. The factors include lack of physical fitness, lack of educational attainment, 
and involvement in crime or substance abuse.  It’s also important to note that the study was 
completed in 2020, and therefore, does not capture the full impacts of the pandemic. 
Often, when citizens think of our military the pictures that come to mind are the fast movers:  the 
F-35 Lighting 2 fighter jets, battleships like the DDG 51 destroyers and future Navy platforms to 
be built at BIW in Bath, and the American M1A2 Abrams tanks, smart weapons, and other 
amazing state of the art technologies. 
 
All of that is true – but our Armed Forces’ most important element is its people. Make no 
mistake about it:  the men and women of the military are dedicated and committed people, ones 
who are ready to defend our country and carry out their mission; and our military remains the 
strongest in the world.  But when we recognize that 77% of young Americans cannot qualify for 
miliary service, I am concerned about our nation having the number of people and the quality of 
minds that we will need to secure our future.  And I note:  this is both in the military, as well as 
all other career fields.   
 
The best way to address these disqualifiers is early intervention and support. As many on this 
Committee know, especially our teachers, the first five years of a person’s life are fundamental 
to all of the success or failure that comes afterwards. This is the time when young children 
develop core pre-literacy and pre-math skills, and build the foundations for all later cognitive and 
social learning.  
 
That is one critical reason why high-quality early learning programs are so important.  Research 
shows that these programs can help create a stronger educational foundation, prevent obesity, 
and reduce behavioral issues. 
 
These programs include high-quality public pre-K, child care and Head Start – all of which are 
great long-term strategies that will help young people in Maine succeed in school, so they can 
graduate and move forward to a productive career. I am pleased to read that LD 1799 encourages 
and support more partnerships among these early learning programs.  
 
 
 
 
MAINE 
 
StrongNation.org/MissionReadiness Research in multiple states shows the direct link between the quality of early education and later 
academic performances.  Children who attend high-quality preschool are more likely to arrive at 
kindergarten ready to learn, with enhanced early math, language, and literacy skills. They are 
also less likely to be held back in school or to need special education, and more likely to be 
proficient in reading and math. Preschool participants also have an increased probability of 
graduating from high school.   
 
By providing young children with pre-K opportunities for early learning, we can help them 
become successful students who are more likely to finish school and pursue the career path of 
their choice.  
 
For those of us who have made a career in the military, it has been an outstanding experience 
that afforded us opportunities for learning self-discipline, building professional skills, and 
serving our country and communities. It would be a shame for the next generation not to have the 
same opportunities. 
 
I urge the Education and Cultural Affairs Committees to support LD 1799 and expand high-
quality Pre-K including mixed-delivery programs in interested communities throughout Maine.   
 
Sincerely, 
Dwaine Drummond  
Dwaine Drummond 
Brigadier General, U.S. Army (Retired) 
China  
 
