 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1799-An Act to Expand Maine’s High -quality Early Learning and Care 
for Children by Increasing Public Preschool Opportunities in Communities  
 
Joint Standing Committee on  Education and Cultural Affairs  
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator  Rafferty , Representative  Brennan  and members of the Committee  on Education , 
 
I am Eamonn Dundon , Director of Advocacy  for the Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce. We represent 
1,300 businesses in our region who employ over 65,000 Mainers. We are submitting this written testimony  
today to express our organization's strongest support for  LD 1799 .  
 
We have collaborated with  Starting Strong, a Portland based coalition focused on establishing the building 
blocks for lifetime learning, in 2020, 2021, and again this year to survey our membership and investigate  the 
impacts of lack of childcare on the business community in our region. Our survey spanned  businesses from 
small storefronts with a handful of workers up to some of the largest employers in the state and the results 
were clear:  a lack of childcare poses a significant challenge  to hiring, training, and retaining employees and the 
current programs in place are not enough to address this overwhelming need.  
 
82% of our members report that their employees have trouble finding childc are, up from 70% just before the 
pandemic in 2020. This translates into very real business impediments that undermine our economic 
development efforts at the state and local level, with 88% of our members saying that their employees 
experience unplanned wo rk absences due to lack of childcare, and nearly 65% saying that lack of childcare has 
caused issues when it comes to employee retention, up from 46% just one year ago. Fully 95% of our members 
who identified lack of childcare as a problem for their busine ss gave availability and affordability as the biggest 
barriers to their employees finding childcare, both of which would be helped by the vision for a mixed -delivery 
pre-K system laid out in this legislation.  
 
This legislation also h olds implications for t he development of Maine’s 21st century workforce. While it will 
provide  immediate relief to working families, it will also lay a solid foundation for future workers . Research has 
demonstrated  the importance of pre -K as a building block for a child’s later learning, especially for early learners 
from lower income backgrounds who are better able to close gaps with their more well -resourced peers with 
the supports that high -quality pre -K provides. We cannot build the workforce of tomorrow without investing 
in learners at the earliest stage of their educational journey.  
 
We thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers, and we ask for your expeditious approval of this 
important legislation.  
  
