LD 1799 An Act to Expand Maine's High-quality Early Learning and Care for Children by 
increasing Public Preschool Opportunities in Communities 
Pre-K bill LD 1799 Mixed Delivery System 
Testimony of LD 1799 
In support of 
LD 1799 An Act to Expand Maine's High-qual|ty Early Learning and Care for Children by 
Increasing PUb|lC Preschool Opportunities in Communities 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, 
and distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, 
my name is Sessa Salas. I am the Director 
of a Peop|eplaceCooperative Preschool, 
and l live in Camden. l’m testifying in 
support of LD 1799 An Act to Expand 
Maine's High-quality Early Learning and 
Care for Children by Increasing Public 
Preschool Opportunities in Communities. 
l’d like to start by thanking you. We are all 
here today because there are efforts being 
made to address the issues in our childcare 
system and improve the lives of Maine 
children, families, and those providers who 
are in service to those families and children.
O\ 
I am here today because those in the 
industry of childcare and in the field of Early 
Childhood Education need your help. We 
are in crisis. The system is broken and it 
needs to be fixed - for everyone ’s sake. Our 
economy depends on it - literally. We would 
not have an economy if we did not have 
childcare. Women would not be in the 
workforce without it. Whether you look at it 
as an industry or a field of study, those 
doing this work are providing an essential 
service. 85% of the caregivers in Maine are 
women. 100% of the 12 people on my staff 
are women. 
Peopleplace is a childcare center licensed 
for 47 children ages 18 months to 5 years 
old. We have been NAEYC accredited 
since 1987 (one of the first in the State of 
Maine). We also maintain a Star 5 on the 
Rising Stars for ME quality rating system. 
Because of our high quality and standards,
iQ we are required to hire and maintain high 
quality teachers. This means teachers are 
expected to pursue higher ed degrees, do 
between 30 and 40 hours of professional 
development or continuing education and 
increase their levels on the career lattice 
through the Maine Roads to Quality 
Professional Development Network. 
The expectations are high, but the reward is 
not commensurate with those expectations. 
Not only do they not get paid for the time it 
takes to do that extra work, they often have 
to pay for that training and education. The 
demands are high and yet, they are getting 
paid the same as what someone working at 
a fast food restaurant makes. And with no 
health insurance. This is NOT okay. I would 
say it is downright unconscionable. I have 
to admit, I often feel embarrassed and 
ashamed.
At my high-quality program I simply cannot 
pay teachers enough. If I want to pay 
teachers more, I have to raise tuition. 
Tuition that is already too expensive. 
Payroll is our biggest expense, by far, as it 
should be, at 70% of our budget. For us as 
a school, we have to make the difficult 
choice each year about whether to burden 
families more by raising tuition or increasing 
wages for teachers to pay them a liveable 
wage. Starting wage at my preschool is 
$17/hr - which is the industry standard - or 
higher. lt is NOT enough. Now we are faced 
with increasing our current teacher’s wages 
in order to account for inflation because our 
starting wage was at $15/hr a year ago. 
That means everyone ’s wages are going 
up. That means tuition needs to go up. 
There is a disconnect between MRTQ, Dept 
of Education, DHHS, CDS, CCSP and it 
needs to be better. l had a lead teacher
/’\ r 
if3 
gt, J1 
who had been working at my school for *\J~/ 
over 10 years. She was the highest paid 
teacher at around $35,000 annual salary. 
The local public school in my district 
opened a public pre-k two years ago (that 
they modeled after our program). That 
teacher was hired by them and is now 
making $80,000 a year. That salary, plus an 
Ed Tech’s salary at another $40,000 a year 
(with benefits) totals $120,000 for 16 
preschool children to attend this public 
Pre-K program. Not only that, the local 
public school has decided to fill those spots 
with 20% low-income and 80% high and 
middle income earners. This is not an 
equitable system and we need to do better. 
That is compared to approximately $48,000 
we pay our teachers to serve the same 
number of children for the same amount of 
time.
There are a total of about 65 4yr olds in ourO district being sewed. The public school only 
serves 16 of those children - and at a very 
high cost. The others are being sen/ed by 
other private nonprofit childcare or 
preschools in our area. 
When I approached the local school district 
to partner and enter into a Memorandum of 
Understanding under the public pre-k 
Chapter 124 rules, they had no interest. 
There is no incentive for them to partner 
with us. They are not meeting the demand 
for childcare in our district. We are doing 
the work and we need support in order to 
provide this essential sen/ice to the families 
in our community.
l 
The childcare delivery system in the State 
of Maine needs to be examined more 
closely and revamped to be more equitable 
for everyone. 
ﬂank W/l ta” ’1“”/"’i"lY\l A/Ml 0vn§l‘0l6m‘-l'i01~l 
17» -r- I7!-\,ﬂf§\I7I 0-, .1-l‘¢ .rn/ML nlm|13i' — . ‘E,.l‘.l..LJ.-I-,1,-I»-p -r l.-,./ -l- . AA/Al/0 lun:4< /l-Tr-r‘ (’V-£J’°|0‘V\»e»(
