 
 
 
Contact: Tina Jennings Association Director of Community & Youth Engagement 
YMCA of Auburn-Lewiston  
P: 207-784-4995 E: tjennings@alymca.org 
Testimony of Tina Jennings before  
the Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs  
in support of 
LD 1799: An Act to Expand Maine's High-quality Early Learning and Care for Children 
by Increasing Public Preschool Opportunities in Communities 
May 10th, 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Tina Jennings and I’m Tina Jennings, Association 
Director of Community & Youth Engagement at the YMCA of Auburn-Lewiston. I support LD 
1799: An Act to Expand Maine's High-quality Early Learning and Care for Children by Increasing 
Public Preschool Opportunities in Communities. 
 
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve 
thousands of children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, 
and summer camp. These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, 
and are a critical component of our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our 
economy.  
 
Unfortunately, the childcare system is under incredible strain. The Ys have extensive waitlists of 
families trying to access care for their children. This leaves parents to make incredibly hard 
decisions around placing their children in unlicensed care, cutting back their work hours, or 
leaving the workforce altogether. Despite our best efforts, the system is failing Maine families.  
 
The childcare system needs public investment to meet the needs of Maine families. LD 1799 
would expand access to publicly-funded pre-K that better aligns with the needs of working 
families by leveraging the existing network of childcare programs across Maine. This is an 
efficient use of resources that also helps minimize disruption of care for children. 
 
Our YMCA serves 40 children ages 3-5 in our center-based Pre-K programs, and another 28 in 
our preschool rooms, between the hours of 7AM and 5:30PM. These hours allow working parents 
to commit to full day employment schedules, knowing that their children are receiving high 
quality care and education from staff who genuinely care about their children in a center-based 
setting. Including YMCAs in this endeavor will help working families by still allowing them to 
work FULL day schedules and know that their children are well cared for and given a high quality 
education to set them up for success in kindergarten and beyond. 
 
I urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 1799. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
Tina Jennings 
 
 
 
