o 
EDUCARE CENTRAL MAINE 
Edueare Central Maine 
Govemance Board 
Jim Clair, Chairperson 
Clair Group of Companies 
Eric Haley, 
W68-Ch3l:p3l'SO ﬂ 
Waterville Public Schools 
Suzanne Walsh, 
Secretary/Treasurer 
KVCAP 
Bill Alfond 
Bill & Joan Alfond Foundation 
Mike Burke 
Buﬁett Early Childhood Fund 
Rabbi Rachel Isaacs 
Colby College 
Michael Mitchell, LCSW 
K VCAP Board of Directors 
Peter Hallen 
Waterville Public Schools 
Jeremy Fischer 
Drummond Woodsum The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Testimony from Tracye F ortin, Chief Gperating Officer, Educare Central Mame 
In Support Of 
L D. 1799 “An Act to Expand Maine’s High-quality Early Learning and Care for Children 
by Increasing Pubhc Preschool Opportunities in Communities ” 
Wednesday, May 10, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I am Tracye 
Fortin, Chief Operating Ofﬁcer for Kennebec Valley Community Action Program Child 
& Family Services overseeing the development and implementation of Head Start, Early 
Head Start, Child Care and preschool in multiple public school partnerships, including 
Educare Central Maine, and commumty child care centers and family child care homesl 
am here in strong support of L.D. 1799 
It 1S with passion and commitment I share with you that in my 33 years of professional 
experience at KVCAP, high quality, comprehensive, early care and education makesa 
positive difference in the lives of young children and their famihes 
Since the early 90’s, I have worked to create partnerships between Head Start and Public 
Schools What a Joy it is to see the evolution of these collaborations with the blending and 
braidmg of funding to sustam high quality preschool programs for all children There is 
not a better approach to equity than ]I1C1l.1SlV6 programming; imxed incomes, abilities, and 
cultures. With comprehensive services as the delivery model, every child and their family 
benefits from developmental and health supports for children as well as resource supports 
for families. True family partnerships result in family engagement inclusive of both child 
and family goal setting, a 2-Generation approach This trajectory of learning continues 
well into elementary school. Assisting children and families experiencing adverse 
childhood experiences establishes resiliency skills for lifelong success 
It is cause for celebration that our multiple blended preschool classrooms have evolved to 
now 24 in 4 school districts across 8 communities, and 9 infant/toddler classrooms with 
more planned for 2024 and 2025. The partner ship possibilities create opporttmities for 
positive change. The Skowhegan district, inﬂuenced by the Educate model. 1S 
constructing an Early Learning Center in a new school building project. Each of these 
collaborations have remamed solid through several administrative changes, validating the 
mutual belief in our partnerships. It works! 
56 Drummond Avenue, Wateiville ME 04901 1 (207) 680-7200 I www educarecentralmaine org
0 
E D U CA RE 
CENTRAL MMNE 
Additionally we celebrate the success of our Elevate Maine:S0n1eI5et nmdel, 6. pIOVeI1 Early 
Head Start‘ Child Care Partnership with IO community childcare providers, both Famzly Clnld 
Care and Center based, and the impetus for First4ME. Thrs model research indicates quahty 
settings for ﬁ.11'l.‘l'l61’ public school partnerships 
And last but not least, I share with you that the Educate Central Maine Head Start/Chsld 
Care/Public school partnership data from the Umversity of Maine Muskre Institute demonstrates 
that Edueare ‘graduates ’ score equal to or better in third grade assessments than their more 
resourced peers. Sustalned learnmg is testimony for high quality pubhc school / child care / Head 
Start partnerships for Mai.ne’s youngest learners. 
Thank you for your attention to the needs of Maine’s young children and our S’£ate’s future 
Workforce 
Sincerely, 
Tracye F ortin 
Tracye Fortm 
Ch1efOperating Officer, KVCAP C&FS 
Educare Central Maine 
101 Water Street, Watervllle, ME 04-901 
207-859-1616 (oﬁice) 207-514-6446 (cell) 
tracyef@klcap.org 
www.kvcap.o1-g 
educarecentrahnameorg 
56 Drummond Avenue, Watennlle ME 04901 | (207) 680-7200 i WWW educarecentralmame org
