 
 
 
Contact: Whitney Files, CEO, Penobscot Bay YMCA 
P: 207.200.5931 E: wfiles@penbayymca.org 
 
Testimony of Whitney Files before  
the Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs  
in support of 
LD 1799: An Act to Expand Maine's High-quality Early Learning and Care for Children 
by Increasing Public Preschool Opportunities in Communities 
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Whitney Files and I am the CEO of the Penobscot Bay 
YMCA located in Rockport, Rockland and North Haven. I support LD 1799: An Act to Expand 
Maine's High-quality Early Learning and Care for Children by Increasing Public Preschool 
Opportunities in Communities. 
 
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve 
thousands of children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, 
and summer camp. These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, 
and are a critical component of our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our 
economy.  
 
Unfortunately, the childcare system is under incredible strain. Our two childcare programs in 
Rockport and Rockland collectively serve 100 children, ages 6 weeks to 5 years. We offer full-
day care from 7AM to 5PM for working families, and provide a high quality, safe and caring 
environment for young children to play, grow, share and learn. Every week, we speak with 
families who are in desperate need of care for their children and we are forced to place these 
children on lengthy wait lists. This leaves parents to make incredibly hard decisions around 
placing their children in unlicensed care, cutting back their work hours, or leaving the workforce 
altogether. Despite our best efforts, the system is failing Maine families.  
 
The childcare system needs public investment to meet the needs of Maine families. LD 1799 
would expand access to publicly-funded pre-K that better aligns with the needs of working 
families by leveraging the existing network of childcare programs across Maine. This is an 
efficient use of resources that also helps minimize disruption of care for children. Our Y would 
love to offer public pre-K to our community. Funding from the state would help to minimize costs 
for working parents, many of whom cannot enroll their children in public pre-K programs in our 
area because the programs end at 3PM (or even earlier). By collaborating with Ys and other 
providers to bring public pre-K into existing private childcare centers, we can offer better and 
more affordable full-day child care options for our community. 
 
I urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 1799. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Whitney Files 
CEO, Penobscot Bay YMCA (Rockport, Rockland, North Haven) 
