1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Wednesday, May 17 
  
LD 1866 – “An Act to Establish 5 New Tax Brackets and a Surcharge for Higher 
Income Levels” 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good morning, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1866, “An Act to 
Establish 5 New Tax Brackets and a Surcharge for Higher Income Levels.” 
For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2023, the bill expands the 
current three individual income tax rate brackets (5.8%, 6.75%, 7.15%) to eight tax 
rate brackets (one bracket at 4.5%; one bracket at 6.75%; two brackets at 7.15%; 
four brackets at 8.75%).  The bill also imposes an income tax surcharge if Maine 
taxable income is $1 million or more for single individuals and married persons 
filing separate returns, $1.5 million or more for individuals filing as heads of 
households, and $2 million or more for married individuals filing jointly or as a 
surviving spouse.  The tax surcharge is 3% of the tax otherwise imposed by 36 
M.R.S. § 5111, except that it is 6% if Maine taxable income is $10 million or more 
for single individuals and married persons filing separate returns, $15 million or 
more for individuals filing as heads of households, and $20 million or more for 
married individuals filing jointly or as a surviving spouse. 
Maine has the 9th highest top marginal tax rate in the country.  A top 
marginal tax rate of 8.75% would tie Maine at the 7th highest top marginal tax rate 
2 
 with Vermont.  Including the surtax, a tax rate of 14.75% would be the highest in 
the country.  The Administration opposes this tax increase. 
The Administration also notes the following administrative and technical 
concerns:  
• The tax increase would have an adverse effect on existing 2023 
withholding tables and estimated tax forms and instructions currently 
being used.  Even if the proposal were emergency legislation, it would be 
difficult for MRS, employers, payroll processors, producers of tax 
software, tax preparers, and individuals to respond to the proposed 
changes for tax years beginning in 2023.  It would be more feasible to 
implement the changes if the bill applied to tax years beginning on or 
after January 1, 2024. 
• Sections 2, 4, and 6 of the bill should be amended to collapse the two 
7.15% tax rate brackets into one 7.15% tax rate bracket and the four 
8.75% tax rate brackets into one 8.75% tax rate bracket. 
• The bill should be amended to coordinate Sections 2, 4, 6, and 7 with the 
annual inflation adjustment under 36 M.R.S. § 5403. 
• The tax dollar amounts in fifth, sixth, seventh, and eight tax rate brackets 
in Sections 4 and 6 of the bill are mathematically incorrect. 
• It is unclear if the surcharge is to be applied to the taxable income of 
estates and trusts (36 M.R.S. § 5160). 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is not currently available. 
If the bill is amended to apply to tax years beginning on or after January 1, 
2024, the estimated administrative costs would be nominal and could be absorbed 
3 
 by the Bureau.  However, the Bureau would incur significant administrative costs 
if the bill is not amended; those administrative costs have not yet been determined. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
