 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony in Support  of LD  1754:  Resolve Establish the Commission  to Study 
the Delivery of Services to Children and Families  and LD 545 An Act to 
Establish a Cabinet -level Position to Ensure a Continuum of Care to Support 
Children and Their Families  
 
Senator Baldacci and Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee, my  name is Deborah Hagler. I reside in Harpswell. 
I have practiced General Pediatrics for 26 years in Brunswick. I am the immediate past President of the Maine Chapter of the American A cademy of Pediatrics  
 I remember the sense of relief I felt when I moved from New York City over 2 decades ago to Maine and started to treat patients with complex medical and developmental problems . At that time, it was a relatively straightforward  pathway  to help families 
access needed support s. Now , I have come to understand from my patient’s families 
that it is easy to get lost in a complex system; there are many places to go to get a 
variety of necessary  services .  First , I must d etermine whether I can simply refer to 
specific provider (s) for the necessary services in a care plan  or does the child initially 
need to be found eligible through the Child Development Services  (CDS), Educational  
or MaineCare system to be able to even access the service ?   Once that initial question  
is resolved the next issue is to determine who will provide the  services and then I 
submit  the appropriate referral.  Even after a referral from my office there can be a host 
of other complications.  Most of the se issues stem from these services being run 
through multiple State systemic  silos , in a fragmented system .  
 
 I have learned these lessons myself as well. As the primary medical home trying to help my patients knit a care plan together -  I spend a considerable amount of time 
chasing people. While it is wonderful that the science has confirmed that the earlier, we intervene and provide a host of supports for youth with developmental disorders the better the outcomes and we have more services and tools to s upport families - the 
complexity of accessing these supports can be overwhelming. For example, one 
service team may only work with patients until the age of three  while  another team  
until the age of 8; another program requires a full neuropsychiatric evaluation before a child can be seen and this service may only takes Mainecare.  And then of course 
there are the releases required so one provider can talk to another…. There are lots of moving parts. 
 LD 1754 asks for an urgent examination to look at the array of children’s services and how they are coordinated. LD 545 asks for a similar examination with slightly different nuances then  LD 1754.  Then LD 545 lays out a process to do the  work but asks for 
the examination  to occur above the silos  under the Children’s Cabinet.  Both of these 
bills ask for stronger legislative oversight .  Both of these bills have components of 
things that need to be done.  
Developmental disorders are common. Estimates are that 1 in 36 youth will be 
diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder. We need to make sure our systems are 
focused  to support families and youth to achieve their fullest potential.   
 
The Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics  strongly encourage s the 
passage of LD  1754  or LD 545 . 
  
