 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Hannah Hudson  on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
May 12, 2023  
 
Supporting:  
LD 1754 , “Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Study the Delivery of Services  
to Children and Families ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative Glenn Curry  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Health and Human Services , I am Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager at  
Maine Primary Care Association (MPCA).  
 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers 
(CHCs), also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the 
largest  independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable 
primary and preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people 
(1 in 6  Mainers ). 
 
LD 1754 would establish a commission to study a new department focused on improving 
services for children and fami lies. MPCA supports this legislation, and we thank Representative 
Curry and the other cosponsors for bringing this bill forward.  
 
In 2021, Maine’s CHCs provided care to over 38,100 children, almost 20% of all patients served  
within our network .1 With the  CHC collaborative care model for providing services, providers 
are often well acquainted with a patient’s needs beyond just medical services. Primary care 
providers, behavioral health care providers, case managers, and many more non -clinical staff 
members , work together to ensure that CHC patients are receiving all the support they need. 
Care teams see first -hand the struggles and stressors that can negatively impact a family trying 
to access services for a child.  
 
To receive necessary services, a parent o f a child with a special healthcare need may have to 
navigate multiple offices within many departments. It is a very complicated process and leads 
to many children not accessing all the services they desperately need.   
 
An essential part of this commission will be the review of various methods for reorganizing the 
structure of state services for children and families. A broad view needs to be taken that 
encompasses all programs that support children and families. At the end of the day, o ur 
 
1 Maine Health Center Program Uniform Data System (UDS) Data. Accessed here: https://data.hrsa.gov/tools/data -
reporting/program -data/state/ME/   
 
 
 
 mepca.org  childre n require a developmental model to meet all their needs.  Easy access to coordinated, 
comprehensive services  is essential for families in Maine.  
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. 
Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up 
questions.  
 
Hannah Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
