 
   
 
              
              
 
Waypoint  
5 Dunaway Drive Sanford, ME 04073         P: (207) 324 -7955        F: (207) 324 -6050       info@waypointmaine.org      
www.waypointmaine.org    
 
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the committee on Health and Human 
Services, I’m writing in support of LD 545, An Act  to Establish a Cabinet -level Position to Ensure 
a Continuum of Care to Support Children and Their Familie s, and/or  LD 1754, Resolve, to 
Establish the Commission to Study the Delivery of Services to Children and Families.  
 
My name is Tiffany Haskell, and I’ ve worked with children and their families for 30 years in Maine 
across a variety of community and school- based services. I serve as the Clinical Director for 
Waypoint, formerly known as Waban, in Sanford, Maine . We provide comprehens ive services to 
children and adu lts with intellectual disabilities, a utism, and other developmental disabilities . 
 
Each of these bills calls for a study of the system of care for young children , and the 
development of a Cabinet level position or new state department to oversee the reorganization 
of state services for children and their families. While LD 545 has identified birth to 3 years of age as the targe t, LD 1754 does not identify an age range for this work.  Where LD 1754 re quires 
a report- back to the Legislature in December 2023, LD 545 does not i nclude  a timeline . Taken 
together, th ese bills h elp highlight the need for comp rehen sive analysis of the current services  
in pla ce, bar riers to accessing those service s, and opportunities to streamline acce ss, maximize  
funding and improve outcomes for children.  
 I write in support of characterizing the current system as fractured and confusing for families of children with special needs  and special health care needs . DHHS’ Office of Child and Family 
Service s and the Department of Education’s Child Development Services each have 
responsibilities to our population of young children yet operate in perceived silos from the family p oint of view.  This  critical work is overdue.  
  
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Tiffany Haskell  
thaskell@way pointmaine.org  
 
  
