Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
May 12, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1754 – Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Study the Delivery of Services to Children 
and Families  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services : 
 
Thank you for th e opportunity to provide information and our opposition to LD 1754 , Resolve, to 
Establish the Commission to Study the Delivery of Services to Children and Families . This resolve 
creates a commission to study issues related to establishing a new state department focused solely 
on improving services for children and families.  
 
The Commission created by this bill  has a stated  goal to remove OCFS and its associated functions 
from DHHS and creat e a separate Department. OCFS believes any such division of the current 
structure of the Department would hinder work already being done across DHHS O ffices to 
support children and families.  The entire Department, including OCFS, is seeking to eliminate 
barriers and silos to enable collaboration and the goal of this bill would run counter to this work.  
 
Collaboration is key to ensuring the well -being, safety, and prosperity of Maine families. 
The connections between OCFS’ work and that of other Offices are  numerous. Some 
specific examples include:  
 
• OCFS’ work with MaineCare to ensure children and families access to behavioral 
health services through rate studies, efforts to expand evidence -based services, and 
the addition of new services to the MaineCare B enefits Manual  
• OCFS’ work with MaineCare on the SUD 1115 Waiver, expanding services for 
MaineCare enrolled parents with SUD who are at -risk of or already involved with 
child welfare  
• OCFS’ work with MaineCare, OBH, and the MaineCDC on the MaineMOM 
project, seeking to improve care for pregnant and postpartum people with opioid 
use disorder  
• Coordination with OBH on ensuring that the Federal Mental Health Block Grant is 
used to improve mental health services for both children and adults  
• Coordination with OADS a s youth with significant behavioral health needs 
transition to adulthood  
This list does not begin to demonstrate the many ways that the work of OCFS is 
interconnected with that of other DHHS Offices. OCFS’ home within DHHS a llows for a 
better coordinated approach to serving children and families as the Commissioner’s Office 
ensures cohesive and coordinated programs and initiatives to meet the needs of Mainers, 
including children and families.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the  above information as you consider this bill going 
forward. If you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dr. Todd A. Landry   
Director  
Office of Child and Family Service s 

