TESTIMONY OF DR DAVID FRIED, VOLUNTEER DENTIST IN SUPPORT OF 789 
“An Act Regarding Dental Licensure for Charitable Care”
 Sponsored by Senator Grohoski 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH COVERAGE, INSURANCE AND FINANCIAL 
SERVICES
March 14, 2023 1:00 P.M. 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee.  My name is 
Dr David Fried.  Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on LD 876, as presented today.   
I am a practicing general Dentist, and have been in private practice in Connecticut for over 30 years. I 
have a Maine Dental license which I have personally paid for.  I am a retired Lt Col from the Army 
National Guard, served in the United States Air Force, and am a volunteer clinical faculty member at the 
University of Connecticut School of Dental Medicine.  I serve at the ADA level on the Council of Dental 
Practice and National Eldercare Advisory Board. I am a member of the Connecticut Benecare advisory 
committee which serves as a liaison between the Connecticut Department of Social Services and the 
insurance company that serves Connecticut’s Medicare population.   I am a Past-president of the 
Connecticut State Dental Association, and serve as their Co-chair of the Legislative Council.  I currently 
have a Maine Dental License which cost me $850 for two years. Over the last 10 years, I have provided 
free care on UCONN supported service trips to Maine, Honduras and Guatemala.  Since the pandemic, 
UCONN students have stayed local to the United States providing care in Puerto Rico, Tennessee, Maine, 
South Dakota, and Alaska. We will continue our service trips, but may not include Maine.  You get to 
choose.
I am part of the University of Connecticut School of Dental Medicine faculty which has been facilitating 
trips to Maine for approximately the last 15 years.  We have been working with Caring Hands of Maine, 
creating a pop-up free clinic for Maine residents.  I repeat FREE. I have been mentoring 12-20 students 
to provide are in Houlton and Ellsworth for the past two years, and before me, Dr Kevin Norige led the 
project for about 10 years.  We have been doing fillings, root canals, extractions and dental cleanings to 
hundreds of Maine residents for free.  FREE. Think about it, FREE.  Also we exposed close to 100 Dental 
students to the State of Maine, and many have thought about actually returning to Maine to live and set 
up practices.  
$850.  The only reason I have a Maine Dental License is in order to treat Maine’s underserved 
population.  I do not plan to work in Maine, live in Maine or accept anything from Maine other than the 
lobsters that I love.  This is a truly benevolent program. I have a hard time recruiting faculty to come on 
trips with me due to the licensing fee.  Previously it was free or nominal.  Charitable dentistry should not 
be ignored, and I doubt that you will receive very many comments on this topic. It is not like we have 
hoards of Dentists clamoring to come to Maine to provide free care to your citizens.    I imagine that 
there are not a lot of Dentists like myself even testifying before you.  The bottom-line question when 
you vote on this topic is this:  Is it important that your Dental Board receive $850 a few times every few 
years, or the State of Maine saves a hundred thousand dollars and citizens get healthier?  Remember, 
the gateway to health is through the mouth.   Last year, my group of students provided $30,000 of free 
dentistry in a week.  Free is free, and we keep patients out of your emergency rooms.  Free.
Many New England states including Connecticut and Rhode Island have no fee licenses for charitable 
care.  As I understand it, Maine just expanded Mainecare to include an additional 100,000 people.  Do 
you realize how expensive a medical emergency room visit is for the State of Maine?   How much do you 
anticipate tooth related emergency room visits will cost Maine taxpayers?  Are your Maine dentists 
ready to provide care to your population?  At the reduced reimbursement levels for Medicare, they 
cannot afford to do it with the increases in supply costs and staff salaries.   Are you really saying “No” to 
free care for your citizens?
I think it is a terrible policy that I need to purchase a full Maine license in order to help serve Maine’s 
increasing Mainecare population which, by the way, is having a harder and harder time finding care.  
How many of your Maine population even make an $850 charitable donation, and, as I mentioned, I live 
in Connecticut, live on my military retirement, and am partially retired. 
Again, thank you for the opportunity to comment, and I look forward to continuing my unsupported 
trips to provide free care to Maine residents.   I would be happy to answer any questions.  I, and my 
colleagues, look forward to treating your underserved populations.
David Leon Fried DMD
LTC, retired CT ARNG
Uconn School Of Dental Medicine Clinical Faculty
