                                                  105 2nd St Suite 2A
Hallowell, ME 04347
MOHC@mcdph.org
www.maineoralhealthcoalition.org
Testimony of the Maine Oral Health Coalition 
Neither for Nor Against LD 789, 
An Act Regarding Dental Licensure for Charitable Care
March 22, 2023
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance & Financial Services Committee, this testimony is submitted on behalf of the Maine 
Oral Health Coalition. Founded 25 years ago as the Maine Dental Access Coalition, we have 
functioned as a broad network, and maintain a close interest in policy and systems changes 
that can improve access to services and oral health status in Maine. 
The Coalition has been consistently supportive of legislative proposals that come forward with 
the intent to increase access to oral health services throughout Maine. LD 789 demonstrates 
that intent. We all should do all that we can to encourage interested dentists to contribute 
their skills to Maine to care for people who need that care. The purpose of LD 789 represents a 
measurable potential benefit for the State. However, we are not in a position to evaluate the 
extent to which restoring a licensure category (charitable dentist license) and waiving or 
reducing a licensure fee would accomplish that objective, nor how the process would work to 
assure that individuals practicing under this category will provide safe and effective treatment. 
It’s because of what we don’t know that we take the NFNA position at this time. 
We urge the Committee to consider the positive potential of LD 789 for helping to relieve the 
severe and persistent workforce challenges that limit access to oral health care, and resolve 
any issues that it presents. 
Thank you.
Judith Feinstein, MSPH, Coordinator
jafme52@gmail.comMOHC Steering 
Committee
Wendy Alpaugh, DMD
General Practice 
Dentist, Stonington
Kalie Hess, MPH
Partnership for 
Children’s Oral Health
Beth Pearce
Maine Primary Care 
Association
Bonnie Vaughan, 
IPDH, MEd, MBA 
Kennebec Valley 
Family Dentistry 
Center and Maine 
Dental Hygienists’ 
Association
Judith Feinstein, MSPH
Coordinator 
The Maine Oral Health 
Coalition represents a 
statewide group of 
organizations and 
individuals who work 
together as a network 
to support each other 
in raising awareness 
and promoting oral 
health and dental 
disease prevention 
activities, through 
community education 
and advocacy, with 
the vision that oral 
health is valued as a 
vital element of 
wellness for all Maine 
residents.
