Children’s Oral Health Network | Becca Matusovich | becca@mainecohn.org | www.mainecohn.org 1Testimony of Kalie Hess, Associate Director
Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine
LD 789: An Act Regarding Dental Licensure for Charitable Care and LD 876: An Act to Expand Access to 
Oral Health Care in Rural Maine by Allowing Certain Out-of-state Dentists to Practice in Dental Clinics in 
the State
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Issues
Public Hearing: March 22, 2023
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and 
Financial Issues. My name is Kalie Hess and I am the Associate Director of the Children’s Oral Health Network of 
Maine (COHN/Network). Our Network includes providers of dental care and leaders in communities and 
educational institutions, working collaboratively to identify issues and build appropriate responses. Our ultimate 
goal is to ensure that all children in Maine can grow up free from preventable dental disease.
We have been hearing from partners all over the state about the dental workforce shortage and we are actively 
working on solutions that can help us better use the workforce that we have to prevent disease before it begins. 
COHN has also been partnering with the State of Maine on their public oral health workforce effort. There are 
significant workforce challenges that are resulting in severe illness for people all over the state and our network 
is extremely concerned about this issue.
With regards to LD 789, we have become aware that the requirements to obtain a temporary license are 
significant and are stopping some dentists from choosing to participate in charitable care programs in Maine. 
Ultimately, our Network is working towards a Maine where our neighbors will not need to rely on charity care 
for essential health care. Unfortunately, at this point in time, for many people in Maine charitable care is still 
essential as it may be the only option to meet their urgent oral health needs.
With regards to LD 876, we have heard about the barriers that foreign-trained dentists face to provide care in 
Maine. The barriers to complete the current licensing requirements are significant and prevent people from 
using their expertise to meet the incredible need we have for dentists in Maine. One option is for people already 
trained as dentists to complete the Advanced Standing Track with the UNE College of Dental Medicine which is 
intended for foreign-trained dentists who wish to practice in the United States. Fees for this course as of the 
writing of this testimony are $214,408 for two and a half years of instruction.1 For many people who have 
already completed college and dental school and then resettled in the United States, the costs of tuition and 
foregoing income to attend school full-time for another two and a half years seem likely to present an 
insurmountable barrier.  Given the shortage of dentists in Maine, and the many Mainers who are unable to 
access dental care currently, it seems like a good idea to find more ways to take advantage of the skills that 
foreign-trained dentists have brought with them.  
Taken together, the issues brought forward in these bills reinforce that there is a need for qualified dentists to 
practice in Maine and there are opportunities to put more dentists who have been licensed and trained 
1 University of New England College of Dental Medicine Advanced Standing Track for Foreign-Trained Dentists: 
https://www.une.edu/dentalmedicine/program/advanced-standing-track-foreign-trained-dentists
Children’s Oral Health Network | Becca Matusovich | becca@mainecohn.org | www.mainecohn.org 2elsewhere to work in our state. Other states are working on these challenges as well. For instance, 
Massachusetts has passed legislation to support foreign-trained dentists to practice in the state, and perhaps 
the implementation burden can be lessened by replicating approaches that have proven successful there.
Some of the current barriers may also be addressed through efforts like the interstate Dentist and Dental 
Hygienist Compact, which aims to establish licensing reciprocity among participant states and reduce the 
barriers to license portability.2 
The workforce and access challenges that precipitated these bills is clear, and we appreciate the effort that is 
going into developing solutions.  There are complexities related to licensing that are outside our expertise, and it 
stands to reason that the Maine Board of Dental Practice may need additional resources to invest in solutions to 
these problems. It is important to ensure sufficient funding for the relevant state agencies to work on reducing 
the barriers that keep dentists from practicing in Maine. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony.
2 Dentist and Dental Hygienist Compact: https://ddhcompact.org/
