CARING HANDS OF MA|NE DENTAL CENTER 72 BEECHLAND ROAD. ELLSWORTH, MAINE 04605 
v: 207.667.6769 / F: 207.667.6675 
22 March 2023 
131$‘ Legislature of the State of Maine 
Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance, & Financial Services 
Testimony of Timothy W. Oh, Executive Director, Caring Hands of Maine, 
7‘6‘i 
IN SUPPORT Of LD 876, “An Act Regarding Dental Licensure for Charitable Care" 
Sponsored by Senator Nicole Grohoski 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee. My 
name is Timothy W. Oh, Executive Director, Caring Hands of Maine, and a Maine licensed 
dentist since 2008. Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on LD 876, as 
presented today. 
I am a general dentist and founder of the nonprofit Caring Hands of Maine Dental Center in 
Ellsworth. For the past 15 years my career has been working in Maine nonprofit clinics. We 
have developed an active mobile dental program that has traveled Eastern Maine serving 
dozens of sites from Rockland to Machias to Houlton and Fort Fairfield. We have set up 
regular dental clinics on 6 of the year-round island communities off our shores. Our dental 
center is an externship teaching site for dental students from 7 different universities 
including the University of New England and the University of Maine of Augusta — Bangor 
allied dental programs. I have been faculty with most of these universities for over a dozen 
years. Since 2010 we have had approximately 400 externs come and work with us as part 
of their clinical rotations. In a normal year our program traveled to over 36 sites — most 
every 6 months, and also operated our comprehensive Dental Center in Ellsworth providing 
in total an excess of 10,000 patient visits annually. Approximately % of our patients are 
Mainecare recipients and approximately % our patients are under 21years old. Through 
our charitable clinics and Mainecare write offs, we have provided in excess of $5M in 
uncompensated care since our beginning. It is not normal times, however. Since 2020 we, 
and most safety net clinics in Maine, have been facing a crisis of workforce shortage s and 
skyrocketing demand. We are short on dentists, dental hygienists, and certified dental 
assistants. After the pandemic shutdown in 2020 we only accepted new patients under 18 
as there is no pediatric dentist in our primary service areas of Hancock or Washington 
Counties, and due to our shortage of available appointments have had to pause taking any 
new patients as of 2023.
This Act seeks to re-instate a provision in the State of Maine dental licensing process that 
allowed dentists who hold an active dental license in good standing in another state to come 
to Maine and volunteer their services without compensation for their work. Temporary 
dental licenses for volunteer/charitable activities are granted by many other states across 
the country and in New England. Volunteers will not solve our provider shortage; however, 
they are an excellent resource and help tremendously with the impact of charitable 
programs in Maine. These providers not only treat underserved Maine residents, but they 
also amplify our recruitment efforts, build goodwill, and often eventually apply for a full 
Maine dental license. 
I have been involved in charitable programs that in one week can provide in excess of 
$60,000 in free care. The savings in terms of dental treatment and avoided acute care in 
settings such as emergency departments far outweigh the revenue to the state from newly 
instituted licensing fees. 
The recent removal of this provision has limited our pool of willing volunteers, strained 
budgets of charitable programs in Maine, and has already reduced the number of volunteers 
willing to come serve the neediest in Maine. We seek the wisdom of this committee to 
advance this Act and lower barriers for volunteer dentists to return to provide much needed 
care for our communities. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Timothy Oh, DMD
