 
Executive  Committee  
President  
Laura  Blaisdell,  MD,  MPH,  FAAP  
 
Vice  President  
Brian  Youth,  MD,  FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher  Motyl,  DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting,  MD,  FAAP  
 
Immediate  Past  President  
Deborah  Q. Hagler,  MD,  MPH,  FAAP  
 
Board  of Directors  
 
Mahmuda  Ahmed,  MD,  FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne  Carmack,  MD,  FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Alyssa Goodwin, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale,  MD,  FAAP 
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer  Jewell,  MD,  MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton  Kremer,  MD,  PhD,  FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney  Sewall  MD,  MPH,  FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary  Tedesco -Schneck,  PhD,  NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron  Wallace,  MD*  
 
*Resident  Board  Representatives  
**Medical  Student  Representatives  
 
Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive  Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN , BSN 
Admin  & Project  Coordinator  
 
30 Association  Drive,  Box 190 
Manchester,  ME 04351  
office:  207-480-4185 
www.maineaap.org   
 
Testimony  in support  of LD 1340 – ‘An Act to Prohibit  the Sale  or 
Possession  of Rapid -fire Modification Devices’  
 
Honorable Senator Beebe- Center, Representative Salisbury and Members of the 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety,  my name is Alyssa Goodwin, M.D. I am a 
pediatrician and parent in Brunswick, and a member of the board of directors for the Maine 
Academy of Pediatrics and co - chair of their school health committee.  
 
When our communiti es are safe, we can go about our daily activities and access 
opportunities with comfort and without the fear, threat, or reality of violence harming us and 
our loved ones. As a pediatrician I counsel children and families on safety and wellness 
every day. In many aspects of child health,  we have made gains in reducing the burden of 
injury and death, such as in the case of motor vehicles accidents. Laws passed in Maine 
have focused on evidence- based legislation to promote and require developmentally 
appropri ate child and adolescent car safety. This proactive legislation has led  to a decrease 
in pediatric deaths due to Motor vehicle accidents.   
 
The opposite is true for gun violence in our state and across the country.  We have a real 
problem with gun violence. In 2023 alone,  the United States  has experienced over 150 mass 
shootings, making mass casualty gun violence nearly a daily occurrence in the US . Last year 
the US experienced 647 mass shootings, of which 21 involved 5 or more fatalities. Mass 
shooting occur in every imaginable setting, urban, suburban, rural, schools, churches, public 
setting and in homes.  
 
Last year firearms surpassed accidents and became the leading cause of death for children 
aged 1- 19. This is an unacceptable statistic. The US is the only country among its peers 
experiencing this s taggering and tragic statistic. This statistic is even more tragic because 
these deaths are preventable. LD1340 is a practical and common -sense law aimed at 
limiting post - sale modifications to transform a semi - automatic weapon into an automatic 
weapon ca pable of firing hundreds of rounds in minutes.  
 
The number of shootings involving automatic weapons has skyrocketed since 2019, with a 
1400% increase between 2019-  2020. This trend has not slowed down since 2020. Many 
recent high profile mass shootings hav e involved automatic weapons made illegally with post 
sale modifications. We have learned that when we create common sense laws for safety,  we 
prevent injury and death.  
 
LD1340 is about safety and protecting lives. This is why I am asking your support in voting 
Ought to Pass on LD 1340.   
 

