ID“ 
LDJI-4'61 and LD 1340 May 8, 2023 
Good afternoon. Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee: 
My name is David Fitz. I live in Cumberland, Maine. I am a retired surgeon, gun owner and 
hunter; I testified earlier today. 
l am here today to testify in favor of: 
LD 1011 (An Act Requiring the Reporting of Stolen Firearms) and 
LD 1340 (an Act to Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid Fire Modification Devices). 
LD 1011 is relatively noncontroversial: by not reporting stolen firearms, a link critical to law 
enforcement may be lost. Many guns used in crimes have been stolen and this is a significant 
problem in Maine as well as nationally. 
It is estimated that as many as 10,000 guns were stolen in the U.S. in 2021 (Center for 
American Progress). 
As many as 30% of guns recovered at crime scenes were stolen. 
Please vote “ought to pass” on this bill to help law enforcement solve crimes with timely 
reporting. 
You may need to reword the part about antiques, as I used a 90 year old rifle this past fall ona 
moose hunt, and I own a 100 year old shotgun, both antiques and quite functional. 
LD 1340 “An Act to Prohibit the Sale of Rapid Fire Modification Devices" is a straight fon/vard 
bill designed to criminalize accessories which will convert a firearm into a machine gun. 
Machine gun prohibition was passed in the National Firearms Act of 1934. 
Rapid fire modification devices are currently used as a curiosity, or by those who think they are 
cool; or they are used by criminals and mass murderers. 
They are of no use while hunting, and are of no use to responsible firearm owners. They are an 
abomination to the hunter’s “fair chase“ concept. 
I do not see enforcement as a problem: finding illegal devices during a criminal investigation or 
routine traffic stop are problematic for the owner. Those who trade in or sell illegal devices will 
know the risks. 
This bill has nothing to do with my 2nd Amendment rights, and these devices should be 
criminalized. Those who own them can have the opportunity to turn them in. 
Please vote “ought to pass” on this bill which is critical to making Maine and our country a 
safer place. 
Thank you.
