Distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, my name is Isa Morton and I am a resident 
of Falmouth. I stand before you today as: A mother. A wife. A sister. A daughter. An auntie. A friend. A fellow community 
member. And a deeply concerned citizen. 
As a concerned citizen, I urge you to support LD 1340 An Act to Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid-ﬁre Modiﬁcation 
Devices. 
I care about this issue because this bill will help protect Mainers by prohibiting common, easy-to-obtain conversion 
devices that signiﬁcantly increase the rate of ﬁre of semi-automatic ﬁrearms, approximating machine gun ﬁre. 
In 11 minutes, the Las Vegas mass shooter shot over ONE THOUSAND bullets. 11 minutes. Killing 58 people and injuring 
nearly 500 others. Thirteen of the riﬂes he used were outfitted with rapid-ﬁre modiﬁcation devices. 
I attended last month's public hearings regarding the arming of teachers and security officers in our schools. Supporters 
of those bills, of which I also strongly oppose, spoke to the precious ﬁrst moments of a mass shooting and how, due to 
geographic limitations and stafﬁng, law enforcement cannot often nerrget to schools within less than 10 minutes. So I ask 
those supporters who want to arm our educators, imagine the risk that n_ot prohibiting rapid-ﬁre modiﬁcation further 
introduces... the deadly release of thousands of bullets in such a short time frame. 
For years, manufacturers have created devices and attachments like bump stock, trigger cranks, and binary triggers that 
dramatically increase semi-automatic ﬁrearms’ rate of ﬁre, allowing them to mimic machine gun ﬁre. 
These modifications turn a semi-automatic firearm into a machine gun. So, instead of one round being discharged 
from a firearm with the single pull of the trigger, when the switch is installed onto a firearm, we are now talking about 
1,200 rounds with the single pull of the trigger within a minute. 
One thousand, two hundred bullets with just one pull. 
>; 
These weapon accessories serve no other purpose than to increase the rate of ﬁre to maximize the number of dead and 
wounded. 
Many responsible Maine gun owners report that they do not want to own or use bump stocks. Including responsible 
hunters in our great state. 
By passing this bill, Maine is ensuring that common conversion devices that signiﬁcantly increase a ﬁrearm’s rate of ﬁre 
are prohibited by state law. 
Please - I urge you to help to keep our communities safe by voting to support LD 1340. Weapons of war do not belong 
on our civilian streets or land.» 
With my remaining time, I would also like to express my support of LD 1011 An Act Requiring the Reporting of Stolen 
Firearms. 
I am here to support this bill because gun thefts occur in staggering numbers. Hundreds of thousands of guns are stolen 
every year, taken from houses, vehicles, and stores. 
Gun thefts often divert guns into an underground market where people with dangerous histories are easily ableto obtain 
ﬁrearms without restriction. That is why stolen guns are often recovered at crime scenes, including at the scenes of 
homicides and other violent crimes. 
Please do your part in keeping our communities and Maine's future safe by voting to support LD 1011 and LD 1340. 
Thank you for your time today.
