it 
£4 iité. 3 we"? pg. 
_, tr. _a 
OFFICE OF THE DISTRICTATTORNEY 
CUMBERLAND COUNTY Jacqueline A- Sarwris 142 Federal Street, Portland, Maine, 04101 Portland 
District Attorney (207) 871-8384 
JACQUELINE SARTORIS, DISTRICT ATTORNEY, D2 
“An Act to Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid-ﬁre Modiﬁcation Devices” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Public Hearing Date: May 8, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 1340 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary, thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. My name is Jacqueline Saitoris, I am 
the District Attorney for District 2, which includes Portland and so many diverse Cumberland County 
communities comprising a quarter of Maine ’s total population. I am here to testify in support of LD 1340, 
“An Act to Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid-ﬁre Modiﬁcation Devices” , because I see the way in 
which the unfettered access to guns, ammunition, and other equipment of war is harming our' 
communities and making us far less safe by the day. The proposal to prohibit possession of equipment to 
accelerate the rate of ﬁre of a semi-automatic ﬁrearm is simply common sense, but it is warranted given 
our nation’s history and now daily experience of gun violence. 
A few weeks ago, the community of South Portland found themselves in the news, watching 
footage of a tactical team descending upon the home of a local student. Public reporting detailed that 
several weapons had been recovered, including high powered riﬂes. South Portland Police Chief Daniel 
Ahern was quoted as stating “We reduced any type of threat from the individual. We recovered a lot of 
evidence... that will stop any actions that he had planned... We want to ensure the public they are safe.” 
Other than to cite the press reporting and public statements, I obviously cannot speak to pending 
charges against a juvenile, and I want to emphasize that the intent of the juvenile criminal code is 
rehabilitation, which I strongly support. But I also need to tell this committee that, although Chief Ahem 
was speaking about that one case, the public in Maine is in fact not safe. I tell you that based on the cases 
I see as District Attorney, the cases I prosecuted as an Assistant DA, our recent experience last month in 
South Portland, and then on Route 295 in Falmouth, where a family just driving the highway suddenly 
experienced the trauma and lasting harm of gun violence.
Your constituents are not safe because of the money there is to be made by selling fear, and the 
availability of things like bump stocks to enable everyday citizens to arm as if for war. Quite simply, if 
there were no money to be made from the sale of guns and ﬁrearm accouterments, we would not be 
having any of the many conversations we are forced to have due to the mind boggling access to guns and 
all of the other equipment of war that is currently legally available, like bump stocks and other 
mechanisms that enable the automatic ﬁring of guns. This includes legal access by high schoolers, as 
well as their de facto access to all sorts of weaponry when these weapons are otherwise legally kept in the 
home by an adult. 
Ironically, we have a juvenile code that embraces rehabilitation because we know that kids this 
age have limited capacity to fully appreciate the long term consequences of their choices. But at the same 
time we allow them access to weapons, even the ability to make them fully automatic. We can’t expect 
them not to act as dozens of impressionable, confused kids have done all over this nation because by and 
large we are not preventing gun violence through all of the common sense approaches Mainers support. 
We are fooling ourselves if We believe it can’t happen here. 
I need to give you some hard news: there is no question about WHETHER Maine’s children will 
experience a school shooting. There is only a question of WHEN. There is no question about HOW 
some kid in Maine will access firearms and take a ﬂeeting obsession with Hitler, or white supremacy, or 
hatred of some group, to try and kill other students and staff. There is not a question about IF Maine’s 
schoolkids have access to exactly the same arsenal of weapons that have been used to murder and 
traumatize thousands of American children over the past few decades. They do. 
We hear a lot about hardening our schools right now. This is really about hardening our society 
and turning towards even greater fear. Fear sells these weapons of War. Putting those weapons aside, 
shared values and building community ﬁghts that impulse. When I hear the calls to harden schools, I 
can’t help but hear the phrase from church - “when you hear his voice, harden not your hearts,” If we 
listen, we can hear the voices of our children, for whom things have already been quite hard these past 
few years. They are asking us not for metal detectors, but for us to put down needless weapons of war 
and open our hearts to build communities that teach, accept, embrace and Welcome our children into lives 
built not on fear, but on care. 
For these reasons, I urge your support of LD 1340. 
I am always happy to take any questions or provide additional information, and thank you so 
much for your time and concern for the important work we do.
