Janet Lynch
Pownal
LD 1340
From: Janet Lynch, Pownal, representing myself
Date of hearing: 8 May 2023
Re: LD 1340 - “An Act to Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid-fire Modification 
Devices”
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee, 
I strongly support LD 1340 - “An Act to Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid-fire 
Modification Devices.” This urgently needed bill OUGHT TO PASS.
Almost daily, the nation has been reeling from horrific multiple murders committed 
with automatic and semi-automatic weapons which can fire up to 1200 rounds a 
minute, or 15 rounds or more per second. To put this into context, in Maine, hunters 
are PROHIBITED from using weapons that fire over 6 rounds, and for duck hunters, 
you may not have more than 3 shells. The devices prohibited by this bill are used to 
create weapons whose sole purpose is mass killing.
Some have argued that they enjoy using high capacity automatic and semi-automatic 
weapons in competitions, but the rights of some to enjoy an inherently dangerous 
pastime do not outweigh the threat to public safety posed by such weapons. I note that
in 2008, the Supreme Court ruled that dangerous weapons which are not in common 
use may be banned. 
The aim of this bill is to ensure that such extremely dangerous weapons stay OUT of 
common use by banning devices used to create them. Almost daily, sickening reports 
of mass shootings which turn peaceful public spaces (shopping malls, concerts, 
schools, churches, etc.) into grisly scenes of mass murder show that such weapons are
becoming increasingly common, with deadly results. This much-needed bill aims to 
curb that trend by banning devices used to evade the law to create high capacity 
weapons of war, helping law enforcement protect the public from such weapons.
Some argue against any bill which limits the types of firearms which may be legally 
used, citing federal and state constitutional protections of the right to bear arms, 
hewing to an absolutist objection to any limitation on firearms. Let me be clear: no 
legally protected right is completely unfettered. For example, the constitutional right 
to free speech is fundamental to a functioning democracy. Yet it is well established 
that, for obvious reasons of public safety, the right to free speech does not protect 
someone shouting “FIRE!” in a crowded theater. Moreover, devices used to modify 
firearms to increase their killing capacity are not firearms themselves, and there is no 
constitutional right to use after-market devices to increase the lethality of firearms.
Assault weapons and rapid fire devices are not allowed for hunting and have no place 
in our state. This bill aims to prohibit devices used to turn firearms into a 
high-capacity weapons of war, with the capacity to maim and kill staggering numbers 
of people in seconds. These devices are not themselves firearms but are used to 
increase the lethality of firearms. There is absolutely no reason for ANYONE to own 
such a device, and they should be banned.
I urge you to please vote, LD 1340 Ought to Pass.
Sincerely,
Janet Lynch, Pownal
