 
LD 1340 An Act to Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid-fire Modification Devices 
  
 
Memorandum of Opposition 
Date:  May 8, 2023 
To:  Honorable Members of the Committee On Criminal Justice and Public Safety.  
From:  Jonathan Martell  
RE:  LD 1340 An Act to Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid-fire Modification Devices 
 
Members of the committee, I would like to express my Opposition of LD 1340 An Act to Prohibit the Sale or 
Possession of Rapid-fire Modification Devices 
 
My Name is Jonathan Martell. I am a Sanford City Councilor, Head of The Southern Maine Chapter for Gun 
Owners of Maine, Legislative Officer for Sanford Springvale Fish and Game Club and NRA Member.  
 
This is another attempt to ban items that the author has not fully defined and does not understand. None of 
these devices make a firearm fire faster, nor do they make it fire fully automatic. Fully automatic firearms are 
already controlled under the National Firearms Act, and illegal to make.  
 
The devices mentioned still only fire one round with one activation of the trigger. Bump firing is nothing more 
than rapid activation of the trigger and can be done with a trigger finger. No other devices are necessary.  
Binary Triggers have been approved by the ATF and only fire with one action of the trigger. 
Bump Stocks still only use a single action of trigger  
Burst Trigger System is wrongly defined as is still using a single action of the trigger, and does not cause 
automatic fire. Anything firing 2 or more rounds with a single trigger pull is defined as a machine gun under the 
National Firearms Act, and is already to produce.  
Rapid-fire modification device attempts to lump multiple items together. This is wrong as the cyclic rate of fire is 
determined by physics of the firing mechanism, gas system, bolt design, cartridge pressure and other factors. It 
is not determined by how fast someone can pull a trigger.  
Trigger crank is still a single action of the trigger, and again does not actually make the firearm fire faster.  
Crank firearms have been around since the 1700's, and are strangely exempted from this legislation. A crank on 
a 22 for plinking at the range would be illegal, but a 45-70 Gattling gun is still ok?  
 
The technical inaccuracies and blatant attempt to infringe on firearm rights and accessories that do not make a 
semi automatic firearm fire any faster or make it more dangerous should be reason enough to reject this 
legislation. Those submitting this legislation should at least understand what they are trying to ban. Clearly the 
author does not.  
 
Again, the Maine Constitution should be pointed out that this is an infringement on my right to keep and bear 
arms without question. Please uphold your oath, and vote ought not to pass for LD 1340 An Act to Prohibit the 
Sale or Possession of Rapid-fire Modification Devices. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Jonathan Martell 
Sanford, ME 
Sanford City Councilor 
Head of The Southern Maine Chapter for Gun Owners of Maine 
Legislative Officer for Sanford Springvale Fish and Game Club 
National Rifle Association Member 
 
