Testimony of Lani Graham, MD, MPH 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 134-0 & LD 1011 
An Act Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid-ﬁre Modification Devices 
Presented by Representative Melanie Sachs
& 
An Act Requiring the Reporting of Stolen Firearms 
Presented by Representative Victoria Doudera 
Before the Criminal Iustice and Public Safety Committee, May 8, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Members of the 
Criminal Iustice and Public Safety Committee, my name is Lani Graham. 
I am a former Chief Public health Officer for Maine. I live in Freeport. 
Let's first tackle the biggest source of resistances to these bills, namely, 
that it won't make any difference in gun deaths and the real problem is 
mental health. While mental health is indeed a crisis in this country, 
access to firearms, particularly dangerous ones, is also a problem. In 
public health we believe in science and tracking of information. The 
most important source of data to consider is the impact of the federal 
assault weapon ban, which was passed in 1994 and discontinued in 
2004- . Gun deaths went down by 70% nationally} So, exactly as hoped, 
the federal ban made a difference. Too bad LD 1340 is just banning 
modification devices, I'd love to see Maine join 10 other forward- 
thinking states and ban assault weapons. But the point is, our country 
has a firearms death problem because access is too easy and too 
dangerous for these weapons. Why would anyone not in a war want to 
turn a riﬂe into a machine gun? 
Let's consider another angle on this issue. The United States has beena 
consistent outlier compared to other developed nations. When we look 
at countries with populations over 10 million, the United States ranks 
first with respect to firearm homicides. Our rate is 13 times higher than 
‘ https://ohiocapitaljoumal.com/2022/06/l 5/did-the-assault-weapons-ban-o ﬁ1994-bring-down-mass- 
sho otin gs-heres-what-the-data-tel1s-us/
France and 23 times higher than Australia? To support the concept 
that it's all about mental health, you would have to believe that the 
United States has many more mentally disturbed people than any other 
developed nation. And even though Maine's firearms death , rate is 
relatively low compared to other states, we are high compared to other 
countries. Maine’s firearm death rate is higher than Australia, New 
Zealand, the Netherlands, and many other countries.3 
Mental health services are certainly important and should be 
addressed, but stealing a firearm or being able to buy a device that turns 
a firearm into a military weapon are also both important issues that 
must be addressed. It could make the difference between life and death 
for yourself and for others. 
For all these reasons, I hope that you will support these two bills 
unanimously. 
Thank you for your attention. I would be glad to answer any questions 
you might have. 
Z 
https://www.healthdata.org/acting-data/gun-violence-united-states-outlier 
3 
https1!/worldpopulationreview.coml count1y-ranl<ings/ gun-deaths-by-country
