Testimony in Support of LD 1340 An Act to Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid- 
fire Modiﬁcation Devices 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Michele Stapleton and I live in 
Brunswick. 
On December 14, 2012, at about 7:40 a.m. Beijing time, a man with a knife attacked a 
primary school as children were arriving, stabbing 23 children and an elderly 
woman.~Though some of the children had ﬁngers or ears cut off, none of the victims 
died. 
Approximately 14 hours later and 7000+ miles away, Adam Lanza, carrying a AR-15, 
two semiautomatic pistols, and a shotgun, broke into the Sandy Hook Elementaiy 
School. ln the span of about ﬁve minutes, Lanza visited ﬁred 154 rounds and claimed 
the lives of 20 children and 6 adults. 
Five years later and over 2000 miles away on October ’l, 2017, Stephen Paddock, 
opened ﬁre on a music festival on the Las Vegas Strip. ln a ten-minute span he fired 
more than 1,000 bullets, killing 60 people and wounding at least 413. The ensuing 
panic brought the total number injured to approximately 867. This, the deadliest mass 
shooting in U.S. history was made possible by the use of bump stocks, which allowed 
Paddock to ﬁre at a rate similar to that of automatic ﬁrearms. 
l'm sure everyone is familiar with the saying "guns don't kill people, people kill 
people." However, the issue is not whether a gun can spontaneously get up and kill 
someone on its own. The issue is how incredibly easy it is to inflict carnage with some 
modern weapons. The differences among these three cases were not the assailants, 
but the lethality of the weapons they chose. 
People intent on inflicting harm will use whatever they can put their hands on. Rocks, 
baseball bats, a chair, a knife or a gun. That's why it's vital to restrict what is available 
and who can get it. Mainers do not need rapid-fire weapons for hunting. Or for self 
protection. If we allow these devices to be sold here we're only asking for a repeat of 
the massacre we saw in Las Vegas. 
ln the Heller decision, Scalia said "Like most rights, the right secured by the Second 
Amendment is not unlimited." He also noted the "historical tradition of prohibiting 
the carrying of ‘dangerous and unusual weapons." ’
Sources: 
It's Time To Retire The ‘Guns Don't Kill People — People Kill People’ Argument. 
Guns DO Kill People, https://medium.com/@msharnmas/its-time-to-retire-the-guns- 
don-t-kilI-people-people-kill-people-argument-60c|91889f806 
Chenpeng Village Primary School stabbing, https://en.wikipedia.org/vviki/ 
Chenpeng_Vi||age¥Primary_SchooLstabbing 
District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570 (2008), https://supremejustia.com/cases/ 
federal/us/554/57W
