 
 
 
 
1 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774-5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
Ought  Not to Pass  
 
LD 1340, An Act to Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid -fire Modification Devices  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY  
 
May 8 , 202 3 
 
     Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety, good morning. My name is 
Michael Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organizati on 
committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine 
and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to oppose LD 1340 because it 
would e xpand our criminal legal system by creating a new crime , strengthening a failed method 
of problem -solving.  
 The right to own and use guns is not absolute nor free from government regulation . 
Firearms are inherently dangerous instrumentalities and their use, unlike other activities 
protected by the Bill of Rig hts, can inflict serious bodily injury or death. Therefore, firearms are 
subject to reasonable regulation in the interests of public safety, crime prevention, maintaining 
the peace, environmental protection, and public health.  We recognize that gun violenc e is 
increasing, reaching levels not seen in the past twenty years.1 Black people and young people age 
18 to 24 are the most frequent victims of gun violence.2 And, we recognize that this committee is 
tasked with creating public policy that promotes publ ic safety in our state, and may feel moved 
to enact gun control measures as part of its work. We ask that as you deliberate over these bills  
other bills like them , that you look for solutions that do the most good while preventing the most 
harm, and consid er in your weighing process whether creating new crimes is the best way to 
change behavior.  
 
1 See Ed Pilkington, Gun deaths in US rise to highest level in 20 years, data shows , THE GUARDIAN, Dec. 13, 
2018, available at https://www.theguardian.com/us -news/2018/dec/13/us -gun-deaths -levels -cdc2017  
2 Firearm Violence, 1993 -2011 , Bureau of Justice Statistics, available at  https://bjs.ojp.gov/press -release/firearm -
violence -1993 -2011 . 
  
 
Every three seconds a person is arrested in this country. According to the FBI, of the 10.3 
million arrests each year, only 5 percent are for offenses involving vio lence. Popular culture 
teaches that people who are accused of crimes are violent and dangerous, but the vast majority of 
people who are arrested each year are accused of relatively minor infractions.  More than three 
fourths of Maine’s arrests every year ar e for misdemeanors. Moreover, the system 
disproportionately arrests people of color as compared to white people, so that while 1.6 percent 
of Maine’s population is Black, Black people make up 5 percent of all arrests and more than 10 
percent of those in Ma ine’s prisons.  
It does not have to be this way. Another gun bill from this legislative session, LD 60, 
attempts to curb gun violence without creating a new crime. That bill creates new civil 
infractions with a $200 to $500 fine for the first violation and a $500 to $1,000 fine for a 
subsequent violation.  That approach is less harmful than new crimes.  
We can shrink our outsized and misused criminal justice system and commit our 
resources to things that make communities healthier and safer: edu cation, housing, and health 
care. We lock up more people in this country than any country in the history of the world and our 
incarceration rate in Maine is higher than most NATO member states. A better world begins with 
making the commitment to stop turni ng to the criminal justice system to solve society’s 
problems. Unless it is amended to remove the new crime, we urge you to vote that LD 1340 
ought not to pass .  
Thank you for your time and attention.  
 
 
 
