Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety, my name is Nacole Palmer. I live in Bowdoin. l stand in support of LD 
1340: Prohibiting Rapid Fire Modiﬁcation Devices and LD 1011: An Act Requiring the Reporting 
of Stolen Firearms. 
U.S. law prohibits owning automatic weapons, but the small device commonly known as a bump 
stock will take a semi-automatic weapon and effectively make it an automatic weapon, capable 
of ﬁring up to 1,200 rounds per minute. That's twenty bullets per second, in case you’re 
counting, enough to kill everyone in the room in under 5 seconds. 
Now, I have no doubt that the NRA lobbyists and organizations will be here today, their efforts 
paid for by the very companies who stand to profit from the killing that l am begging you to 
prevent. These NRA sponsored lobbyists will try to convince you that Mainers need to possess 
weapons whose sole purpose is to kill large numbers of humans as quickly as possible. l ask 
you to remember that these same people were in this room four weeks ago, arguing that “Maine 
is the safest state in the country, ” and that that’s why we don’t need to make sure criminals can't 
buy guns as easily as they do here. lt’s the safest state in the country, and yet regular citizens 
need to have a tiny device that allows them to kill hundreds of people in minutes? The 
l ask you to consider the 2018 mass shooter in Las Vegas, who killed 58 people and injured 
almost 500 others in a matter of minutes, thanks to the bump stocks that were outﬁtted on his 
weapons. I ask you to think about the fact that every day, we see news of a new gun rampage 
that has taken many lives all at once. 
When is it going to end? What steps can you take to stop this madness? This is a simple one 
and an easy one. Automatic weapons are illegal for a reason. Bump stocks that make firearms 
into de facto automatic weapons should be, too. Please vote YES on LD 1340. 
Regarding LD 1011: Reporting Stolen Firearms. This bill will go a long way to strengthening the 
ability of law enforcement to keep our communities safer, and it in no way limits the owning or 
bearing of ﬁrearms. With the large number of stolen ﬁrearms in Maine, estimated at 500 or more 
each year, and with most of those weapons ending up in the hands of criminals, mandatory 
reporting would reduce straw purchase, reduce crime, and help police solve crimes. Let’s give 
the police every tool they need, and are asking for, to help them keep our communities safe. 
lsn’t that what this committee is charged with.. .public safety? This bill is a clear win for public 
safety, and l urge you to vote ought to pass.
