Peggy McGehee 
Falmouth, Maine 
Good aﬁernoon, Chairs Beebe-Center and Salisbury and Members of the Committee: 
lam Peggy McGehee, a resident of the Town of Falmouth, and 1 speak in support of L.D. 1340. 
Rapid tire modiﬁcation devices, like bump stocks, convert a semi-automatic ﬁrearm into 
extremely dangerous automatic weapons of war, capable of ﬁring up to 1,200 1‘OU.l1dS per minute. 
in 2018, a mass shooter shot l049 bullets in l 1 minutes at a Harvest Festival in Las Vegas, 
killing 58 people and injuring nearly 500 others. Thirteen of the riﬂes he used were outﬁtted with 
rapid-ﬁre modiﬁcation devices called bump stocks, allowing his semiautomatic weapons to ﬁre 
at the rate of an automatic riﬂe with up to 1,200 rounds per minute. 
In May, 2022, a shooter outside a MacDonald ’s restaurant in Chicago shot 9 people, killing 2, 
with a semi-automatic handgun he had converted into a high-capacity machine gun with a device 
known as an auto sear, aboutthe size of a thumbnail, called a Glock “switch.” The number of 
such switches recovered by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives rose from 
I00 in 20! 7 to about 1,500 last year. Since 2018, police have observed that these converted guns 
are showing up at more and more crime scenes. 
There are, today, thirteen states with banning or restricting the modiﬁcation devices, including 
Vermont and Massachusetts, and other state legislatures are considering adopting the same. 
To the extent opponents assert that the bill violatescitizens ’ Second Amendment rights, it does 
not. There is no U.S. Supreme Court decision, Maine Law Court, U.S. District Court for Maine, 
or U.S. First Circuit appellate court decision declaring rapid ﬁre modiﬁcation devices to be 
unconstitutional. 
Rather, because rapid ﬁre modiﬁcation devices are both dangerous and not in common use for 
self-defense, they meet the U.S. Supreme Court’s standard for constitutionality. See District of 
Columbia ll Heller, 554 U.S. 570 (2008) (“We also recognize another important limitation on the 
right to keep and carry arms [which is, if the ﬁI€ﬂl'I’HS are not] ‘in common use at the time’ for 
lawful purposes like self-defense. .. We think that limitation is fairly supported by the historical 
tradition of prohibiting the carrying of “dangerous and unusual weapons”) 
Applying that Supreme Court standard, the D.C. Federal District Court held just last month, in 
the case of Hanson v. District of Columbia, that a ban on large capacity magazines 
(“LCMs”)—was constitutional as LCMs were dangerous and not in common use for self- » 
defense. The Court held that “‘ _law-abiding individuals do not use LCMs for self-defense because 
incidents where a civilian actually expends more than ten bullets in self-defense are ‘vanishingly 
rare.”’ Like LCMs, rapid ﬁre modiﬁcation devices are dangerous and not in common use for 
self-defense. 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments. 
Peggy McGehee pmcgehee4@gmail.com
