Good afternoon, Chairs Beebe-Center and Salisbury and Members of the Committee. My name 
is Peter Fromuth, I’m the dad of a high school daughter and an attorney. I live in Yarmouth. 
I speak today in support of L.D. I340, a bill to criminalize rapid—ﬁre modiﬁcation devices, 
making their possession, sale, distribution, transfer or import a Class D crime. 
In 1934, Congress passed the National Firearms Act sharply increasing the cost and difficulty of 
owning a machine gun. Machine guns became scarce and those that remained were very tightly 
regulated. But an industry emerged to make workarounds, to convert legal ﬁrearms into 
weapons whose rapid-ﬁre capacity made them the functional equivalent of machine guns. That 
prompted the ATF to adjust its language to keep up with the technology, and Congress added 
further restrictions. 
But, things didn’t end there. Workarounds kept evolving until in the last several years advances 
in low-cost manufacturing, combined with internet-based imports, have created an enormous 
market for rapid ﬁre conversion devices. The most popular one, the tiny auto sear attachment 
can be - —and often is - - made on a 3D printer, installed in seconds, and converts a semi- 
automatic to an automatic weapon able to fire 20 rounds per second. BINGO, the machine gun 
is back, and at $20 — - it’s cheaper than ever. 
The federal government is trying to keep up. Congress amended the statutory deﬁnition of 
machine gun to cover any weapon that shoots more than one shot by a single function of the 
trigger - - thus without manual re-loading (26 U.S.C. § 5845(b)). It also amended the law to 
cover any part designed and intended to convert a weapon into a machine gun. 
lVlaine’s criminal law uses virtually the same machine gun definition as the U.S. Code. 
However, even though rapid-fire devices clearly fall within the pertinent language ofthe Maine 
Criminal Code (l7—A, Chp. 43 § 1051) L.D. 1340 would signiﬁcantly strengthen our protection 
against machine-gun-equivalent rapid-fire devices. It would create a new statute that defines and 
describes them and applies the same prohibition and Class D criminal penalty as now exists 
under our machine gun statute. 
While these devices have no practical use in marksmanship, hunting or recreation, their ability to 
spray bullets at a fantastic speed gives them murderous capacity in criminal hands easily out- 
gunning law enforcement. Please help keep them out of criminal hands by voting ought-to-pass 
L.D. 1340.
