 
19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622 -7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®   
 
 
Testimony in  Support of  LD 470 (“An Act to Support Lead Abatement in Older 
Residential Properties ”)  
 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  
 
April 14, 2023  
 
Senator Pierce , Representative Gere  and members of the Joint Select  Committee on 
Housing , my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. 
We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association 
established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s 
economy and build M aine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved 
in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes 
industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building 
inspector s, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association 
of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  
 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports  LD 470. The bill provides an ongoing 
$1,000,000 appropriation to support the Maine State Housing Authority’s lead abatement 
program .  
 
The Association recognizes the health impacts that lead poisoning can cause and has long -
supported efforts to educate homeowners and to mi tigate the dangers of lead poisoning. 
MAR supports consumer education about voluntary testing and inspections so that buyers 
and sellers can make their own informed decisions.  Our members provide educational 
literature to all potential homebuyers on lead poisoning  and during the transaction they 
encourage homebuyers to screen a property for lead . We are committed to improving the 
safety and quality of Maine’s aging housing stock  and ensuring that every individual should 
have opportunities to live in s afe and decent housing that is affordable to them . LD 470 would 
ensure that more people can be protected  by the abatement of lead in properties throughout 
our state.  
 
For these reasons, we support  LD 470 and respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Pass. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
 
