J ‘Z
7 
12> 3;‘
* 
5,, A 1;’? 
[?J§ﬁ§%@‘ 
Mark W_ Lawyencg 3 SIZH6 HOUSE SlHIlOl] 
Senator, District 35 13 lst Legislature Augusta, M85116 04333 
Testimony of Senator Mark Lawrence introducing LD 1806 “An Act to Require Online Used Car 
Dealers to Be Licensed ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business ” 
May 9, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business. I am Senator Mark 
Lawrence, and I represent Senate District 35, which is made up of Eliot, Kittery, Ogunquit, South 
Berwick, and York. I am here today to present LD l806, “An Act to Require Online Used Car Dealers to Be 
Licensed. ” . 
We are seeing more and more convenient car shopping options pop up all over the country. This is 
quickly becoming a trend in the automotive industry, and with changing times, this was an inevitability. 
While it is always great to expand our options, and create more avenues for business, it is important that 
we also give Maine consumers a place that they can go to with their concerns. I’m presenting this bill 
today in the hopes to accomplish that. 
This bill would require that online used car dealers be licensed to sell motor vehicles to Maine residents. 
If an online used car dealer establishes a physical place of business in the state, they are subject to 
requirements regarding those businesses like any other car dealer would be in Maine. It would also 
require that the business post its license on their website so that it can be veriﬁed by the public. 
Having had my own experience getting a car on one of these websites, I have ﬁrsthand understanding of 
the pros and cons of this process. While I do enjoy the car that I now have, the process was less than 
ideal. There are ways to make this easier for Maine residents as well as creating more transparency in the 
process, and I think this is the ﬁrst step in doing that. 
I thank you all for your time and consideration, I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Chair, Energy, Utilities and Techno/ogjy Committee 
State House: (207) 287-1515 * Fa.\'.' (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free: 1-800-423-6900 * TTI’: 711 
Mark.Law/ ‘@nce@legislature. mc1i12e.g0v * iegis/alure. mc1ine.g0v/senate
