Pretilaherty 
Bruce C. Gerrity 
bgerrity@preli.com 
207.623.5300 
April 6, 2023 
Rep. Matt Moonen, Chair 
Committee on Judiciary 
Cross Building, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04330 Sen. Anne Camey, Chair 
Committee on Judiciary 
Cross Building, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04330 ‘ Portland, ME 
Augusta, ME 
Concord NH 
Boston, MA 
Washington, DC 
RE: LD 934 — An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for 
Wrongful Death .- 
Dear Senator Camey and Representative Moonen, 
This written testimony is submitted by the American Property Casualty Insurance 
Association (“APCIA”) in strong opposition to LD 934. APCIA is a nationwide association of 
property casualty insurance companies with 1,200 member insurers which collectively write 60% 
of the property and casualty insurance in the United States. lts members write auto, 
homeowners, commercial, malpractice, marine, inland marine and other property and casualty 
coverages for citizens of Maine.' 
» 
LD 934 proposes to increase limits for damages arising from a wrongful death claim by 
an unprecedented amount. It will double the amount recoverable for loss of comfort, society and 
companionship of a deceased from $750,000 to $1,500,000. It proposes to increase the punitive 
damages cap from $250,000 to $1,000,000, guadrupling the amount that can be awarded. It 
proposes to increase the timeframe for ﬁling a claim by 50%, from two to three years. LD 934 
th 
proposes these increases in the wake of expansive legislation in the 129 Legislature, a mere 
four years ago, which, at that time, increased damages for loss of comfort, society and 
companionship by 50%, from $500,000 to $750,000. The proposed changes in LD 934 are 
neither necessary nor fair barely after the ink is dry on Public Law 2019, c. 198 
One of the challenges in enacting statutes of this nature is to ﬁnd the proper line to be 
drawn on protecting the rights of all affected parties. No matter where the line is drawn, there 
will always be instances where the facts might suggest a different amount might be perceived to 
be justiﬁable. It also does not mean, however, that a statute intended to protect and balance the 
PretiFlal1erty _i 
“‘*'lV@¥*“<‘§<Pa“'\l°5LlP 45MemorialCircle,Augusta,MEO433O | POBo><l0S8,Augusta,ME04332-1058 p Te|207.623.530O | v.Iww.preti.com 
Attorneys at l aw _ 
203083052
PRETI FLAHERTY 
Sen. Anne Carney, Chair 
Rep. Matt Moonen, Chair 
April 6, 2023 
Page 2 , 
rights of all parties should be eviscerated for one party, a defendant, to accommodate any one 
given claim or any one perspective. The limits in Maine’s wrongful death statute are intended 
not only to recognize the viability of a wrongful death claim, but to protect the rights of those 
against whom a claim is made. A claim arising out of someone’s death always creates the 
potential for an umeasonable verdict based upon juror sympathy rather than the facts. LD 934 
ignores the rights of a defendant who has been accused of acting negligently, tipping the scales 
so severely that any notion of fairness is jettisoned. 
Make no mistake ~ increases of this magnitude will place exposure on a defendant well 
beyond reasonable limits of insurance coverage or the ability of the overwhelming majority of 
Mainers to pay. Also, there is not only insurance coverage involved — once policy limits are 
reached, all of the assets of a defendant are subject to forfeiture. A defendant ’s right to defend 
him or herself, rely on the facts, the evidence and questions of liability and comparative 
negligence will be curtailed. The consequence will be more claims settling at policy limits, with 
punitive damages piling on thereafter. 
There are three facets to the automobile segment of property casualty insurance that place 
Maine citizens in an extraordinarily advantageous position relative to the rest of the country. ‘ 
Maine has the highest minimum limits of coverage in the country. Maine has among the very 
lowest percentage of uninsured drivers. Finally, Maine’s rates are annually at or among the 
lowest three or four states in the country. Maine citizens will unquestionably lose this trifecta in 
the wake of LD 934. That is not good public policy. One of the inevitable consequences of 
increasing damages exposure will be to increase rates, placing higher levels of insurance coverage 
beyond the reach of many who already struggle to purchase insurance. Liability limits of a policy 
in the $500,000 range for a single limits policy is robust coverage - but it will not begin to cover 
the proposed increase. Piling an increase to punitive damages to $1,500,000 (which is not 
covered by insurance) on top of a draconian loss of comfort and society increase renders a 
‘ APCIA cites to automobile coverage given that many wrongful death cases arise out of the operation of motor 
vehicles.V 
2()3()8305.2
PRETI FLAHERTY 
Sen. Anne Carney, Chair 
Rep. Matt Moonen, Chair 
April 6, 2023 
Page 3* 
defendant incapable of defending a claim. LD 934 also has the potential to otherwise reduce the 
amount of coverage an individual can afford. The consequence of that development, ironically, 
could be smaller recoveries arising out of wrongful death actions because there will be less 
coverage available to satisfy a judgment. These likely consequences of LD 934 will beneﬁt no 
one. . 
In addition, there is no reason to increase damages only four years after what was an 
aggressive expansion of the statute. We live in a time of extraordinary economic volatility. The 
country is in the immediate wake of a worldwide pandemic. Banks are failing. The stock market 
is bouncing pillar to post. A number of Mainers are unemployed. This is not the time to enact an 
exorbitant increase to Maine law that will impact almost all Mainers. 
Finally, this bill proposes to increase the statute of limitations from two to three years. 
Why? A plaintiff who believes that the death of a loved one was a result of negligence is not 
going to wait more than two years before even contemplating bringing an action. The reasons for 
a statute of limitations are well accepted in American law. As time passes, memories fade, , 
records may be lost, individuals who might otherwise have knowledge of the facts surrounding a 
claim may move away or pass on. This prejudices any individual ’s ability to mount a defense toa 
wrongful death claim, even as a claimant marshals its case, investigates the facts and develops its 
strategy. Changing the statute of limitations is unwarranted and unfair. , 
For these reasons, APCIA urges the Committee to report LD 934 out Ought Not to Pass. 
‘ 
Respectfully submitted, 
t-_’_ (__ /fr/
_ 
‘
I 
< ,_.- 
Bruce C. Gerrity 
cc:V 
Committee members 
Samuel Prawer, OPLA Analyst 
Susan Pinette, Committee Clerk 
20308305.2
