Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matthew Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: LD 934 — An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful 
Death 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Carol A. Frost. I’m from East Baldwin, Maine. I am in support of LD 934, An Act to 
Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful Death. 
I am here today because my daughter, Jessica Lee Frost, was killed on September 4, 2021. She 
was only 23 years old, and her life was just beginning. 
No parent should ever, ever have to bury their children. It’s incredibly difﬁcult just to say those 
words, let alone live them. I’ve experienced grief in many forms over the course of my life, but 
nothing compares to the depth of the loss I live with every moment of every day since Jessie died. 
From the time I ﬁrst held Jessica on May 28 in I998, she changed my life for the better. Jess was 
a force of nature. Her time on this earth was full——from traveling to Costa Rica (where she 
developed a passion for saving Leather Back Sea Turtles) to dedicating herself to her studies in the 
ﬁeld of Health Sciences. Just two weeks before my daughter was taken from me, she graduated 
from the University of Southern Maine with a 3.6 GPA. She planned on becoming a pediatric 
speech therapist. . 
Jessie’s greatest passion in life was children ——the miracle of life itself. She loved babysitting, 
spending time with her niece Oakley, and working with special needs children. Jessica was gifted 
with a special ability to communicate with kids, relate to them, comfort them, and teach them. She 
wanted a family of her own one day—and she’d already started making plans to grow it by 
planning to have her own childcare facility. 
My daughter was killed as a result of the careless and selﬁsh actions of a drunk driver. She died 
in a stand of trees, alone and scared, on the side of a country road. It was senseless. It was brutal. 
It was unforgivable. It stands in complete contrast to the beauty of Jess’s life. 
When our Jessie died, I didn’t just lose my daughter. Her siblings didn’t just lose a sister. Oakley 
didn’t just lose her auntie and best friend. All of those things are true, but it’s also true that we lost 
one another. Jessica was the foundation of our family. This has left a hole in all our hearts. 
I am supporting LD 934 because no family should be forced to suffer the additional injury that 
Maine’s current Wrongful Death Act causes. Increasing the time that grieving families have to 
bring their claims is important. People may not realize just how disorienting the immediate days, 
weeks, and months, after a loss like this truly are. The ﬁrst year after Jessie died was a blur. Some
days, I was barely able to function because of my grief, let alone begin to think about a legal 
process. No hurting parent, spouse, child, or sibling should have to put their grief on the back 
burner in order to pursue justice. 
More than that, assigning a “value” of $750,000 to Jessica Frost’s life is wrong. She was going to 
change the World. This bill would go a long way toward ﬁnding more full damages for the loss of 
a loved one by doubling the cap on non-economic damages. Doing so would also incentivize 
accountability and make our communities safer. 
Thank you, 
Carol A. Frost
