Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matthew Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary 
l0O State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: LD 934 —An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful 
Death 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Elizabeth Hamp. I reside in Cumberland Foreside. I am here to testify in support of 
LD 934, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful Death. 
I am here today because my life, my daughter ’s life, and the lives of our family changed on May 
7, 2020, when my father was suddenly killed by a negligent driver. My dad, Nicholas Edward 
Hamp, was 81 when he died. 
The day before, he FaceTimed with his granddaughter my daughter, Katherine. Rarely a week 
went by without Katherine receiving calls or visits from her “Popo.” Even after the pandemic 
started, it was important to my dad to still see Katherine, even if it was outside, ﬁ‘om a distance, in 
the parking lot of his favorite ——Dunkin’ Donuts. 
That’s the kind of person my father was. Above all else, he cherished his time with family. He was 
compassionate, supportive, and always our biggest cheerleader. No one knew how to express their 
love quite like my dad. He was truly the best husband, father, brother, and Popo any of us could 
have asked for. He owned businesses and properties all of his career. Those who did business 
with him loved him too. 
My dad died because someone was careless. No matter how careful, respectful, thoughtful, and 
cautious he had been in life, my father was ultimately taken from us abruptly and violently 
because another person he’d never met could not be bothered to operate their vehicle 
responsibly. And just like that, on May 7, 2020—out of nowhere—l had to explain to Katherine 
why she would never see her Popo again. 
My dad died on the street, in the arms of a stranger who witnessed the crash. According to those 
who were with him in his last minutes- —including a physician who happened to be passing by—— 
my father was still alive when they pulled him from the wreckage of his vehicle. He was 
confused, scared, and in pain. He suffered. And, he died a sudden, lonely death that just doesn’t 
“fit” with the beautiful life he led. 
My father was my best friend. He was my role model. He was the best grandfather. And he was 
an unwavering light in our lives. 
l am supporting LD 934 because that light was unfairly put out without the grace and dignity my 
dad deserved —and that he gave to others. Reducing the supposed value of Nick Hamp’s lifeto
$750,000 a number for insurance companies to quibble over and scrutinize —-is an affront to his 
memory. Give Mainers like me, Katherine, and my clad the justice We all deserve by passing this 
bill. 
Because as much as my father was one of a kind, we all have a Nicholas Hamp that means the 
world to us. 
Thank you, 
Elizabeth K. Hamp
