Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matthew Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, IVIE 04333 
RE: LD 934 — An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for 
Wrongful Death 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary: 
My name is Graham Hartford, I am a lifelong Mainer, and I currently reside with my 
wife and two children in Freeport. 
I am here today representing my son, Henry James Hartford. Henry was born on 
October 25, 2013. It was the greatest and proudest day of my life. When Henry was 
old enough, we found a daycare that we were comfoitable bringing him to. It hada 
small enrollment, and we understood that it would stay that way. We felt safe with 
our decision to bring him there. 
One day my wife informed me that the daycare would be adding additional students. 
We wondered if they were taking on more kids than they could handle, but we trusted 
that they would not do anything to jeopardize Henry’s safety. 
On September 23, 2014, Henry was in the daycare yard. He was not adequately 
supervised, and he inhaled a small pebble that blocked his airway. He was rushed to 
the hospital where, two days later, we had to make the decision to say goodbye to 
Henry. He was only eleven months old. 
We lost our son because of negligence and inadequate care. We never pursued legal 
action with the intent of ﬁnancial compensation but simply to get answers about 
what happened. 
Henry has two beautiful sisters Maeve & Celeste that he will never know, and 
never get to play with. The concept of their brother who loves them, but is not 
here, continues to be heart-breaking every day of our lives. Our family has been 
strong, but the truth is that none of our hearts will ever be complete as long as we 
live.
Since Henry has passed, we have started a golf tournament in his honor, with the 
proceeds beneﬁting the Make-A-Wish Foundation. We have tried to honor Henry 
by granting wishes to children who might not see tomorrow. At least we can show 
these suffering children the love that Henry gave us before he was taken so soon. 
Our son means everything to us. 
The current law, which caps damages at $750,000 for losses of comfort, care and 
society for families who will have to receive phone calls like the one we received on 
September 23, 2014...only adds insults to injury. I am here today testifying in support 
of this bill in the hope that I can help other families who carry the weight of the 
tragic loss of a loved one, and make their road one that is a little lighter to tread. 
Thank you for your efforts to pass this important bill. My family is grateful to you. 
Graham Hartford
