Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matthew Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: LD 934 —An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful 
Death 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Margaret Sanders, but everyone knows me as “Peggy.” l’m 69-years-old and I live in 
Kennebunk. I am writing to testify in support of LD 934, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing 
Damages Awarded for Wrongful Death. 
I am here today because my husband, Richard Sanders, mattered. He still matters. And while the 
rest of the world gets to "go on” living, I haven’t had an hour pass since his death where I don’t 
grieve the loss of my husband, partner of 45 years, and best friend. 
Rick was 67-years-old when he died. But he was more than just a number. Rick was a leader at 
work. He was a talented artist. He was creative. When he smiled, he did so with his eyes, and 
everyone smiled because of him. He loved to travel, but not nearly so much as he loved coming 
home. Maine was his home, and a place of peace and comfort to enjoy with family. Rick wasa 
veteran and proudly served his country during the Vietnam War. He cared about others and 
volunteered whenever and wherever he could be of service. 
My husband Rick was an amazing husband, loving and generous beyond words. He was the world 
to me and our two sons, Richard Jr., and Jeffrey. His place in our lives was everything. The 
company’s negligence blew our lives apart. 
On Saturday, June 3, 2017, my husband and our son, Richard Ir., went whitewater rafting. He 
was excited for a new adventure. Rick was wearing his lifejaeket and a helmet, following the rules 
and instructions, as he was trained to do in the service. He did everything right that day. And yet, 
he never came home. 
It hurts to think about what my husband’s last minutes were like. But how can I not? After he 
went under, he was kept down by the current of the river and didn’t surface for several minutes 
following a missed headcount. Did those terrible minutes feel like hours to him? What does it 
feel like to drown? Was he scared? Did Rick think he might resurface? What if he realized he 
was helpless against the river? Did it hurt? Did he suffer? Did he know he was dying? 
I hope no one ever has to think of these things. I hope no one ever gets that phone call. I hope 
your child never has to make that phone call to you. I hope none of you ever have the horrible, 
terrible, surreal waking nightmare of seeing your spouse’s photo appear on the evening news and 
hearing his name come out of the same television he used to watch with you at the end of a long
day. Because then it’s real It’s real, it’s a nightmare, and there’s never really complete closure. 
Not when you lose someone like this. 
I’d known and been with Rick longer than I’d been without him when he died — 4-5 years. I mourn 
my boys’ loss of their dad. But I need you to know the special kind of pain that is a widow’s grief. 
My husband, Rick. vanished from my life on a weekend in 2017. I lost the love of my life. There 
was and always will be a hole in my heart that can never be ﬁlled. I cannot express the pain and 
emptiness I feel every day. 
I am supporting LD 934 because no one — no child, no sibling, no parent, no spouse — should have 
to endure a nightmare like this under indignity. My husband, Richard, was more than a number— 
but words and laws matter. I hope you will do the right thing for your constituents and grant them 
this grace. Although the idea of even capping non-economic damages seems inhumane, this bill 
will go a long way toward allowing the extent of damages from losing a loved one due to an0ther’s 
wrongdoing. Not only that, a higher risk for these unregulated, rule-breaking companies could help 
another widow along the Way. Because the number of deaths that happen yearly on white water is 
too much. 
My husband was proud to have served his country and I hope you’ll make Maine proud of your 
public service. , 
Thank you, 
Margaret Sanders
