Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matthew Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: LD 934 — An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful Death 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Mark Pendergast and I reside in Berwick. I am writing to testify in support of LD 934, An Act to 
Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful Death. 
I am here today to provide a voice for myself and my family for my daughter Amy, who died tragically on April 
10"‘ , 2013. Amy was 34 years old. 
Prior to her death, Amy was a fantastic daughter, sister, wife, and mother to 2 children but also a well respected 
and devoted teacher to autistic children who was completely committed and connected to her students. She had 
just completed studies for her masters degree, an achievement that she was so proud of, which also showed her 
desire to become as educated as possible with helping autistic children. She was also actively looking for a home 
for her young family and was so excited to take this next step with them to set down roots in a own home. 
Amy was such a caring person — to her family, friends, school, and students. She was a very strong willed 
advocate for all that she believed in, she read a book a day, spent as much time as she could in the beautiful Maine 
outdoors with her family, and she simply loved life. 
I believe Amy died because of the negligence of others. She was driving her then 4 year old daughter to 
daycare with her then 7 year old son also in the car with her when a l7 year old swerved into her lane and 
hitting her head on, killing her with the impact. Her son sustained a broken back and had to be transported to 
MA General in Boston for treatment while her daughter fortunately sustained minor injuries. The l7 year old 
was not injured however he never should have been allowed to drive after apparently dealing with concussions 
from sports injuries that caused random black outs. 
I have had to watch my grandchildren deal with the trauma of losing their mother so suddenly since the day that 
Amy died ~ the impact is even more signiﬁcant now that they are both teenagers. They continue to need 
counseling to deal with the trauma and likely will for years to come. 
Amy meant the world to us. This event has forever changed my life. I myself have struggled to move on and 
spent a month in a program 3 years ago to help me deal with the impact to my life. A1ny’s youngest sister spent 
3 months in a program 4 years ago, also as a result of the impact to her life. The cost of these programs as well 
as my grandchildren ’s ongoing therapy has been hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
I am supporting LD 934 because of the ﬁrst hand experience my family and I have had and continue to have 
spending a signiﬁcant amount of personal money to try getting our lives back on track after suffering sucha 
needless tragedy. _ 
Thank you, 
Mark Pendergast
