TESTIMONY OF ROMEO LUCAS, DO, DC, FACOG 
OWNER/PHYSICIAN: NEW ENGLAND CENTER FOR PELVIC HEALTH 
IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 934, AN ACT TO AMEND THE LAWS GOVERNING DAMAGES AWARDED FOR WRONGFUL DEATH 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Room 438, State House, Augusta, I\/Iaine 
Thursday, April 6, 2023, 1:00 p.m. 
Good afternoon, lvlembers of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary. i\/Iy name is Romeo Lucas, DO, DC and 
I am a practicing OB/GYN in Freeport. I recently opened an independent gynecology practice: New England 
Center for Pelvic Health. This was in response to noticing an unmet need for dedicated care for patients with 
persistent pelvic pain and endometriosis, not only in I\/Iaine, but also throughout the region and country. I am 
proud to say that I serve patients from all corners of our state as well as those coming to |\/Iaine for this 
specialized care. This includes patients from not only New England but also states outside our region as well as 
neighboring Canadian provinces. I currently hold positions with the Ivlaine Osteopathic Association Board and 
serve as the Vice Chair and Legislative Committee Chair for the Maine Section of the American Congress of 
OB/GYN. 
I am submitting testimony in opposition to L.D. 934, An Act To Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded 
for Wrongful Death. 
LD 934 seeks to undermine the general medical malpractice stability by doubling the limit for non- 
economic damages from $750,000 to $1,500,000, drastically increasing the cap for the award of punitive 
damages from $250,000 to $1,000,000 and most significantly, expanding the length of the statute of limitations 
from 2 years to 3 years. 
Extension of the statute of limitations from 2 to 3 years is particularly problematic for several reasons: 
1. After the passage of many years, relevant evidence may well have been lost, unfairly hindering 
the prosecution or the defense and lead to an unjust verdict 
2. Relevance of eyewitness testimony degrades over time, especially if no formal statement was 
made by a witness near the time of the alleged offense. Memories fade and become less 
reliable. It is considered unreasonable to expect witnesses to be able to clearly recall details 
from an incident that may have occurred decades earlier. It is unreasonable to expect a jury to 
reach a fair verdict based on potentially weak testimony. 
3. Date of the creation of the cause of action is very clear, meaning death. The estate of the 
decedent has ample time to bring an action. Extending the statute beyond two yearsunfairly 
prejudices the defendant. 
4. There is no current, compelling reason to extend the statute of limitations. 
5. The 2-year time period is by far the prevalent length of time used across the country. 
Together, these changes significantly expand the statutorily created wrongful death statute. This is 
potentially devastating for community-based, independent physicians whose practices already function on 
precarious budgets. Often, these physicians offer healthcare services in the communities to which they belong, 
providing professional care and personal connection for their patients/neighbors. I am here to attest that
I
significant changes to operating costs for these physicians will lead to damaging effects to these communities. 
These are communities that are already suffering from a lack of access to healthcare. 
Liability cost is one factor that physicians weigh as they decide where to practice. These proposed 
changes will certainly be a barrier to attracting a_ll medical professionals to l\/laine. We are struggling to attract 
physicians and all medical professionals, especially to our rural parts of the State. it will become that much 
more difficult to keep and attract needed medical professionals to l\/laine if this bill is passed. 
Expansion of damages as proposed in this bill will certainly raise premium costs for physicians, let alone 
homeowners, auto and all the other liability coverages. We know that, over time, increases in medical liability 
insurance cost will be especially significant. That impacts the whole healthcare system in several ways. 
A growing number of physicians in l\/laine are independent of larger hospital or group practices. While 
this is, in my opinion, a promising and beneficial trend.--the risk is already substantial. The typical liability 
coverage is $1 million/$3 million aggregate limits and may be mandated by the hospital to be even higher if 
these physicians need privileges in order to provide care within a hospital setting like an operating or 
emergency room. inordinate expansion of damage limits will result in a dramatic expansion of medical liability 
costs. This will effectively make independent physician practice, especially independent specialty physician 
practice, impossible. 
Unfortunately, I can tell you that l have had the experience of practicing medicine in a state with 
expanded damage limits and extended reporting periods for malpractice and wrongful death. The immediate 
and long-term costs were devastating to independent practices which are now virtually non~existent in that 
state. The physician community is almost entirely hospital system employed. Patient and doctor satisfaction 
scores are consistently low. As the increased liability insurance premium costs are passed onto the consumer, 
healthcare costs continue to rise. lt would be a mistake and a shame if the same happened here in Maine. 
Damage limits and statute of limitations attempt to balance the interests of families suffering an 
emotional loss with the interests of all other l\/laine citizens, particularly those whose personal assets are 
exposed for claims exceeding usual insurance limits. To me, these limits and statutes are in pursuit of fairness. 
The proposed expansion not only impacts every l\/laine medical professional, but every driver, 
homeowner, renter, snowmobiler, hunter, business owner, non-profit, independent contractor, builder, 
municipality, trucker and every profession and trade. Please remember that ALL OF US (notjust physicians) are 
potential defendants. l acknowledge the need for establishing "rules of the road” but in so doing, l urge you to 
weigh the interests of _a_H l\/laine residents. l urge you to consider the downstream effects on our communities 
when the approach to these considerations is not measured and balanced. 
Thank you for considering rny concerns about L.D. 934. l urge an "ought not to pass" vote on this bill. l would be 
happy to respond to any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
éwﬁéﬂs Romeo Lucas, DO, DC, FACOG 
romeolucas@necph.com
2
