Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matthew Moonen  
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station, Room 438  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 934 – An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful 
Death 
  
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Committee on Judiciary: 
 
My name is Stephen Anderson.  I live in Saco.  I am testifying in support of LD 934, An Act to 
Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful Death.   
 
I’m speaking to you today because my sister, Kathleen Anderson, can’t. Had the crash that took 
my sister Kathy’s life on July 28, 2021, not happened—or happened differently—I wouldn’t need 
to be doing this. But our family wasn’t so lucky—and neither was Kathy, whose life was cut short 
at just 66. 
 
Kathy was killed when another driver attempted to overtake and pass several vehicles in Surry, 
Maine. Because a stranger was careless, the beautiful flame of my sister’s life was snuffed out 
unceremoniously. It’s perhaps the most unfair thing in the world that someone like Kathy—to 
whom family and faith were so cherished—had no choice in the abrupt and senseless manner in 
which she died. 
 
Before Kathy died, she’d lived a life in dedication and service to faith and family. Her work—
which was far from over—included ministering at the Community of Christ as an ordained priest, 
providing daily care for the intellectually disabled, and a career as a teacher. Kathy loved children, 
and delighted in having helped raise many locals as a mentor and care provider. She felt 
particularly blessed when those she had once cared for returned to Kathy as parents, seeking her 
familiar loving care for their own children. 
 
Kathy was the sole caregiver for my brother, who has special needs.  Now that role has been passed 
onto the taxpayers, in part, because of the limited recovery that we were able to obtain under 
Maine’s current cap on non-economic damages.  This bill will help families who lost loved ones 
like Kathy to obtain a more full amount of damages than current law allows. 
 
Kathy loved her family, friends, and community deeply. She expressed that love through the 
celebration of faith, volunteer work, and taking careful time to get to know the people in her life 
as though they were lifelong friends. And, for Kathy, almost all of them were. 
 
Whether nurturing her gardens, baking sweets and treats to share, or venturing outside to 
photograph the beauty of her Lord’s creation, Kathy was always a force for good. She gave freely 
of her many talents, accepted warmly all those she encountered, and loved generously the one life 
she’d been given. 
 
 
I support LD 934 because it’s a steppingstone toward making sense of the senseless. No family 
should have to go through something like this. Changing Maine law won’t bring our loved ones 
home, but it will raise the stakes and make our State a safer place.  
 
My siblings and I cannot forget the beauty of Kathy’s life—she shone too brightly for that. But 
neither can we escape the stain of how she was taken from us.  
 
Kathy was a blessing to so many and wanted only to make a loving difference. I humbly request 
you use your powers for good, and do the same. 
 
 
Thank you,  
 
 
Stephen Anderson 
 
 
