Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matthew Moonen
Committee on Judiciary
100 State House Station, Room 438
Augusta, ME 04333
RE: LD 934 - An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful
Death
Dear Senator Camey, Representative Moonen and Members of the Committee on Judiciary:
My name is Suzanne Mills. I reside in Augusta, Maine. I am writing to testify in support of LD
934, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful Death.
I am writing to you to provide a voice for my son, Roderic (Rod) Carmichael, who died tragically
on Febmary 25, 2016. Rod was only 24 years old. He was engaged to be married and looking
forward to a life with his partner.
Prior to his death. Rod attended schools in the Messalonskee School District and attended college
in Fairfield studying massage therapy. After he graduated, he worked at a summer camp, in retail,
and for an inventory company.
Everyone loved Rod and wanted to spend time with him at family barbecues, weddings, birthdays,
and holidays. His interests and talents were many, and he was very intelligent and learned quickly.
He had an infectious smile and a giggle that would make anyone's day a little bit brighter. He was
a son, grandson, cousin and best friend and a wonderful cook. He loved nature, all things spiritual,
drawing & writing. He was a great artist and story teller. He also loved music and learned to play
the guitar with his father. He was sensitive and cared for others and always willing to help when
and where he could.
I believe Rod died because of medical negligence. He was given the wrong medication at the
hospital. This caused his blood pressure to crash and for his heart to stop. Although medical
providers were able to get his heart beating again, his brain was without oxygen for too long and
he suffered a permanent brain injury.
The 9 days Rod was in the hospital after his heart stopped were the worst days of my life and the
lives of my family. I would wish this on no one. Every morning we went to the hospital hoping
that it would be the day he would wake up from his coma. Every evening we went home
heartbroken and devastated. He never woke up from his coma. I never got to speak to my son
again. I will never forget how the color drained from his ears in the minutes after he took his last
breath. Never.
Rod was my only child and our family's first grandchild. Rod meant the world to ALL of us. This
event has forever changed our lives. There are no words that aptly express how empty my life is
without him. I grieve for all the things that I will miss; a wedding, grandchildren and visits when
I am old to name a few. I also grieve for all of those things in life that he will miss. The warmth
of the sun on his face on a beautiful day. Spending time with family and friends. The joy of having
children and a home. Falling asleep in the arms of his spouse. The feeling of pride and success in
landing the job of his dreams. The privilege of living life and growing old.
I am supporting LD 934 because while there is no amount of money that can bring a loved one
back, the amount should be enough to make those at fault take notice and hopefully change their
practices.
"C^Q^^N^^t^aA^^f^
Suzanne Ashcroft Mills
