Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matthew Moonen  
Committee on Judiciary  100 State House Station, Room 438  Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 934 – An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Damages Awarded for Wrongful Death 
 Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Committee on Judiciary: 
 My name is Thaddeus Guillemette.  I reside in Madawaska.  I am writing to testify in support of 
LD 934, An Act to Amend the Laws Governi ng Damages Awarded for Wrongful Death.   
 I am here today to provide a vo ice for my daughter, Jenna Marie Guillemette, who died tragically 
on December 5, 2019.  Jenna was only 17-years-old.    Prior to her death, Jenna was ener getic and excited about  her future.  She wa s in the top of her 
junior class at Madawaska High School. Jenna wa s involved in her local community. She worked 
throughout her high school years at Dolly’s, a restaurant in Frenc hville. She also served as the 
student representative to the Valley  United school board, and she had se rved as her class president.   
 In the summer of 2019, Jenna attended an Upward  Bound program at the University of Maine 
Presque Isle. She was determined to become the fi rst member of her family  to attend and graduate 
from college.  Jenna planned to attend the Univ ersity of Maine at Fa rmington to study early 
childhood education. Her goal was to work in th e pre-school or elemen tary school setting.  
 Jenna had many special qualitie s.  She had perseverance, compassion, and strength. 
Jenna had a smile that could light up a room and a kind and caring demeanor.  She was always 
drawn to helping people, including he r younger brother and sister.      
 I believe Jenna died because of medical negligence.  The medical facility that we trusted to care 
for my daughter prescribed a ne w medication to Jenna that unbeknownst to us increased her risk 
of developing blood clots in her lung.  Over the course of two weeks and three separate office 
visits in November and December 2019, the medical facility failed to recognize that Jenna had 
warning signs for a blood clot in her lungs.   
 On the morning of December 5, 2019, Jenna collaps ed into my arms.  She looked scared and had 
blood in her mouth.  An ambulance took her to the emergency depart ment, but at the hospital she 
went into cardiac arrest and died from blood clots in her lungs.           
 Jenna meant the world to us.  This event has foreve r changed my life.  There is not a day that goes 
by that we do not think of Jenna and grieve her un timely death.  When we learned about the current 
law, which capped damages for our loss of Jenna ’s comfort, society, and companionship at 
$750,000, it only added insult to inju ry.  I am supporting LD 934 in hopes that I can help other 
families who carry the weight of the tragic loss of  a loved one and make thi ngs a little easier for 
them in the future.    Thank you,    Thaddeus Guillemette      
