February 16, 2023
Greetings Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the Judiciary 
Committee
My name is Jan Collins, I am assistant director of Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition. I am here 
to oppose the movement of people with severe mental illness from mental hospitals to jails per 
the statute mentioned in  LD 118 “An Act to Ensure Continuity of Care for Pretrial Defendants".
MPAC's mission is to support Maine's incarcerated citizens, their families, and friends, 
in their struggle with Maine's criminal justice system. Our purpose is to reduce Maine's 
use of incarceration by creating a criminal justice system that is ethical, humane, and 
restorative in nature. 
I have several concerns about the bill as written. 
1.I believe that the statute’s provision to move mentally ill patients who are a risk to 
themselves or others to jails is a violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Currently the Department of Justice has a lawsuit against the State of Maine 
regarding youths with disabilities. That suit contends that the state does not provide 
appropriate mental health care for youth and instead has placed some of these  
youth in detention centers. The same can be said for adults.                                                                                            
In a recent visit to Somerset County Correctional Facility, the Jail Administrator 
stated that mental health facilities are refusing to hold or even take mentally ill 
residents. The Jail Administrator said the very first patient who was returned to 
Somerset from Riverview was dead in three days from suicide.     If a mental health 
hospital is not able to care for a patient with mental illness, how can we possibly 
expect a jail to do so? Jails are ill equipped and have no training to provide for 
people with severe mental illness.
2.Having reviewed the testimony provided in the hearing, I see no input from the 
Maine Sheriffs Association. Did the sponsors of the bill consult with the people who 
work in jails who will carry the burden of caring for individuals with severe mental 
illness without the resources to do so?
3.Are we not simply moving people who are mentally ill around without ever taking the 
necessary steps to actually help them?

Maine Prisoner Advocacy has no issue with the bills provisions regarding the sharing of 
information. However, we cannot condone the states placement of people with medical 
conditions in jails which lack all capacity to care for them.
I urge you to reconsider this provision in this statute.
Thank-you for your consideration.
Jan M. Collins
janmariecollins57@gmail.com
Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition
PO Box 360
East Wilton, ME   04234
Jan Collins
Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition
LD 118
Greetings Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the Judiciary 
Committee
My name is Jan Collins, I am assistant director of Maine Prisoner Advocacy 
Coalition. I am here to oppose the movement of people with severe mental illness 
from mental hospitals to jails per the statute mentioned in  LD 118 “An Act to Ensure 
Continuity of Care for Pretrial Defendants".
MPAC's mission is to support Maine's incarcerated citizens, their families, and 
friends, in their struggle with Maine's criminal justice system. Our purpose is to 
reduce Maine's use of incarceration by creating a criminal justice system that is 
ethical, humane, and restorative in nature. 
I have several concerns about the bill as written. 
I believe that the statute’s provision to move mentally ill patients who are a risk to themselves 
or others to jails is a violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Currently the Department
of Justice has a lawsuit against the State of Maine regarding youths with disabilities. That suit
contends that the state does not provide appropriate mental health care for youth and instead
has placed some of these  youth in detention centers. The same can be said for adults.          
In a recent visit to Somerset County Correctional Facility, the Jail Administrator stated that 
mental health facilities are refusing to hold or even take mentally ill residents. The Jail 
Administrator said the very first patient who was returned to Somerset from Riverview was 
dead in three days from suicide.     If a mental health hospital is not able to care for a patient 
with mental illness, how can we possibly expect a jail to do so? Jails are ill equipped and 
have no training to provide for people with severe mental illness.
Having reviewed the testimony provided in the hearing, I see no input from the Maine Sheriffs
Association. Did the sponsors of the bill consult with the people who work in jails who will 
carry the burden of caring for individuals with severe mental illness without the resources to 
do so?
Are we not simply moving people who are mentally ill around without ever taking the 
necessary steps to actually help them?
Maine Prisoner Advocacy has no issue with the bills provisions regarding the sharing 
of information. However, we cannot condone the states placement of people with 
medical conditions in jails which lack all capacity to care for them.
I urge you to reconsider this provision in this statute.
Thank-you for your consideration.
Jan M. Collins
janmariecollins57@gmail.com
Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition
PO Box 360
East Wilton, ME   04234

