Janet T_ Ming Maine Department of Health and Human SLYHCGS 
Gﬂvemm. _ Office of Behavioral Health 
ll State House St ition 
1 ‘ , 41 Anthony A» enue 
ﬁ:;“"““* PM)‘ Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 
‘ Tel: (207) 287-2595; Fax: (207) 287-9152 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of Director Sarah Squirrell 
Ofﬁce of Behavioral Health, Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
In Support of LD 118 An Act to Ensure Continuity of Care for Pretrial Defendants 
February 9, 2023V
, 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary, I am Sarah Squirrell, Director of the Office of Behavioral Health (OBH) Within the 
Department of Health and Human Services. I am here to help introduce and testify in support of 
LD 118, An Act to Ensure Continuity of Care for Pretrial Defendants. The Department thanks 
Senator Camey for introducing this bill on our behalf. I would like to offer the following 
infonnation for your consideration. . 
LD 118 seeks to authorize the State Forensic Service, under limited circumstances, to 
share prior court-ordered evaluation reports with institutions authorized to accept for admission 
pretrial defendants who are committed to the custody of the Commissioner of Health and Human 
Services pursuant to 15 MRS 101-D(4). Pretrial defendants may be court ordered into the 
Commissioner ’s custody in order for the State Forensic Service to conduct further evaluation. 
Under those circumstances, the Department has authority to place those individuals in an 
appropriate institution for the care and treatment of individuals with mental illness or in an 
appropriate residential program that provides care and treatment for persons who have 
intellectual disabilities or autism.I 
In order to effectively make the most appropriate placement decisions, the Commissioner 
- 
must gather sufficient information about the defendant. In almost all such cases, the State 
Forensic Service has conducted a prior evaluation (often conducted at the county jail) which may 
include relevant details for the Commissioner to make an appropriate placement determination. 
The ability to release the prior State Forensic Service report may therefore facilitate an 
appropriate and timely admission. In addition, once the defendant is admitted to an appropriate 
placement, this bill would authorize treatment providers to access the State Forensic Service 
report. This will give treatment staff a better understanding of the reason the State Forensic 
Servicerecommended further evaluation in a Department placement, and may provide additional 
clinical information that is useful in facilitating treatment planning. 
LD 118 also considers the privacy concerns of the defendants and the conﬁdentiality of 
State Forensic Service reports. This bill therefore seeks to only release such reports if they 
pertain to the pending charges (for which the individual is committed to the Commissioner ’s 
custody) and to only release reports that are not otherwise impounded. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you 
may have and to make myself available for questions at the work session.
