TESTIMONY OF 
Patrick Keliher 
Department of Marine Resources 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying 
In Support of 
LD 1552 An Act to Create the Lobster Innovation Fund 
Before the Committee on Marine Resources 
Sponsored by Senator Vitelli 
Date of Hearing: April 27, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Marine 
Resources, my name is Patrick Keliher, Commissioner of the Department of Marine Resources, andI 
am testifying on behalf of the Department in support of LD 1552. I would like to commend Senator 
Vitelli for bringing this bill forward. 
As you have had heard, the six-year pause that was achieved through the Federal Omnibus spending 
bill provides some time and funding to address many aspects of the interaction between Maine's 
lobster fishery and the North Atlantic Right Whale. One of these topics is the potential for the use of 
innovative fishing technologies that could reduce risk to right whales. 
Innovative fishing technologies could include many potential solutions that could minimize interactions 
between lobster gear and right whales. While proponents of ropeless fishing gear generally focus on 
that particular technology, there are a variety of options that may be appropriate for different 
segments of the industry. 
Like almost everything in the lobster industry, there is no ”one size fits all" solution to this problem. 
Any future requirements should be tailored to such considerations as where the individual is fishing 
(inshore or offshore), time of year, and other specifics that factor into the actual level of risk the gear 
presents. 
Maine DMR is concerned that in many ways, the challenges associated with transitioning to innovative 
fishing technologies have been greatly minimized by NOAA and national environmental groups. 
Bringing gear to the surface is only one aspect of this problem. In addition, gear location, gear conflict 
and enforcement challenges must be addressed. Many of these issues can only be understood and 
resolved by the participation of fishermen using these innovative gears and helping to troubleshoot the 
problems. However, testing gear requires fishermen to fish in compliance with the research project, 
which is likely to include deviations from their normal decision-making. For example, testing may 
require them to fish the gear in an area that is less productive than they would normally choose, take 
additional time dealing with the new gear that negatively impacts their profitability, or require their 
time in reporting on their experience. 
It is reasonable and appropriate that fishermen receive some compensation for these efforts. LD 1552 
provides $1 million in each year of the biennium for DMR to provide stipends to holders of Class l, Class
ll or Class Ill lobster fishing licenses to participate in the testing of new lobster fishing technologies 
DMR believes this is a valuable addition to the other sources of funding available to work through 
these issues in advance of any new federal regulations in 2028. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I would be happy to answer any questions you might have.
