 
 
TESTIMONY  
Patrice McCarron, Policy Director  
Maine Lobstermen’s Association  
 
In Support of  LD 1552  
An Act to Create the Lobster Innovation Fund  
 
April 27, 2023  
 Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Marine Resources Committee, my name is Patrice McCarron, and I am the policy director for the Maine Lobstermen’s Association  
(MLA). The MLA supports LD 1552 to create the Lobster Innovation Fund to provide financial support to lobstermen to test new lobster fishing technol ogies.  
 
The Maine  lobster  industry  is facing devasting restriction s as a result of the 10 -year whale plan 
released by the National Marine Fisheries Services (NMFS) in 2021 . Developing  and testing  new  
whale  safe fishing  gear  solutions,  and ensuring  those  solutions  work for all segments of Maine’s  
diverse  fleet,  is critical to the survival  of Maine’s  lobster  industry.  The Lobster  Innovation  Fund 
proposed  in LD 1552 w ould  provide  necessary  funding  to lobstermen  to ensure  this important  
work  happens.    
 
NMFS’s 10 -year whale plan  requires the Maine lobster fishery to reduce its already minimal risk 
to the endangered North Atlantic right whale  (NARW)  by 98 % by 2030. The lobster industry 
implemented the first phase of this plan in 2022 to reduce risk by 60%, with two additional 
reductions scheduled before 2030 . This is an unachievable  goal  that w ould  devastate  Maine’s  
lobster  industry  and the families,  businesses and communities  that depend  on it. 
 
  
 
 
There  are many  strategies  underway  to address  this problem  to stave  off the elimination  of the 
lobster  fishery  in just seven  years.  The Maine  delegation , with  support from  Governor  Mills,  has 
secured  a 6- year  pause  in new  regulations  along  with  significant  funding  to conduct  stud ies on 
right  whale  distribution  and develop  new  fishing  gear  technologies . This is extremely  important  
as it delay ed the 90%  risk reduction  that had been  scheduled for implementation  in 2024 which  
would have  devasting  impacts  on the lobster  industry.   
 
•Phase 1
•60% RR2022•Phase 2
•90% RR2024•Phase 3
•98% RR2030Risk Reduction Schedule: NMFS 10 -Year Whale Plan  (Biological Opinion, 2021)  
 
 
 
 
NMFS  has prioritized  ropeless  fishing  as its ultimate  solution  for the lobster  industry  to reach  a 
98% risk reduction . To complicate  matters,  NMFS  has provided conflicting  guidance  on the scale  
at which ropeless  fishing  must  be adopted. In the agency’s  Roadmap to Ropeless Fishing , NMFS  
presents  ropele ss fishing  as a strategic  solution  to fish in areas  that are closed  to protect  right  
whales.  By contrast,  NMFS  has stated  in court  documents  that the only  way to achieve  a 98%  
risk reduction  prior  to 2030 would be full closure  of the state  and federal  waters  lobster  
fisheries , or large -scale  adoption  of on-demand  ropeless  fishing , which the agency 
acknowledges is not currently or soon to be commercially available. This  is a major  concern  for 
Maine’s  lobster  fishery.  
 
Ropeless  fishing  is not the appropriate  solution for Maine’s  lobster  fishery  because  right  whales  
are extremely  rare in areas  where  most  Maine  lobstermen  fish,  and ropeless  fishing  poses 
significant  technological,  economic , and operation al challe nges. This gear may work on a 
limited basis in small areas  of high risk where whales are present , but it is not a solution that 
could be widely adopted in Maine.  
 
Recent  studies  confirm  that NARW have shifted their habitat usage away from the Maine lobster 
fishery. This has been confirmed by monitoring devices deployed by Maine DMR in both state and 
federal waters beginning in 2020. Data analyzed through June 2021 indicate detections on just 
0.2% of the sampled days. Given the extremely low presence of right whales, full conversion to 
ropeless fishing would  not significantly benefit whales. The low whale presence, along with all 
of the conservation mea sures adopted by Maine lobstermen,  explain  why th ere have been no 
observ ed right whale en tanglement s in Maine gear  since 20 04, and no right  whale death has 
ever been assoc iated with  Maine lobster gear.   
 
Economically , ropeless fishing presents  serious  concerns  for the Maine  lobster  fishery  due to 
the diverse  nature  of the fleet.  The on-demand  systems that NMFS  is testing  are extremely  
expensive,  require  crew  and deck  space  to operat e, and are not interoperable  among  
manufacturers.  This high -tech solution requir es significant capital investment and high 
operating costs. This solution would be nearly impossible for Maine’s smaller boats with single operators to purchase and operate an d it strongly favors only the largest vessels in the fleet.  
Operationally, the technology slows down fishing, is unreliable, creates gear conflict issues , and 
creates significant enforcement challenges.  
 Of significant concern for Maine, l arge -scale adoption of this capital -intensive  fishing 
technology would result in immense pressure to replace Maine’s owner -operator lobstering 
system with a heavily consolidated, corporately owned fleet. Maine’s owner -operator 
lobstering model has sustained our rural communities for generations. As observed in fisheries 
around the world, consolidation results in a few very big winners, with the majority of 
fishermen forced out of business.  
 •Phase 1
•60% RR2022•Phase 2
•90% RR2028•Phase 3
•98% RR2030Revised Risk Reduction Schedule: 6-Year Pause  (Federal Omnibus Bill , Dec  2022  
  
For the Maine  fleet  to survive,  it is imperative  that lobstermen  have  an opportunity  to develop  
and test a variety  of new  lobster  gear  technologies . NMFS  is currently  testing  high -tech  ropeless  
fishing  with  the lobster  fleet . While  there  are some  Maine  lobstermen  participating  in this 
research,  the agency  recently  redirect ed some  funding  for Maine  lobstermen  to the 
Massachusetts  fleet  where  right  whales  are abundant . In Maine,  there is a need  to test 
alternative  lower  tech , cost effective  solutions  looking  at a variety  of methods  to locate  and 
retrieve  gear,  achieve  interoperability  between  systems, and explore  gear  innovations  that 
utilize  rope.    
 
To successfully  develop  innovative  gear,  it must  be field  tested.  This is very  costly for 
lobstermen  because  they  must  invest  significant  time  in learn ing the new  gear  and explor ing 
methods  to alter  their  fishing  practices  to find safe, manageable  ways  to deploy  the gear.  Field  
trials  to test new  fishing  gear  require  lobstermen  to commit  to fishing  a certain  number  of 
units,  to closely  track  the testing  through logbooks,  maintain  the gear,  trouble  shoot  issues  that 
arise  when new  techn ologies  are used;  all while  trying  to haul  through  traditional  gear.  LD 1552  
would allow  the Maine  Department  of Marine  Resources  (DMR ) to assess the cost of deploying  
new  gear  to offset the costs  and loss of income  experienced  due to testing.   
 
The MLA does  have  a few concerns  which  should  be addressed  by DMR  if the Lobster  
Innovation  Fund  is established. First,  DMR  should not prioritize  the testing  of ropeless  gear  over  
other  new,  innovative  gear  technologies.  These  funds  should be used  to test a wide  variety  of 
gear  innovations , including  those  that use rope  and buoys,  for use by diverse  sectors  of the 
fleet.  Second,  lobstermen  interest ed in testing  gear  for the state  of Maine  should be required  
to disclose  if they  are participating  in other  gear  testing  projects.  Lobstermen  should not be 
allowed  to “double  dip,” or get paid  to test the same  gear  for more  than one researcher.  For 
example,  if a lobsterman  is already  being  paid  by the Northeast  Fisheries  Science  Center  to test 
ropeless  gear,  they  should not qualify  to test ropeless  gear  through  the Lobster  Innovati on 
Fund.  Finally,  ropeless  gear  should  not be tested  in closed  areas  unless  there  is a enough gear  
and funding  to allow  the opportunity  for all lobstermen  displaced from  the closure  to 
participate  in the research  if they  choose .  
 
MLA urges the Marine Resources Committee to vote Ought to Pass.  
 Thank you for your consideration.  
