 
 
 
150 Bar Harbor Rd., Trenton, ME 04605 
 
 
Good Afternoon Senator Perry, Representative Hepler, 
Honorable members of the committee, 
My name is Virginia Olsen, I am a lobsterman from 
Stonington, Maine and Director of the Maine 
Lobstering Union. 
We support LD 1552 “An Act to Create the Lobster 
Innovation Fund.” 
First, I would like to thank Senator Vitelli for putting 
the bill forward. I have seen a plethora of funding for 
development of technology which is being gobbled up 
by companies that think they know how best to fix an 
issue without fishermen consultation. They are 
included in the testing phase and asked to give input 
on the design.  That is too late in the process.  We are 
problem solvers by nature- working on highly 
corrosive salt water- if we had to go back to port each 
time something went wrong or broke, we would never 
Maine 
 Lobstering 
 Union
Local 207
get a chance to lobster! We are all engineers out of 
necessity.  I would like to see this bill that puts funding 
in lobstermen’s hands set a precedence on gear types 
designed in, or produced in, Maine, with lobstermen 
collaboration.  We also need equal representation of 
all 7 zones as each one is different from the next.  
Testing a bunch of gear in 10 fathoms of water would 
be vastly different than 50-100 fathoms where it will 
most likely be required first. If you split that up it 
would be $142,857.00 per zone- just over $35,000.00 
for 4 fishermen- 2 federal and 2 state or 3 federal and 
1 state.  Either way, you should have geographical 
diversity, multiple types of gear, with varying price 
points. Some of today’s pop-up gear would never work 
on a 19’-20’ skiff. Finding out when and where this 
gear is needed is just as important as how it works.  
How we can adopt equipment we already use should 
be high on the wish list.  I greatly appreciate this 
funding that goes directly to fishermen. It feels like we 
have an issue that everyone is trying to solve for us, 
not with us.  This doesn’t need to be about creating a 
new industry to allow us to fish, it needs to be a 
methodical approach to how we can best protect a 
majestic creature that spends very little time in our 
fishing grounds. How do we best protect the right 
whale and the lobstermen? We are still trying to figure 
that out. As I said before, knowing where to use this 
technology and when are two questions we MUST 
answer before this pause comes to an end. 
Thank you for your time today. I would be happy to 
answer any questions. 
Respectfully, 
 
Virginia Olsen 
Director Maine Lobstering Union 
