
MHDO Board of Directors Public Hearing 
The MHDO Board of Directors (the board) met on April 7, 2022, and authorized MHDO to 
initiate rulemaking for Chapter 570. The proposed rule was publicly noticed on September 
14, 2022, and a public hearing was held on October 6, 2022. Public comments were received at 
the public hearing and by the 10-day comment period deadline of October 17, 2022. The Board 
met on December 1, 2022, where they reviewed and discussed the public comments received 
and considered staff's recommendations regarding how to address each comment. At the end 
of the process the board unanimously voted to provisionally adopt the rule changes presented 
to you today. 
Summary of Proposed Changes 
Attached to my testimony is a description of each proposed rule change and rationale for the 
change (Attachment A). A copy of the Basis Statement which includes the Public Comments 
and Response Document (Attachment B); and a copy of Rule Chapter 570 with the proposed 
changes identified in track changes (Attachment C). Lastly, l would like to bring to the 
Committees ’ attention a reference correction that should be made in Section 2. C. 1. a. 
The current language is as follows: 
Included in the public notice of substantial drug price change or introduction under subsection 
2(C); and; 
The correction is as follows: 
Included in the public notice of substantial drug price change or introduction under subsection 
2({;§); and; 
This concludes my testimony. I would be happy to answer questions now or at the work session 
2lPage
90-590 Maine Health Data Organization 
Planning for Public Hearing - October 6, 2022 
Attachment A 
Proposed Rule Summary of Changes and Basis Statement 
Chapter 570: Uniform Reporting System for Prescription Drug Price 
Data Sets 
(Major Substantive) 
The Maine Health Data Organization (MHDO) is authorized by statute to collect health care 
data, including prescription drug price data. The purpose of this Chapter is to explain the 
provisions for filing prescription drug price sets from prescription drug manufacturers, 
wholesale distributors and pharmacy benefits managers. 
The MHDO Board met on April 7, 2022 and authorized the MHDO to initiate rulemaking to 
Chapter 570 (22 MRSA §8704, sub-§1; §8705-A; §8737), for the primary purpose of aligning 
Chapter 570 with PL 2021, c. 305. 
The following represent the proposed changes to the rule and the rationale for these changes: 
Section 1. Definitions 
Non-substantive typographical and wording changes are included. 
Rationale: The proposed changes clean up the typos and improve uniformity and 
consistency in language between MHDO statute and rules. 
Section Z. Registration and Submission Requirements 
-Section 2(B) Public Notice of Substantial Drug Price Change or introduction has revised 
language. 
Rationale: PL 2021, c. 305 Sec. 5 and 22 MRSA §8732, sub-§1-A 
-Section 2(C) Disclosures by Manufacturers, Wholesale Drug Distributors and Pharmacy 
Benefits Managers has revised language. 
Rationale: PL 2021, c. 305 Sec. 6 and 22 MRSA §8732, sub-§2 
-Section 2(J)(3) Pharmacy Benefits Manager Report has revised language for several 
data elements regarding reporting for the State of Maine rather than the United States. 
Rationale: The issue regarding the level of reporting for Pharmacy Benefit Managers 
.. ., . .. .. ....
was agreed to in the HCIFS committee work session in the 130th Maine Legislature, but 
inadvertently not included in the final version of the rule that the legislature voted on 
earlier this year. 
Section 6. Confidentiality 
-Sections 6(B) and 6(C) have revised language. 
Rationale: PL 2021, c. 305 Sec. 7 and 22 MRSA §8733 
Statutory Authority: 22 M.R.S. §§ 8703(1), 8704(1), 8705-A and 8705-/3(3), 8731, 8732, 8733, 
8734, 8735 and 8737. 
Effective Date: TBD 
4|Page
M DO intormaiian I iﬁsigiat l improvement 
Attachment B 
Chapter 570: Uniform Reporting System for Prescription Drug Price Data Sets (Major 
Substantive Rule). This rule requires legislative approval prior to final adoption. 
Table of Contents 
Section l. Basis Statement. 
Section ll. Names of individuals that Submitted Comments. 
Section lll. Summary of Comments Received by Submitter with Agency Response & 
Recommended Board Action. 
Section I. Basis Statement 
The Maine Health Data Organization (MHDO) is authorized by statute to collect health care 
data, including prescription drug price data. The purpose of this Chapter is to explain the 
provisions for filing prescription drug price sets from prescription drug manufacturers, 
wholesale drug distributors and pharmacy benefits managers. 
This rule change is necessary to align the requirements in PL 2021, c305, "An Act To increase 
Prescription Drug Price Transparency" , with the requirements in 90-590 C.M.R. Ch. 570. 
The MHDO Board met on April 7, 2022 and authorized the MHDO to initiate rulemaking to 
Chapter 570 (22 MRSA §8704, sub-§1; §8705-A; §8737). A public hearing was held on October 
6, 2022, with a 10-day public comment period. This major substantive rule requires legislative 
approval prior to final adoption. 
Section II. Names of Individuals that Submitted Comments 
The following individual and affiliation submitted written comments to the Maine Health Data 
Organization (MHDO) regarding the proposed rule change: 
1. Ashlie Van Meter, Senior Director, State Government Affairs, Association for 
Accessible Medicines 
5|Page
Section Ill. Summary of Comments Received by Submitter with Agency Response & 
Recommended Board Action. 
Below is a summary of the comments received by the submitter and the proposed Agency 
Response and Board Action: 
Comments: 
Definition of “Drug Product Family" Should be Modified to Reference "Non-Proprietary 
Name" and "Dosage Form" 
We recommend the definition of ”drug product famiIy” be modified in the following two ways: 
1. Replace "generic drug description ” with "non-proprietary name.” This amendment is 
consistent with the terminology used by the U.$. Adopted Names Council, as well as other 
healthcare regulatory agencies, stakeholders, and organizations. This non-substantive change 
would streamline the language by removing the use of a vague term (”generic drug 
description") which has no formal meaning and replacing it with a formal, legally defined term. 
MHDO Staff Response: 
The proposed Rule does not contemplate changes to the definition of Drug Product Family in 
Section 1(C) which became effective December 10, 2021. However, the recommendation to 
modify the definition to specify ”non-proprietary name" in place of "generic drug description 
(non-trade name)" for clarity is not a substantive change and therefore our recommendation is 
to do so. 
2. Add "dosage form" descriptor for specificity. Under the current definition for ”drug 
product family, ” reporting requirements may be triggered for all dosage forms that use the 
same active pharmaceutical ingredient(s) (API). However, there can be and are multiple dosage 
forms that use the same API. For example, /isinopril has at least two different dosage forms 
(oral tablets and solution). Further, the oral tablets are available in six strengths, ranging from 
2.5 mg to 40 mg, however, the solution is only available as 1 mg/mL. After a drug goes off 
patent, multiple manufacturers make certain dosage forms, and strengths, but not others, 
leading to price fluctuations within the API or even unique dosage forms. it is important that 
reporting requirements are limited to the speciﬁc dosage form of interest to allow the MHDO to 
implement substantive reporting requirements that increase the applicability of the data 
collected. 
MHDO Staff Response: 
MHDO is interested in evaluating drug costs for all strengths within a drug product family. For 
example, MHDO may examine whether there may be potential savings achieved in prescribing 
.. ,. , , . .. .. , ,,.
two units of a 250MG tablet instead of one unit of a SOOMG tablet. However, for clarity, we do 
recommend replacing ”drug form" with "dosage form” in our definition of Drug Product Family, 
defined as the physical form in which a prescription drug is produced and dispensed, such asa 
tablet, a capsule, or injectable. 
We also recommend adding the definition for ”dosage form" in Section 1. The proposed 
definition for ”dosage form" is adapted from the FDA Glossary of Terms. 
Recommended Board Action: 
1. Amend current Section 1(C) as follows: 
Drug Product Family. ”Drug product family" means a group of one or more 
prescription drugs that share a unique non-proprietary name 
{nan-trade-name-) and drug-dosage form. 
2. Add a definition to current Section 1 for Dosage Form as follows: 
Dosage Form. ”Dosage Form" means the physical form in which a prescription drug is 
produced and dispensed, such as a tablet, a capsule, or an injectable. 
Statutory Authority: 22 M.R.S. §§ 8703(1), 8704(1), 8705-A and 8705-A(3), 8731, 8732, 8733, 
8734, 8735 and 8737. 
Effective Date: TBD 
Proposed Responses to Written Comments-Rule 570. Discussed with MHDO Board 12/01/2022- 
unanimously approved. 
7|Page
Attachment C 
90-590 C.M.R. Chapter 570 
Chapter 570: UNIFORM REPORTING SYSTEM FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRICE DATA 
SETS 
SUMMARY: This Chapter contains the provisions for ﬁling pharmaceutical pricing data sets from 
prescription drug manufacturers, wholesale drug distributors and pharmacy beneﬁts managers. 
The provisions include: 
Identiﬁcation of the organizations required to register and report; 
Establishment of requirements for the content, format, method, and time frame for ﬁling 
prescription drug price data; 
Establishment of standards for the data reported; and 
Compliance provisions. 
1. Deﬁnitions 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the following 
meanings: 
A. Acquisition date. “Acquisition date” means the date that the manufacturer registered 
with the FDA as the labeler for the drug product. 
B%Brand-name drug. “Brand-name drug” means a prescription drug, having a unique 
NDC, marketed under a proprietary name or registered trademark name, including a 
biological product, and approved under a New Drug Application or Biologics License 
Application. 
B=C. Dosage Form. “Dosage Form” means the physical form in which a prescription 
drug is produced and dispensed. such as a tablet. a capsule. or an injectable. 
€—.D. Drug product family. “Drug product family” means a group of one or more 
prescription drugs that share a unique non-proprietary name 
and drug-Qgsgg_e_form. 
-HE. Generic drug. “Generic drug” means a prescription drug, having a unique NDC 
whether identiﬁed by its chemical, proprietary or nonproprietary name, that is nota 
8|Page 
brand-name drug, is therapeutically equivalent to a brand-name drug in dosage, strength, 
method of consumption, performance and intended use, and approved under an 
Abbreviated New Drug Application. "Generic drug" includes a biosimilar product. 
H. Introduced to Market. “Introduced to Market” means made available for 
purchase in the United States. 
F-.G. Manufacturer. “Manufacturer ” means an entity that manufactures or 
repackages, and sets the wholesale acquisition cost for, prescription drugs that are 
distributed in the State. 
G<H. M1-IDO. "MHDO" means the Maine Health Data Organization. 
l=I=LM.R.S. “M.R.S.” means Maine Revised Statutes. 
l~.J_. _ National Drug Code (NDC). “National Drug Code (NDC)” means the three-segment 
code maintained by the federal Food and Drug Administration that includes a labeler 
code, a product code, and a package code for a drug product and that has been converted 
to an l 1-digit format consisting of ﬁve digits in the ﬁrst segment, four digits in the 
second segment, and two digits in the third segment. A three-segment code shall be 
considered converted to an ll-digit format when, as necessary, at least one “O” has been 
added to the front of each segment containing less than the speciﬁed number of digits 
such that each segment contains the speciﬁed number of digits. 
J¢QNew Prescription Drug. “New prescription drug” means a drug receiving initial 
approval under an original new drug application under 2l e~f—tlae 
United States Code, Section _3L5 _ 5_(b), under an abbreviated new drug application under 
2l of—the-United States Code, Section 355(1), or under a biologics 
license application under S 42 ef-t-he-United States Code, Section 262. 
Each product listed on the application shall be considered a new prescription drug. 
K—.L. Nonproprietary name. “Nonproprietary name” means the generic name 
assigned by the United States Adopted Names (USAN) Council. 
EM. Pharmacy Benefits Manager (PBIW). “Pharmacy Beneﬁts Manager (PBM)” 
means an entity that performs pharmacy beneﬁts management, as deﬁned in 24-A M.R.S 
§4347, sub-section 17. 
MN. Prescription drug. “Prescription drug” means a drug, as deﬁned in Seetien 
21 etltlae-United States Code, Section 321g g) or a biological product as 
deﬁned in 42 efthe-United States Code, Section 262§ i )1 1) that; 
i. ils intended for human use; 
ii. ils not a device within the meaning of 2l etlthe-United 
States Code, Section 32l§h);Ld 
iii.b _By federal or state law, can be lawfully dispensed or administered only on 
prescription by a licensed health_care professional. 
N10. Pricing component data. “Pricing component data” means data unique to each 
reporting entity subject to this rule that evidences the cost to each reporting entity to       
158.com make a prescription drug product available to consumers and the payments received by 
each reporting entity to make a prescription drug product available to consumers, taking 
into account any price concessions, and that is measured unifonnly among and between 
the entities, as detailed by this rule adopted by the organization pursuant to 22 M.R.S.; 
S%%n§ 8737. 
9< _l°. _Pricing unit. “Pricing unit” means the smallest dispensable amount of a prescription 
drug product that could be dispensed. 
R§LProprietary name. “Proprietary name” means the brand or trademark name of the drug 
reported to the FDA. 
Q=R. _Rebate. “Rebate” means a discount, chargeback, or other price concession that affects 
the price of a prescription drug product, regardless of whether conferred through regular 
aggregate payments, on a claim-by-claim basis at the point-of-sale, as part of 
retrospective ﬁnancial reconciliations (including reconciliations that also reﬂect other 
contractual arrangements), or by any other method. “Rebate” does not mean a “bona ﬁde 
sen/ice fee” , as such term is deﬁned in 2 e£the~Code of Federal 
Regulations,gt_' l_9L¢l4_ll7_. __5Q2_, published October l, 2019. 
R<§_Reporting entity. “Reporting entity” means any manufacturer, pharmacy beneﬁts 
manager, wholesale drug distributor, or any other entity required to register and/or submit 
data pursuant to 22 M.R.S.; -Seet~iens§L§ 8732, 8734, 8735 and this rule. 
SJ. Specialty Drug Under Medicare Part D Program. “Specialty Drug Under 
Medicare Part D Program” means a prescription drug product having a wholesale 
acquisition cost that exceeds the threshold set for a specialty drug by the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services under the Medicare Part D. 
5E<QTax identification number (TIN). “Tax identiﬁcation number (TIN)” means the 9-digit 
Taxpayer Identiﬁcation Number used by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). 
Uwlwholesale acquisition cost (WAC). “Wholesale acquisition cost (WAC)” meansa 
manufacturer ’s published list price for sale of a prescription drug product with a unique 
NDC to any wholesale drug distributor or other entity that purchases a prescription drug 
directly from the manufacturer, not including any price concessions. 
RAW. Wholesale drug distributor. “Wholesale drug distributor ” means an 
entity that 
i. is licensed by the State to engage in the sale of prescription drugs to persons 
and/or entities other than a consumer or patient; and 
ii. distributes prescription drugs, of which it is not the manufacturer, to persons and 
/or entities other than a consumer or patient in the State. 
2. Registration and Submission Requirements 
Reporting entities shall submit to the MHDO or its designee complete prescription drug price data 
sets in accordance with the requirements of this section. Data may be submitted by corporate 
entities or their subsidiaries. Reporting entities that engage subcontractors or other third parties to 
submit information on their behalf Warrant the completeness and accuracy of all data submitted.  
11|Page Registration. Each entity required to report shall complete an online registration 
fonn, or update an existing one, via the MHDO Prescription Drug Price Data Portal 
web interface (https://mhdo.maine.gov/pharma_portal/) by January 30"‘ of each year. 
It is the responsibility of the reporting entity to complete, as needed, all company and 
contact information. 
Public Notice of Substantial Drug Price Change or Int1'o<lucti0n 
. -No later than January 30th of each year, 
the MHDO shall produce 
and post on its publicly accessible website a list of prescription drugs for which the 
manufacturer has during the prior calendar year: 
l) Increased the wholesale acquisition cost of a brand-name drug by more than 
20% per pricing unit; 
2) Increased the wholesale acquisition cost of a generic drug that costs at least 
$10 per pricing unit by more than 20% per pricing unit; or 
3) Introduced a new prescription drug for distribution in this State when the 
wholesale acquisition cost is greater than the amount that would cause the drug 
to be considered a specialty drug under the Medicare Part D program 
(hereinafter “new drug”). For the purposes of this paragraph, “Medicare Part 
IQ” hasjthe same_meaning as in 22 M.R.S. § @— _Q(l)(F); 
0 - . I' 
~' 
I ' '
. 
- 
- - 1- 1., , V’ . 
1 ~1 
n+£%4 Disclosures by 
manufacturers, wholesale drug distributors and pharmacy benefits managers. 
The following_disclosures apply to manufacturers, Wholesale drug distributors and 
pharmacy beneﬁts managers. 
1)$]NE;E_].]_.. o 9 ‘ ‘_ xi Ll. 
O11 or before 
February 15th of each year, the MHDO shall produce and post on its publicly 
accessible website a list of drug product families for which it intends to request 
pricing component data from manufacturers, wholesale drug distributors and 
12lrl1na2yi>§n.e. ﬁt§_tmir1ag%Ilt@_I\Zll:II2D will base its inclusion of drug 
product families on any information the l\/H-IDO determines is relevant to 
providing greater consumer awareness of the factors contributing to the cost of 
prescription drugs in the State,_and the MI-lDO_}vill consider drug_pr0duct 
families of prescription drugs: 
a) Included in the public notice of substantial drug price change or 
introduction under subsection 2(GB); and 
.5. ’ .i 1_5.2£E;M'_[_:_ _: olesale dr
b) or which the MHDO is required to produce an 
annual report pursuant to 22 M.R.S. § 87l2(5)g, 
including. but not limited to, the 25 costliest Ddrugs 
(determined by the total amount spent in the State); the 25 Mmost 
Ffrequently Pprescribed _dDrugs in the State§,_a@ the 25 Dglrugs with 
the Hhighest ¥year-Qgver-¥year Ggost ﬁncreases (detennined by the 
total amount spent in the State),; —an@l 
. 
1].] .H I. 1. 
Era 1 E .1. E_l.1. 
392) Not sooner than 30 days after publicly posting the list of drug product 
families pursuant to sub-section C(12), the MHDO will notify, via e-mail: 
a) manufacturers that are required to report pricing component data as 
detailed in section 2(J)(1); 
b) wholesale drug distributors that are required to report pricing component 
data as detailed in section 2(J)(2); and 
c) pharmacy beneﬁts managers that are required to report pricing 
component data as detailed in section 2(J)(3). 
493) Each reporting entity receiving such a notiﬁcation shall submit their 
pricing component data to tl il\/ll-IDO for each NDC in each drug product 
family included in the notice in accordance with the requirements below. 
Submission Method. Data ﬁles must be submitted via the MI-IDO Prescription Drug 
Price Data Portal web interface (https://mhdo.maine.g0v/pharma_portal/). E-mail 
attachments shall not be accepted. 
File Format. The ﬁle format will be an MIHDO-provided Excel template for each 
dataset submitted via a secure web upload interface. Submitters must use the current 
version of the appropriate template. The ﬁle format will contain the data elements 
found in the Reporting Speciﬁcations described in subsection 2(J). File naming 
conventions will be speciﬁed in the instructions included with each template. 
Codes. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, only the code sources listed and described in the 
templated reports are to be utilized. Speciﬁc or unique coding systems shall not be 
permitted. 
Submission Deadline. Prescription drug manufacturers, wholesale drug distributors 
and pharmacy beneﬁts managers shall report no later than 60 days after notiﬁcation 
from the MHDO, as described in subsection 2(C)(_2_). 
Rejection of Submissions. Failure to conform to the requirements of subsections D, 
E or F of this Section shall result in the rejection of the data ﬁle(s). All rejected ﬁles 
must be corrected and resubmitted to the MHDO or its designee within 30 days. 
Replacement of Data Files. A reporting entity may replace data submitted to the 
MHDO with updated data within 90 days of the updated information becoming 
available. Any replacements after this period must be approved by the MHDO.  
13lPage Reporting Speciﬁcations. For each drug product NDC indicated in the MHDO 
notice, the reporting entity must report the following data. Data related to sales 
volume, acquisition volume, revenue, acquisition amount, and rebates should be 
provided net of returns.
1) Manufacturer Report 
Data Element Name Description/Codes/Sources 
NDC 
Drug Indicator 
Estimated Number of Patients 
Baseline WAC Amount 
Total WAC Change Amount 
WAC After Change 
Unit Sales Volume in US 
Revenue in US 
Total Rebate Payable Amount in 
US 
Cost Change Factors 
14|Page The national drug code maintained by the FDA for the drug 
product that includes the labeler code, product code, and 
package code. A drug’s NDC is typically expressed using ll 
digits in a 5-4-2 fonnat (xxxxx-yyyy-zz). The ﬁrst ﬁve digits 
identify the manufacturer, the second four digits identiﬁl the 
product and strength, and the last two digits identify the package 
size and type. Do not leave blank. 
l = Brand Name; 2 = Generic 
Estimated annual patient volume in the United States for this 
drug product during the current calendar year. 
The wholesale acquisition cost of the dmg product on the later 
of the day prior to the ﬁrst day of the prior calendar year, the 
introduced to market date, or the acquisition date. 
The total amount of wholesale acquisition cost change for the 
drug product during the last calendar year. Indicate $0 if no 
change. 
The wholesale acquisition cost resulting from the reported 
wholesale acquisition cost change for the drug product. That is, 
the wholesale acquisition cost on the last day of the calendar 
year. If no change, this amount should be the same as the 
Baseline WAC Amount. 
The number of units of the drug product sold in the United 
States during the prior calendar year. 
Gross revenue from sales in the United States for this drug 
product during the prior calendar year. 
Total rebate payable amount accrued for the drug product in the 
United States during the prior calendar year. 
Reasons for WAC change 
0 — No change/not applicable 
— Change in administrative expenses 
— Scheduled price change 
- Change in ingredient costs 
~ Change in manufacturing 
— Change in marketing & advertising costs 
- Change in ﬁnancial assistance 
- Change in R&D costs 
— Change in rebates to PBMs/wholesalers 
— Other rebate change                        
Data Element Name Description/Codes/Sources 
Acquisition Date 
Company Acquired from Name 10 — Change in supply (shortage or surplus) 
ll — Change in sales costs 
12 ~ Change in state and federal taxes 
13 ~ Change in proﬁt targets 
14 — Change in supplier price (repackaged NDC) 
15 — Other/Specify 
If the drug product was acquired by the manufacturer within the 
previous ﬁve years, the date of acquisition. If not, leave blank. 
If the drug product was acquired by the manufacturer within the 
previous five years, the name of the company from which the 
drug was acquired. If not, leave blank. 
Company Acquired from Tax ID If the drug product was acquired by the manufacturer within the 
Number 
Acquisition Price 
WAC at Acquisition 
WAC One Year Prior to 
Acquisition 
Introduced to Market Date 
WAC at 
Market Introduction 
Acquisition Comments 
General Comments 
ge I previous ﬁve years, the TIN of the company from which the 
drug was acquired. If not, leave blank. 
If the drug product was acquired by the manufacturer Within the 
previous ﬁve years, the purchase price of acquisition. If not, 
leave blank. 
If the drug product was acquired by the manufacturer within the 
previous ﬁve years, and the acquisition date falls alter the 
introduced to market date, the wholesale acquisition cost of the 
drug product at the time of acquisition. If not, leave blank. 
If the drug product was acquired by the manufacturer within the 
previous ﬁve years, and the acquisition date falls more than 365 
days after the introduced to market date, the wholesale 
acquisition cost of the drug product one year prior to the date of 
acquisition. If not, leave blank. 
If the drug product was introduced to market within the previous 
calendar year or acquired by the manufacturer within the 
previous ﬁve years, the date the drug product was introduced to 
market. If not, leave blank. 
If the drug product was introduced to market within the previous 
calendar year or acquired by the manufacturer within the 
previous ﬁve years, the wholesale acquisition cost of the drug 
product when it was introduced to market. If not, leave blank. 
Additional information related to the acquisition information 
provided, if applicable. 
Additional information related to the data submitted for this 
drug product, if applicable.
2) Wholesale Drug Distributor Report 
Data Element Name Description/Codes/Sources 
NDC 
Unit Acquisition Volume in US 
Total Acquisition Amount in US 
Total Rebate Receivable 
Amount in US 
Unit Sales Volume in US 
Revenue in US 
Total Rebate Payable Amount in 
US 
General Comments 
16|Page The national drug code maintained by the FDA for the drug 
product that includes the labeler code, product code, and 
package code. A drug’s NDC is typically expressed using 11 
digits in a 5-4-2 format (xxxxx-yyyy-zz). The ﬁrst five digits 
identify the manufacturer, the second four digits identify the 
product and strength, and the last two digits identify the package 
size and type. Do not leave blank. 
The number of units of the drug product acquired in the United 
States by the wholesale drug distributor during the prior 
calendar year. 
Total spent before rebates by the wholesale drug distributor to 
acquire the drug product in the United States during the prior 
calendar year. 
Total rebate receivable amount accrued by the wholesale drug 
distributor for the drug product in the United States during the 
prior calendar year. 
Number of units of the drug product sold by the wholesale drug 
distributor in the United States during the prior calendar year. 
Gross revenue from sales in the United States generated by the 
wholesale drug distributor for this drug product during the prior 
calendar year. 
Total rebate payable amount accrued by the wholesale drug 
distributor for the drug product in the United States during the 
prior calendar year. 
Additional information related to the data submitted for this 
drug product, if applicable.
3) Pharmacy Beneﬁts Manager Report 
Data Element Name Description/Codes/Sources 
NDC 
Pricing Units Administered in 
J=J§Maine 
Total Phannacy Reimbursement 
in lJ~SMaine 
Total Payment Received in 
USMaine 
Total Rebate Receivable 
Amount in USMaine 
Total Rebate Payable AmountQ Maine 
General Comments 
R The national drug code maintained by the FDA for the drug 
product that includes the labeler code, product code, and 
package code. A drug’s NDC is typically expressed using ll 
digits in a 5-4-2 format (xxxxx-yyyy-zz). The ﬁrst ﬁve digits 
identify the manufacturer, the second four digits identify the 
product and strength, and the last two digits identify the package 
size and type. Do not leave blank. 
The number of pricing units of the drug product ﬁlled in the 
Mai11e for which the PBM administered claims 
during the prior calendar year. 
Total reimbursement amount accrued and payable to pharmacies 
for pricing units of the drug product ﬁlled in tl=ie—Ui+i4eee1 
St-a»tesMaine for which the PBM administered claims during the 
prior calendar year. 
Total reimbursement and/or administrative fee amount accrued 
and receivable from payers for pricing units of the drug product 
ﬁlled in M_aQ@ for which the PBM 
administered claims during the prior calendar year. 
Total rebate receivable amount accrued by the PBM for the drug 
product in Mai11e during the prior calendar 
year. 
Total rebate payable amount accrued by the PBM for the drug 
product in Maine during the prior calendar year. 
Additional information related to the data submitted for this 
drug product, if applicable. 
ort
3. 
4. 
18|Page Evaluation; Notiﬁcation; Response 
A. Evaluation. The MHDO or its vendor shall evaluate each ﬁle in accordance with the 
following standards: 
l) When applicable, only an eligible code value for a speciﬁed data element 
shall be accepted; 
2) Coding values indicating “data not available ” , “data unknown” , or the 
equivalent shall not be used for individual data elements unless speciﬁed as 
an eligible value for the element. 
B. Notification. Upon completion of the data evaluation, the MHDO or its designee will 
promptly notify each reporting entity whose data submissions do not satisfy the 
standards for any ﬁling period. This notiﬁcation will identify the speciﬁc ﬁle and the 
data elements within them that do not satisfy the standards. 
C. Response. Each reporting entity notiﬁed under subsection 3(B) will respond within 
30 days of the notiﬁcation by making and reporting the changes necessary to satisfy 
the standards. 
Compliance 
Certiﬁcation of accuracy. A notiﬁcation or report to the MHDO by a reporting entity 
shall include a signed, written certiﬁcation of the notiﬁcation or report’s accuracy. 
Reporting entities will be allowed to attest to the accuracy of their notiﬁcation or report 
through the MHDO Prescription Drug Price Data Portal web interface. Conﬁrmation will 
be documented electronically and will count as the Written certiﬁcation. 
Audit. With a 30-day notice, the MHDO may audit the fmalized data submitted bya 
reporting entity, and that entity shall pay for the costs of the audit. The MHDO will 
consider recommendations from the reporting entity as to the scope of the audit and the 
selection of the independent auditor. 
Corrective action plan. The MHDO may require a reporting entity to develop a 
corrective action plan to correct any deﬁciencies in compliance discovered during an 
audit. The corrective action plan shall include, in writing: the speciﬁc requirement to be 
extended; an explanation of the cause; the methodology proposed to eliminate the 
necessity of the extension; and the time frame required to come into compliance. 
Enforcement. The failure to ﬁle, report, or correct prescription drug price data sets when 
required in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter may be considered a civil 
violation under 22 M.R.S.-See_§ 8705-A and Code of Maine Rules 90-590, Chapter 100: 
Enforcement Procedures.
5. Extensions to Data Submission Requirements 
If a reporting entity, due to circumstances beyond its control, is temporarily unable to 
meet the terms and conditions of this Chapter, a written request must be made to the 
Compliance Officer of the MHDO as soon as it is practicable after the reporting entity 
has determined that an extension is required. The written extension request shall include 
the same elements as the corrective action plan in Section 4(C). 
6. Conﬁdentiality 
STATUTORY AUTHORITY: 22 M.R.S. §§ 8703(1), 8704(1), 8705-A and 8705-A(3), 8731, 8732, 8733 Information provided to the MHDO as required by this chapter bya 
manufacturer, wholesale drug distributor or pharmacy beneﬁts manager is conﬁdential 
and not a public record under Title l, chapter 13, except that the MI-IDO may share 
information: 
A. Bureau of Insurance. With the Department of Professional and Financial 
Regulation, Bureau of Insurance, to the extent necessary for the bureau to enforce the 
provisions of Title 24-A, as long as prior notice is provided to reporting entities that 
information will be shared, and any information shared is kept conﬁdential; —and 
B. Aggregate. In the aggregate, as long as it is not released in a manner that allows 
the dete1'mi11ation of individual prescription drug 
pricing cqntract terms cov_ering_a manufacturer, wholesale drug distributor or 
pharmacy beneﬁts managergich 
.$,.. .1_ 
v, .5.” 1.! .$. 5.l..llg_, 
I p_Z v 1. y ‘Z H zL_.. §.l..l_l 
C. Publicly Available. That is available. for purchase or otherwise, to the public. 
8734, 8735 and 8737. 
EFFECTIVE DATE: February 4, 2020 
19[Page December 10, 2021n
