 
Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff 
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org  Testimony in favor of LD 463 and 507 – extending MaineCare coverage to young 
adults emerging from Foster Care.       Sydney R. Sewall, MD 
 
Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyer and members of the HHS committee: 
 
I’m speaking as a representative of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy 
of Pediatrics, an organization of over 300 child health specialists dedicated to 
improving outcomes for all kids in Maine.  I personally have practiced in the 
Central Maine area since the 1980’s, and most recently have worked in a clinic 
associated with MaineGeneral evaluating children placed into Foster Care.   
 
Almost by definition, children aging out of the Foster Care system have been 
affected by multiple adverse childhood experiences  and chronic stress.  As you all 
have likely heard, there is an extensive research base showing the correlation 
between ACE’s and negative long-term mental health, developmental, and 
medical outcomes.    These challenges are related to physiologic changes due to 
poorly understood epigenetic mechanisms – the relationship between nature and 
nurture, as it turns out, is quite complicated.      
 
Studies over the last decade have shown that ACEs alter the neurobiology of the 
brain, leading to negative impacts on emotional regulation, in addition to 
impairing cognition and attentional skills.  This dysregulation does not disappear 
at age 18 or 21 – but extends into adulthood.    ACEs are also associated with 
neuroendocrine and immunologic alterations – increasing the foster child’s risk for 
eventually developing medical conditions including diabetes, obesity, 
inflammatory bowel disease, et. Al.    
 
Thus, children emerging out of Foster Care have extensive psychiatric and medical 
needs.   Many require psychopharmacologic interventions to maintain emotional 
stability, while others respond to supports and psychologic therapies.  Some have 
chronic medical conditions like asthma that are best controlled with prescription 
medications.   
 
There are state agencies in place that promote opportunities for former foster 
children to get post-High School education and job training – to make it possible 
for these individuals to become self-supporting and productive.  However, if their 
emotional and medical challenges are not addressed, their chance of success is 
limited.  It is unlikely that their first jobs will provide adequate coverage.   
 
Providing health insurance to this population of kids through the young adult 
years is not only the right thing to do, but also will be cost effective in the long 
run.   
 
Sincerely,   
 
Sydney R. Sewall, MD MPH 
Hallowell 
 
 
