Andrea Dole
Belfast
LD 545
Andrea Dole of Belfast, Maine
Testimony in support of LD 545, An Act to Establish a Cabinet-level Position to 
Ensure a Continuum of Care to Support Children and Their Families, & LD 1754, 
Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Study the Delivery of Services to Children 
and Families
 
Representative Meyer, Senator Baldacci, and distinguished members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee. I respectfully submit to you my written testimony in
support of LD 545 and LD 1754. The perspective and strategies offered in these bills 
are timely and insightful, and of particular and crucial relevance to our family, and 
many more like us. 
Children and Youth with Special Health Care Needs (CYSHCN) and Children with 
Medical Complexity (CMC) like my son James offer important insights, critiques, and
templates for systems of care improvement that can have far reaching benefits for all 
children and families.
Our son James was born July 26, 2015. I had an educated, healthy, full term 
pregnancy, guided by my midwife during monthly prenatal care and was grateful for a
natural home birth attended by two midwives and a doula. My husband Patrick and I 
experienced a strong sense of empowerment and safety fostered by our birth team. 
The midwifery model of care continues to give me faith that quality, evidence-based, 
family-centered care is not only possible, but crucial for all children and families. Our
team's respectful and attuned care nurtured our resilience, necessary for what was 
soon to come: navigating Maine hospitals and state agencies when dealing with 
James's unique medical and developmental challenges. 
Two days after James's birth, doctors presented an analysis of his MRI. They told us 
our son was “Like a chimpanzee, he'll never think or feel anything.” They suggested 
we not bother to attach to him, giving James a prognosis of “weeks to months, 
perhaps a couple of years at best.” The hospital social worker had no alternative 
narrative to present, failing to mention Early Intervention, Child Development 
Services, Title V CYSHCN or CMC. Like us, she was a puddle of tears. She handed 
us gas cards for our trip to the next hospital to consult with a neurologist and 
geneticist and do more tests.
James's seizures began at six weeks old. I counted them through the night, clocked 
their duration, and coordinated closely with his neurologist in Portland. After James's 
local PCP misinterpreted the seizure medication dosage schedule, I communicated 
directly with specialty care neurology. I routinely needed to explain our son's 
diagnosis and prognosis to folks at MaineCare while advocating for his various and 
many needs. Without a doubt, his insurance provider should have known his 
diagnosis, but did not. The feeling of invisibility was painful and alarming, increasing
our sense of isolation and vulnerability during a time already full of anxiety and grief.
When James was nine months old, living and learning with a phenomenal amount of 
spirit, I contacted Child Development Services and found Case Management through 
a local agency. These professionals bolstered my confidence in myself and our 
family's natural supports. Their valuable expertise helped support James's healthy 
development using a wide array of therapists and consultants. This approach was 
family-centered and multi-disciplinary. We were shocked to learn there was no 
communication or coordination with James's medical team, his medical needs were 
not all within the expertise of the “educational” and “behavioral” models of service 
delivery. 
MaineCare and all state agencies involved in children's care should be informed, 
proactive, and coordinated in supporting families. They must meet these children's 
ongoing developmental needs. New parents should always have access to 
knowledgeable guides who understand children's physical, developmental, and 
educational needs as being interconnected, with the highest evidenced-based 
standards of care. 
Our family spent valuable time and energy submitting mountains of paperwork to 
apply for, then later appeal the denials and deferrals we received for “medically 
necessary” interventions, referrals, devices, healthy g-tube formula, eligibility for and 
appropriate allotment of crucial home nursing care. These were necessary for James 
to grow and thrive, and provide long-term health and development. 
Before James was born, I was a case manager familiar with advocating for children 
with disabilities. I shudder to imagine how other families facing medical and 
developmental challenges similar to ours, but without an advocacy background, are 
able to prioritize their children's medical and developmental needs in a system that 
isn't actively providing early intervention. Such parents need this support in 
coordinating their complex care. They need to be “seen.”
Children like James require increased coordination of care due to the severity and 
complexity of their medical and developmental needs. As a recent trainee in the 
NH-ME LEND program, a federally funded 300 hour graduate program through the 
Bureau of Maternal-Child Health, I learned of national standards for Children and 
Youth with Special Health Care Needs. A central component of the national standards
for CYSHCN is parent involvement and empowerment within systems of care. 
Navigating a challenging diagnosis at the hospital, learning how to coordinate with 
medical specialists, local doctors, and community resources, understanding g-tubes 
and seizures, navigating the challenges of in-home nursing care – these were only 
some of the things we were completely on our own to figure out while keeping our 
extremely vulnerable child alive through numerous medically and emotionally 
challenging situations. Each step was made more stressful by the redundancy of 
multiple uncoordinated agencies. In that environment, any person would start to feel 
intense shame about having any needs. Such an extremely demoralizing and 
panic-inducing situation is not conducive to anyone's well-being.
I am grateful for all the valuable components of support we have been able to access 
on James's behalf through primary care, medical model therapies, specialists, essential
surgeries, home care nurses, developmental and educational providers, advocacy 
organizations, respite and palliative care. What we need is a system of care that 
facilitates coordination of these efforts and incorporates parents as peer experts in the 
care delivery system. This would be in keeping with national standards for CYSHCN.
As you push forward policies and structures to ensure a supportive, interconnected 
continuum of care for children and families, please consider centering the national 
standards for CYSHCN (in both process and outcome) to create a universal design 
that serves all Maine families.
I have shared some links below that may be helpful, including documents that 
describe programs in other states. I will make myself available for the work session 
and would be honored to be part of the commission if that plan moves forward.
Thank you for your valuable time and attention, and for all the good work that you do.
Resources for CYSHCN and CMC:
https://nashp.org/toolkit-national-standards-for-children-and-youth-with-special-healt
h-care-needs/
https://nashp.org/how-states-use-the-national-standards-for-cyshcn-in-their-health-car
e-systems/
https://nashp.org/how-states-use-the-national-standards-for-cyshcn-to-strengthen-med
icaid-managed-care-for-children-with-special-health-care-needs/
https://nashp.org/national-care-coordination-standards-for-children-and-youth-with-sp
ecial-health-care-needs-cyshcn-implementation-guide/
http://contentmanager.med.uvm.edu/docs/default-source/nipn-documents/establishing
achildhealthip-ahow-toguide_000.pdf?sfvrsn=2
https://cssp.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/CSSP-Leveraging-TitlveV-FULL-REPO
RT.pdf
Programs in Delaware, Kansas, and Rhode Island:
https://dhss.delaware.gov/dmma/files/de_plan_cmc.pdf
https://www.kdhe.ks.gov/1810/Holistic-Care-Coordination-Toolkit
https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/case-study/2010/jan/rhode-islands-
pediatric-practice-enhancement-project-parents
