 
Senator Baldacci 
Representative Meyer 
Members of the Committee of Health and Human Services 
 
RE: LD 545 An Act to Establish a Cabinet-level Position to Ensure a Continuum of Care to Support 
Children and Their Families 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services Committee. 
My name is Carrie Woodcock I am the parent of two children with special needs and the Executive 
Director for Maine Parent Federation (MPF), the federally funded Parent Training and Information 
Center (PTI), Family to Family Health Information Center (F2F) and Statewide Family Network. We assist 
families of children with disabilities and special healthcare needs to navigate all systems of care. I am 
submitting this testimony in support of LD 545 An Act to Establish a Cabinet-level Position to Ensure a 
Continuum of Care to Support Children and Their Families. 
 
As both a parent and a professional I have navigated the various systems of care for families of 
Maine children with a disability such as autism, cerebral palsy, intellectual, or developmental 
disability. In order to receive all the services and interventions which are crucial to their 
development a family must be fluent in what services are available, what department they are 
available through, the various application processes and assessments they will need to qualify, 
and their rights to appeal a decision if they do not qualify. If a family is lucky enough to gain all 
the services, they then need to be efficient at coordinating all the services. This in and of itself is 
a full-time job.  
 
You have heard a lot about the fragmented systems of care as we have navigated a life span 
waiver this session. While I am excited about the potential of that waiver in Maine it would start 
at age 14. This does not address the fragmented systems of care that still exists birth – 13. 
 
Our various state departments are not communicating, are not coordinating care, and often are 
only educated about their specific services. Our waiver process is confusing and access to 
different waivers could require navigating different departments within DHHS. There are 
waitlists or simply no available providers for the services to be carried out. In addition, our Early 
Intervention Services through Child Development Systems for our 3-5-year-olds also have 
waitlists. It is not unusual for me to talk to a parent whose child has been on this waitlist since 
being determined eligible at the age of 3 and are now transitioning to kindergarten without ever 
receiving services.  Our Early Intervention Services birth – 2-year-olds are only being offering 1 
hour of parent coaching every other week, which is not even close to what research shows 
works. All these issues are very concerning for our children and they also put our state out of 
federal compliance in many different areas.  
  
It is time for Maine to explore a different way of providing these services to our children. It is 
time for us to look at a state like Connecticut who have developed and implemented a 
successful separate state department to address all the needs of their young children with 
disabilities. It provides one entry point for families to receive multiple services, referrals, and 

warm handoffs within the department for services, and coordinated care so all providers are 
well informed about the patient plan. One entry point, warm handoffs, and care coordination 
are the top three priorities we hear from families and priorities they list as missing here in 
Maine.  
 
Our fragmented services are hurting one of our most vulnerable populations. If this population 
received what they needed through our state they are a population who have tremendous 
potential, potential under the current model which is never achieved. We can do better and I 
urge the Committee to please support LD 545 and get us one step closer to doing right by our 
children. 
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Carrie Woodcock 
Executive Director 
Maine Parent Federation 
cwoodcock@mpf.org  
(207) 588-1933 
 
