 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Hannah Hudson  on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
May 12, 2023  
 
Supporting:  
LD 545, “An Act to Establish a Cabinet -level Position to Ensure a Continuum of Care to 
Support Children and Their Families ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative Holly Stover  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Health and Human Services , I am Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager at  
Maine Primary Care Association (MPCA).  
 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers 
(CHCs), also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the 
largest  independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high qual ity and equitable 
primary and preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people 
(1 in 6  Mainers ). 
 
In 2021, Maine’s CHCs provided care to over 38,100 children, almost 20% of all patients served  
within our network .1 With the CHC collaborative care model for providing services , providers 
are often well acquainted with a patient’s needs beyond just medical services . Primary care 
providers, behavioral health care providers, case managers, and many more non -clinical staff 
members, work together to ensure that CHC patients are receiving all the support they need. 
Care teams see first -hand the struggles and stressors that can negatively impact a family trying 
to access services for a child.  
 
To receiv e necessary services, a parent of a child with a special healthcare need may have to 
navigate multiple offices within many departments. It is a very complicated process and leads 
to many children not accessing all the services they desperately need.   
 
LD 5 45 would establish a comprehensive continuum of coordinated services aimed at 
identifying, evaluating,  and supporting young children’s physical, emotional and social 
development. MPCA supports this legislation, and we thank Representative Stover and the 
other cosponsors for bringing this bill forward. It will create a process that defines a clear 
method and prevent s duplication of effort , for both t he providers of services  and the famil ies 
trying to access services .  
 
 
1 Maine Health Center Program Uniform Data System (UDS) Data. Accessed here: https://data.hrsa.gov/tools/data -
reporting/program -data/state/ME/   
 
 
 
 mepca.org  Moving this work into the Children’s Cabinet is essential to ensure that a broad view is taken 
that encompasses all programs that support children and families. We need to avoid silos , 
where good work is likely happening  but often does not translate across the lifecourse of the 
individual . At the end of the day , our children require a developmental model to meet all their 
needs.  Easy access to coordinated, comprehensive services  is essential for families in Maine.  
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for conside ring our comments. 
Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up 
questions.  
 
Hannah Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
