Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
May 12 , 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 545 – An Act to Establish a Cabinet -level Position to Ensure a Continuum of Care to Support 
Children and Their Families  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 545, An Act to Establish a Cabinet -level Position to 
Ensure a Continuum of Care to Support Children and Their Families .  
 
This bill is a concept draft but the bill summary indicates it would require the De partment to develop a 
comprehensive inventory of programs and services that support young children’s physical, emotional, 
and social development; establish a working group to analyze the information produced by the 
Department and make recommendations to th e Children’s Cabinet; require the Children’s Cabinet to 
develop a data -driven plan and report on the working group’s recommendations; and establish a 
cabinet -level position to develop a continuous system of care to meet the needs of young children and 
their families.   
 
The Department is already devoting significant resources to supporting young children and their 
families through work that  requires significant  cross -Department and cross -office collaboration . 
Initiatives span  across  OCFS, CDC, and MaineCare and also involve collaboration with key partners 
like DOE and the Children’s Cabinet. The Cabinet acts as a key source of coordination between 
Departments and is overseeing the work of the Children’s Cabinet Early Childhood Adviso ry Council  
and Early Intervention Workgroup  which are already working towards the goals outlined in this bill.  
 
OCFS’  recommendation would be to focus on existing efforts  instead of creating a new department or 
an additional cabinet -level position. As suc h, OCFS opposes this bill. The work required to develop the 
required plan, workgroup , and data -driven reporting would take significant resources away from 
current efforts that are directly impacting the lives of children and families (including, Help Me Gr ow, 
ECCP, and First4ME , among others).  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dr. Todd A. Landry  
Director  
Office of Chi ld and Family Services  

