 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1189  (Opposed)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1189, An Act to Amend the Burden of Proof for Defendants Who C annot Pay Criminal 
Restitution  
 
DA: April 10, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1189 .   
 
 To the extent the bill proposes to authorize a court to terminate restitu tion, existing caselaw  
indicates that the approach is likely unconstitutional  as a violation of  the separation  of powers 
provision of the Maine Constitution  (i.e., an intrusion on the Governor ’s clemency authority ).    
State v. Ga gne, 2019 ME 7 ¶ 14; State v. Hunter , 447A2d 797  (Me 1982 ).  A similar proposal was  
removed from a bill addressed  by the 118th Legislat ure for the same reason . Summary, Committee 
Amendment to LD 882, An Act to Re quire Defendants to Pay Restituti on, Monetarily or Through 
Work Restitution (118th Legis.)  (citing Hunter ). 
 
 CLAC members noted that sentencing judges  currently have broad discretion to set the  
amount of restitution, based not only on the victim ’s loss, but also on whether restitution would 
constitute  an “excessive financial hardship ” for the defendant or the defendant ’s dependents.   The 
judge must consider the  defendant ’s living expens es, work travel e xpenses, special needs, present 
income, future earning capacity, resources , number of dependents, and the special needs and living 
expenses of dependents.   This is not an exclusive list ; other factors may be considered.   17-A 
M.R.S . § 2005.   
 
 A judge  also has broad discretion to modify the time and method of payment of restitution  at 
any time after it is imp osed.  Periodic payments can be reduced o r extended to allow additional 
time.  There is no  limit on the number of times a person may make such a request .  17-A M.R.S.  
§ 2014.    In addition, a defendant or the State may bring a motion pursua nt to Maine Rule of 
Unified Criminal Procedure 35 to correct a s entence, i ncluding restitution, that is illegal or imposed 
in an illegal manner  and base d on a mistake of fact, within one year .  Either party can appeal from 
an adverse ruling.      
 
 CLAC members also noted that there are victims ’ rights concerns associated with the bill.  
While those topics are better addressed by victim advocates and victims themselves, such issues 
include notification to victims of change in restitution,  finality of judg ment s, and possible financial 
impact on the Victims ’ Comp ensation Program  and in dividual vict ims.   
 
 
  In light of the questionable legality of the proposal, the court ’s broad discretion to fashion ,  
modify  and correct  restitution awards , and the possible unintended negative cons equences, CLAC 
opposes this bill.  
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
