  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
May 25 , 202 3 
 
Senator Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1993 – An Act to Expand Home Visiting Services and Provide for Reimbursement Under 
the MaineCare Program for Perinatal Doula Services and Midwifery Services . 
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information on LD 1993, An Act to Expand Home Visiting Services and 
Provide for Reimbursement Under the MaineCare Program for Perinatal Doula Services and 
Midwifery Services . The Department opposes this bill because the work on most of these services 
is already happening and other proposals are in conflict with rate system reform.  
 
This bill requires the Department to offer a voluntary universal home visiting program for new 
families with children, and to provide for reimbursement under the MaineCare program for home 
visiting services , perinatal doula services , and services provided by certified professional 
midwives.  
 
Section 1:  The Maine CDC oversees the Maternal, Infant and Early Childhood Home Visiting 
(MIECHV) program which is implemented by the Mai ne Children’s Trust and their eleven 
subcontractors. The MIECHV Program  is referred to as the Maine Families Home Visiting 
Program and  implements the evidence -based Pa rents as Teachers curriculum . This service is 
available to all families in Maine who are pregnant or have a baby three months or younger. Once 
a family is enrolled, they can stay in the program until the child reaches three years of age. The 
Program provid es prenatal support , information  on breastfeeding; eating healthy for you and your 
baby; childbirth; and fetal development.  
 
Additionally, once the baby is born, families receive  information about what to expect at different 
ages and stages of the baby's d evelopment.  Families are also provided helpful tools and ideas for 
meeting the daily challenges of parenting.  
 
Currently , the Maine Families Home Visiting Program  is funded through federal and state funds 
and does not bill MaineCare.  MaineCare coverage wou ld require federal approval through a waiver 
application.  
 
Section 2:  The requirements in this  section  are in conflict with P.L. 2021, ch 639. For rates where 
there is not an appropriate Medicare or alternative benchmark, t he Department’s process  is to 
provide an  annual cost of living  adjustment  once it has established the rate, and rebase rates every 
 
 five years , not every two years . This schedule is important to ensure the Department has bandwidth 
to ensure all rates remain sustainable over time.  
 
Section 3:  MaineCare is on track to adopt rules for MaineMOM services , which serve pregnant 
and parenting people with opioid use disorder,  by fall 2023 , which will include doulas as approved 
members of the MaineMOM team of providers . This will achieve a limited level of  MaineCare 
coverage of perinatal doula services  in the short term.  Based on recent national reviews of doula 
coverage in Medicaid, other states , especially early implementors of Medicaid coverage for doulas,  
have faced challenges in effecti vely enroll ing doulas as direct servic e provides , with important 
considerations on scope of practice, clinical supervisory requirements, and appropriate rates.  
 
Broader  access to doula services is a long er-term goal for the Office of MaineCare Services 
(OMS) . The Department recognizes  it is critical  to introduce  these services with intention , ensuring 
ample time to  design a service model which meets the diverse needs of  MaineCare members  as 
well as providers . The Department believes a thoughtful , stakeholder -informed, phased -in roll out 
of broader doula services is necessary in order to overcome potential barriers to service and ensure 
meaningful utilization of doula services to reduce health inequities.  
 
To inform this work, OMS is gathering information from across the nation. According to June 
2022 data presented by Georgetown University Health Policy Institute, seventeen states are in 
various stages of the process to consider and implement doula coverage : six states currently 
reimburse for doul a services through Medicaid , an additional six actively sought  Center for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services  approval to implement doula coverage in 2022 –2023, and five 
states are considering an approach to coverage ; OMS is  monitoring  these implementation 
process es. Within Maine, OMS has engaged  with community providers  to learn more about their 
specific vision  for the service and use of doulas.  
 
In addition, OMS is actively spearheading an initiative to address similar coverage expa nsion for 
Community Health Worker  (CHW)  services, a provider type which share s numerous  
characteristics with doula s. For example, there are key implementation questions around the 
capacity and appropriateness of community -based  or single /small group practitioners enroll ing in 
MaineCare  and billing fee -for-service and how th ose administrative processes  and incentives do 
or do not  align  with the goals and approach of CHW or doula service model. Additionally, states 
must thoughtfully design or articulate  meaningful training and certification requirements , 
oversight and reporting, and “coordination with broader systems of care.   
 
In time, the Department would like to expand coverage of doula services , but the approach must 
be thoughtful and use MaineMOM and CHW work to inform our broader approach.  OMS advises  
the committee to support existing  Department efforts to incorporate doula coverage through 
MaineMOM  and allow  the time re quired to work through capacity and billing challenges.  
 
Section 4: Enrolling midwi ves as MaineCare providers could take at least a year to develop in our 
claims system.   In addition to system development timelines , the Department would need an  
additional  year to develop and promulgate Maine Care rules associated with this change.  Like 
Section 2, this bill requires the Department to reevaluate reimbursement rates every two years , 
which conflicts with the Department’s rate reform process and is not sustainable . 
 
  
If you have any questions, pleas e feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

