Maine Developmental Disabilities Council 
May 25, 2023 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against LD 1993 An Act to Expand Home Visiting Services and 
Provide for Reimbursement Under the MaineCare Program for Perinatal Doula Services and 
Midwifery Services 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
My name is Nancy Cronin, and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Developmental 
Disabilities (DD) Council? I have several concerns that I wish you to consider. It is my 
understanding that home visiting is currently being funded under a grant passed through Maine 
CDC Maternal Child Health. If you pass this as written: 
0 I believe that MaineCare will need to ask CMS if this service meets the deﬁnition of "medically 
necessary" and if the State is allowed to bill for this service. 
o If it is medically necessary, it is my understanding that Medicaid is the payer of last 
resort. How will the federal grant fund be branded with Medicaid to ensure compliance 
with both federal funding streams? 
I If it is not ”medically necessary. ” This bill strikes through the clause ”as 
permitted by the availability of funds.” Does that mean that if MaineCare 
cannot bill for the service the Department is on the hook for all the costs 
indefinitely? 
I If it is determined to be ”medicaIly necessary." Are there any consequences 
with the other federal grant? For example, Medicaid is the payer of last resort. 
If MaineCare can bill for the services and the grant fund is exhausted, what is 
the overall cost to the State? 
1 
Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill 
of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970. Maine's DD Council has been advocating with and for individuals with 
developmental disabilities for over 50 years. The DD Council is a federally funded, independent organization with 
members from across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and representatives of public 
and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for services for individuals with developmental 
disabilities. As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, capacity building and systemic change 
activities, with the goal that individuals with developmental and other disabilities of all ages are fully included, 
integrated, and involved in their communities and the decisions impacting their lives. 
526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330 207-480-I478 833-713-2618 www.maineddc.org
0 Regardless of what you decide to do regarding Medicaid. Please do not remove "as permitted 
by the availability of funds." In my opinion this could put the State in a potential corner to be on 
the hook for unforeseen costs. 
I As l spoke with you in the past there are a great number of services to families for children aged 
O-5. I believe that this bill would expand the Home Visiting Services that is currently being 
provided for children aged O-3 to children aged 0-5. ls there a specific reason for that? 
' The home visiting services that are currently being delivered are important. However they are 
not coordinated well with the public health nursing and early head start work that is occurring 
to the exact same population. (Not to mention CDS and disability specific sen/ices.) I 
understand that this bill allows for perinatal doula services, how will that be connected to public 
health nursing? 
In summary, I am concerned that if passed this bill could cause unforeseen issues and confusion. 
Will it cause unforeseen costs? Will it cause signiﬁcant administrative burden reducing the 
number of children and families served? Will it cause additional confusion to families? Should 
new parents work with Public Health Nursing, Home Visiting, Children with Special Healthcare 
Needs, or Early Head Start? Should they access services through Help Me Grow, Cradle Me, 
Partners in Care, or Maine Families? 
This bill strengthens my belief that examination of the existing early childhood systems is long 
overdue. 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide input and l am available for any questions. 
Wlﬁ 
526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330 207-480-i478 833-7l3—26l8 wWw.maineddc.org
