 
Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth 
In Opposition to LD 1993, “An Act to Expand Home Visiting Services 
and Provide for Reimbursement Under the MaineCare Program for 
Perinatal Doula Services and Midwifery Services” 
Thursday, May 25, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Sarah Calder, Senior Government Affairs 
Director at MaineHealth, and I am here to express concerns with LD 1993, “An Act to Expand 
Home Visiting Services and Provide for Reimbursement Under the MaineCare Program for 
Perinatal Doula Services and Midwifery Services.”  
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a continuum of health 
care services to communities throughout Maine and New Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 
care team members support our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the 
Healthiest in America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty physician 
services to a continuum of behavioral health care services, community and tertiary hospital care, 
home health care and a lab.  
MaineHealth is committed to providing high quality and safe care to our patients, including our 
smallest patients, and we are very proud to have delivered 4,889 babies in 2021 – or over 44% of 
all the babies born in Maine. We also recognize the importance of providing supports to new 
families in the days and weeks after childbirth, and support efforts to increase access to visiting 
nurse home visits. With that said, however, we have significant concerns with LD 1993 as 
currently drafted.  
Doulas can play a very important role during and after pregnancy and childbirth, which is 
evident by the fact that, as of February 2023, 10 states  provide Medicaid coverage for their 
services. Those states, however, require doulas be certified and/or meet core competency 
requirements. LD 1993 does not require certification or training, and has the potential to require 
reimbursement for any individual providing physical, emotional, or educational support to 
pregnant MaineCare members. We would urge the Legislature to consider creating a certification 
or licensure pathway for doulas before addressing reimbursement.  
We also strongly support patient choice of provider for normal and low-risk pregnancies. Our 
goal is to ensure that women experiencing high-risk pregnancies receive appropriate maternal 
care to ensure safe and healthy deliveries. It is for that reason that we worked to introduce 
legislation this Session (LD 1205) to clarify the scope of practice of certified professional 
midwives and align their scope of practice with state statute. That legislation has been carried 
over and the Board of Professional and Financial Regulation has agreed to convene stakeholders 
over the summer and fall to address the concerns raised by both the medical community and the 
 
midwifery community. With that said, it is premature to provide MaineCare reimbursement for 
midwifery services prior to addressing these concerns.  
Thank you for your consideration of these concerns and I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have.  
