Dan Davis
Porter
LD 1057
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the CJPS 
Committee.
I represent no agency or entity, and oppose LD1057.
Given the speculation of the incomplete LD2003 law and the significant amount of 
federal subsidies available, likely housing starts in the coming years will well exceed 
4,600 residential housing permits as noted in the SFMO testimony, and it will strain 
(and break) not only SFMO staff, but municipalities as well.
A co-sponsor of this bill actually notified their constituents that LD2003, a public law 
(Chapter 672) that triples and even quadruples housing density on every single-family
residential law in the State was optional and only a guide. Mainers are still trying to 
find out if this is true, even as the state is still creating definitions and regulations to 
complete the law and will be attempting to educate the public on what the law means 
up to a month before it rolls out (July 1, 2023). 
Most municipalities also do not have and cannot retain qualified and properly paid 
code enforcement staff, due to their limited tax based and lack of central economic 
resources, or the fact that most rural communities don't believe that a code 
enforcement officer is important.
In addition, this bill converts roughly 70% of the state municipalities under 4,000 in 
population who are exempted from administering and enforcing MUBEC (for the 
same reason above, limited tax base, limited resources) back into insurance 
operatives, causing a substantive unfunded mandate across the State. How will this be
fully funded by this bill?
Finally, this bill will severely hurt many small businesses and operators throughout 
Maine who know how to build, and build well, but do not have the soft free capital 
and overhead budget to absorb undue burdens imposed by the State such as this.
Regarding ''Consumption'', the consumer has the responsibility to assume some of the 
risk and due diligence in a decision to exchange their currency (their life-blood 
conversion) into a desired service or product. It is not the primary role of the State to 
pick winners and losers and to torpedo small businesses simply for the catch-phrase 
''consumer protection''.
What statistics has the drafter of this legislation provided that indicates the number of 
faulty residential construction projects (which involve IMMINENT 
LIFE-THREATENING CONDITIONS, not the punchlist or minor pet peeves of a 
consumer), by town, by county, by district, per year, over the last 15 years? Proof has 
to be provided as to the location and scale of this ''need'' for additional consumer 
protection and to evaluate the merits of this proposal and the broad-reaching impacts 
that it will impose on market values, businesses, municipalities, and the State (not just
the consumer).
To me, it seems odd that the State would prefer to focus on protecting ''consumers'' at 
the expense of its constitutional obligations to secure the liberty, freedom, 
independence, an ability to create a life, and the attainment of happiness for all 
Mainers here in this state. Seems biased, and Mainer's will pay dearly for it if LD1057
passes.
I strongly urge the committee to OUGHT NOT TO PASS LD1057
Thank you.
Dan
