DTE?E“.;ii*~;l ’ sﬁ LEAG :13 7 " 
Hrrctméa 1-wide 
Sup_port for LD 734 — Authorizing State Treasurer to Invest in Gold 
and Silver 
The rampant inﬂation facing Americans today is largely a federal problem, but states don’t have 
to sit idly by while citizens suffer from a broken monetary system. That’s why I strongly urge 
you to vote YES on LD 734, a measure pending Committee on Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs that would simply allow the State Treasurer to protect the state by holding physical gold 
and silver. 
This measure would permit — but not require — the Treasurer to hold some portion of state funds in 
physical gold and silver to help secure state assets against the risks of inﬂation and ﬁnancial turmoil 
and/or to achieve capital gains as measured in Federal Reserve Notes. The Treasurer currently has 
only a few options for holding, managing, and investing Maine state funds (which currently amount 
to several million dollars). 
Because of market conditions and statutory constraints, Maine’s reserves are invested almost 
exclusively in low-yielding debt paper — such as corporate bonds, tax-anticipation notes, municipal 
bonds, repurchase agreements, CDs, treasuries, and money market funds. These debt instruments 
appear to have low volatility, but they carry other risks — including pernicious inﬂation and the 
steady erosion in real value of principal, coupled with interest rates that are negative in real tenns. 
LD 734 bill does not grant authority to buy stocks, futures contracts, or other ﬁnancial instruments. 
An allocation to physical gold and silver ﬁts squarely Within the objective of protecting Maine state 
funds against ﬁnancial risks and would logically be included in a list of safe investment options. The 
monetary metals can provide a hedge against inﬂation, debt default risks, and stock market declines— 
and have historically boosted investment returns while also reducing volatility. 
Texas and Ohio have previously acquired gold. Meanwhile in 2023, legislation like LD 734 is 
under consideration in Missouri, Wyoming, Idaho, Montana, Tennessee, and West Virginia. 
I urge you to vote YES on LD 734 to give Maine the basic option to own physical gold and silver. 
Thank you for your consideration.
