54 STATE HOUSE STATION 
“ AUGUSTA MAINE 04333 0054 1“! , _' 
Janet T_ Ming Laura A. Fonman 
COMMISSIONER i STATE OF MAINE 
,__ 
\ DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
U‘ 
":(§!iI 
GOVERNOR 
Testimony of Mike Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards 
Maine Department of Labor 
in Support of LD 1278 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, April 4, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. I'm Mike Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards at the 
Maine Department of Labor. l'm here today to testify in support of LD 1278 An Act to Require Timely 
Payment for Salaried Employees. 
The amendments proposed in LD 1278 are designed to correct a deficiency in current statute that is 
ambiguously constructed and has created confusion within the regulated community regarding the 
payment of wages to certain salaried employees. Currently, the Bureau regularly receives complaints 
regarding final pay from salaried employees but lacks enforcement authority because they are exempt 
under existing statutes. 
The bill clarifies that an employer is required to maintain accurate records regarding payment to 
salaried employees and to pay those employees at regular intervals and at a rate previously 
established, unless those employees are either family members or employees who are also 
stockholders of a limited liability partnership or an S corporation. 
We also note that item #1 in the summary accompanying the bill is somewhat inaccurate. In fact, the 
bill would only exempt employers from paying family members and salaried employees at regular 
intervals not to exceed 16 days. Employers would still be obligated to pay those employees at regular, 
established intervals - however, the interval may exceed 16 days. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you mayhave now 
or at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to serving Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth. 
PHONE: (207) 623-7900 TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-5292 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.
