H- 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
42 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS coL.w|1.Lré>£Fo. ROSS 
covssuoa V 
MICHAEL SAUSCI-IUCK LTC. BRIAN P. SCOTT 
COMMISSIONER DEPUTY cums 
Testimony of Lt. Col. Brian P. Scott 
131st First Regular Session 
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1436 AN Acr TO PROVIDE REMEDIES FOR ’I‘HE SURVIVORS OF 
COMMERCIAL SEXUAL EXPLOITATION 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the - 
joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Lt. Col. Brian P. Scott, and I am here today to 
testify on behalf of the Maine State Police and the Department of Public Safety in 
Opposition to LD 1436 ACT TO PROVIDE REMEDIES FOR THE SURVIVORS OF 
COMMERCIAL SEXUAL EXPLOITATION. 
As with LD 1435 we understand and support the spirit of the bill, but we are not 
conﬁdent that this legislation would reach that goal. Similarly, while, DPS does not 
take any position on Sections 1 through 9 of this bill, we should point out thata 
bill dealing with similar issues was vetoed by Governor Mills in the 130* 
Legislature. ‘ However, we do oppose Section 10, as it would require that no later 
than January 15, 2024, and biemiially thereafter, the Department of Public Safety 
shall submit to the joint standing committees of the Legislature having jurisdiction 
over health and human services matters and over criminal justice and public safety 
matters a report on the following: 1. The number of convictions in the preceding 
biennium for violations of Title 17-A, chapter 35, the total amount of ﬁnes imposed 
and the total amount of ﬁnes collected; 2. The number of requests for sealing 
records related to violations of the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 17-A, former 
section 853-A and the judicial determinations in those proceedings; and 3.A 
description of services provided by the State for survivors of commercial sexual 
exploitation, including survivors who are minors or persons with a mental 
disability. 
1 
L.D. 1592, An Act to Remove Punishrnents for Sex Selling and Decrease Demand by Increasing Penalties 
for Sex Buying, (I30"‘ Legis. 2021).
Much of the information that is required in the preceding paragraph is not yet 
created, and / or is not currently housed by nor falls under the purview of the 
Department of Public Safety. I anticipate that it would take a technology solution, 
such as a centralized database at considerable expense, in order for all police 
agencies, DHHS and others to contribute to in order to accurately collect the data 
contemplated in this bill. This would also require dozens of staff hours to develop 
the needs for this system, create a Request for Proposal, go out to bid, review bids, 
select a vendor and then actually implement such a system. It would then require 
a “system administrator, ” ongoing maintenance, data mining, preparation and the 
dissemination of the report described. 
We are dealing unprecedented low levels of stafﬁng where we are very close toa 
crisis. We are seeing more employees retiring or resigning faster than we can 
recruit, hire, and train. While our stafﬁng levels have down our responsibilities 
have gone up. Maine has seen drug overdose deaths skyrocket; homicides double, 
and fatal car crashes increasing throughout the state. The DPS has many 
incredibly hard-working individuals who are doing everything that they can to try 
and reverse these horrible trends, however they only have the capacity to do so 
much. 
We also don't have the ability to predict when the next crisis will hit the state of 
Maine. We must be ﬂexible and dynamic and shift priorities on the spot when 
unpredictable emergencies arise so we may mitigate and reduce risks associated 
when such occurrences strike. Each time statutes require the DPS to take on 
additional duties without providing additional resources or staffing we are forced 
to stop doing something else that our training, education, and experience tells us 
requires our attention. We no longer have the ability to decide what the priorities 
are in making Maine a safer place to live, work and visit, as our priorities and 
deadlines are determined by state law, such as what this bill proposes. We have 
always prided ourselves on the fact the Department of Public Safety can do 
anything that we set our minds to, however we cannot do everything. Our 
capacity bubble has burst, and we can no longer take on additional duties without 
additional stafﬁng. 
For these reasons, I urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1436. 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police, I thank 
you for your time and would be happy to try and answer any questions that you 
might have. 
45 COMMERCE DRIVE, Svrm 1, 42 STATE Housr STATION, Aucusm, ME 04333-0042 
TEL: (207) 624.7200 I TTY: (207) 287.3659 I FAX: (207) 287.3042
