 
ATTN: Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members 
of the judiciary committee,1435 
My name is Casey Bernardini I am 34 In 2015 I was a victim 
in a federal sex trafficking ring, and then after a witness. My 
trafficker took a deal and was sentenced to 30 years for 
multiple counts of trafficking across state line and trafficking of 
minors. But I also was a victim in a more recent crime of sexual 
exploitation and sex trafficking in 2023.Both of these cases 
were just as horrendous. In both cases I was subject to physical 
abuse, sexual abuse, and emotional abuse, but these 2 cases 
were handled very differently. Which Is why I ask you to 
support LD 1435 and LD 1436. 
I believe law enforcement has a very important job and a 
very crucial job of handling situations that involve women of 
sexual exploitation and woman who have been trafficked. If a 
woman is degraded, if a woman in disrespected, if a woman 
feels like she is not heard or believed, the state of Maine will 
lose vital witnesses, vital to sentencing traffickers to prison. I 
also ask you to support the repeal of the crime of engaging in 
prostitution (those who are sold are no longer arrested but 
given services.) I recognize the South Portland Police 
Department for the way they handled my situation.  
 In LD 1436 I, along with so many other women ask for 
survivors, to be able to seal prostitution records. People have 
asked me what was the worst part physical or emotional? I tell 
them the healing. I can control panic attacks, there is medicine 
for my ptsd, there is therapy for my flashbacks. But I cannot 
control the charge on my record. A charge that affects housing, 
higher education, jobs and careers, my child’s fieldtrips? I can 
not control language used to describe that exact opposite of 
the human I am. But,yet language does affect my life every day. 
I ask you weather democrat, republican, father, mother to see 
me as human. To see that I have been through enough abuse. 
Please support LD 1436 I ask you you, today April 11, 2023, to 
support this bill. This will be the type of change our children will 
read about, like rosa parks or women’s rights, please be the 
first in the State of Maine. Please make history. Please have 
conviction, instead of supporting the conviction 
 
Thank you, 
Casey Bernardini 
