April 11th 2023 Testimony of Desiree D. Demos, Senior Director of Community 
Based Programs at Living in Freedom Together-LIFT, in support of LD 1435 An 
Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation and LD 1436 An Act to Provide 
Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation.  
 
 
To Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and honorable members of the Judiciary Committee, 
my name is Desiree Demos, and I am a Survivor of Commercial Sexual Exploitation and the 
Senior Director of Community Based Programs at Living in Freedom Together-LIFT, a 
Survivor-Led organization in Worcester MA. I am writing today in strong support of LD 1435 
An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation and LD 1436 An Act to Provide Remedies for 
Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation. 
 
I am not resident of Maine, but given its proximity to Massachusetts it ensures that I work with 
many survivors who have been impacted by the sex trade in your state. 
 
When survivors exit the sex trade it is critical that they can equally access employment, 
housing, and community resources for continued exiting support. Many survivors are barred 
from accessing basic needs such as housing, and key resources in our communities due to 
criminal records associated with their exploitation. The time has come to stop penalizing 
survivors of the sex trade for our compounded victimization in the violent and oppressive 
system that is prostitution. This is the only system where it is standard operating procedure to 
charge the victim of a crime as criminals themselves, and most often not even arrest the actual 
criminal. 
 
Throughout my many years in the sex trade, I have been raped, repeatedly beaten, kidnapped, 
held hostage, and propelled into a dark hole of substance use and mental health disorders. This 
is the daily reality of the majority of those trapped in the sex trade. We need to systematically 
remove stigmatizing language used towards survivors so that their exploitation does not 
continue to define their lives. ‘Prostitute’ implies a choice, whereas ‘Exploitation’ is an act of 
violence that happened to the survivor.  
 
We need legislatures to publicly acknowledge that this is not a victimless crime by 
decriminalizing survivors, eliminating stigmatizing language in the judicial system, and 
increasing penalties for perpetrators, thus advancing civil rights in Maine, and throughout the 
nation. Please vote “ought to pass” on LDs 1435 and 1436.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 11th 2023 Testimony of Desiree D. Demos, Senior Director of Community 
Based Programs at Living in Freedom Together-LIFT, in support of LD 1435 An 
Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation and LD 1436 An Act to Provide 
Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
