H E) 
1- 
. I _~ »
o 
AMERICAN Clllll UBERTIES lJl‘liUN 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
Ought to Pass — LD 1436 
An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, and I am policy director at the 
ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and 
civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge 
you to suppoit this bill because it would help free Mainers from the debilitating unintended 
consequences of certain criminal records. q 
This is how criminal law is the supposed towork. The legislature decides that something 
is a crime. Then it designates consequences for committing the crime. These consequences are 
designed to be proportional to the crime. They can include a prison sentence, rehabilitation or 
mental health services, community service, supervised release, and still more. Unfortunately, for 
as long as there have been criminal laws — but exponentially more in the digital age - a criminal 
record has prevented people from continuing their education, getting housing, a professional 
license, credit, investments, and other features of a stable, digniﬁed life. In short, a criminal 
record has prevented millions across the country, and thousands across Maine, from moving on 
with their lives, pushing them into second-class status even after they completed their sentences. ‘ 
This bill is a necessary corrective to this harmful flaw in our criminal legal system. In 
addition to decriminalizing prostitution, it would also ensure that the criminal records of some 
people who have been convicted of this crime are sealed. Crucially, it would also establish a 
1 
The legislature was aware of this problem when, in 2019, it established a Criminal Records Review Committee, a 
bipartisan group that included lawmakers, prosecutors, law enforcement, civil liberties advocates, survivors of 
sexual trafﬁcking, representatives of the judiciary, advocates for survivors of domestic violence, and still more 
voices from a diverse array of backgrounds. The Committee ’s recommended, among other things, a constitutional 
amendment to enable the legislature to enact laws permitting people to expunge criminal records without a ,~ 
gubernatorial pardon. See Final Report of the Criminal Records Review Committee, December 2021, at l4, 
available at l1iiDSI/i'l €§ZlSiﬂiUl‘€.lﬂ3lllC.£()\ ’/(i()C/776l .
stakeholder group in DHHS to identify funds that can be used to provide necessary services to 
survivors of exploitation in the prostitution industry? Finally, this bill will direct the Department 
of Public Safety to inform the legislature about the number of convictions and ﬁnes assessed and 
collected under Chapter 35 of the Criminal Code, the number of requests for sealing records 
pursuant to this bill, and the services provided by the State, so that lawmakers have a clearer 
picture of the people that Maine’s sex trafficking, prostitution and public indecency laws affect, 
and of the number of people bills like this one might help. This bill will make our laws fairer, 
and our state more just. We urge you to vote ought to pass. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 
2 
There is no deﬁnition of commercial sexual exploitation in the bill, and we recommend that the bill be amended to 
include a deﬁnition. For reasons we discuss in our testimony on LD 1435, we do not support the crime of 
prostitution being renamed “commercial sexual exploitation ” when referring to behavior engaged in by adults.
