Testimony Submitted 4/11/2023 to the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
RE: An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitatoin - L.D. 
1436 
My Name is Nate Walsh, and I am a resident of Freeport. I am also an Assistant District 
Attorney who has worked speciﬁcally as a Human Trafficking prosecutor for about eight years. I would 
like to thank you for allowing me to offer my testimony in support of L.D. 1436. 
I am appearing before you in my personal capacity as a Mainer. I have had the privilege of 
working alongside dedicated law enforcement ofﬁcers and prosecutors who have all worked to do justice. 
We have held the guilty accountable and sought convictions for crimes that have been committed. 
However, when it comes to the crime of Engaging in Prostitution, we have often used the charge as way 
of leveraging individuals into services. Currently, a person may not be sentenced to jail for a ﬁrst-offense 
conviction of Engaging in Prostitution, and the Court is instructed to impose a ﬁne. If that person hasa 
conviction in the prior two years, the Legislature has instructed prosecutors that a deferred disposition is 
the preferred disposition to resolve the case. 
Deferred dispositions are a very helpful tool for prosecutors that allow a defendant to avoida 
conviction or have their charges or sentences reduced if they abide by a contractual agreement with the 
State. For charges involving Engaging in Prostitution, the goal would be for defendants to accept 
services. However, “servicesl ” is not a term that is easily deﬁned in this context. What exists in 
Cumberland County or Androscoggin County may not exist in Penobscot County or Aroostook County. 
This bill will help us understand how we can help survivors of trafficking and exploitation statewide. 
To go on a deferred disposition, a defendant is required to waive their trial rights and plead guilty 
at the onset of the deferred and have sentencing continued to a later date. If the Court ﬁnds thata 
violation of the deferred disposition agreement has occurred, the case usually then proceeds to sentencing 
on the charge. If there was a requirement for the individual to engage in services, and those services 
proved illusory or not compatible with the individual ’s needs, the deferred disposition has set them up to 
fail. This bill will provide us with much-needed infonnation about services to help these members of our 
communities. 
Defendants are entitled to a number of defenses to prosecution. lt’s a complete defense if they 
were compelled to engage in prostitution in a manner that would make them a victim of Aggravated Sex 
Trafficking. This defense also establishes a defense for the traffickers. It allows for a trafﬁcker to claim 
that a victim is just saying they were being trafﬁcked to save themselves from being prosecuted for 
prostitution and that they were willingly engaging in the conduct on their own. A victim of trafficking, 
potentially under threat of violence, will likely be hesitant to cooperate with law enforcement against their 
trafﬁcker if the alternative is to simply plead guilty and pay a ﬁne. Arresting a victim to attempt to 
compel them to cooperate furthers mistrust in law enforcement and the criminal justice system. 
Moreover, a trafficking victim has a constitutional right under the Fifth Amendment of the United 
States Constitution and Article I, Section 6 of the Declaration of Rights in the Maine Constitution to 
remain silent and not testify that they have committed a criminal act by Engaging in Prostitution. 
Presently, it’s an affirmative defense if they were doing so to prevent serious bodily injury, 
serious economic hardship, or another threat to themselves or someone else. To establish these defenses, 
they must also admit their guilt, but then provide evidence as to why. To guide them through this, they
will need to rely on a lawyer of the day at their arraignment, because they will not be eligible for court- 
appointed counsel after that court event, and they will need to hire their own attomey. The prosecutors 
will also not be able to talk to them directly unless they sign a waiver in open court. 
If an individual is convicted for the offense of Engaging in Prostitution, it can carry lifelong 
consequences. L.D. 1436 will provide a way for the Court to allow an individual to have this conviction 
sealed to help them live a restored life. This bill will also call together the people ﬁghting for justice for 
these victims across Maine to form a' stakeholder group so we can look at what they need to do their jobs 
better. 
For these reasons, I support L.D. 143 6, and I urge you to as well. 
Respectfully submitted, 
1/W/V Nathan R. Walsh 
Freeport, Maine
I 
is
1
\ 
42
i
r
x
5
