Ryann Whitaker, Housing Coordinator for Victims of Exploitation at LIFT 
Written Testimony In Support of LDs 1435 and 1436 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee, thank 
you for taking the time to hear testimony on this important bill. My name is Ryann Whitaker and 
I live in Worcester, MA. I work as a Housing Coordinator for Victims of Exploitation at Living 
in Freedom Together, a non-profit organization committed to ending the sex trade.  I am writing 
today to ask you to support LDs 1435  An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation and 
1436  An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation.  
While I am not a Maine resident, legislation like this matters to me and the population I 
serve. I am a mother, a woman in recovery from substance use disorder, and survivor of the sex 
trade. When I first tried to leave the oversight of my exploiter, I was threatened with a gun. I was 
told I would be shot to death. This certainly was not the first, nor the last time I experienced 
violence within that system. After fleeing the state, I was one of the fortunate few who was able 
to access services to support my journey out of homelessness, active substance use, and 
commercial sexual exploitation. More than five years after exiting the life of prostitution, I 
continue to work on unraveling the trauma and PTSD that comes with having been prostituted. 
I have experienced and witnessed the egregious violence we survivors are exposed to 
while within the systems of prostitution. Survivors are often faced with long-term effects from 
PTSD, substance used disorder, and complex mental health challenges due to the negative 
impacts of the sex trade. Not only will this bill support survivors in need but this may also help 
shift the perspective of the community by using more survivor centered language. Survivors 
should not be looked on as criminals but as people who need community support and exit 
services. My hope is that one day my daughter will live in a world where it is no longer 
normalized to purchase access to another human being. 
I urge you to please vote “ought to pass” on LDs 1435 and 1436. Thank you for your time. 
