Theresa Dumond
Lakes Region Recovery Center / CourageLives
LD 1436
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, And members of the Judiciary Committee, 
thank you for taking the time to hear testimony on this important bill. My name is 
Theresa Dumond, I live in Denmark Maine. I am writing today to ask you to support 
and LDs 1436 an act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation and LDs 1435 an act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation. I am 
here in favor of an act to provide remedies for survivors of commercial sexual 
exploitation. I'm not only here on my personal behalf I'm also here on my professional
behalf. My life almost came to an end due to my chronic drug use and not being able 
to take care of myself. my body was so polluted it ended up shutting down on me and 
I was in a coma my family came in to say goodbye. By the grace of God I woke up I 
was blessed to find the group of women that I did and the very few resources that are 
out here. The home that helped me is now turning into something else it's no longer a 
residential place for women. We need funds for this specific issue we have funds for 
domestic violence, substance abuse, but nothing for victims of exploitation or human 
trafficking. I hate telling the women that I have to help today I don't know where to 
send you. I know that you're trying to run from your pimp and have a safe place to go 
where you feel confident in yourself so you can become a productive member of 
society. But I'm sorry to tell you we don't know what to do for somebody in your 
case. those words have kept me down for way longer than I should have been down. 
as I said by the grace of God I found my group of women I think it's time we give 
other people that chance to thrive in life. Will this be easy to do no but nothing in life 
comes easy these women need resources they need clothes feminine products a place 
to lay their head food in their stomachs. If we were able to provide women with these 
basic necessities, they wouldn't have to sell their self to meet their daily needs. So 
again, I ask are you in favor of this bill are you wanting to help victims find a better 
way of living I know I am? 
