Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
 
 
April 11, 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney , Chair  
Representative Matt Moonen , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1436 – An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding OCFS opposition to LD 1436 , An Act to Provide 
Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploi tation . This bill would eliminate the crime 
of engaging in prostitution, provide for the sealing of a record for a former crime of engaging in 
prostitution , and establish a stakeholder group within the Department of Health and Human 
Services t o identify fu nds that may be used to provide services to those who have experienced 
violence associated with commercial sexual exploitation (with an associated report to the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee).  LD 1436 would also require that the Department 
of Public Safety report on the number of convictions for certain crimes, fines imposed, requests 
regarding sealing, and support services provided.  
 
OCFS is strongly supports  services  and supports  for victims of commercial sexual exploitation 
and human trafficking , but has concern about the establishment of  a stakeholder group given that 
much  of this work is already being done by the Maine Coalition to End Sexual Assault 
(MECASA) . OCFS does not cur rently have capacity to participate in or support the proposed 
workgroup in addition to the work already underway and would need additional resources to 
engage as required in this bill. Furthermore, OCFS believes that  significant stakeholder 
engagement has  already occurred  through the Crime Victimization Study and the 2022 State of 
Maine Victim Needs Assessment  (VNA) which was published last summer by the University of 
Southern Maine acting under contract with the Department to complete the Federally required 
needs assessment.  Human trafficking and  commercial sexual exploitation were a part of the 
VNA which is inte nded to inform the Department of the current needs of crime victims and 
recommend strategies for meeting those needs in accordance with the Federal Victim of Crime 
Act (VOCA) requirements . 
 
In addition , OCFS funds MECASA’s work on human trafficking. In FFY22, their contract with 
the Department facilitat ed MECASA to distribute nearly $30,000 through their Human 
Trafficking Survivor Fund to meet the immediate needs of survivors, including shelter, 
healthcare, techno logy, clothing, food, etc. MECASA also offers support group  to survivors of 
human trafficking and referrals to services of survivors.  
 
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further ques tions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dr. Todd A. Landry  
Director  
Office of Child and Family Services  
 

