 
 
 
Testimony of Yasmin Vafa, Esq.  
Executive Director, Rights4Girls  
Maine Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
April 11, 2023  
 
 
Thank you, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and H onorable Members of the Judiciary 
Committee for taking the time to consider  testimony on this important bill. My name is Yasmin 
Vafa and I am a human rights attorney and Executive Director of Rights4Girls —a national human 
rights organization based in Washington, DC. I am writing  today to ask you to support LD  1436, 
An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation.  
 
At Rights4Girls, we work to end gender -based violence against marginalized young women and 
girls throughout the United States, including right here in New England. Specifically, we work to 
change the policies that allow women and girls to be criminalized when they experience sexual 
violence, and promote approaches that provide survivors with access to safety, justice, and support. 
We do so through policy advocacy, research, and training and technical assistance. I n addition,  
we are honored to serve as member s of the U.S. Advisory Committee on the Sex Trafficking of 
Children and Youth under the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services where we provide 
national guidance, as well as expertise and co unsel to the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary 
of Health of Human Services on the nation’s response to human  trafficking .  In addition, over the 
last decade, we have served as adjunct judicial faculty for the National Judicial Institute on 
Domestic Child Sex Trafficking  where  we have trained more than 800 judges throughout the 
country on how to promote alternatives to detention for survivors of commercial sexual exploitation that appear in their courtrooms.  
 Just yesterday , our organization released a new report with the Geor getown Law Center on Gender 
Justice & Opportunity called Criminalized Survivors: Today’s Abuse to Prison Pipeline for Girls . 
The report highlights how too often, survivors are punished, blamed, and pushed into the criminal justice system because of the violence and exploitation they endure.  In fact, the Washington Post 
featured the report  and highlighted how survivors of sexual exploitation and trafficking were 
particularly vulnerable to this disturbing cycle .  
   
 
 
As advocates who work at the intersection of  justice reform and gender equality, we would like 
to voice our strong support for  LD 1436, because we believe it will help take steps to 
dismantle this injustice for survivors of exploitation in Maine . 
 
Critically, LD 1436 enables sex trade survivors to seal records of their convictions. T his is vital,  
because it recognizes that these records are what keep so many women trapped inside the industry 
and unable to exit. Research has shown that most individuals in the sex trade would like to exit  the 
industry but feel that they cannot. Often it is these ver y criminal records that keep survivors  
trapped. These records impede individuals in the sex trade  from accessing safe jobs, housing, 
education, and other opportunities outside the sex industry. LD 1436 recognizes this fundamental 
injustice and works to seal survivors’ records so that they can finally move on with their lives. It 
would be ideal if the legislation could also include an expungement component so that these 
records could be completely removed from survivors’ records once and for all.  
 
In additi on to allowing survivors to seal their records, LD 1436 also includes important provisions 
that recognize the importance of services for individuals in the sex trade. We know that in order 
to effectively exit the industry and stay out, we must adopt polici es that  i) repeal the crime of 
engaging in prostitution for survivors, ii) provide survivors criminal record relief, and iii) provide 
essential services and exit support to individuals in the sex trade .  That is why it  is absolutely 
crucial that this legis lation passes along with the bill that was heard earlier today, LD 1435, 
An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation. These bills are complimentary and must be 
passed together in order to provide the protection to truly support Maine’s survivor 
population.   
 For these reasons, we ask you to please vote “ought to pass” on LD 1436 and its complimentary 
bill, LD 1435. Please help support Maine’s survivors. 
 
 Sincerely,  
   Yasmin Vafa, Esq.  
Executive Director  
Rights4Girls  
  

