 
 
 
 
 
 
LD 1859, An Act to Reimburse Training Costs for Emergency Medical and Public Safety 
Dispatchers 
 
May 16, 2023 
 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in support of LD 1859. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
What does LD 1859 do?  LD 1859 requires the Emergency Medical Services Board to coordinate with the 
Public Utilities Commission’s Emergency Services Communication Bureau to establish a reimbursement 
schedule for the cost of training an emergency medical dispatcher or a public safety dispatcher. Additionally, 
this bill requires that when a dispatcher is hired by another governmental entity as an emergency medical 
dispatcher or public safety dispatcher within five (5) years of the first governmental entity’s incurring 
expenditures for the training, the subsequent governmental entity must provide reimbursement for training costs 
in accordance with the reimbursement schedule. 
 
Discussion.   Emergency medical dispatchers and public safety dispatchers play a crucial role in keeping our 
communities safe and healthy, and our Association recognizes the important contributions of such dispatchers. 
Counties employ many dispatchers that work in conjunction with county law enforcement and emergency 
medical personnel on a daily basis. The cost to train dispatchers is significant, and communities – including 
counties – expend significant resources each year on such training.  
 
LD 1859, if passed, would help ensure that counties are reimbursed for the investments they make in hiring and 
training emergency medical and public safety dispatchers if such dispatchers utilize that training with another 
governmental entity within five years of training. Further, Maine law already requires the sharing of training 
costs for other public safety employees such as corrections officers and law enforcement officers.  See 25 M.R.S. 
§§ 2808, 2808-A.  Under such “cost sharing” statutes, a similar reimbursement schedule as that proposed by LD 
1859 is applied to various county corrections officers and law enforcement officers. This bill aims to treat the 
expenditure of training costs for dispatchers like that of other public safety employees. For these reasons, we 
write in support.  
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1859 
May 16, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
