131st Legislature Senator Benjamin M. Chipman 
3 State House Statzon 
S€l’l6lt€ Of Mdi11€ Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
. . Oﬁce: (207) 287-1515 
Senate D 1317’ wt 28 Benjamin. Ch1pman@legislature. maine gov 
T ranspor/ation Committee, Chan 
T axafion Convrnzﬂee, Member 
Testimony of Senator Ben Chipman introducing 
LD 4 06, “An Act to Expand Passenger Rail Service” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
April 12, 2023 
Representative Williams, and Distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Transportation, my name is Ben Chipman, and I represent Senate District 28, which includes part 
of Portland in Cumberland County. I am before you today to introduce LD 406, “An Act to 
Expand Passenger Rail Service. ” 
This legislation would establish an advisory committee in order to develop a Rail Corridor Use 
Vision Plan for constructing speciﬁc rail lines throughout the state. The rail lines that this vision 
plan would cover are the Berlin Subdivision, also known as the St. Lawrence and Atlantic rail 
corridor from Portland to Auburn, the Lower Road rail corridor" from Brunswick to Augusta, the 
Mountain Division Line from Portland to Standish, and the Rockland Branch rail corridor from 
Brunswick to Rockland. As part of the study, the advisory committee would prioritize the use of 
compatible multimodal uses, such as passenger train service and freight train service. 
The core of the Industrial Revolution was the implementation of rail throughout the United 
States. The ability to transport goods across thousands of miles played a large role in the 
incredible growth of the American economy during this period. Railways remain to be important 
to the transportation infrastructure in the United States, and in Maine. Establishing this advisory 
committee would ensure that we are prioritizing our focus on upgrading and irmovating existing 
rail corridors in the state. 
Investing in railways directly addresses the current climate crisis. Rail reduces the individual 
carbon emissions, which would directly help our enviromnent in a state where the use of cars is 
the main mode of transportation. For the transportation of goods, rail would greatly improve how 
the enviromnental impact of transporting freight. A single train can carry the freight of hundreds 
of trucks, which would reduce greenhouse gas emissions by up to 75%. In a time when the fate 
of the planet is in our hands, we must prioritize rail corridors. 
Additionally, rail connects communities all over the state. This legislation speciﬁes that the 
advisory committee identify locations for train stations along each corridor, building a network 
that brings communities together. In a driving-heavy state, building new rail corridors and 
updating existing ones would increase access for low-income communities. Buying a vehicle isa 
Fax: (207) 287-1585 TTY 711’ * Message Se2"v1Ce 1’ -<‘§0{)-423-6900 *5‘ 
ieg1'sicn2n"e.maisze.gov[senc;u ‘e
131st Legislature Senator Benjamin M. Chiprnan 
3 State House Station 
S€116l1'€ Of Mame Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
. . Oﬂice: (207) Z87-1515 
Senate D1Str1Ct Benjmnin.Chzpman@legislatz1re.moinagov 
Transportation Committee, Chair 
Taxation Committee, Member 
huge barrier for someone without ﬁnancial stability and constructing railways between major 
hubs in Maine would provide larger access to necessary resources. 
Ultimately, this bill ensures that rail remains a priority when considering ways to innovate 
Maine’s infrastructure. As a rural state, rail would be transformative for many communities and 
our economy. Now is the time that we ensure the future of Maine by investing in rail. 
Thank you for your consideration and I would be happy to answer questions. 
Fax." (207) 287-1585 * TT)’ 71] Message Service I-<3‘{}()-423-6900 legisiafzzre. maii1e.gov/senate
