MRG, lnc. (Maine Rail Group) 
PO Box 5494 
Augusta, ME 04332 
httgzflmainerailgrougorg 
Working to enhance rail services in Maine and New England 
TO: Honorable Chairs and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
PLEASE VOTE TO PASS LD 860 AND LD 406 IN SUPPORT OF PASSENGER RAIL IN MAINE; HERE'S WHY: 
Passenger Rail for State-Owned Corridors 
Amtrak's Downeaster came to Portland Maine in 2001. Later it reached Brunswick and served annually 
more than 550,000 pre-pandemic riders. Maine demonstrates expertise to administer and operate the 
Downeaster through NNEPRA, Amtrak, TrainRiders Northeast and the communities served. Maine can 
leverage this expertise to extend passenger services through Augusta and Lewiston to Waterville and 
Bangor, westward to Conway Scenic Railroad and from Portland to Montreal. 
Under aegis of Maine Department of Transportation (MeDOT) Regional Transportation Advisory 
Committees (RTACs) in 2001-2003, and leadership of the Bangor City Council, municipalities along active 
rail lines and idle state—owned corridor between Augusta and Brunswick, adopted resolutions to identify 
and save the Portland-Brunswick-Augusta-Waterville~Bangor rail corridor as a future passenger route 
linking southern and northern Maine. Since then, passenger rail from Portland to Lewiston —Auburn was 
studied. The Augusta City Council resolved to study passenger service from Brunswick through Augusta 
to Waterville and Bangor. Public interest exists for both routes, which formerly operated in coordination. 
State-owned rail corridors from Gardiner to Topsham, Portland to Auburn, and Portland to Fryeburg, are 
now eyed for recreational trails. Such conversions billed as temporary will be difﬁcult to reclaim for rail 
once trails are established. Maine's State Capital will be isolated from future passenger rail service. 
Maine abounds with opportunities for recreational trails without destroying major corridors reserved for 
railroads. Trails can co-exist with railroads where safe separation is maintained. National attention has 
shifted towards passenger rail expansion. The transportation, environmental, economic development 
and tourism potentials offered by rail should not be foreclosed by myopic corridor conversion to trails. 
Maine should act now to support expanded rail services: 
0 View passenger rail as an extension of Amtrak and Amtrak's Northeast Corridor; 
0 Maine rail must connect with the interstate rail system — 
not be myopically limited at state lines; 
0 Preserve key state-owned corridors for railroad use; 
~ Study and reactivate key corridors - prioritized according to transportation demand; environmental 
beneﬁts, related economic development and tourism potentials; 
0 Pursue available federal funding for development and operation of key rail expansions; 
0 Follow, evaluate and apply new rail-related technologies that offer opportunities for Maine; 
¢ Encourage TIDC involvement (Transportation infrastructure Durability Center) at UMO; 
0 Apply administrative and operating experience derived from the Downeaster, NNEPRA and Amtrak; 
1 Include visions for an integrated passenger rail system in future Maine State Railroad Plans; 
I Focus on the ”Last Mile" connections that are important to passenger rail utilization. 
Jack Sutton, MRG, Inc. Past President & Director April 10, 2023 
§;t_ggtten@r0adrunner.com 207-495-3498
