Jason Ronco
Falmouth
LD 406
From: Jason Ronco, Falmouth, Maine
In support of LD406
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and Members of the Transportation 
Committee,
Good afternoon,
I have lived at 129 Middle Road in Falmouth for 27 years.  We all agree that 
Falmouth and its surrounding towns/environs are a great place to live.  And that's why
I have serious concerns about a public trail basically being in my backyard.  Here's 
why-the train tracks are in my backyard, about 40 feet from my house.  The track 
property abuts my property.  At first glance, the idea of a public trail on old train 
tracks sounds great.  I'm all for exercise outdoors, in nature, but not in my backyard.  
(Yes, NIMBY)!  My house and my backyard would be totally exposed to the people 
on the tracks/proposed trail.  Having people riding or walking on this trail hugely 
impacts my privacy and sense of security on my property, in my house.  Passersby 
would easily be able to look at me and my family as they pass by.  There would be 
nothing that I could do about that.  That's creepy!  It's already bad enough that I-295 is
just on the other side of the rail tracks.  The noise from I-295 is atrocious.  My 
bedroom and bathroom windows at the exact same eye level as this proposed trail.  
What prevents people from being on the trail at night, when it's dark?  On the other 
side of my house is Route 9/Middle Road which has become a very busy road where 
many drivers regularly go well over the speed limit of 35 mph., endangering my 
family, dog and negatively impacting my quality of life.  I use the backyard often for 
gardening, small bon fires, and playing with my dog and kids.  I'm an extrovert but 
the idea of having strangers walk, run or bike by my backyard is quite unsettling.  
Additionally, how much trash/litter will end up in my backyard?   Would I need to 
sell the house and move elsewhere If the trail is developed, would I need to sell my 
home?  And would the value of my house have decreased?  (Yet another (huge) 
negative impact).  I certainly do not think that a trail would increase its value.  
I appreciate your time, consideration and thoughtfulness regarding this issue and with 
everything else that you do as legislators.  I urge you to support LD406/860.  How the
tracks get utilized definitely needs a lot more thought.  
Thank you.
Sincerely,
Jason Ronco
129 Middle Road
Falmouth, Maine
