 
Technology Association of Maine  
Connecting Technology, Community & Education  
 
 
3 Middle R d 
Cumberland , Maine  04021 
207-200-3633  
www.TechMaine.com  
 
April 8, 2023 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Transportation Committee  
 
My name is Joe Kumisz cza, of Cumberland Maine. I am testifying in support of LD 40 6: Resolve, Directing the 
Department of Transportation To Develop and Adopt a Rail Corridor Use Vision Plan for State of Maine -
Owned Railroads  
  
I am a resident of Cu mberland and an abutter to the proposed Casco Bay trail. I state my support for LD 406 to 
develop a rail corridor use vision plan. The highest and best use of the corridor is for rail travel. Use for non -rail 
activities is not in the public's interest. Rai l is the best option for bringing economic benefit to the corridors.  
  
We in the technology sector are very aware of "networks." Maine's railway system is a network that must remain in 
place. This is not the time to reduce or diminish our transportation in frastructure. The state is wise to develop and 
adopt a rail corridor use vision plan for State of Maine owned railroads. Transformative new technologies are 
having and will continue to have incredible impacts on how we work, live, and travel. We must not u nderestimate 
the value of our current transportation infrastructure. The demolition of Union Station in Portland is the perfect 
example of what happens when rail is underestimated. We can't afford to remove current rail lines and repeat that 
mistake.  
  
Proponents for the Casco Bay Trail had a strong influence on the community to support their trail initiative. They 
succeeded in keeping information about the plan away from abutters to the trail. The fact that this group took the 
position of keeping abutters out-of-the-loop makes me believe that much is being hidden from the community. From 
what I have seen from other similar rail/trail groups they have been counseled to establish direct communication 
with abutters, but most often fail to do so. Trail proponen ts and developers may not change abutters' way of life 
without including them in the process. Our area has an abundance of trails and recreational opportunities, but we 
suffer from a lack of transportation alternatives.  
  
In the RUAC comments Train Riders Northeast highlighted some very important points. It seems that State 
purchase of rail lines by taxpayer bonds requires that the bond funds be used to promote rail, and not trail. If trail 
use is developed than abutters will likely be making claim to the l and as owners in fee and assert their rights as 
claimants in this process. Abandonment of a rail bed often means the property reverts to the private landowners 
from whom the railroad took it.  
  
I hope the State of Maine will aggressively pursue the establi shment of a more robust commuter rail system across 
the state to provide sustainable public transportation, including the SLA line from Portland to Auburn.  
  
I appreciate this opportunity to comment on the restoration and future use of Maine's rail corrido rs and reiterate my 
opening statement that the highest and best use of the corridor is for rail travel. Non -rail use is not in the public’s 
interest.  
  
Please support passing LD 406 To Develop and Adopt a Rail Corridor Use Vision Plan for State of Maine -
Owned Railroads  
Sincerely,  
 
 
Joseph F. Kumiszcza  
President  

