April 12, 2023 
Testimony of Patricia Quinn 
Northern New England Passenger Rail Authority 
Before the 131"‘ Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Neither For nor Against 
LD 406 
An Act to Expand Passenger Rail Services 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Patricia Quinn and I am the Executive Director of the 
Northern New England Passenger Rail Authority (NNERPA). NNEPRA is neither for nor against 
LD 405, An Act to Expand Passenger Rail Services. Because this bill is a concept draft, NNEPRA is 
unable to take a definitive position, but would like provide the committee with information 
regarding passenger rail improvement and expansion efforts. 
NNEPRA was established for the general purpose of promoting passenger rail service and is 
directed to take all actions reasonably necessary to do so. NNEPRA managed the construction 
and service development activities to initiate the Amtrak Downeaster in 2001 and remains 
actively involved in all facets of day-to-day operations to deliver quality and seamless passenger 
rail service that meets the needs of the traveling public and provides public benefit. To date, 
the Downeaster has transported nearly 9 million riders more than 650 million passenger miles. 
The NNEPRA Team is committed to continual improvement and has planned and managed 
numerous operating and capital projects which have increased and expanded Downeaster 
service and the passenger experience. Construction on the Wells Area Improvement Project, 
which will improve reliability and add service between Brunswick and Wells, is underway. A 
series of Strategic Objectives, which have been identified in the Maine State Rail Plan, are also 
being pursued to diversify Downeaster ridership and expand mobility within and to l\/laine. 
These include the relocation of Portland Station to reduce passenger travel time and increase 
access to employment hubs, the addition of a station in West Falmouth to improve access to 
the l-95 Corridor and reduce Vl\/lT’s, a pilot program to evaluate connecting service to Rockland 
to improve mobility and mitigate congestion on Route 1, and technology improvements to 
streamline connections to the Amtrak National Network in Boston. 
In addition, NNEPRA works closely with MaineDOT and actively participates with transportation 
organizations and planning efforts at the local, state, regional and national level to understand 
and monitor transportation, economic, social and environmental trends and opportunities. This 
includes the Maine State Rail Plan, as well as propensity, economic and service planning studies 
for services between Portland and Lewiston/Auburn and Bangor. 
75 West Commercial Street, Suite 104, Portland, l\/laine 04105 207-780-1000 nnepra.com
Earlier this month, NNEPRA submitted an application for the Downeaster Corridor (Rockland— 
Boston) into the Federal Railroad Administration's (FRA) Corridor lD Program. lf accepted into 
this new Program, created by the Bipartisan infrastructure Law (BIL), NNEPRA will receive 
federal funding to complete and update the 2016 Service Development Plan (SDP). Train 
frequencies, speeds, trip times, existing and proposed station locations and rolling stock needs 
will be explored in the SDP as well as connections with other passenger transportation services 
environmental benefits, impacts on highway congestion, energy consumption, land use, and 
economic development. CSX Transportation, owner of the rail lines in l\/IE and NH, has agreed 
to cooperate with NNEPRA on future projects to improve the rail lines over which the 
Downeaster operates to support improved and/or increased passenger service. Amtrak has 
also agreed to work with NNEPRA on service improvement and expansion projects. The SDP 
process will develop operating, capital improvement, financial and implementation plans to 
improve, enhance or expand passenger rail service. In addition, Downeaster Corridor projects 
identified by the SDP will be prioritized in discretionary grant opportunities offered by the US 
Department of Transportation. 
The Northern New England Passenger Rail Authority works every day to provide the leadership 
and support to deliver passenger rail services that meets and exceeds the expectations of our 
customers, delivers value and benefit to the public and to contributes to a safe, efficient and 
integrated transportation system.
