TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF “AN ACT REGARDING THE ISSUING OF DIPLOMAS 
FOR STUDENTS AT THE LONG CREEK YOUTH DEVELOPMENT CENTER” 
March 23, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Bremian, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: my name is Jamie Nohr. I am an intern with the 
Youth Center for Policy and Law and am here today to testify in favor of “An Act Regarding the 
Issuing of Diplomas for Students at the Long Creek Youth Development Center.” 
Ma;ine’s new record sealing bill, passed in 2021, allows for certain low-level juvenile 
offenses to be automatically sealed.‘ Sealing means that outside of law enforcement, the courts, 
and the youth, the record is confidential. Unless a youth is applying for a job with the federal 
government, they likely do not need to disclose the adjudication to a potential employer or 
potential post-secondary educational institution. Receiving a diploma from the Arthur R. Gould 
School (A.R. Gould) creates the possibility that a youth’s record may be sealed, but in practice 
this record is not actually conﬁdential. 
Youth at Long Creek are educated by A.R. Gould, “an accredited, public, diploma- 
granting high school and alternative academic program for youth in the care of the Maine 
Department of Corrections. ” At A.R. Gould, “[t]he goal of the educational program is to ensure 
that all students receive academics, aligned with State and National standards, that are relevant, 
engaging, and designed to prepare students for re-entry into the community. ”3 Even though A.R. 
Gould is accredited as a school independent of Long Creek Youth Development Center, there is 
no separating the school from the broader organization. For example, a college admissions 
' 
15 M.R.S. §3308—C 
2 Arthur R. Gould School Brochure, https://www.maine.gov/corrections/sites/maine.gov.corrections/ ﬁles/inline 
ﬁles/AR%20Gould%20Website%202020-Final%20Draft%208.l3.20%20sj.pdf (last visited 
3 
Id.
1
officer is generally reading applications for a speciﬁc region or state. They are responsible for 
knowing the high schools within their territory and When they receive an application froma 
school they haven’t heard from, they Will likely do research on that high school. When you 
google the A.R. Gould School, the second link is to the Department of Corrections Website, with 
D.O.C. in the header of the search result. Once on that page, there is no text, but the A.R. Gould 
School is nested under the Long Creek Youth Development Center page. Although this makes 
sense logically, given its location and the youth it serves, it means that any youth with a diploma 
from A.R. Gould School is immediately associated with Long Creek Youth Development Center, 
essentially nullifying the purpose of the sealing records legislation. Even if they are able to 
demonstrate competence and ability to succeed in post-secondary classes, they will still be 
judged and evaluated for the fact that they were incarcerated at Long Creek when they apply to 
attend further education. Requiring that a diploma be issued from a high school tied to Long 
Creek runs contrary to the purpose of the sealing law which seeks to minimize the stigma of 
justice system involvement. 
For students who are not seeking to apply to post-secondary education, the fact that their 
diploma is issued by a school inside of Long Creek could still impact their ability to get a job. 
Jobs ask Where people went to school and disclosing that a high school diploma is from the A.R. 
Gould School also discloses that an applicant spent time at Long Creek, which then raises 
questions about why they were incarcerated, defeating the purpose of record sealing. Because 
diplomas are issued by A.R. Gould and linked to incarceration at Long Creek Youth 
Development Center, some youth may opt to take a high school equivalency exam instead, so as 
not to permanently have their education tied to their incarceration. Although a diploma anda 
high school equivalency are technically equal, there are a number of ways they create further
2
educational and health gaps among recipients. For example, one study found that “Those witha 
high school equivalency have “about twice the odds of self-reported ‘worse’ health and physical 
limitations than a high school diploma. ”4 This study found that “[a]dults with GEDs have health 
comparable to high school graduates who are up to [twenty] years older.”5 
Maine needs a policy that addresses this conﬂict and gives administrators guidance that 
fosters student choice and clearly explains the choices available to students for graduating. The 
staff at Long Creek Youth Development Center and the A.R. Gould School are all clearly 
invested in a youth’s educational attainment. However, this leadership will not always be the 
same, thus it is important to develop a policy to ensure that future students receive the same 
guidance about their choices for graduating and the consequences that come with those choices. 
Establishing a policy that provides administrators with guidance on counseling graduating youth is 
just one way that Maine can help combat the challenges facing incarcerated youth and continue to 
ensure that a youth’s juvenile record remains sealed and conﬁdential as imagined by the record 
sealing bill. 
Although this policy would be relatively minor overall, it has the potential to makea 
difference for youth incarcerated at Long Creek Youth Development Center who earn a high 
school diploma while there. A resolve‘ 
will provide that guidance for students exists beyond the 
current administrators and will ensure that the spirit of Maine’s record sealing laws is honored so 
that all youth have the option of a successful transition into their communities. 
4 Id. 
5 Id. This study also found that those with GEDs have health outcomes not only worse than those with high school 
diplomas, but also those who dropped out of high school. Id.
3
Today I ask you to vote for ensuring that all Maine students are able move on from past 
harms and transition successfully into adulthood by supporting “An Act Regarding the Issuing of 
Diplomas for Students at the Long Creek Youth Development Center.”
4
