Administrative Offices: 277 Cumberland Avenue, PO Box 7830, Portland, ME 04112
T: (207) 874-1069  |  E: info@bgcmaine.org  |  W: www.bgcmaine.org  |  F: (207) 874-1074
March 22, 2023  
 
My name is Fayla Sutton; I am writing this letter in support of LD 974, An Act to Support the Distribution 
of Free Summer Lunches. Currently, I work as The Bridge to Success Coach at The Portland Boys and 
Girls Club, but previously I served as Resident Service Coordinator for 3 of Portland Housing Authority’s 
family sites, Riverton, Sagamore, and Kennedy Park, serving families with up to 12 children. In my role at 
Portland Housing Authority, I worked very closely with the study centers on site, which were partners 
for the summer lunch program. I assisted with the meal program in the summer of 2022.  
My role as resident service coordinator was focused on helping residents meet their basic needs. It 
quickly became evident to me that food insecurity was the greatest need. While there are many services 
in the area that support access to food, in the summer when parents are working and providing 
childcare, these services become a bit harder to access.  
In my time assisting with the summer meals program, we ran into some challenges around the timing 
and availability of meals. In the communities I was working in, many parents are working multiple jobs 
and rely heavily on childcare in the summer months. This, combined with a challenge in communication 
to parents that are multilingual, made it difficult for children to get their meals on time. In my role, I was 
seeing the impact of the missed meals as children who missed them would come to me looking for food. 
This was a daily occurrence.  
For families with many children and that are working multiple jobs the summer meal program is a saving 
grace during the day. Due to the restrictions on timing, many families are missing this opportunity. For 
this reason, I have written this testimony in support of LD 947 An Act to Support the Distribution of Free 
Summer Lunches.  
 
All the best, 
Fayla Sutton  
fsutton@bgcmaine.org 
Fayla Sutton
Portland/ Boys and Girls Club 
LD 947
March 22, 2023  
 
My name is Fayla Sutton; I am writing this letter in support of LD 974, An Act to 
Support the Distribution of Free Summer Lunches. Currently, I work as The Bridge to
Success Coach at The Portland Boys and Girls Club, but previously I served as 
Resident Service Coordinator for 3 of Portland Housing Authority’s family sites, 
Riverton, Sagamore, and Kennedy Park, serving families with up to 12 children. In 
my role at Portland Housing Authority, I worked very closely with the study centers 
on site, which were partners for the summer lunch program. I assisted with the meal 
program in the summer of 2022.  
My role as resident service coordinator was focused on helping residents meet their 
basic needs. It quickly became evident to me that food insecurity was the greatest 
need. While there are many services in the area that support access to food, in the 
summer when parents are working and providing childcare, these services become a 
bit harder to access.  
In my time assisting with the summer meals program, we ran into some challenges 
around the timing and availability of meals. In the communities I was working in, 
many parents are working multiple jobs and rely heavily on childcare in the summer 
months. This, combined with a challenge in communication to parents that are 
multilingual, made it difficult for children to get their meals on time. In my role, I was
seeing the impact of the missed meals as children who missed them would come to 
me looking for food. This was a daily occurrence.  
For families with many children and that are working multiple jobs the summer meal 
program is a saving grace during the day. Due to the restrictions on timing, many 
families are missing this opportunity. For this reason, I have written this testimony in 
support of LD 947 An Act to Support the Distribution of Free Summer Lunches.  
 
All the best, 
Fayla Sutton  
fsutton@bgcmaine.org 
