PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org
March 22, 2023
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs in support 
of LD 947, An Act to Support the Distribution of Free Summer Lunches for Children and to Create a Program 
to Distribute Leftover School Food Within Communities
To Chairperson Rafferty, Chairperson Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs,
My name is Rebekah Lane and I am the Community Organizer for Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine. I am 
here today to express our support, and ask for your support, of LD 947, An Act to Support the Distribution of 
Free Summer Lunches for Children and to Create a Program to Distribute Leftover School Food Within 
Communities.
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access to nutritious 
food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the public in the fight to end 
hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 600 organizations to help distribute food 
to community members in need. Our network of partner agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior 
centers, school programs, and healthcare facilities. In our work centering equity, we are increasingly working 
with communities of color to address food security in a culturally responsive way. 
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in Maine. Working in partnership with the state 
legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make Maine a stronger, better 
place to work and live.
Hunger doesn’t end with the school year, and the Summer Food Service Program for Maine is vital for many 
Maine children experiencing hunger. But like all aspects of hunger, how to best meet the needs of those 
children varies across the state. Some Summer Meal Sites do best paired with a free local summer camp, like 
the one at the Thomaston Public Library, while other’s see participation increase when meals are delivered, 
and where delivery isn’t feasible the best scenario can be a pick up day that allows families to receive up to 
10 days worth of meals at once. 
In the DOE Summer Food Service Program report for the 2022 season, two-thirds of respondents, when 
asked for their suggestions, commented on needing flexibility to best service their communities. The majority 
of those comments directly stated that non-congregate options were felt to provide the greatest impact in 
participation. 
Transportation and proximity to grocery stores both impact a families ability to access food during the 
summer months, including summer meal sites.  Physically getting to a summer meal site isn’t the only barrier, 
when the meals are available also plays a big role in a families ability to participate. Most working parents 
aren’t going to be able to utilize an 11am-1pm pick up window to get lunch for their child each day. 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org
We believe this bill will increase access to food during the summer months for kids who might otherwise go 
hungry. The flexibility to choose how to best serve the community needs is integral to the work of combatting 
hunger in the summer months.  
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony.
Sincerely,
Rebekah Lane
Community Organizer
rlane@gfsb.org
207-577-6656
