g A MAINE HOUSE OF 
r REPRESENTATIVES Z STATE HOUSE STATION, AUGUSTA, ME Q4333‘ 
Sophie B. Warren 
State Representative 
P.O. Boxl 
Scarborough. ME 04070 
(207) 450-0765 
Sophie.Warrcn(¢1lcgislaturc.mainc.gov 
LD 947, An Act to Support the Distribution of Free Summer Lunches for Children and to Create 
a Program to Distribute Leftover School Food Within Communities 
Good morning Chair Rafferty, Chair Brennan and respected members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Sophie Warren and I am fortunate to serve as representative for 
Scarborough district 124. I am here today to share with you the bill LD 947, An Act to Support the Distribution 
of Free Summer Lunches for Children and to Create a Program to Distribute Leftover School Food Within 
Communities. 
The bill l ask your support of today seeks to give community partners and site who distribute free 
summer lunches to Maine kids the most ﬂexibility possible within federal guidelines so that unused food within 
those under federal regulations does not go to waste. The Summer Food Service Program (SFSP)1 is a federally- 
funded, state-administered program? What SF SP does is provide the ﬁnancial support and certain regulatory 
guidelines with reimbursement to program operators who serve. The SFSP was established to ensure low- 
income children continue to receive nutritious meals during the summer months when school is not in session. 
The Southern Maine Boys and Girls Club came to me with this bill, though I know it is an issue many 
communities across the state have to deal with and ﬁnd well-meaning regulations leaves kids hungry and food 
wasted within the very nonproﬁt sites intended to address food insecurity for Maine kids. 
While you will hear from one site, we know this is not an experience unique to the Boys and Girls 
Club. The Department of Education has reported on suggested improvements of their Summer Food Service 
Program and two-thirds of respondents in summer 2022 report3 commented on the need for greater ﬂexibility to 
better serve their communities, including making speciﬁc mention of greater non-congregate options to provide 
the greatest impact in participation. 
There will be site providers after me who have had direct experience with the Program and I would ask 
you reserve your questions for them, as they have graciously made themselves available to us today by Zoom 
and appreciate this opportunity to discuss their experiences with this committee today. Thank you for your time 
and consideration. 
1 Summer Food Service Program (SFSP), Maine Department of Education, https://www.maine.gov/doe/schooIs/nutrition/programs/sfsp. 
2 2022 Summer Food Service Program Updates, Maine Department of Education, https://www.maine.gov/doe/sites/maine.gov.doe/fi|es/inline-fi|es/ 
2022%20SFSP%2OSponsor%20Updates.pdf. 
3 Maine Department of Education Child Nutrition Services Summer Food Service Program Outreach Project 2022 Expansion and Areas ot Focus Recommendations Report, 
September 28, 2022, Maine DOE, https://www.maine.gov/doe/sites/maine.gov.doe/files/inIine-tiles/2022%2OSFSP%200utreach%20Fieport%20.pdf. 
District 124: (Coastal part) Scarborough
