Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 739
S.P. 297 In Senate, February 16, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Empower the Legislature to Allow the Expungement or 
Sealing of Certain Criminal Records
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator HICKMAN of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative DILL of Old Town and
Senators: BAILEY of York, BEEBE-CENTER of Knox, HARRINGTON of York, 
Representatives: ANDREWS of Paris, BOYER of Poland, FAULKINGHAM of Winter 
Harbor, HASENFUS of Readfield, Speaker TALBOT ROSS of Portland.

Page 1 - 131LR2120(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง24 is enacted to read:
5Section 24.  Power to expunge or seal criminal records.  The Legislature may 
6 enact laws to allow for the expungement or sealing of a criminal record on the completion 
7 of a sentence served by a person convicted of certain crimes, as the Legislature considers 
8 best to rehabilitate convicted persons, protect the public safety and advance restorative 
9 justice.
10Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
11Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
12 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
13 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
14 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
15 resolution by voting upon the following question:
16 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to allow the Legislature 
17 to enact laws to allow for the expungement or sealing of a criminal record 
18 on the completion of a sentence served by a person convicted of certain 
19 crimes?"
20 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
21 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
22 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
23 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
24 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
25 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
26 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
27 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
28Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
29 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
30 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
31SUMMARY
32 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to enact a provision to 
33 allow for the expungement or sealing of a criminal record on the completion of a sentence 
34 served by a person convicted of certain crimes.32
33
34
