 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1604
S.P. 636 In Senate, April 11, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Extend the Time That a Signature on a Petition for a 
Direct Initiative of Legislation Is Valid
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BENNETT of Oxford.
Cosponsored by Senators: BRAKEY of Androscoggin, HICKMAN of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 131LR2347(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub-ยง2 is amended to read:
52.  Referral to electors unless enacted by the Legislature without change; 
6number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating signatures 
7on petitions; competing measures.  For any measure thus proposed by electors, the 
8 number of signatures shall not be less than 10% of the total vote for Governor cast in the 
9 last gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such petition.  The date each signature 
10 was made shall be written next to the signature on the petition.  A signature is not valid if 
11 it is dated more than one year 18 months prior to the date that the petition was filed in the 
12 office of the Secretary of State.  The measure thus proposed, unless enacted without change 
13 by the Legislature at the session at which it is presented, shall be submitted to the electors 
14 together with any amended form, substitute, or recommendation of the Legislature, and in 
15 such manner that the people can choose between the competing measures or reject both. 
16 When there are competing bills and neither receives a majority of the votes given for or 
17 against both, the one receiving the most votes shall at the next statewide election to be held 
18 not less than 60 days after the first vote thereon be submitted by itself if it receives more 
19 than 1/3 of the votes given for and against both.  If the measure initiated is enacted by the 
20 Legislature without change, it shall not go to a referendum vote unless in pursuance of a 
21 demand made in accordance with the preceding section. The Legislature may order a 
22 special election on any measure that is subject to a vote of the people.
23Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
24Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
25 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
26 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
27 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
28 resolution by voting upon the following question:
29 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to extend from one 
30 year to 18 months the period of time that signatures are valid on a petition 
31 for a direct initiative of legislation?"
32 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
33 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
34 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
35 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
36 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
37 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
38 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
39 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
40Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
41 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
42 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
Page 2 - 131LR2347(01)1SUMMARY
2 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to extend from one year 
3 to 18 months the period of time that signatures are valid on a petition for a direct initiative 
4 of legislation.2
3
4
