 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 928
H.P. 575 House of Representatives, March 2, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Establish a Right to a Clean and Healthy Environment
Reference to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative O'NEIL of Saco.
Cosponsored by Representative WARREN of Scarborough, Senator BENNETT of Oxford and
Representatives: CRAFTS of Newcastle, JAUCH of Topsham, PLUECKER of Warren, RANA 
of Bangor, RIELLY of Westbrook, Senator: DAUGHTRY of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 131LR1341(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. I, ยง26 is enacted to read:
5Section 26. Environmental rights.  The people of the State have the right to a 
6 clean and healthy environment and to the preservation of the natural, cultural and healthful 
7 qualities of the environment. The State may not infringe upon these rights. The State shall 
8 conserve, protect and maintain the State's natural resources, including, but not limited to, 
9 its air, water, land and ecosystems for the benefit of all the people, including generations 
10 yet to come.
11Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
12Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
13 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
14 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
15 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
16 resolution by voting upon the following question:
17 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to grant the people of 
18 the State a right to a clean and healthy environment and to the preservation 
19 of the natural, cultural and healthful qualities of the environment?"
20 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
21 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
22 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
23 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
24 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
25 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
26 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
27 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
28Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
29 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
30 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
31SUMMARY
32 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to grant the people of the 
33 State a right to a clean and healthy environment and to the preservation of the natural, 
34 cultural and healthful qualities of the environment.32
33
34
