 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 937
H.P. 584 House of Representatives, March 2, 2023
Resolve, to Establish the Commission Regarding Foreign-trained 
Physicians Living in Maine
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CLOUTIER of Lewiston.
Cosponsored by Speaker TALBOT ROSS of Portland, Senator CURRY of Waldo and
Representatives: ABDI of Lewiston, DHALAC of South Portland, PERRY of Calais, RIELLY 
of Westbrook, ROBERTS of South Berwick, ZAGER of Portland, Senators: RAFFERTY of 
York, ROTUNDO of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 131LR0616(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, this legislation establishes the Commission Regarding Foreign-trained 
4 Physicians Living in Maine to study integrating foreign-trained physicians into the health 
5 care workforce; and
6Whereas, this legislation must take effect before the expiration of the 90-day period 
7 so that the commission may timely meet and make its report to the Legislature; and
8Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
9 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
10 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
11 therefore, be it
12Sec. 1.  Commission established.  Resolved:  That the Commission Regarding 
13 Foreign-trained Physicians Living in Maine, referred to in this resolve as "the commission," 
14 is established.
15Sec. 2.  Commission membership.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 
16 353, the commission consists of 16 members appointed as follows:
17 1.  Two members of the Senate, appointed by the President of the Senate, at least one 
18 of whom must be a member of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
19 Economic Advancement and Business;
20 2.  Two members of the House of Representatives, appointed by the Speaker of the 
21 House of Representatives, at least one of whom must be a member of the Joint Standing 
22 Committee on Health and Human Services;
23 3.  One member who is a representative of the Board of Licensure in Medicine, 
24 appointed by the President of the Senate;
25 4.   One member who is a representative of the Maine Hospital Association, appointed 
26 by the President of the Senate;
27 5.  One member who is a representative of insurance carriers in the State, appointed by 
28 the President of the Senate;
29 6.  One member who is a representative of the New Mainers Resource Center, 
30 appointed by the President of the Senate;
31 7.   Three members who are physicians who are refugees or immigrants, 2 of whom are 
32 appointed by the President of the Senate, at least one of whom must be licensed to practice 
33 in the State, and one of whom is appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives;
34 8.  Two members who are representatives of the Maine Medical Association, appointed 
35 by the Speaker of the House of Representatives;
36 9.  One member who is a representative of the Maine Public Health Association, 
37 appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives;
38 10.  One member who is a representative of the Maine Immigrants' Rights Coalition, 
39 appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; and
Page 2 - 131LR0616(01)1 11.  One member from the staff of the Office of the Governor, appointed by the 
2 Governor.
3Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the first-named Senate member is the Senate chair 
4 and the first-named House of Representatives member is the House chair of the 
5 commission.
6Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of commission. Resolved:  That all 
7 appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 
8 resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 
9 Council once all appointments have been completed. After appointment of all members, 
10 the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the commission.  If 30 days or more 
11 after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 
12 made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority for 
13 the commission to meet and conduct its business.
14Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the commission shall study integrating foreign-
15 trained physicians living in the State into the health care workforce to best reflect their level 
16 of skills and training, with a focus on those who are here as refugees and asylum seekers.  
17 The commission shall explore a wide range of options for how to help enable foreign-
18 trained physicians who wish to live and practice in the State to best use their skills and 
19 talents, increase health care workforce cultural competency and address potential 
20 workforce shortages.  The commission shall make recommendations on:
21 1.  Strategies to integrate foreign-trained physicians into the health care workforce;
22 2.  Other ways, outside of being licensed as a physician, that foreign-trained physicians 
23 can be supported to best use their skills and training;
24 3.  Changes for regulations that may pose unnecessary barriers to practice for foreign-
25 trained physicians;
26 4.  Necessary supports for foreign-trained physicians moving through the different 
27 steps in the licensing process prior to involvement with the Board of Licensure in Medicine;
28 5.  Opportunities to advocate for corresponding changes to national licensing 
29 requirements; and
30 6.  Any other matters pertaining to foreign-trained physicians considered necessary by 
31 the commission.
32 The commission shall review and identify best practices learned from similar efforts in 
33 other states.  The commission may hold hearings and invite testimony from experts and the 
34 public to gather information.  The commission may develop guidelines for full licensure 
35 and conditional licensure of foreign-trained physicians and recommendations for the types 
36 of strategies, programs and support that would benefit foreign-trained physicians to use the 
37 fullest extent of their training and experience.
38Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Legislative Council shall provide 
39 necessary staffing services to the commission, except that Legislative Council staff support 
40 is not authorized when the Legislature is in regular or special session.
Page 3 - 131LR0616(01)1Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 6, 2023, the commission 
2 shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 
3 legislation, for presentation to the Second Regular Session of the 131st Legislature.
4Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
5 takes effect when approved.
6SUMMARY
7 This resolve creates the Commission Regarding Foreign-trained Physicians Living in 
8 Maine to study integrating foreign-trained physicians living in the State into the health care 
9 workforce to best reflect their level of skills and training, with a focus on those who are 
10 here as refugees and asylum seekers.7
8
9
10
