 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1531
H.P. 986 House of Representatives, April 5, 2023
Resolve, to Implement a 4-year Moratorium on Solar Energy 
Subsidies and Direct the Department of Environmental Protection 
to Study the Economic Impact of Industrial Solar Energy Projects
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative FAULKINGHAM of Winter Harbor.
Cosponsored by Representatives: CAMPBELL of Orrington, DUNPHY of Embden, FOSTER 
of Dexter, LANDRY of Farmington, LEMELIN of Chelsea, THERIAULT of Fort Kent.

Page 1 - 131LR1885(01)1Sec. 1.  Four-year moratorium on solar energy subsidies implemented. 
2Resolved:  That an agency, department, bureau, office or independent governmental unit 
3 of the State may not provide or disburse any subsidy or assistance to a private person for 
4 the purpose of researching, developing, implementing, constructing or supporting a solar 
5 energy project for a period of 4 years after the effective date of this resolve.
6Sec. 2.  Department of Environmental Protection to study economic impact 
7of industrial solar energy projects. Resolved:  That the Department of 
8 Environmental Protection shall study the economic impact of industrial solar energy 
9 projects in the State. By December 6, 2023, the department shall report the results of the 
10 study along with any recommended legislation to the Joint Standing Committee on 
11 Environment and Natural Resources. The joint standing committee may report out 
12 legislation based on the study to the Second Regular Session of the 131st Legislature.
13SUMMARY
14 This resolve implements a 4-year moratorium on solar energy subsidies provided or 
15 disbursed by the State to a private person and directs the Department of Environmental 
16 Protection to study the economic impact of industrial solar energy projects in the State and 
17 report the results of the study to the Legislature.14
15
16
17
