 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1340
H.P. 854 House of Representatives, March 28, 2023
An Act to Prohibit the Sale or Possession of Rapid-fire Modification 
Devices
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SACHS of Freeport.
Cosponsored by Senator DAUGHTRY of Cumberland and
Representatives: BOYLE of Gorham, CLOUTIER of Lewiston, DOUDERA of Camden, 
GRAMLICH of Old Orchard Beach, MADIGAN of Waterville, MILLETT of Cape Elizabeth, 
WHITE of Waterville, ZAGER of Portland.

Page 1 - 131LR1181(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง1060 is enacted to read:
3ยง1060.  Possession of rapid-fire modification device
41.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms 
5 have the following meanings.
6 A. "Binary trigger system" means a device that, when installed in or attached to a semi-
7 automatic firearm, causes the firearm to fire once when the trigger is pulled and again 
8 when the trigger is released.
9 B. "Bump stock device" means a device or instrument that increases the rate of fire 
10 achievable with a semi-automatic firearm by using energy from the recoil of the firearm 
11 to generate a reciprocating action that facilitates repeated activation of the trigger.
12 C. "Burst trigger system" means a device that, when installed in or attached to a semi-
13 automatic firearm, alters the trigger reset to allow the firearm to discharge 2 or more 
14 shots with a single pull of the trigger.
15 D. "Rapid-fire modification device" means a binary trigger system, bump stock device, 
16 burst trigger system, trigger crank or any other device that is designed to accelerate the 
17 rate of fire of a semi-automatic firearm.
18 E. "Semi-automatic firearm" means a firearm that is able to fire repeatedly through an 
19 automatic reloading process but requires release and another pull of the trigger for each 
20 successive shot.
21 F. "Trigger crank" means a device or instrument that repeatedly activates the trigger of 
22 a semi-automatic firearm through the use of a crank, lever or other part that is turned 
23 in a circular motion to accelerate the rate of fire of the firearm. "Trigger crank" does 
24 not include a firearm that is originally designed and manufactured to fire through the 
25 use of a crank or lever.
262.  A person is guilty of possession of a rapid-fire modification device if the person 
27 knowingly possesses, imports into the State or transfers, distributes, sells or gives to 
28 another person a rapid-fire modification device. 
293.  Possession of a rapid-fire modification device is a Class D crime.
30SUMMARY
31 This bill makes the possession, transfer, distribution, sale or importation into the State 
32 of a rapid-fire modification device a Class D crime.  A rapid-fire modification device is a 
33 binary trigger system, bump stock device, burst trigger system, trigger crank or any other 
34 device that is designed to accelerate the rate of fire of a semi-automatic firearm.31
32
33
34
