 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1834
H.P. 1166 House of Representatives, April 27, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Establish an Officer on Tribal Relations
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Speaker TALBOT ROSS of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator BAILEY of York and
Representatives: DANA of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, MOONEN of Portland, Senators: 
BENNETT of Oxford, CARNEY of Cumberland, President JACKSON of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 131LR0005(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IX, ยง26 is enacted to read:
5Section 26.  Officer on Tribal Relations.  The Officer on Tribal Relations must 
6 be chosen biennially by joint ballot of the Senators and Representatives in convention. A 
7 vacancy in this office that occurs when the Legislature is not in session may be filled by 
8 appointment by the Governor subject to confirmation by the Senate. The Officer on Tribal 
9 Relations shall endeavor to improve relations between the Indian tribes and the State.
10Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
11Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
12 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
13 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
14 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
15 resolution by voting upon the following question:
16 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to establish an Officer 
17 on Tribal Relations who would be tasked with improving relations 
18 between the Indian tribes and the State?"
19 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
20 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
21 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
22 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
23 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
24 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
25 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
26 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
27Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
28 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
29 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
30SUMMARY
31 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to establish an Officer on 
32 Tribal Relations who is elected by the Legislature and tasked with improving relations 
33 between the Indian tribes and the State.31
32
33
