 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1487
S.P. 608 In Senate, April 5, 2023
An Act to Ensure That Residents of the State Have the Right to 
Repair Their Own Electronic Devices
Reference to the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator TIPPING of Penobscot.
Cosponsored by Representative MATHIESON of Kittery and
Senator: BRAKEY of Androscoggin, Representatives: BOYER of Poland, CLUCHEY of 
Bowdoinham, JAUCH of Topsham, LOOKNER of Portland, ROEDER of Bangor.

Page 1 - 131LR2305(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  10 MRSA c. 234 is enacted to read:
3CHAPTER 234
4RIGHT TO REPAIR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
5ยง1500-O. Right to repair
61. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, 
7 the following terms have the following meanings.
8 A. "Authorized repair provider" means:
9 (1) An original equipment manufacturer that offers the services of diagnosis, 
10 maintenance or repair of its own digital electronic equipment and that does not 
11 have an arrangement described in subparagraph (2) with an unaffiliated person; or
12 (2) A person that is unaffiliated with an original equipment manufacturer and that 
13 has an arrangement with the original equipment manufacturer under which the 
14 original equipment manufacturer grants to the person a license to use a trade name, 
15 service mark or related characteristics for the purposes of offering the services of 
16 diagnosis, maintenance or repair of digital electronic equipment under the name of 
17 or on behalf of the original equipment manufacturer.  
18 B. "Digital electronic equipment" or "equipment" means a product that depends for its 
19 functioning, in whole or in part, on digital electronics embedded in or attached to the 
20 product, but does not include a motor vehicle.
21 C.  "Documentation" means any manual, diagram, report, service code description, 
22 schematic diagram or similar information provided to an authorized repair provider for 
23 purposes of offering the services of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of digital 
24 electronic equipment.
25 D. "Embedded software" means any programmable instructions provided on firmware 
26 delivered with digital electronic equipment, or with a part for such equipment, for 
27 purposes of equipment operation, including all relevant patches and fixes made by the 
28 manufacturer of such equipment or part for these purposes. 
29 E. "Fair and reasonable terms" means the following terms for obtaining documentation 
30 or a tool or part:
31 (1) With respect to documentation, including any relevant updates, that there is no 
32 charge, except when the documentation is requested in physical printed form, in 
33 which case it means the reasonable actual costs of preparing and sending the copy;
34 (2) With respect to a tool, that there is no charge, no required authorization or 
35 Internet access for the use or operation of the tool and no other impediment to 
36 access or use of the tool for its full functionality, except when the tool is requested 
37 in physical form, in which case it means the reasonable actual costs of preparing 
38 and sending the tool; and
Page 2 - 131LR2305(01)1 (3) With respect to a part, that the cost and terms are equivalent to the most 
2 favorable costs, conditions, obligations and other terms offered by the original 
3 equipment manufacturer to an authorized repair provider, accounting for all 
4 discounts, rebates or costs.
5 F. "Firmware" means a software program or set of instructions programmed on digital 
6 electronic equipment, or on a part for such equipment, to allow the equipment or part 
7 to communicate with other computer hardware.
8 G. "Independent repair provider" means a person in this State: 
9 (1) That is not an authorized repair provider or affiliated with an authorized repair 
10 provider and is engaged in the services of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of 
11 digital electronic equipment; or 
12 (2) That is an authorized repair provider or affiliated with an authorized repair  
13 provider with respect to any services of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of digital 
14 electronic equipment that is not manufactured by or sold under the name of the 
15 original equipment manufacturer for which the person, or the person's affiliate, is 
16 an authorized repair provider. 
17 H. "Motor vehicle" has the same meaning as in section 1171, subsection 11 and 
18 includes any component part of the motor vehicle. 
19 I. "Original equipment manufacturer" means a business engaged in the business of 
20 selling or leasing to any person new digital electronic equipment manufactured by or 
21 on behalf of itself.
22 J. "Owner" means a person that owns or leases digital electronic equipment purchased 
23 or used in this State.
24 K. "Part" means any replacement part, either new or used, made available by an original 
25 equipment manufacturer for purposes of maintenance or repair of digital electronic 
26 equipment manufactured or sold by the original equipment manufacturer. 
27 L. "Tool" means any software program, hardware or other mechanism or apparatus 
28 necessary to repair digital electronic equipment and restore it to fully functional 
29 condition.
30 M. "Trade secret" means anything tangible or intangible or electronically stored or kept 
31 that constitutes, represents, evidences or records intellectual property, including secret 
32 or confidentially held designs, processes, procedures, formulas, inventions or 
33 improvements or secret or confidentially held scientific, technical, merchandising, 
34 production, financial, business or management information, or anything within the 
35 definition of "trade secret" under 18 United States Code, Section 1839(3), as in effect 
36 on January 1, 2019.
372. Requirements.  An original equipment manufacturer shall, with respect to any 
38 digital electronic equipment sold or used in this State, make available on fair and reasonable 
39 terms to the owner of the equipment or to any independent repair provider:
40 A. Parts, tools and documentation necessary to repair the digital electronic equipment, 
41 including any updates to information or embedded software; and 
Page 3 - 131LR2305(01)1 B. If the digital electronic equipment contains an electronic security lock or other 
2 security-related function, any parts, tools and documentation needed to reset the lock 
3 or function when disabled in the course of diagnosis, maintenance or repair of the 
4 equipment. 
5 Parts, tools and documentation made available under this subsection may be made available 
6 through appropriate secure release systems.  Nothing in this subsection requires an original 
7 equipment manufacturer to make available a part if the part is no longer available to the 
8 original equipment manufacturer.
93. Limitations.  This section may not be construed or interpreted to:
10 A. Require an original equipment manufacturer to divulge a trade secret to an owner 
11 or an independent service provider;  
12 B. Alter the terms of an arrangement between an authorized repair provider and an 
13 original equipment manufacturer, including, but not limited to, the performance or 
14 provision of warranty or recall repair work by an authorized repair provider on behalf 
15 of an original equipment manufacturer pursuant to the arrangement, except that any 
16 provision that purports to waive, avoid, restrict or limit the original equipment 
17 manufacturer's obligations to comply with this section is void and unenforceable; or 
18 C. Require an original equipment manufacturer or an authorized repair provider to 
19 provide to an owner or independent repair provider access to information, other than 
20 documentation, that is provided by the original equipment manufacturer to an 
21 authorized repair provider pursuant to the terms of an arrangement between the 
22 authorized repair provider and an original equipment manufacturer.
234. Liability.  Neither an original equipment manufacturer nor an authorized repair 
24 provider is liable for any damage or injury to an owner or independent repair provider 
25 resulting from the use of digital electronic equipment provided by the original equipment 
26 manufacturer or authorized repair provider pursuant to this section.
275. Enforcement.  A violation of this chapter constitutes an unfair or deceptive act or 
28 practice in violation of Title 5, chapter 10.
29SUMMARY
30 This bill establishes a requirement that a manufacturer of digital electronic equipment 
31 sold or used in this State make available on fair and reasonable terms to the owner of the 
32 equipment or to any independent repair provider parts, tools and documentation necessary 
33 to repair that digital electronic equipment, including any updates to information or 
34 embedded software.  If the equipment contains an electronic security lock or other security-
35 related function, the manufacturer must also provide any parts, tools and documentation 
36 needed to reset the lock or function when disabled in the course of diagnosis, maintenance 
37 or repair of the equipment.  The bill does not apply to digital electronic equipment in motor 
38 vehicles.30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
