 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1842
H.P. 1174 House of Representatives, April 27, 2023
Resolve, to Support Energy Upgrades at Maine Public Schools and 
Ensure That New School Construction Meets Current Energy 
Efficiency Standards
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative LaROCHELLE of Augusta.
Cosponsored by Representatives: KESSLER of South Portland, MALON of Biddeford, 
OSHER of Orono.

Page 1 - 131LR2037(01)1Sec. 1.  Department of Education to form working group. Resolved:  That 
2 the Department of Education shall form a working group that includes representatives of 
3 the Maine Municipal Association, Maine School Management Association, Maine School 
4 Superintendents Association, Maine Education Association, Efficiency Maine and other 
5 interested parties to review and recommend changes to the department's new construction 
6 and renovation energy efficiency standards for schools with an emphasis on heating and 
7 cooling systems. The working group shall also consider the best ways to upgrade existing 
8 schools' older heating and cooling systems to more energy-efficient systems and how those 
9 upgrades can be made cost-neutral for school administrative units. The department shall 
10 report the working group's findings and recommended law changes to the Joint Standing 
11 Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs by December 6, 2023. The committee may 
12 report out legislation related to the report to the Second Regular Session of the 131st 
13 Legislature.
14SUMMARY
15 This resolve directs the Department of Education to form a working group to review 
16 and recommend changes to the department's new construction and renovation energy 
17 efficiency standards with an emphasis on heating and cooling systems. The working group 
18 must also consider the best ways to upgrade existing schools' older heating and cooling 
19 systems to more energy-efficient systems and how those upgrades can be made cost-neutral 
20 for school administrative units. The department must report its findings and recommended 
21 law changes to the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs.15
16
17
18
19
20
21
