 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1722
S.P. 685 In Senate, April 18, 2023
Resolve, to Establish the Blue Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan 
for Sustained Investment in Preventing Disease and Improving the 
Health of Maine Communities
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator ROTUNDO of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Representative GATTINE of Westbrook and
Senators: BALDACCI of Penobscot, BENNETT of Oxford, Representatives: CLOUTIER of 
Lewiston, CYRWAY of Albion, DUCHARME of Madison, SACHS of Freeport, Speaker 
TALBOT ROSS of Portland, TERRY of Gorham.

Page 1 - 131LR1273(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, this resolve establishes the Blue Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for 
4 Sustained Investment in Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of Maine 
5 Communities; and
6Whereas, tobacco users are switching to electronic cigarettes, which are not included 
7 in the tobacco Master Settlement Agreement pursuant to the lawsuit State of Maine v. Philip 
8Morris, et al., Kennebec County Superior Court, Docket No. CV-97-134; and
9Whereas, the switch to electronic cigarettes has diminished the payments to the 
10 tobacco Master Settlement Agreement and therefore reduced the funds received by the 
11 Fund for a Healthy Maine without reducing the harm to public health from tobacco; and
12Whereas, more funds are allocated through the Fund for a Healthy Maine baseline 
13 budget than the State receives from the tobacco Master Settlement Agreement, resulting in 
14 an unsustainable structural deficit in the Fund for a Healthy Maine; and
15Whereas, Fund for a Healthy Maine funds are essential for funding tobacco 
16 prevention and treatment, other chronic disease prevention initiatives and health promotion 
17 efforts in the State, particularly for the benefit of children and families in the State; and
18Whereas, public health problems are seldom solved and health and economic benefits 
19 are rarely measurable within a 2-year state budget cycle; and
20Whereas, the structural limitations of the State's 2-year budget cycle result in an 
21 ongoing loss of opportunities to plan and invest in long-term, evidence-informed primary 
22 and secondary chronic disease prevention initiatives; and
23Whereas, the State receives funds from multiple legal settlements with manufacturers 
24 and excise taxes on products that affect public health and well-being but lacks the system 
25 and structure necessary to maximize benefit through coordinated planning and sustained 
26 investment in preventing disease and improving the health of communities in the State; and
27Whereas, the work of the Blue Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for Sustained 
28 Investment in Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of Maine Communities must 
29 be initiated before the 90-day period expires in order that the commission's work may be 
30 completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next legislative session; and
31Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
32 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
33 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
34 therefore, be it
35Sec. 1. Commission established. Resolved: That the Blue Ribbon Commission to 
36 Design a Plan for Sustained Investment in Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of 
37 Maine Communities, referred to in this resolve as "the commission," is established.
38Sec. 2. Commission membership. Resolved: That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 
39 353, the commission consists of 15 members as follows:
40 1. Six members appointed by the President of the Senate as follows:
Page 2 - 131LR1273(01)1 A. One member of the Senate from the party holding the largest number of seats in the 
2 Legislature who is currently serving on the Joint Standing Committee on 
3 Appropriations and Financial Affairs;
4 B. One member of the Senate from the party holding the 2nd largest number of seats 
5 in the Legislature who is currently serving on the Joint Standing Committee on 
6 Appropriations and Financial Affairs or the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
7 Human Services;
8 C. One member with policy expertise or experience in state budgeting and funding 
9 improved access to health care for low-income individuals and other populations 
10 experiencing inequitable access to health care;
11 D. One member who has a minimum of 8 years of experience leading a community 
12 health coalition and experience working with rural populations;
13 E. One member who manages a public health endowment for a health system in the 
14 State and has experience developing statewide plans for improving health and 
15 prosperity; and
16 F. One member who is currently or was formerly employed as senior staff or faculty 
17 for a university in the State with expertise in public health, rural health and health 
18 equity financing models;
19 2. Seven members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives as 
20 follows:
21 A. One member of the House of Representatives from the party holding the largest 
22 number of seats in the Legislature who is currently serving on the Joint Standing 
23 Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs or the Joint Standing Committee 
24 on Health and Human Services;
25 B. One member of the House of Representatives from the party holding the 2nd largest 
26 number of seats in the Legislature who is currently serving on the Joint Standing 
27 Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs;
28 C. One member who represents a statewide association of public health professionals 
29 that works to improve and sustain the health and well-being of all people in the State 
30 through health promotion, disease prevention and the advancement of health equity;
31 D. One member who has a minimum of 8 years of experience serving in the Legislature, 
32 including service on both the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and 
33 Financial Affairs and the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services;
34 E. One member who is employed by a philanthropic organization in the State with 
35 experience or expertise funding initiatives in public health and primary prevention that 
36 advance racial health equity or reduce health disparities;
37 F. One member who represents a community development financial institution that 
38 advances health and economic equity for people and communities in the State through 
39 the integration of finance, business expertise and policy solutions; and
40 G. One member who serves as senior staff for a municipal or county health department;
41 3. The Director of the Office of Policy Innovation and the Future or the director's 
42 designee; and
43 4. The Attorney General or the attorney general's designee.
Page 3 - 131LR1273(01)1Sec. 3. Chairs. Resolved: That the first-named Senate member is the Senate chair 
2 of the commission and the first-named House of Representatives member is the House chair 
3 of the commission.
4Sec. 4. Appointments; convening of commission. Resolved: That all 
5 appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 
6 resolve. The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 
7 Council once all appointments have been completed. After appointment of all members, 
8 the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the commission. If 30 days or more 
9 after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 
10 made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority for 
11 the commission to meet and conduct its business.
12Sec. 5. Duties. Resolved: That the commission shall evaluate funding models and 
13 structures that allow for the sustained investment in the health and prosperity of youth and 
14 families in the State and make recommendations for further legislative action. The 
15 commission shall prioritize research and recommendations that:
16 1. Resolve the structural deficit in the Fund for a Healthy Maine;
17 2. Identify sources of sustained funding for reducing tobacco use, improving public 
18 health, preventing chronic illness, reducing health disparities across demographic and 
19 geographic populations and improving the community conditions that support good health 
20 and wellness;
21 3. Identify strategies and structural changes that resolve structural inequities and allow 
22 funding and investment plans to extend beyond the Legislature's 2-year budget cycle when 
23 doing so is necessary for accomplishing their intents and purposes;
24 4. Advance the long-term goals established by the Legislature for funds received from 
25 legal settlements with manufacturers and excise taxes on products that affect public health 
26 and well-being;
27 5. Identify policy and funding models that maximize alignment between the purpose 
28 and intent of public health funding sources and the investments in public health and 
29 prevention initiatives those funds support;
30 6. Identify how funding from various public health-related sources could be blended or 
31 pooled to achieve common aims in preventing chronic disease, reducing health disparities 
32 among historically disenfranchised and vulnerable populations and improving the 
33 community conditions that support the health and resilience of youth in the State; and
34 7. Identify strategies and system changes that would allow for the calculation of return 
35 on investment of all proposed public health and prevention measures over a period of time 
36 using the projected health and productivity benefits of those investments.
37Sec. 6. Staff assistance. Resolved: That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, the 
38 Legislative Council shall provide necessary staffing and consulting services to the 
39 commission, the cost of which up to $20,000 must be paid from the Fund for a Healthy 
40 Maine.
41Sec. 7. Report. Resolved: That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353 and no later than 
42 December 6, 2023, the commission shall submit a report that includes its findings and 
43 recommendations, including legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on 
Page 4 - 131LR1273(01)44 Appropriations and Financial Affairs and the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
45 Human Services. After receipt and review of the report, one or both of the joint standing 
46 committees shall submit legislation relating to the subject matter of the report to the Second 
47 Regular Session of the 131st Legislature.
5Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
6 takes effect when approved.
7SUMMARY
8 This resolve establishes the Blue Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for Sustained 
9 Investment in Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of Maine Communities to 
10 evaluate funding models and structures that allow for the sustained investment in the health 
11 and prosperity of youth and families in the State and make recommendations for further 
12 legislative action.1
2
3
4
8
9
10
11
12
