 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1750
S.P. 695 In Senate, April 20, 2023
Resolve, Directing the Department of Transportation to Complete a 
Service Plan and Determine the Scope of Work for Restoration of 
Rail Use of the Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor from Downtown 
Portland to Auburn
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CHIPMAN of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Representative WILLIAMS of Bar Harbor and
Senators: BALDACCI of Penobscot, NANGLE of Cumberland, ROTUNDO of Androscoggin, 
Representatives: ALBERT of Madawaska, ANKELES of Brunswick, O'CONNELL of Brewer, 
THERIAULT of Fort Kent, WHITE of Guilford.

Page 1 - 131LR1755(01)1Sec. 1.  Department of Transportation to complete plans; Berlin 
2Subdivision Rail Corridor. Resolved: That the Department of Transportation shall 
3 conduct a study that includes a service plan and scope of work plan for the section of the 
4 Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor between downtown Portland and Auburn for restoration 
5 of the rail corridor to a minimum of Class 3 interurban light rail operating conditions. The 
6 service plan and scope of work plan must satisfy legal and United States Department of 
7 Transportation, Federal Railroad Administration requirements for crossing the CSX 
8 Transportation main line corridor and for shared corridor use to downtown Lewiston and 
9 through Danville Junction on the Genesee & Wyoming railroad to a station site at or near 
10 the Auburn-Lewiston Airport.  The study must include proposed community train station 
11 locations and appropriate multimodal use of the rail corridor including trail use. The service 
12 plan must include an examination of the feasibility of applying for federal capital 
13 improvements grants to restore the rail corridor.
14Sec. 2.  Establishment of advisory committee; duties. Resolved: That the 
15 Commissioner of Transportation shall establish an advisory committee to advise the 
16 Department of Transportation in undertaking its responsibilities under section 1.
17 1.  The Commissioner of Transportation shall appoint at least 9 but no more than 15 
18 members to the advisory committee, including from among the following: 
19 A.  A person representing the Transit Oriented Development Institute;
20 B.  A person representing the Lewiston Auburn Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce;
21 C.  A person representing the Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce;
22 D.  A person representing the Yarmouth Chamber of Commerce;
23 E.  The Commissioner of Economic and Community Development;
24 F.   A person representing the Greater Portland Council of Governments or the Portland 
25 Area Comprehensive Transportation System;
26 G.  A person representing the Androscoggin Valley Council of Governments or the 
27 Androscoggin Transportation Resource Center; 
28 H.  A person representing a state agency other than the Department of Transportation;
29 I.  A person representing an organization advocating for rail use; 
30 J.  A person representing an organization advocating for nonrail or recreational trail 
31 interests; and 
32 K.  Persons with expertise in rail logistics or infrastructure.  
33 2.  The Commissioner of Transportation shall designate the chair of the advisory 
34 committee. The Department of Transportation shall provide staff support to the advisory 
35 committee. The advisory committee may adopt policies to effectively govern its 
36 proceedings. The advisory committee shall meet at the call of the chair and hold a minimum 
37 of one public hearing located in the geographic area along the rail corridor between 
38 Portland and Auburn. 
39 3.  Within 9 months of convening its first meeting, the advisory committee shall submit 
40 a report to the Department of Transportation on its findings and recommendations 
Page 2 - 131LR1755(01)41 regarding the service plan and scope of work plan developed pursuant to section 1.  The 
42 advisory committee terminates upon the submission of its report to the department.
3Sec. 3.  Report.  Within 30 days of receiving the report under section 2, subsection 
4 3, the Department of Transportation shall submit a report to the joint standing committee 
5 of the Legislature having jurisdiction over railroad matters on the actions of the department 
6 taken under section 1, including the development of the service plan and scope of work 
7 plan under section 1 and any recommendations for suggested legislation.  After reviewing 
8 the report, the joint standing committee may report out a bill to implement any of the 
9 recommendations included in the report.
10SUMMARY
11 This resolve directs the Department of Transportation to complete a study that includes 
12 a service plan and scope of work plan for the section of the Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor 
13 between downtown Portland and Auburn for restoration of the rail corridor to a minimum 
14 of Class 3 interurban light rail operating conditions.  The plans must satisfy legal and 
15 United States Department of Transportation, Federal Railroad Administration requirements 
16 for crossing the CSX Transportation main line corridor and for shared corridor use to 
17 downtown Lewiston and through Danville Junction on the Genesee & Wyoming railroad 
18 to a station site at or near the Auburn-Lewiston Airport. The study must include proposed 
19 community train station locations and appropriate multimodal use of the rail corridor 
20 including trail use.
21 The resolve requires the Commissioner of Transportation to establish an advisory 
22 committee to advise the department in undertaking its responsibilities regarding the service 
23 plan and scope of work plan. Within 9 months of convening its first meeting, the advisory 
24 committee is required to submit a report to the department on its findings and 
25 recommendations regarding the service plan and scope of work plan.  The department is 
26 required to submit a report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 
27 jurisdiction over railroad matters on the actions taken by the department, including the 
28 development of the plans and recommendations for suggested legislation. After reviewing 
29 the report, the joint standing committee may report out a bill to implement any of the 
30 recommendations included in the report.1
2
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
