 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1012
H.P. 648 House of Representatives, March 7, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine Regarding the Timing of Judicial Review of the 
Determination of the Validity of Written Petitions
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SUPICA of Bangor.
Cosponsored by Senator HICKMAN of Kennebec and
Representatives: BOYER of Poland, RIELLY of Westbrook, RUDNICKI of Fairfield, 
Senators: BENNETT of Oxford, GROHOSKI of Hancock.

Page 1 - 131LR1141(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง22 is amended to read:
5Section 22. Election officers and officials, how governed.  Until the Legislature 
6 shall enact further laws not inconsistent with the Constitution for applying the people's veto 
7 and direct initiative, the election officers and other officials shall be governed by the 
8 provisions of this Constitution and of the general law, supplemented by such reasonable 
9 action as may be necessary to render the preceding sections self executing.  The Legislature 
10 may enact laws not inconsistent with the Constitution to establish procedures for 
11 determination of the validity of written petitions.  Such laws shall include provision for 
12 judicial review of any determination, to be completed within 100 days from the date of 
13 deadline for filing of a written petition in the office of the Secretary of State.
14Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
15Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
16 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
17 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
18 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
19 resolution by voting upon the following question:
20 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to change the time 
21 period for judicial review of the validity of written petitions from within 
22 100 days from the date of filing to within 100 days from the deadline for 
23 filing of a written petition in the office of the Secretary of State?"
24 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
25 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
26 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
27 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
28 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
29 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
30 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
31 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
32Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
33 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
34 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
35SUMMARY
36 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to change the time period 
37 for judicial review of the validity of written petitions from within 100 days from the date 
38 of filing to within 100 days from the deadline for filing of a written petition in the office of 
39 the Secretary of State.36
37
38
39
