 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1579
H.P. 1024 House of Representatives, April 11, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Eliminate the Diversion of Revenue from Professional and 
Occupational Licensing Fees
Reference to the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MORRIS of Turner.
Cosponsored by Representative: MILLETT of Waterford, Senator: BENNETT of Oxford.

Page 1 - 131LR1319(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IX, ยง26 is enacted to read:
5Section 26. Limitation on expenditure of professional and occupational 
6licensing fees.  Revenue, proceeds and income derived from professional and 
7 occupational licensing fees must be expended solely for the cost of administering and 
8 enforcing the laws governing professional and occupational licensing and may not be 
9 diverted for any other purpose.
10Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
11Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
12 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
13 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
14 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
15 resolution by voting upon the following question:
16 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to provide that revenue 
17 derived from professional and occupational licensing fees must be 
18 expended solely for the cost of administering and enforcing the laws 
19 governing professional and occupational licensing and may not be diverted 
20 for any other purpose?"
21 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
22 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
23 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
24 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
25 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
26 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
27 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
28 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
29Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
30 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
31 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
32SUMMARY
33 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to provide that revenue 
34 derived from professional and occupational licensing fees must be expended solely for the 
35 cost of administering and enforcing the laws governing professional and occupational 
36 licensing and may not be diverted for any other purpose.33
34
35
36
