Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 590
S.P. 258 In Senate, February 14, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Establish a Right to Health Care
Reference to the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator HICKMAN of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Speaker TALBOT ROSS of Portland and
Senators: BAILEY of York, INGWERSEN of York, President JACKSON of Aroostook, 
TIPPING of Penobscot, Representatives: ARFORD of Brunswick, COLLINGS of Portland, 
PLUECKER of Warren, SUPICA of Bangor.

Page 1 - 131LR2136(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. I, ยง26 is enacted to read:
5Section 26.  Right to health care.  Health care, including care to prevent and treat 
6 physical and mental illness, is the right of the people and necessary to ensure the strength 
7 of the State.  The Legislature shall provide by law the implementation and enforcement of 
8 this right, which may not be infringed upon.
9Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
10Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
11 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
12 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
13 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
14 resolution by voting upon the following question:
15 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to establish that health 
16 care, including care to prevent and treat physical and mental illness, is the 
17 right of the people and necessary to ensure the strength of the State and to 
18 require the Legislature to provide by law the implementation and 
19 enforcement of this right?"
20 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
21 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
22 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
23 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
24 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
25 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
26 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
27 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
28Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
29 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
30 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
31SUMMARY
32 This resolution proposes a constitutional amendment to establish that health care, 
33 including care to prevent and treat physical and mental illness, is the right of the people 
34 and necessary to ensure the strength of the State and requires the Legislature to provide by 
35 law the implementation and enforcement of this right.32
33
34
35
