 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1506
H.P. 961 House of Representatives, April 5, 2023
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Study the Scarcity of Licensed Clinical Behavioral Health 
Professionals Across the State
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SARGENT of York.
Cosponsored by Senator INGWERSEN of York and
Representatives: CRAFTS of Newcastle, DODGE of Belfast, GOLEK of Harpswell, 
GRAMLICH of Old Orchard Beach, MADIGAN of Waterville, MATHIESON of Kittery, 
MEYER of Eliot, Senator: MOORE of Washington.

Page 1 - 131LR2175(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, this legislation must take effect before the expiration of the 90-day period 
4 in order for the stakeholder group established by the Department of Health and Human 
5 Services pursuant to this legislation to be timely convened; and
6Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
7 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
8 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
9 therefore, be it
10Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services study required; training 
11and recruitment of clinical behavioral health care professionals.  Resolved:  
12 That the Department of Health and Human Services shall convene a stakeholder group to 
13 study issues related to the training and recruitment of clinical behavioral health care 
14 professionals.  At a minimum, the department shall invite to be members of the stakeholder 
15 group representatives of major health care providers in the State, representatives of major 
16 behavioral health care providers in the State, representatives of a major mental health 
17 organization in the State, licensed clinical social workers and licensed professional 
18 counselors.  The stakeholder group shall review issues related to: the current number of 
19 psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, clinical social workers, psychological nurse 
20 practitioners and licensed clinical professional counselors currently practicing in the State; 
21 the number of those professionals serving MaineCare patients; the number of additional 
22 professionals needed to meet the current unmet need in the State; the state of current 
23 waiting lists for mental health treatment; access to educational opportunities to train clinical 
24 behavioral health care professionals in the State; costs associated with education programs 
25 for clinical behavioral health care professionals in the State; methods to enable individuals 
26 to work in the clinical behavioral health care field while attaining a degree or certification, 
27 including opportunities to count time working in the field toward attaining an advanced 
28 degree or certification; and ways to recruit clinical behavioral health care professionals 
29 from out of state.  By December 6, 2023, the department shall submit a report related to the 
30 study, including recommendations and any suggested legislation, to the Joint Standing 
31 Committee on Health and Human Services.  The committee may report out a bill relating 
32 to the report to the Second Regular Session of the 131st Legislature.
33Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
34 takes effect when approved.
35SUMMARY
36 This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to convene a 
37 stakeholder group to review issues related to the training and recruitment of clinical 
38 behavioral health care professionals.  The resolve requires the department to submit a report 
39 related to the study to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services and 
40 authorizes the committee to report out a bill relating to the report.36
37
38
39
40
