 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 892
S.P. 384 In Senate, February 28, 2023
An Act to Improve School Safety and Preparedness Through 
Comprehensive Health and Safety and Emergency Management 
Planning
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator DAUGHTRY of Cumberland.
Cosponsored by Senator LaFOUNTAIN of Kennebec and
Senators: CHIPMAN of Cumberland, DUSON of Cumberland, HICKMAN of Kennebec, 
Representatives: ANKELES of Brunswick, GEIGER of Rockland, GOLEK of Harpswell, 
MONTELL of Gardiner.

Page 1 - 131LR0355(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง1001, sub-ยง16, as amended by PL 2021, c. 464, ยง1, is further 
3 amended to read:
416.  Comprehensive health and safety and emergency management plan.  Each 
5 school board shall annually approve a comprehensive health and safety and emergency 
6 management plan that meets nationally recognized practices and is developed by the school 
7 unit administration working collaboratively with  school teachers and staff and local, county 
8 and state public safety officials, fire-fighting personnel, emergency management officials, 
9 mental health officials, law enforcement officials, school nurses, physicians and public 
10 health staff to identify and deal with all hazards and potential hazards that could reasonably 
11 be expected to affect a facility or unit under the authority of the school administrative unit  
12 appropriate stakeholders.  The approval of a comprehensive health and safety and 
13 emergency management plan under this subsection is public information.  At the request 
14 of any school board member or full-time school employee, the school board shall form a 
15 steering committee composed of school employees, including a school employee 
16 designated by that employee's school as having oversight regarding school safety, school 
17 board members, parents and others.  A majority of the school employees must be chosen 
18 by the local representatives of the applicable bargaining unit if the school employees are 
19 covered by a collective bargaining agreement.  The steering committee shall regularly 
20 review and refine the comprehensive health and safety and emergency management plan.  
21 The following information pertaining to a comprehensive health and safety and emergency 
22 management plan is public information:
23 A.  A description of the scope and purpose of the comprehensive health and safety and 
24 emergency management plan and the process used for developing and updating the 
25 plan;
26 B.  General information on auditing for safety and preparedness;
27 C.  Roles and responsibilities of school administrators, teachers and staff and the 
28 designated chain of command during an emergency; and
29 D.  Strategies for conveying information to parents and the general public during an 
30 emergency.
31 Except as provided in paragraphs A to D, release of the contents of a comprehensive health 
32 and safety and emergency management plan approved under this subsection is subject to 
33 the limitations set forth in Title 1, section 402, subsection 3, paragraph L.
34SUMMARY
35 This bill requires that a school comprehensive health and safety and emergency 
36 management plan approved by a school board meet nationally recognized practices and be 
37 developed collaboratively with appropriate stakeholders.  It also requires that any steering 
38 committee formed by the school board as part of the plan update and approval process 
39 include a school employee designated by that employee's school as having oversight 
40 regarding school safety.35
36
37
38
39
40
