 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1149
S.P. 476 In Senate, March 13, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Strengthen the Due Process Rights of Persons Accused by 
Requiring Notification of Those Rights
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator HICKMAN of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative LEE of Auburn and
Senators: BAILEY of York, BRAKEY of Androscoggin, CARNEY of Cumberland, DUSON 
of Cumberland, Representatives: BOYER of Poland, HASENFUS of Readfield, MOONEN of 
Portland, POIRIER of Skowhegan.

DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT        Page 1 - 131LR2316(01)        DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. I, ยง6 is amended to read:
5Section 6.  Rights of persons accused.  In all criminal prosecutions, the accused 
6 shall have a right to be heard by the accused and counsel to the accused, or either, at the 
7 election of the accused;
8 To demand the nature and cause of the accusation, and have a copy thereof;
9 To be confronted by the witnesses against the accused;
10 To have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in favor of the accused;
11 To have a speedy, public and impartial trial, and, except in trials by martial law or 
12 impeachment, by a jury of the vicinity. The accused shall not be compelled to furnish or 
13 give evidence against himself or herself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, property or 
14 privileges, but by judgement of that person's peers or the law of the land.
15 The accused has a right to be notified of the rights described by this section before a 
16 custodial interrogation.
17Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
18Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
19 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
20 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
21 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
22 resolution by voting upon the following question:
23 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to establish an accused 
24 person's right to be notified of the person's rights before a custodial 
25 interrogation in a criminal investigation?"
26 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
27 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
28 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
29 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
30 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
31 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
32 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
33 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
34Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
35 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
36 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
37SUMMARY
38 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to establish an accused 
39 person's right to be notified of the person's rights before a custodial interrogation in a 
40 criminal investigation.38
39
40
