 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 941
H.P. 588 House of Representatives, March 2, 2023
An Act Facilitating the Efforts of the Midcoast Regional 
Redevelopment Authority and the Town of Brunswick to Design and 
Carry Out Improvements to the Storm Water System and Other 
Infrastructure at the Former Brunswick Naval Air Station
Reference to the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative ANKELES of Brunswick.
Cosponsored by Senator DAUGHTRY of Cumberland and
Representatives: ARFORD of Brunswick, CLUCHEY of Bowdoinham, GOLEK of Harpswell, 
HEPLER of Woolwich, JAUCH of Topsham, PAULHUS of Bath, Senators: RENY of Lincoln, 
VITELLI of Sagadahoc.

Page 1 - 131LR1922(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4 This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5 This bill proposes to direct the State to establish a plan to replace, repair and upgrade 
6 critical conventional and environmental infrastructure throughout the entirety of the former 
7 Brunswick Naval Air Station for the purpose of protecting the health and safety of 
8 residents, businesses, nonprofit organizations and the former naval air station's flora and 
9 fauna.
10 The bill proposes to identify and establish a state-level funding stream to facilitate the 
11 execution of the State's plan. 
12 The bill also proposes to provide the Town of Brunswick and the Midcoast Regional 
13 Redevelopment Authority any resources and legal authority necessary to facilitate the 
14 execution of any planning efforts. 
15 The bill also proposes a statutory solution to the fact that the Town of Brunswick, the 
16 Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority, Bowdoin College, the United States Navy 
17 and various developers all own pieces of the storm water system infrastructure at the former 
18 Brunswick Naval Air Station. 
19 Finally, the bill proposes to harmonize all of the above with ongoing federal and state 
20 remediation and safe storage efforts with respect to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl 
21 substances, perfluorooctanesulfonic acid and perfluorooctanoic acid, also known as PFAS, 
22 PFOS and PFOA, respectively, and other known hazardous chemicals.4
