 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1050
S.P. 419 In Senate, March 7, 2023
Resolve, Directing the Department of Labor to Request a Federal 
Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility for Asylum Seekers
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Speaker TALBOT ROSS of Portland and
Senators: BENNETT of Oxford, HICKMAN of Kennebec, KEIM of Oxford, STEWART of 
Aroostook, Representatives: ABDI of Lewiston, DHALAC of South Portland, 
FAULKINGHAM of Winter Harbor, PERRY of Calais.

Page 1 - 131LR1577(01)1Sec. 1.  Commissioner of Labor to request federal waiver to allow asylum 
2seekers to work in the State. Resolved: That the Commissioner of Labor shall request 
3 a waiver from the United States Department of Homeland Security, United States 
4 Citizenship and Immigration Services to allow asylum seekers to work in the State. The 
5 waiver must request that any asylum seeker in the State who has applied for asylum and 
6 who has not been denied asylum is eligible to work in the State:
7 1. For the 6-month period immediately after the asylum seeker has applied for asylum 
8 and is awaiting a decision on a pending asylum application; and
9 2. For any period of time following the expiration of the asylum seeker's existing 
10 asylum work permit while the asylum seeker's application is pending renewal by the 
11 Federal Government.
12SUMMARY
13 This resolve directs the Commissioner of Labor to request a waiver from the United 
14 States Department of Homeland Security, United States Citizenship and Immigration 
15 Services to allow an asylum seeker in the State, if the asylum seeker has applied for asylum 
16 and has not been denied, eligibility to work in the State for the 6-month period immediately 
17 after the asylum seeker has applied for asylum while awaiting a final determination on the 
18 asylum seeker's application and for the time period while an asylum seeker's work permit 
19 has expired and is pending renewal by the Federal Government.13
14
15
16
17
18
19
