 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1289
S.P. 526 In Senate, March 23, 2023
An Act to Facilitate Property Redevelopment and Encourage 
Affordable Housing by Allowing the Conveyance of Unfinished 
Commercial Condominium Units
Reference to the Joint Select Committee on Housing suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator POULIOT of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative CAMPBELL of Orrington.

Page 1 - 131LR0716(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  33 MRSA ยง1602-101, as amended by PL 2009, c. 261, Pt. B, ยง16, is further 
3 amended to read:
4ยง1602-101.  Creation of condominium
5 (a)  A condominium may be created pursuant to this Act only by recording a declaration 
6 executed in the same manner as a deed, by all persons whose interests in the real estate will 
7 be conveyed to unit owners and by every lessor of a lease the expiration or termination of 
8 which will terminate the condominium or reduce its size.  In the creation of a condominium, 
9 the declaration shall must be recorded in the same manner as a deed and plats and plans 
10 shall must be recorded in the same manner as plats and plans generally.  All such 
11 documents, shall must be indexed in the name of the condominium and the parties thereto 
12 and may be included in such other indices as shall be determined by the Register of Deeds.
13 (b)  No Except as provided in subsection (c), interest in any unit may  not be conveyed 
14 to a purchaser until the unit is substantially completed as evidenced by a certificate or 
15 statement of substantial completion executed by an engineer or architect, or until a 
16 certificate of occupancy is issued by the municipal building official; except that this 
17 limitation does not apply to contracts, options or reservations for sale of units later to be so 
18 completed or to mortgages or transfers of units as security for an obligation, deeds in lieu 
19 of foreclosure, foreclosures and foreclosure sales, conveyances to successor declarants or 
20 to any person in the business of selling real estate for that person's own account, or to 
21 financial institutions.
22 (c)  A condominium unit described in this subsection may be conveyed to a purchaser 
23 or transferee, whether or not the unit is constructed and whether or not the unit is completed, 
24 in accordance with this subsection. A condominium unit:
25 (1)  To be used for nonresidential purposes may be conveyed by a declarant in any 
26 stage of completion to a purchaser or transferee.  The purchaser or transferee and the 
27 declarant shall enter into a written agreement establishing the rights and responsibilities for 
28 completion of the unit and the common elements. The agreement must indicate whether 
29 the purchaser or transferee is treated as a successor declarant of the uncompleted unit;
30 (2)  That includes land on which improvements will be constructed and become part of 
31 the unit may be conveyed to a purchaser or transferee.  The purchaser or transferee is 
32 responsible for completing the improvements, even if the improvements will include an 
33 individual dwelling unit; and
34 (3)  That contains multiple dwelling units that are to be held and maintained as a single 
35 condominium unit containing multiple dwelling units may be conveyed by a declarant in 
36 any stage of completion to a purchaser or transferee.  The purchaser or transferee and the 
37 declarant shall enter into a written agreement establishing the rights and responsibilities for 
38 completion of the unit and the common elements.  The agreement must indicate whether 
39 the purchaser or transferee is treated as a successor declarant of the uncompleted unit.
40SUMMARY
41 This bill allows the conveyance of certain unfinished commercial condominium units 
42 to a purchaser or transferee for completion by the purchaser or transferee.41
42
