 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 870
S.P. 367 In Senate, February 24, 2023
An Act to Strengthen Freedom of Speech Protections by Extending 
Laws Against Strategic Lawsuits Against Public Participation
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator TIPPING of Penobscot.
Cosponsored by Representative WILLIAMS of Bar Harbor and
Senators: BAILEY of York, BALDACCI of Penobscot, GROHOSKI of Hancock, NANGLE 
of Cumberland, Representatives: BOYER of Poland, SAYRE of Kennebunk, WARREN of 
Scarborough.

Page 1 - 131LR1654(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  14 MRSA §556, last ¶, as enacted by PL 1995, c. 413, §1, is amended to 
3 read:
4 As used in this section, "a party's exercise of its right of petition" means any written or 
5 oral statement made before or submitted to a legislative, executive or judicial body, or any 
6 other governmental proceeding; any written or oral statement made in connection with an 
7 issue under consideration or review by a legislative, executive or judicial body, or any other 
8 governmental proceeding; any statement reasonably likely to encourage consideration or 
9 review of an issue by a legislative, executive or judicial body, or any other governmental 
10 proceeding; any statement reasonably likely to enlist public participation in an effort to 
11 effect such consideration; any statement made in connection with an issue of public interest 
12 in a public forum or other place open to the public; any statement made in a media 
13 publication; or any other statement falling within constitutional protection of the right to 
14 petition government.
15SUMMARY
16 This bill expands Maine's protections against strategic lawsuits against public 
17 participation to include protection for any statement in connection with an issue of public 
18 interest made in a public forum or other place open to the public and any statement made 
19 in a media publication.16
17
18
19
