 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1416
H.P. 912 House of Representatives, March 30, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Increase the Percentage of the Population Required to 
Submit a State Referendum Question
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GRAHAM of North Yarmouth.
Cosponsored by Representatives: BRIDGEO of Augusta, DILL of Old Town, EATON of Deer 
Isle, STOVER of Boothbay, TERRY of Gorham, THERIAULT of Fort Kent.

Page 1 - 131LR0859(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง17, sub-ยง1 is amended to read:
51.  Petition procedure; petition for people's veto.  Upon written petition of 
6 electors, the number of which shall not be less than 10% 25% of the total vote for Governor 
7 cast in the last gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such petition, and addressed to 
8 the Governor and filed in the office of the Secretary of State by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on 
9 or before the 90th day after the recess of the Legislature, or if such 90th day is a Saturday, 
10 a Sunday, or a legal holiday, by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on the preceding day which is not a 
11 Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, requesting that one or more Acts, bills, resolves or 
12 resolutions, or part or parts thereof, passed by the Legislature but not then in effect by 
13 reason of the provisions of the preceding section, be referred to the people, such Acts, bills, 
14 resolves, or resolutions or part or parts thereof as are specified in such petition shall not 
15 take effect until 30 days after the Governor shall have announced by public proclamation 
16 that the same have been ratified by a majority of the electors voting thereon at a statewide 
17 or general election.
18Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub-ยง2 is amended to read:
192. Referral to electors unless enacted by the Legislature without change; 
20number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating signatures 
21on petitions; competing measures.  For any measure thus proposed by electors, the 
22 number of signatures shall not be less than 10% 25% of the total vote for Governor cast in 
23 the last gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such petition.  The date each signature 
24 was made shall be written next to the signature on the petition.  A signature is not valid if 
25 it is dated more than one year prior to the date that the petition was filed in the office of the 
26 Secretary of State.  The measure thus proposed, unless enacted without change by the 
27 Legislature at the session at which it is presented, shall be submitted to the electors together 
28 with any amended form, substitute, or recommendation of the Legislature, and in such 
29 manner that the people can choose between the competing measures or reject both. When 
30 there are competing bills and neither receives a majority of the votes given for or against 
31 both, the one receiving the most votes shall at the next statewide election to be held not less 
32 than 60 days after the first vote thereon be submitted by itself if it receives more than 1/3 
33 of the votes given for and against both.  If the measure initiated is enacted by the Legislature 
34 without change, it shall not go to a referendum vote unless in pursuance of a demand made 
35 in accordance with the preceding section.  The Legislature may order a special election on 
36 any measure that is subject to a vote of the people.
37Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
38Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
39 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
40 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
41 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
42 resolution by voting upon the following question:
43 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to increase the number 
44 of signatures required on petitions for the people's veto and the direct 
Page 2 - 131LR0859(01)45 initiative of legislation from 10% to 25% of the total vote for Governor 
46 cast in the last gubernatorial election preceding the filing of the petitions?"
3 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
4 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
5 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
6 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
7 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
8 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
9 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
10 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
11Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
12 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
13 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
14SUMMARY
15 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to increase the number of 
16 signatures required on petitions for the people's veto and the direct initiative of legislation 
17 from 10% to 25% of the total vote for Governor cast in the last gubernatorial election 
18 preceding the filing of the petitions.1
2
15
16
17
18
