 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1556
S.P. 620 In Senate, April 10, 2023
An Act to Provide a Private Support Organization for the Maine 
Maritime Academy
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator GROHOSKI of Hancock.
Cosponsored by Representative MILLIKEN of Blue Hill and
Senators: LIBBY of Cumberland, PIERCE of Cumberland, RAFFERTY of York, 
Representatives: BRENNAN of Portland, LYMAN of Livermore Falls, MILLETT of Cape 
Elizabeth, SAMPSON of Alfred, WORTH of Ellsworth.

Page 1 - 131LR0867(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง10016 is enacted to read:
3ยง10016.  Private support organization
41.  Designation of private support organization.  The President of the Maine 
5 Maritime Academy shall designate a nonprofit organization as the private support 
6 organization for the Maine Maritime Academy. The designated organization must be 
7 incorporated as a nonprofit corporation under the laws of the State, and its sole purpose, as 
8 reflected in its bylaws, must be to organize and foster support for the Maine Maritime 
9 Academy and its programs.
102.  President or designee to serve on board of directors.  The President of the Maine 
11 Maritime Academy, or the president's designee, shall serve as a member of the private 
12 support organization's board of directors.
133.  Plan of work.  The President of the Maine Maritime Academy shall negotiate an 
14 annual memorandum of understanding between the Maine Maritime Academy and the 
15 private support organization that outlines a plan of work identifying priority projects of 
16 mutual benefit and cooperation. The private support organization's board of directors may 
17 delegate aspects of the plan of work to the executive director or president of the private 
18 support organization. 
194.  Use of property.  The President of the Maine Maritime Academy may permit the 
20 appropriate use of fixed property, equipment and facilities of the Maine Maritime Academy 
21 by the private support organization. Such use must be directly in keeping with the purpose 
22 of the private support organization as set out in subsection 1 and must comply with all 
23 appropriate state policies and procedures.
24SUMMARY
25 This bill directs the President of the Maine Maritime Academy to designate a nonprofit 
26 organization as the private support organization for the Maine Maritime Academy to 
27 organize and foster support for the Maine Maritime Academy and its programs.25
26
27
