 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 932
H.P. 579 House of Representatives, March 2, 2023
An Act Requiring Climate Impact Notes on Proposed 
Transportation Legislation and Agency Rules
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative WARREN of Scarborough.
Cosponsored by Senator CHIPMAN of Cumberland and
Representatives: ABDI of Lewiston, GRAMLICH of Old Orchard Beach, LOOKNER of 
Portland, RANA of Bangor, RECKITT of South Portland, WILLIAMS of Bar Harbor, 
Senators: CARNEY of Cumberland, TIPPING of Penobscot.

Page 1 - 131LR1723(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  3 MRSA ยง163-A, sub-ยง10-A is enacted to read:
310-A.  Statement of climate impact.  With the assistance of the Department of 
4 Environmental Protection, to collect and assemble factual information and to prepare a 
5 statement concerning the climate impact that may result from the implementation of a 
6 proposed law in legislation referred to the joint standing committee of the Legislature 
7 having jurisdiction over transportation matters, including the budget of the Department of 
8 Transportation. The statement must include an estimate in pounds of the amount of carbon 
9 dioxide, methane and any other pollutant that may be emitted and how the amount of any 
10 pollutant may change over time and an analysis of the anticipated effects of any significant 
11 environmental changes and any significant secondary or indirect effects, including effects 
12 on the State's economy or public health, that may result from the implementation of the 
13 proposed law. The statement of climate impact is made within the limits of information 
14 provided to the office designated by the Legislative Council as having responsibility for 
15 financial analysis in collaboration with any other state agency providing an impact 
16 statement of any kind regarding the proposed law. The statement must be furnished to the 
17 joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over transportation matters 
18 for the information of its members and for inclusion in bills that receive an ought to pass 
19 report when reported by the committee. A statement is not necessary for any bill that has 
20 no apparent climate impact;
21Sec. 2.  5 MRSA ยง8063-C is enacted to read:
22ยง8063-C.  Climate impact
23 Every rule proposed by an agency must contain a climate impact note at the end of the 
24 rule. The note must be placed on the rule prior to any public hearing and, in the case of 
25 rules adopted without a hearing, prior to the sending of notice under section 8053. The 
26 climate impact note must describe the estimated climate impact on municipalities, counties, 
27 the State and the United States and globally of implementing or complying with the 
28 proposed rule. If the proposed rule will not impose any climate impact under this section, 
29 the climate impact note must state that fact.
30 This section does not apply to emergency rules.
31SUMMARY
32 This bill requires a climate impact note on every rule proposed by a state agency and 
33 on all legislation referred to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 
34 jurisdiction over transportation matters that would have an apparent significant climate 
35 impact if implemented.32
33
34
35
