 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 985
S.P. 404 In Senate, March 2, 2023
Resolve, to Require the Department of Health and Human Services 
to Provide Additional Reimbursement to Maine Veterans' Homes
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator FARRIN of Somerset.
Cosponsored by Representative LaROCHELLE of Augusta and
Senators: MOORE of Washington, TIMBERLAKE of Androscoggin, Representatives: 
BRIDGEO of Augusta, CRAVEN of Lewiston, DOUDERA of Camden, GUERRETTE of 
Caribou, O'CONNELL of Brewer, SUPICA of Bangor.

Page 1 - 131LR0881(01)1Sec. 1. Department of Health and Human Services to amend rules. 
2Resolved:  That, to create long-term, sustainable funding for the operation of Maine 
3 Veterans' Homes, the Department of Health and Human Services shall amend its rules in 
4 Chapter 101: MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapter III, Section 67, Principles of 
5 Reimbursement for Nursing Facilities and Section 97, Appendix C, Principles of 
6 Reimbursement for Medical and Remedial Service Facilities, to provide that Maine 
7 Veterans' Homes nursing facilities are reimbursed a per patient daily rate for services to 
8 residents covered under the United States Social Security Act, Title XIX at all Maine 
9 Veterans' Homes facilities required under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 37-B, section 
10 601, subsection 2. The rate calculation must include the full cost of operating a veterans 
11 home, including fixed and variable operating costs, capital replacement, geographic 
12 differences and facility size. The rules must contain an annual inflation adjustment 
13 provision. Comparison data with other state veterans home programs and consumer price 
14 indices may be used in deriving the rate. The department may use a 3rd party to derive or 
15 review the rate.
16SUMMARY
17 This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to amend its rules 
18 governing MaineCare program reimbursement in order to provide additional 
19 reimbursement to the Maine Veterans' Homes by ensuring that the Maine Veterans' Homes 
20 nursing facilities are reimbursed a per patient daily rate for services to residents.17
18
19
20
