 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1351
H.P. 865 House of Representatives, March 28, 2023
Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Create a 
Program to Promote Transit and Transportation Research and 
Funding
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative LOOKNER of Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator CHIPMAN of Cumberland and
Representative: ANKELES of Brunswick.

Page 1 - 131LR2362(01)1Sec. 1.  Department of Transportation to create a program to promote 
2transit and transportation research and funding.  Resolved:  That, by July 1, 
3 2024, the Department of Transportation shall develop and implement a statewide program 
4 to undertake and promote transit-related and transportation-related research and to 
5 maximize funds available to entities in the State that undertake transit-related and 
6 transportation-related research, including municipal planning departments and other public 
7 and private agencies and organizations in the State that are involved with transit or 
8 transportation matters or receive government transit-related and transportation-related 
9 funds or assistance. The program shall:
10 A.  Identify funding opportunities from the United States Department of Transportation 
11 and other federal agencies that provide funding with a transit and transportation 
12 research component;
13 B.  Provide department expertise for assistance with preparation of transit-related and 
14 transportation-related related grant applications, sourcing of related studies or research, 
15 materials sourcing and guidance based upon the department's experience, including 
16 potential caveats, concerns and risk in pursuing transit-related and 
17 transportation-related funding and grants; and 
18 C.  Conduct an annual conference attended by members or representatives of municipal 
19 planning departments and other public and private agencies and organizations in the 
20 State that are involved with transit and transportation matters or receive government 
21 transit-related and transportation-related funds or assistance. The conference must 
22 highlight all active and projected research projects and efforts promoted or assisted by 
23 the program and feature potential opportunities for federal transportation grants and 
24 assistance.
25SUMMARY
26 This resolve directs the Department of Transportation to develop and implement a 
27 statewide program to undertake and promote transit-related and transportation-related 
28 research and to maximize funds available to entities in the State that undertake 
29 transit-related and transportation-related research.26
27
28
29
