 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 830
H.P. 519 House of Representatives, February 21, 2023
Resolve, Directing the Maine Community College System to Study 
Providing On-campus Housing on All Campuses
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HOBBS of Wells.
Cosponsored by Senator BRENNER of Cumberland and
Representatives: BRENNAN of Portland, DODGE of Belfast, LANDRY of Farmington, 
PERRY of Calais, RUNTE of York, SARGENT of York, SHAW of Auburn, Senator: CURRY 
of Waldo.

Page 1 - 131LR2233(01)1Sec. 1.  Campus housing study. Resolved: That the Maine Community College 
2 System shall study providing on-campus housing for students, focusing in particular on 
3 campuses that do not offer housing currently.  The system shall consider the cost of 
4 constructing housing, available space on campuses, the cost to students, other infrastructure 
5 and staff that would be necessary to support housing, alternate housing options and any 
6 other issues the system feels are appropriate.  The system shall report its findings and any 
7 suggested legislation to the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
8 no later than December 6, 2023.
9SUMMARY
10 This resolve directs the Maine Community College System to study providing on-
11 campus housing for students, focusing in particular on campuses that do not offer housing 
12 currently.  The system must consider the cost of constructing housing, available space on 
13 campuses, the cost to students, other infrastructure and staff that would be necessary to 
14 support housing, alternate housing options and any other issues the system feels are 
15 appropriate.  The system must report its findings and any suggested legislation to the Joint 
16 Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs no later than December 6, 2023.10
11
12
13
14
15
16
