Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 174
H.P. 115 House of Representatives, January 13, 2023
An Act to Return the Name of the Maine Community College 
System to the Maine Technical College System
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CAMPBELL of Orrington.
Cosponsored by Senator LYFORD of Penobscot and
Representatives: BOYLE of Gorham, DRINKWATER of Milford, SOBOLESKI of Phillips, 
Speaker TALBOT ROSS of Portland, THORNE of Carmel, Senators: BLACK of Franklin, 
President JACKSON of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 131LR0237(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  Transition provisions.  The Maine Technical College System, formerly the 
3 Maine Community College System, is hereby established. All of the duties, functions, 
4 responsibilities, mission and goals and privileges of the Maine Community College System 
5 become the duties, functions, responsibilities, mission and goals and privileges of the 
6 Maine Technical College System. The Maine Technical College System, including all of 
7 its component entities, is the successor in every way to the Maine Community College 
8 System, including all of its component entities on the effective date of this Act. These 
9 powers, duties and functions include, but are not limited to, the following. 
10 1. The members of the Board of Trustees of the Maine Community College System 
11 shall serve as members of the Board of Trustees of the Maine Technical College System 
12 until their appointed terms expire. 
13 2. All accrued expenditures, assets, liabilities, balances, allocations, transfers, revenues 
14 and all other available funds of the Maine Community College System are authorized for 
15 use by the Maine Technical College System. 
16 3. All existing rules, regulations and procedures in effect, in operation or adopted in or 
17 by the Maine Community College System or officers continue in effect until rescinded, 
18 revised or amended by the pertinent authority within the Maine Technical College System.
19 4. All existing contracts, agreements, bonds, insurances, leases and compacts currently 
20 in effect in the Maine Community College System continue in effect until rescinded, 
21 revised or amended by the pertinent authority within the Maine Technical College System. 
22 5. The Maine Technical College System shall serve as the successor employer to, and 
23 shall assume the obligations of, the Maine Community College System. 
24 6. All buildings, automobiles, real property, equipment and other property previously 
25 belonging to or allocated for the use of the Maine Community College System become the 
26 property of the Maine Technical College System. 
27 7. The Maine Technical College System succeeds the Maine Community College 
28 System as a recipient of federal vocational funding. 
29 8. All existing forms, licenses, letterheads, signs and similar items bearing the name of 
30 or referring to the Maine Community College System may be utilized by the Maine 
31 Technical College System until existing supplies of those items are exhausted.
32Sec. 2.  Maine Revised Statutes amended; revision clause.  Wherever in the 
33 Maine Revised Statutes the words "Maine Community College System" or "community 
34 college system" appear or reference is made to those words, they are amended to read and 
35 mean "Maine Technical College System" or "technical college system," and the Revisor of 
36 Statutes shall implement this revision when updating, publishing or republishing the 
37 statutes.
38SUMMARY
39 This bill requires the transition of the Maine Community College System into the 
40 Maine Technical College System.39
40
