 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 780
S.P. 339 In Senate, February 21, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Protect Personal Reproductive Autonomy
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator VITELLI of Sagadahoc.
Cosponsored by Representative WARREN of Scarborough and
Senators: BAILEY of York, BRENNER of Cumberland, CARNEY of Cumberland, 
DAUGHTRY of Cumberland, Representatives: MOONEN of Portland, MORIARTY of 
Cumberland, RECKITT of South Portland, RIELLY of Westbrook.

Page 1 - 131LR1444(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. I, ยง26 is enacted to read:
5Section 26.  Personal reproductive autonomy.  Every person has a right to 
6 personal reproductive autonomy, which is central to dignity and the liberty to determine 
7 one's own life course.  The State may not deny or infringe on the right to personal 
8 reproductive autonomy unless the denial or infringement is justified by a compelling state 
9 interest and is accomplished using the means that least denies or infringes on the right.
10Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
11Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
12 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
13 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
14 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
15 resolution by voting upon the following question:
16 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to declare that every 
17 person has a right to personal reproductive autonomy?"
18 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
19 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
20 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
21 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
22 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
23 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
24 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
25 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
26Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
27 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
28 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
29SUMMARY
30 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine by declaring that every 
31 person has a right to personal reproductive autonomy.30
31
