 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1032
H.P. 668 House of Representatives, March 7, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Specify the Qualifications of Electors
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative ARDELL of Monticello.
Cosponsored by Senator BALDACCI of Penobscot and
Representatives: ARATA of New Gloucester, BLIER of Buxton, FAULKINGHAM of Winter 
Harbor, LANDRY of Farmington, MORRIS of Turner, PERRY of Bangor, Senators: KEIM of 
Oxford, STEWART of Aroostook.

Page 1 - 131LR2171(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. II, ยง1 is amended to read:
5Section 1.  Qualifications of electors; written ballot; military servicemen; 
6students.  Only a citizen of the United States may vote in a state, county or municipal or 
7 other local election.  Every citizen of the United States of the age of 18 years and upwards, 
8 excepting persons under guardianship for reasons of mental illness, having his or her 
9 residence established in this State, shall be an elector for Governor, Senators and 
10 Representatives, and county, local or municipal office in the city, town or plantation where 
11 his or her residence has been established, if he or she continues to reside in this State; and 
12 the elections shall be by written ballot.  But persons in the military, naval or marine service 
13 of the United States, or this State, shall not be considered as having obtained such 
14 established residence by being stationed in any garrison, barrack or military place, in any 
15 city, town or plantation; nor shall the residence of a student at any seminary of learning 
16 entitle the student to the right of suffrage in the city, town or plantation where such 
17 seminary is established.  No person, however, shall be deemed to have lost residence by 
18 reason of the person's absence from the state in the military service of the United States, or 
19 of this State.
20Indians.  Every Indian, residing on tribal reservations and otherwise qualified, shall be 
21 an elector in all county, state and national elections.
22Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 
23Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
24 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
25 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
26 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
27 resolution by voting upon the following question:
28 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to permit only citizens 
29 of the United States to vote in state, county or municipal or other local 
30 elections?"
31 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
32 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
33 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
34 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
35 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
36 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
37 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
38 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
39Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 
40 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
41 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
Page 2 - 131LR2171(01)1SUMMARY
2 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to specify that only a 
3 person who is a citizen of the United States may vote in a state, county or municipal or 
4 other local election.2
3
4
