 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1212
S.P. 493 In Senate, March 20, 2023
Resolve, to Study the Economic Effects of Instituting a Seasonal 
Sales Tax
Reference to the Committee on Taxation suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BALDACCI of Penobscot.
Cosponsored by Senator: CHIPMAN of Cumberland, Representative: DUCHARME of 
Madison.

Page 1 - 131LR1389(01)1Sec. 1. Study effects of a seasonal sales tax.  Resolved:  That the Department of 
2 Administrative and Financial Services, Maine Revenue Services shall conduct a study on 
3 the effects of a seasonal sales tax.  The study must include:
4 1. An estimate of the revenue that would be collected through the adoption of a seasonal 
5 sales tax, including the amount of tax revenue that different seasonal sales tax schemes 
6 would raise compared to the current sales tax and the share of tax revenue collected from 
7 year-round residents of the State under the same seasonal sales tax schemes.  The seasonal 
8 sales tax schemes must include variations in tax rates, tax bases and seasonal periods;
9 2. An analysis of the effects of a seasonal sales tax on the economy, consumer spending 
10 and businesses, including the consumer responses of year-round residents of the State and 
11 tourists regarding shifting the timing of purchases or visits to the State and whether a 
12 seasonal sales tax would allow tourism-dependent businesses to make better use of capital 
13 and fixed costs in their respective off-seasons; and
14 3. An investigation of the effects of seasonal sales tax schemes in use in other 
15 jurisdictions, including South Dakota and certain municipalities in Alaska.
16 In conducting the study, the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, 
17 Maine Revenue Services shall solicit input from stakeholder groups, including 
18 HospitalityMaine, the Maine Tourism Association, the Maine Snowmobile Association, 
19 the Sportsman's Alliance of Maine, the Maine Center for Economic Policy, the Maine 
20 People's Alliance, the Maine AFL-CIO, Maine Equal Justice and the Ski Maine 
21 Association.
22Sec. 2. Report. Resolved: That the Department of Administrative and Financial 
23 Services, Maine Revenue Services shall submit a report with its findings and 
24 recommendations related to the study under section 1 to the Legislature no later than 
25 December 6, 2023. 
26SUMMARY
27 This resolve requires the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Maine 
28 Revenue Services to conduct a study on the effects of a seasonal sales tax.27
28
