_4-. 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
Jessica L. Fay AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
141 Spiller Hill Road (207) 287-14()() 
Raymond, ME 04071 MAINE RELAY 711 
Phone: (207) 655-5020 
Jessica.Fav_@legislaturemaine.gov 
April 27, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Jessica Fay Presenting 
LD 212, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Upgrade 
Municipal Culverts at Stream Crossings 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and honorable members of the Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs Committee, I am Jessica Fay, representing House District 86. Thank you for 
the opportunity to present LD 212, “An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to 
Upgrade Municipal Culverts at Stream Crossings ” for your consideration. 
This bill would authorize a general fund bond to ﬁnance a competitive grant program that 
matches local funding for the upgrade of municipal culverts at stream crossings. This bond is 
crucial for Maine's rural communities, where aging, deteriorating culverts often go unnoticed 
until there is a failure of that infrastructure. Like me, many of you represent small, rural towns 
and regularly deal with the signiﬁcant impact that extreme weather events have on our 
constituents when culverts fail. A wash out is more than an inconvenience —these failures of key 
infrastructure hinder economic productivity and quality of life. 
This program will prioritize culverts that need upgrading or replacement, based on available 
stream survey data, statewide prioritization for aquatic comectivity, and the presence of priority 
watersheds of salmon, alewives, and other diadromous ﬁshes. The program will also ensure that 
culverts meet key Department of Environmental Protection design standards, and meet or exceed 
the Department of Transportation's 50-year ﬂood standard. By doing so, we will be ensuring 
these culverts can withstand the test of time and any severe weather events that may occur. 
In addition to that emphasis on maximizing this investment, the program ﬁxnded by this bond 
legislation will also focus on project cost-effectiveness. The program will provide funds to cover 
only a portion of the costs associated with a proposed project. This approach allows the program 
to assist in the completion of as many vetted projects as possible, while incentivizing municipal 
stakeholders to commit their own resources, too. 
District 86: Casco, Frye Island, Raymond and Part of Poland
Funding more culvert upgrade and modernization projects will also contribute to reducing the 
severity of ﬂooding to municipalities, improving stormwater management within the proposed 
project area, and advancing potential goals around ﬁsh and wildlife habitat. 
In conclusion, I strongly urge you to support the passage of this LD 212 and its proposed 
municipal culvert program, which will make a signiﬁcant difference in our rural communities. 
This program will provide much-needed support to upgrade essential infrastructure that is critical 
to rural communities. Thank you for your time and attention. 
District 86: Casco, Frye Island, Raymond and Part of Poland
