April 27, 2023 
Tl1€Natur€ 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director Conservancy 
The Nature Conservancy in l\/laine Maine 
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
RE: LD 212 - An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Upgrade Municipal 
Culverts at Stream Crossings 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and I am the 
Government Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in l\/laine. I appreciate this 
opportunity to testify in support of LD 212, An Act to Authorize a General Fund 
Bond Issue to Upgrade Municipal Culverts at Stream Crossings. We would like to 
thank Representative Fay for bringing this important legislation forward. 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on-the-ground solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature 
Conservancy has been leading conservation in l\/laine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of l\/laine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate. 
LD 212 provides funds for a very popular competitive grant program, the Municipal 
Stream Crossing Upgrade Grant Program. The program matches local funding for the 
upgrade of municipal culverts at stream crossings in order to improve fish and wildlife 
habitats, increase community safety, and ensure regional economic vitality. 
Under this grant program, eligible project sponsors include local governments, 
municipal conservation commissions, soil and water conservation districts, and private 
nonprofit organizations. Culverts are an essential but often overlooked element of 
Maine's transportation infrastructure. They provide water passage and drainage 
beneath roads and crossings and serve as connectors for fish and wildlife. 
Unfortunately, most culverts in l\/laine were designed to meet standards from 50+ years 
ago and are not keeping up with the current realities of our storm patterns. As a result, 
they are rapidly deteriorating, putting fish and wildlife habitats, as well as community 
safety, at risk. The provisions of the existing Grant Program for “Stream Smart” 
structures are essential to include in replacement crossings, and the funding provided 
through this program is the key element allowing communities to upgrade their 
roadways. 
According to TNC data, there are over 3,000 aquatic "barriers" on municipal, paved 
roads across Maine — culverts that are undersized or "hanging" and therefore limiting 
fish passage and at high risk for washout and failure. The Municipal Stream Crossing 
Upgrade Grant Program, managed by the l\/laine Department of Environmental 
14 Maine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, l\/laine 04011 natureorggmaine
Protection since 2015, has demonstrated success in addressing these barriers. Since its 
inception, the grant program has offered 6 competitive grant rounds, with a 7th round 
under review as we speak. Each round saw high demand for project support from 
municipalities across the state. While the track record of 172 funded projects isa 
tremendous demonstration of success, the demand far exceeds the funding available. 
It is worth noting that the total number of applications over the life of the grant 
program is double the number of funded projects. 
Maine is home to nearly all of the nation's intact native brook habitat, thanks to our 
clean, cold waters. These fishing spots draw not only Mainers but visitors from far and 
wide. Brook trout are particularly put at risk by culverts that block their passage, but 
many other species, from salmon to turtles to deer, depend on uninterrupted stream 
corridors to traverse the landscape. By upgrading these culverts, we can ensure that 
Maine's natural resources remain healthy for generations to come. 
LD 212 would provide $50 million in funding for this grant program over five years. This 
funding would create and support jobs in the areas of construction, engineering, and 
design work, while also supporting Maine's tourism economy. Moreover, right-sizing 
these culverts saves towns (and taxpayers) money in the long-term by mitigating 
future infrastructure needs. 
Access to long-term funding allows communities to plan ahead — either to build the 
resources they need to apply or have the opportunity to reapply if they haven't been 
selected in a previous round. Moreover, this funding could be used to match additional 
federal funds. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law included competitive grant programs 
designed specifically for projects that would meaningfully improve or restore passage 
for anadromous fish, making Maine well poised to receive millions of federal dollars to 
Maine DOT for this work. 
We recognize that general fund bond bills face a highly competitive environment in the 
Legislature. We urge the Committee to ensure there will be some infusion of funding 
into the existing Municipal Stream Crossing Upgrade Grant Program this year, and 
hope to work with you on what that may look like before the session concludes. 
Anecdotally, my staff team has heard repeatedly from the communities and partners 
they work with in the field - many people rely on this grant and are concerned that 
existing funding has been exhausted. 
In conclusion, I urge you to support LD 212 and to provide the necessary funding for 
the upgrade of municipal culverts at stream crossings throughout Maine. This bill is 
critical to ensuring the health of our state's natural resources, protecting our 
communities from flooding and extreme weather, and creating and supporting jobs in 
the areas of construction, engineering, and design work. Thank you for your 
consideration. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 212. I would be happy to 
answer questions the Committee may have in time for the work session.
