 
  
 
 
 
LD 212, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Upgrade Municipal Culverts at Stream 
Crossings 
 
April 27, 2023 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in qualified support of LD 212, with one recommended amendment discussed 
below. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all of Maine’s 16 counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  LD 212 would provide $50 million for a competitive grant program that matches local funding for 
the upgrade of municipal culverts at stream crossings to enhance and restore rivers, various wildlife habitats, and 
allow communities to better prepare for extreme weather, including storms and floods.  
 
As drafted, the proceeds from this bond issue would be available for municipalities, but the bill leaves out the 
unorganized territories that are managed by Maine’s counties. These communities are home to many Maine 
people and also have local needs with regard to culverts.   
 
If the Legislature does decide to move forward with this bill, we would ask that it be amended to allow resources 
to go to the unorganized territories as well. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel  
 
 
 
 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
