PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.aclumaine org 
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought Not to Pass — L.D. 1087 
An Act to Remove Restrictions in the Provisions 
of Law Relating to N0-knock Warrants 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety, good morning. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and l am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to oppose L.D. 1087 because it would 
needlessly roll back changes made just last session and endanger the health and safety of people 
in Maine. 
No-knock raids are a staple of the failed war on drugs.1 They endanger both civilians and 
law enforcement officers. Police barging into people’s homes increases the potential for violence, 
as recent widely-publicized examples have shownl and as statistical analyses have conf1rmed.2 
Even where people end up physically unscathed, no-knock warrants publicly humiliate innocent 
people and often destroy their propeity in the process.3 These legalized home invasions are hectic 
' 
Richard A. Oppel Jr., et al., What lo Know About B/‘co/ma Taylor is Death, N.Y. TIMES (Apr. I6, 2021), 
https://www.nytimes.com/atticle/breonna-tavlor-police.html. 
3 
Kevin Sack, Door-Busting Drug Raids Leave a Trail o/Blood, N.Y. TIMES (March l8, 2017) (“at least 8| civilians 
and I3 law enforcement officers died in such raids from 2010 through 2016. Scores ofothers were maimed or 
wounded. The casualties have occurred in the execution ofno-knock warrants, which give the police prior judicial 
authority to force entry without notice, as well as warrants that require the police to knock and announce themselves 
before breaking down doors. Often, there is little difference. Innocents have died in attacks on wrong addresses, 
including a 7-year-old girl in Detroit, and collaterally as the police pursued other residents, among them a 68-year- 
old grandfather in Framingham, Mass. Stray bullets have whizzed through neighboring homes, and in dozens of 
instances the victims of police gunfire have included the family dog“), 
https1//www.nvtimes.com/interactive/20 l 7/()3/ l 8/us/forced-entry-warrant-drug-raid.html ‘?searchResultPosition=2. 
3 
See Video Shows Chicago Cops Stornzing Into Wrong Home, NBC CHICAGO (updated Dec. I6, 2020), 
https://Wwwnbcchicago.com/news/local/video-shows-chicago-cops-stomiing-into-wrong-home/2395993/ (recent 
example ofa woman who was terrified when a crew ofofficers broke her door and stomied into her house while she 
was naked).
and unpredictable by their very nature. If someone pounded on your door and kicked it open in the 
dark of night, what would you do? Executing no-knock warrants has injured dozens of innocent 
people, and killed others4 During one raid in Georgia, officers threw a ﬂash bang grenade intoa 
nineteen-month old baby’s crib; the child had to be placed in a medically induced coma as a result 
and his face is permanently disﬁgured.5 In Louisville, Kentucky, police killed Breonna Taylor and 
recklessly endangered a nearby family, all in search of drugs that never existed and a person they 
already had in custody. 
Moreover, no-knock raids disproportionately terrorize communities of color, which have 
bome the brunt of the war on drugs. An ACLU study of over 800 raids nationwide found that 
nearly two-thirds of these raids are in search of drugs, and Black and Latino people accounted for 
61% of drug targets. “ SWAT teams found contraband in only about one third of the drug cases, 
meaning even if one believes a raid necessary for a drug search, innocent people were placed in 
life-threatening situations in roughly two out of every three drug raids. 
Overwhelming state violence through no-knock warrants is inconsistent with our tradition 
of protecting the right of people to be left undisturbed in the privacy of their homes.7 If enacted, 
this bill would make four changes to Maine’s no-knock warrant law, each of which would endanger 
ordinary people. We focus on the ﬁrst two as the most dangerous. First, it would remove important 
guidance that, in-part, deﬁnes a no-knock warrant as the execution of a warrant without waiting 
20 seconds after knocking before entering. The push to repeal this important reform is based on 
the ﬂawed assumption that people suspected of crimes will attempt to destroy evidence in those 
20 seconds, when in reality, people use those few seconds to do things like make themselves 
decent, contain a pet, or tum off the stove before answering the door. Second, this bill would allow 
police to obtain a no-knock warrant if they fear that evidence may be destroyed, valuing the 
4 See Dara Lind, Cops d0 20,000 no-knock raids ayear. Civilians Q/‘Zen pay the price when they go wrong, VOX 
(updated May 15, 2015) (describing the results of an ACLU study which found that 46 innocent people were injured 
during the examined period), https://www.vox.com/2014/10/29/7083371/swat-no-knock-raids-po1ice-killed- 
civilians-dangerous-work-drugs. 
5 
See id. 
" War Comes Home: The Excessive Militarizatio/1 Q/“American Police, 2014, ACLU Foundation, at 5, available at 
https://www.aclu.org/report/wancomes-home-excessive-militarization-ameiican-police. 
7 
See Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438, 478 (1928) (Brandeis, J., dissenting) (“[The framers] sought to 
protect Americans in their beliefs, their thoughts, their emotions and their sensations. They conferred, as against the 
government, the right to be let alone—the most comprehensive of rights and the right most valued by civilized 
[people]. To protect, that right, every unjustifiable intrusion by the government upon the privacy ofthe individual, 
whatever the means employed, must be deemed a violation ofthe Fourth Amendment ”).
potential seizure of drugs over the safety and lives of civilians and law enforcement officers. No- 
knock raids also expose our governments to ﬁnancial liability. For instance, the killing Breonna 
Taylor’s killing resulted in a $12 million settlement and countless taxpayer dollars on lawsuits and 
state and federal investigations. “ When governments allow their officers to use these dangerous 
and unnecessary tactics, insurance companies pass on the costs. 
We urge you to vote ought not to pass. 
8 
Keith L. Alexander, Steven Rich and Hannah Thacker, The hidden lJllll0I1 —(l0ll(ll' cost Q/' re_12eatezlpolice 
n1l' .\'c0r1duct, March 9, 2022, Wash‘ Po._ available at 
https://www.wzishingtonpost.com/investigations/interactive/2022/police-misconduct-repeated-settlements/
