  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amb er L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F. McKe e 
 
Secreta ry 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
 April 26, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
RE: LD 1087 – An Act to Remove Restrictions  in the Provisions  of Law 
Relat ing to No Knock Warrants   
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Represe ntative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice  and Pu blic Safety Committe e: 
 
MACDL oppose s LD 1087 . 
 
Once again , the ink is barely dry on the  law that correctly curtailed no knock warrants 
in the last Legislative  session , and here we have  a bill tha t without  any reliable 
information abo ut what has happened since that should  change th e law, seeks to 
repeal it. 
 
Please do not pass this b ill. MACDL testified at the las t session when  eliminating  “no 
knock” warrants was proposed (and which  was ultimately  passed into law) and 
MACDL is here today to speak against this bil l because  unchecked proliferation of 
“no-knock” warrants has not made citizens any safer  and has, in fact, made too many 
of our citizens decidedly less so.  
 
Experts have  termed the ex ecution of no -knock warrants as “forced entry raids” —an 
apt descriptor. No -knock warrants, whether for searches or arrests, are often carried  
out in the middle of the night, intended to be used to disorient the people in that  
location, with screaming offic ers—guns drawn. The execution of such warrants is  
dangerous to both occupants of the residence and law enforcement —without  
knowing that it is law enforcement breaking down a door, many homeowners  
would believe it was their right to defend themselves and t heir families against  
such intruders —and use any means necessary to do so.  
 
No-knock warrants have  been a weapon in the War on Drugs —and their usefulness 
and effectiveness is  disputed. When law enforcement gets it wrong —and when they 
are acting by  authority  vested in them by a judge —people can be injured and people 
can die.  
 
The Legislature  made the right decision in  eliminat ing the use of no -knock warrant  
execution in this State . Nothing has changed since then other than the proponents of  
this bill  did not want  the restri ctions passed the last time around . 
 
 
As always , thank you for the opportunity to address this issue.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F. McKee  
Chair, Legi slative Committee  
