Zoe Eiber
Portland
LD 1087
Your Name: Zoe Eiber
Town: Portland
Position: Ought to NOT to Pass
LD #: LD 1087 An Act to Remove Restrictions in the Provisions of Law Relating to 
No-knock Warrants
Dear Members of the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety,
My name is Zoe Eiber, and I am representing myself. I am writing to express my 
opposition to LD 1087,
which I believe should not pass. This legislation goes against the majority wishes of 
Mainers and poses a significant
risk to both Maine law enforcement and the public.
In 2021, LD 1171 was passed with bipartisan support to restrict No-Knock warrants 
in the state and enhance safety for
law enforcement and citizens. However, some lawmakers now seek to eliminate these
agreed-upon provisions, which
were widely supported by the majority of Mainers.
These new provisions play with the definition of a 20-second waiting period and the 
requirement of officers in full
uniform. Without theses necessary elements of the current law there is no time for 
anyone to answer the door, and
individuals may mistake law enforcement for intruders, leading to potential harm to 
both officers and citizens. The
failure to observe the wait time increases the risk of officers being injured or citizens 
committing a criminal act. Tragic
events, such as the death of Breonna Taylor, can occur if law enforcement does not 
observe the waiting period, leaving
no margin for human error or response.
Furthermore removing provisions of the current law would allow someone who is 
untrained to have access to force like
flashbangs, which can cause unnecessary injury and are often met with gunfire, is 
unacceptable and puts vulnerable
groups, such as pets, the elderly, neighbors, and children, at risk. It's worth noting that
76% of Mainers believe that the
use of stun devices should be limited.
The bipartisan team intentionally omitted the provision of "threat of destroying 
evidence" in no-knock warrants due to
the subjective nature of this criterion, which does not justify the potential harm to law 
enforcement and civilians during
execution. The current law includes exceptions for situations where there is an 
imminent threat to human life, such as
kidnapping, human trafficking, and similar scenarios.
Mainers overwhelmingly and through bipartisan effort supported specific policies on 
No-Knock raids, as seen by the
passage of LD 1171, that would affect them, but the new provisions undermines their 
right to regulate their own law
enforcement by delegating authority to others.
The passage of 1087 must be strongly opposed since it undermines the essential 
bipartisan provisions of a previously
passed law that guarantees the safety of Maine's citizens. I urge you to give weight to 
the opinions of Mainers and
preserve the existing law.
Thank you for your time and attention.
Sincerely,
Zoe Eiber
