Adrienne Horne
Appleton
LD 2004
Testimony in Support of LD 2004 “An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws 
Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations”
May 30, 2023
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the 
Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Adrienne Horne and I’m a resident of Appleton, ME. I am writing today 
in support of LD 2004: “An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the 
Wabanaki Nations”.
I support this bill as a matter of fairness. Currently, the Wabanaki tribes of Maine are 
not treated fairly when compared to the other 570 federally recognized tribes. Unlike 
the other federally recognized tribes, the tribes in Maine must be explicitly written 
into federal legislation thanks to a provision of Maine’s 1980 Settlement Act. This is 
not fair and is an undue burden to Wabanaki tribes. There is a reason that when we 
pass state legislation we do not require specific towns to be added to each piece of 
state legislation. It wouldn’t be realistic to expect our state senators and state 
representatives to amend each bill to name each town specifically, but this is what we 
are asking tribes in Maine to do while other tribes automatically benefit from federal 
legislation. According to Suffolk University, 151 federal laws have been passed that 
tribes in Maine do not have access to. Without legislation to correct the root cause of 
this unfairness, there has been an attempt to pass legislation in Maine on a case by 
case basis to catch up with the federal benefits. Unfortunately, this has not been 
successful. It took seven years for tribes in Maine to receive benefits on par with the 
Violence Against Women's Act that was amended federally to include Native 
American women from all other federally recognized tribes. This is unacceptable not 
only for the tribes in Maine, but for our rural Maine communities. When tribes in 
Maine have access to federal funding and other benefits, surrounding rural areas 
benefit as well, and when these benefits are delayed or withheld all together, we all 
suffer.
LD 2004 doesn’t undo the 1980’s Settlement Act, it simply changes a provision in the
act that would begin the process of treating tribes in Maine more fairly and more in 
line with the 570 other federally recognized tribes. Please join me in supporting LD 
2004 and the path to fairness for the tribes and rural Maine.
Thank you for considering my testimony, and thank you for all the work that you do.
Sincerely,
Adrienne Horne
Appleton, ME

