Carol Horne
Appleton
LD 2004
Members of the Judiciary Committee of the Maine State Legislature:
I am writing to you in support of LD 2004 An Act to Enact the Advancing Equality 
for Wabanaki Nations Act. 
I consider it vastly unfair that the State of Maine treats our Wabanaki tribes to a 
different standard than other Maine communities and to other tribes nationwide 
because of the 1980 Settlement Act. I am not myself a member of a tribe in Maine, 
but I would hope that all citizens of our state are treated fairly, including and perhaps 
especially our indigenous peoples. Because of the 1980 Settlement Act, when 
Congress passes federal legislation for tribes nationwide the tribes in Maine must be 
explicitly written into the legislation unlike the other federally recognized tribes. This 
is an excessive burden of time and effort to the tribes, and our legislature. Suffolk 
University published a report in 2019 highlighting the federal beneficial Indian laws 
passed by Congress since the Settlement Act was implemented in 1980. They found 
approximately 151 federal laws have been passed that the tribes in Maine do not have 
access to. Many of the laws which have passed that the tribes do not have access to 
would not only benefit the tribes but the surrounding rural areas. With the tribes not 
being able to access various federal funding their self-determination and economic 
vitality have been stunted. Allowing access to federal beneficial laws will not only 
benefit the tribes but rural Maine. My understanding is that our current Governor 
Mills feels that we should take each piece of legislation passed regarding the 
Wabanaki tribes on a case by case basis. If this were to happen, it would be an 
immense legislative burden on our legislature and the tribes. For example, in 2013 the
Violence Against Woman’s Act was finally amended to include Native American 
women. However, the tribes in Maine were not included. Maine finally passed 
legislation mirroring the federal law to include the tribes in Maine in 2020.
It is my opinion that instead of considering each law, each right and each promise to 
the tribes separately, that instead we as a state could legislate sovereignty to our tribes
to place them on equal footing with our communities and other federally recognized 
tribes. If specific legislation in the sovereignty bill should come into question, then 
the legislature could act to refine that bill after its passing. In that case, it would not 
take 7+ years for our tribes to access federal legislation that would benefit their 
communities, and save the time and effort and cost expended on considering each of 
these bills separately. 
I thank you for your consideration on this bill,
Carol Horne, resident of Appleton, Maine

