My name is Claire Millikin Raymond. I live in Owls Head, and I teach for the University 
of Maine and Bates College.  
 
I write to urge you to pass LD 2004, an Act to Enact Advancing Equality for Wabanaki 
Nations. Since 1980, forty-three years ago, when the Maine Indian Claims Settlement 
Act was passed, the United States congress has passed legislation significantly 
benefitting federally recognized Indigenous American tribal nations. However, alone 
among federally recognized peoples, the Wabanaki in Maine do not automatically 
benefit from forty-three years of progressive legislation. This is an injustice to the 
Wabanaki people and also is deleterious to Maine’s overall economy. For the Wabanaki 
people to have to litigate basic human rights on a case by case basis is an absurd 
situation and Maine should move quickly to begin to revise this aspect of MICSA. It is 
not a question of rejecting the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act whole cloth but 
rather of fine tuning a particularly damaging provision. Studies have shown that when 
federally recognized tribes benefit from legislation, the entire area and state they inhabit 
also benefits economically. Maine should take this step of signing into law LD 2004 for 
reasons both ethical and practical. This law will be beneficial not just for the Wabanaki 
but for all of rural Maine and therefore for the whole state.   
Claire Millikin Raymond
Owls Head
LD 2004
My name is Claire Millikin Raymond. I live in Owls Head, and I teach for the 
University of Maine and Bates College. 
I write to urge you to pass LD 2004, an Act to Enact Advancing Equality for 
Wabanaki Nations. Since 1980, forty-three years ago, when the Maine Indian Claims 
Settlement Act was passed, the United States congress has passed legislation 
significantly benefitting federally recognized Indigenous American tribal nations. 
However, alone among federally recognized peoples, the Wabanaki in Maine do not 
automatically benefit from forty-three years of progressive legislation. This is an 
injustice to the Wabanaki people and also is deleterious to Maine’s overall economy. 
For the Wabanaki people to have to litigate basic human rights on a case by case basis
is an absurd situation and Maine should move quickly to begin to revise this aspect of 
MICSA. It is not a question of rejecting the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act 
whole cloth but rather of fine tuning a particularly damaging provision. Studies have 
shown that when federally recognized tribes benefit from legislation, the entire area 
and state they inhabit also benefits economically. Maine should take this step of 
signing into law LD 2004 for reasons both ethical and practical. This law will be 
beneficial not just for the Wabanaki but for all of rural Maine and therefore for the 
whole state.  

