1 
 Testimony in Support of An Act to Amend 
the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Implementing Act and Enact Provisions of Law  
Regarding the Application of Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations 
 
Hon. Clarissa Sabattis, Chief, Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, Maine State Legislature 
May 31, 2023 
  
I.  The Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians. 
 
Woli-sepawiw Senator Carney, Representative Moonin and esteemed 
members of the Joint standing committee on Judiciary, Nil T’liwis Clarissa 
Sabattis, I am the Chief of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, a federally 
recognized Indian tribe with approximately  2000  tribal citizens located in 
Aroostook County, Maine.  We are a river ine people who have fished, hunted, 
gathered aquatic and wetland plants for food and basket weaving, and used the 
rivers and streams of our ancestral territory for ceremonial purposes since time 
immemorial.  We call ourselves Wolastoqewiyik or “People of the Beautiful, 
Flowing River.”  The “Wolastoq,” the River of our name, is also known as the St. 
John, and is bisected by the international boundary with Canada.  Our Band are 
“Metahksoniqewiyik” or People of the Meduxnekeag River, a tributary of the 
Wolastoq-St. John that flows through the Town of Houlton, ME. 
 
Our unique tribal culture and traditions are intertwined with our 
environment.  Our tribal citizens and our ancestors have camped; fished for sea run 
fish such as alewives, American eel, blueback herring, Atlantic salmon, and shad; 
2 
 and gathered ash for baskets and fiddleheads (emerging ostrich fern) for food along 
the Meduxnekeag and other tributaries of the Wolastoq-St. John for generations.  
Historically we are also renowned birch bark canoe builders.  Our homelands, 
filled with the productive soils that now grow potatoes, once grew the biggest and 
best canoe birches.  With these light, flexible, sturdy craft we traveled the rivers 
and streams of the Wolastoq-St. John watershed to reach our hunting grounds and 
to portage to streams and rivers in other watersheds.  Evidence of prehistoric 
activities at least as old as 8,000 years exists in fields along the Meduxnekeag.  A 
critical priority of our tribe is to maintain the natural environment that supports the 
fish, animals, and plants on our lands and waters in order to preserve and protect 
our culture and traditions, common welfare, and the health of our Maliseet citizens 
who sustain themselves with those resources.   
 
The Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians’ government-to-government 
relationship with the United States dates to the earliest days of our republic.  Our 
Maliseet Nation, also known as the St. John’s Indians, were signatory to the very 
first treaty entered by the United States – the Treaty of Watertown on July 19, 
1776, just 15 days after the Declaration of Independence.  Our Maliseet ancestors  
and those of the Mi’kmaqs agreed to send 600 of our warriors to fight alongside 
General Washington against Great Britain, and the United States solemnly 
3 
 promised to protect and provide for us.  More than 200 years later, Congress 
confirmed our status as a federally recognized tribe in the Maine Indian Claims 
Settlement Act (MICSA), Pub. L. No. 96-420 (1980).  The Houlton Band is 
“acknowledged to have the immunities and privileges available to federally 
recognized Indian Tribes by virtue of [our] government-to-government relationship 
with the United States as well as the responsibilities, powers, limitations, and 
obligations of such Tribes.”  86 Fed. Reg. 7554 (Jan. 29, 2021).  We are one of the 
four federally recognized Wabanaki Nations, along with the Mi’kmaq Nation, the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe, and the Penobscot Nation. 
 
Despite the 1776 Treaty of Watertown and the 1790 Nonintercourse Act (An 
Act to Regulate Trade and Intercourse with the Indian Tribes), which prohibited 
any sale or transfer of Indian lands to a state or person unless the sale or transfer 
was ratified through a treaty with the United States, we were unlawfully 
dispossessed of our lands.  Beginning around 1870, the State of Maine encouraged 
the non-Indian settlement of Aroostook County by offering land to non-Indian 
settlers at bargain prices.  These settlers occupied our traditional hunting and 
fishing grounds and gradually excluded us from our Maliseet aboriginal territory, 
which originally spanned more than one million acres.  Thus, while we had neither 
signed a treaty ceding our lands to Massachusetts or Maine nor voluntarily left our 
4 
 lands, by the middle of the twentieth century we were landless and were treated as 
“squatters” in our own homeland.  In MICSA, Congress provided the Houlton 
Band just $900,000 to reacquire lands and natural resources along the 
Meduxnekeag River where we could rebuild our community and preserve our 
traditional riverine way of life.  See, e.g., S. Rep. No. 96-957 at 11, 24; H.R. Rep. 
No.  96-1353 (Report of the Dep’t of the Interior, Aug. 25, 1980); Pub. L. No. 96-
420, §5(d) (formerly codified at 25 U.S.C. § 1724(d)).  We have reestablished our 
community near one of the best fishing holes in the river; brown ash and 
fiddlehead ferns grow in abundance along the floodplains; harvesting fiddlehead 
ferns in the spring for food and as a spring tonic continues to be a very important 
traditional practice; and making beautiful, sturdy woven baskets from brown ash is 
a strong and vital part of our enduring culture.   
 
II. Beneficial Federal Law are Critical to the Self-Government and Self-
Determination of the Wabanaki Nations’ and to the Health and Welfare 
of Wabanaki Citizens. 
 
As Chief of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, I stand firmly alongside 
the other Wabanaki Nations and unanimously  support An Act to Amend the Maine 
Indian Claims Settlement Implementing Act and Enact Provisions of Law 
5 
 Regarding the Application of Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations.  
This bill would ensure that our Nations receive equal treatment – with 570 other 
federally recognized tribes nationwide – under laws passed by Congress for the 
benefit of Indians.  This is a small request, but it is an incredibly important one.   
 
While the fundamental purpose of MICSA in 1980 was to settle the 
Wabanaki Nations’ claims to our historic lands in Maine, MICSA also imposed a 
restrictive jurisdictional model, granting the State of Maine broad civil and 
criminal jurisdiction, including civil regulatory authority, over the Wabanaki 
Nations, our citizens, and our reservation and trust lands, unlike the rest of Indian 
Country.  But MICSA went even further, denying to our Nations and our citizens 
the benefits of any federal Indian law passed by Congress that might “affect or 
preempt” state jurisdiction, including both statutes enacted before 1980 and 
statutes enacted after MICSA’s passage.  Pub. L. No. 96-420, §§6(h), 16(b) 
(formerly codified at 25 U.S.C. §§1725(h), 1735(b)).  Section 16(b) provides:  
 
The provisions of any Federal law enacted after the date of enactment of this 
Act for the benefit of Indians, Indian nations, or tribes or bands of Indians, 
which would affect or preempt the application of the laws of the State of 
Maine, including application of the laws of the State to lands owned by or 
6 
 held in trust for Indians, or Indian nations, tribes, or bands of Indians, as 
provided in this Act and the Maine Implementing Act, shall not apply within 
the State of Maine, unless such provision of such subsequently enacted 
Federal law is specifically made applicable within the State of Maine. 
 
Since 1980, Congress has enacted more than 150 laws generally applicable to 
Indian tribes, native people, and Indian lands, but many of these laws “affect or 
preempt” the application of Maine law in some way.  Section 16(b) of MICSA has 
thus had a devastating effect on the Wabanaki Nations’ ability to pursue economic 
development opportunities, provide governmental services to our communities, 
access federal programs and funding, and protect our natural resources under a host 
of federal laws enacted by Congress for the benefit of Indians.  Here are a few 
examples.   
 
Under the Stafford Act, the Wabanaki Nations have been denied the 
authority that other tribes have to directly request a disaster or emergency 
declaration from the President in response to natural disasters and public health 
emergencies in our communities.  This denies us the ability to directly access 
critical federal funding to respond to emergencies like the opioid epidemic.  As a 
Registered Nurse, I am painfully aware that immediate access to drug treatment 
7 
 can be the difference between life and death.  I truly can’t imagine that anyone in 
Congress in 1980 ever imagined or intended that MICSA would threaten the 
Maliseet people with such harm.  Another example is the Violence Against 
Women Reauthorization Act of 2013 (VAWA), which authorized Indian tribes to 
prosecute non-Indian defendants for certain domestic violence crimes against tribal 
members.  Because VAWA affected state jurisdiction, the State of Maine took the 
position that the Wabanaki Nations could not pursue this jurisdiction – jurisdiction 
that Congress specially found necessary to fill a public safety gap in Indian 
Country that led to alarming rates of violence against native women and children.  
Nor are the Wabanaki Nations eligible for treatment as a state (TAS status) under 
environmental laws such as the Clean Water Act.  This lack of authority has 
hampered our decades-long efforts (discussed further below) to improve water 
quality and to restore native salmon populations to the Meduxnekeag River, which 
are especially significant to Maliseet sustenance, spiritual, and ceremonial cultural 
practices.   
 
 MICSA’s restriction on the application of beneficial federal laws to the 
Wabanaki Nations makes it very challenging on a day-to-day basis to exercise our 
basic governmental functions and to develop new tribal institutions.  Like any 
government, our tribe must make difficult decisions about how to allocate its 
8 
 limited financial and staff resources to best serve our community.  There are scores 
of federal statutes that recognize a key role for tribal governments in administering 
federal programs, including in the areas of health care, law enforcement and public 
safety.  But we cannot confidently pursue, invest in, and staff these programs 
because we don’t know whether – or when – the State may challenge our authority 
to administer the programs due to some effect on state jurisdiction.  As a result, for 
decades we have watched tribes across the country  celebrate laws enacted by 
Congress that promote tribal self-government, self-determination, and economic 
development in a host of ways, but we have watched from the sidelines, knowing 
that MICSA denies us an equal opportunity to exercise our rights of self-
determination and self-government.  With the passage of this bill, we would be 
guaranteed that certainty.  We could devote our time and resources to solving the 
problems that Congress has decided must be addressed in Indian County, instead of 
wondering whether MICSA denies us the right to solve them.  And we would 
finally put an end to costly litigation with the State over whether our tribe can 
access the benefits of new Indian laws passed by Congress. 
 
Depriving our tribe of access to the full range of programs, services, and 
authorities that Congress has provided to help build strong tribal governments and 
thriving native communities has very real consequences.  The Harvard Project on 
9 
 American Indian Economic Development’s December 2022 research report 
Economic and Social Impacts of Restrictions on the Applicability of Federal Indian 
Policies to the Wabanaki Nations in Maine (Wabanaki Nations Report), found that 
Maine Indian policy is an extreme outlier and that by denying to the Wabanaki 
Nations full access to federal Indian self-determination law, MICSA has had 
negative economic and social impacts on our Nations, citizens, and rural Maine 
communities.  As a result, Mainers have not witnessed the Wabanaki Nations 
experiencing the same success—economic growth, rising per capita income, and 
robust governmental services—as the rest of the United States has witnessed in 
Indian Country.  Instead, the Harvard Project found that while the real income of 
native people on Indian reservations in the Lower 48 states outside of Maine have 
increased by more than 61% since 1989, the real income of Wabanaki Nation 
citizens has increased by only 9%.  The Harvard Project also found that by 
enabling our Nations to fully access beneficial federal Indian laws, the State would 
enjoy substantial economic benefits, including $330 million in new GDP, more 
than 2,700 new jobs for non-Indians and Indians alike, and $39 million in new 
State and local tax revenues.  This Legislature should seize the opportunity to 
secure these benefits and to make things right—not just for Wabanaki people, but 
for all Mainers. 
 
10 
 The negative effects of denying to the Wabanaki Nations access to federal 
laws that support strong tribal governments and economies have hit home in our 
Maliseet community.  According to a 2010 study, Maliseet citizens lag well behind 
other Mainers in employment, income (72% of our citizens had an annual 
household income of less than $25,000, compared to only 33% of non-Indians), 
and other public health indicators, including depression, alcoholism, and diabetes.  
Four of the five tribal reservations sit within the two rural counties that garner the 
lowest socioeconomic rankings in Maine.  
 
This is a narrow bill.  It makes the Wabanaki Nations eligible to enjoy the 
same benefits and to exercise the same authority  as 570 other federally recognized 
tribes under laws enacted by Congress.  It does not make the general body of 
federal common law – known as federal Indian law – applicable in Maine.  And it 
does not change the overall jurisdictional framework of MICSA, under which the 
State exercises broad jurisdiction over the Wabanaki Nations and our lands.  It only 
withdraws State jurisdiction to the limited extent that it prevents the Wabanaki 
Nations from accessing federal laws enacted for the benefit of Indians.  For 43 
years, our Nations – unique among more than 550 federally recognized tribes – 
have been denied access to all beneficial federal laws that may “affect or preempt” 
the application of State law to the Nations, our citizens, and our lands.  It is time to 
11 
 fix this inequality.  We cannot undo the past, but we can create a better future for  
our future  generations of Maliseet citizens.  By withdrawing State jurisdiction in 
these limited areas, the bill will clarify that there is no barrier to ourWabanaki 
Nations having the same access to federal laws as other tribes.   
 
It is important to emphasize two areas of state authority that this bill will not 
change in any way.  First, this bill will not affect the State’s current jurisdiction 
over crimes or juvenile crimes in any way.  Second, this bill will not affect the 
State’s jurisdiction to regulate gaming by the Wabanaki Nations and expressly 
excludes application of the federal Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (IGRA).  Our 
Nations have been working collaboratively with the State Legislature and 
Governor’s Office to create opportunities that will enable us to share in the 
economic benefits from gaming – benefits that we have been excluded from for too 
long.  Currently, the State only allows two non-Indian corporations to conduct Las 
Vegas-style gaming in Maine, from which they derive tens of millions of dollars in 
profits each year.  Our Nations, however, will have the exclusive ability to offer 
mobile sports betting to the Maine public.  We are looking forward to “going live” 
with sports betting this fall and to creating additional gaming opportunities in the 
future to support state and tribal government services. 
 
12 
 The Houlton Band is committed to continuing its work with the State to 
achieve win-win outcomes for the state-tribal jurisdictional relationship, including 
through state legislation that recognizes the crucial role of sovereign tribal 
governments in providing services, infrastructure, and economic development for 
the benefit of all Mainers, particularly in rural communities.  An Act to Amend the 
Maine Indian Claims Settlement Implementing Act and Enact Provisions of Law 
Regarding the Application of Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations 
will help to advance these efforts.  It will give us new tools to govern our citizens 
and our lands and new revenue streams to provide government services and 
infrastructure in our communities.  From now on, when Congress is considering 
Indian legislation, we will be able to prepare to implement the new law without 
wondering if the State will later challenge our ability to do so.   
 
Despite our inability to access the full range of benefits provided to Indian 
tribes under federal statutes, we have worked hard to build our governmental 
capacity and to exercise our right of self-government for  the benefit of neighboring 
communities.  For example, the Houlton Band has recently donated a police cruiser 
to the Town of Houlton and donated new snow rescue equipment for emergency 
medical services in the Town of Littleton; helped secure grant funding for road 
improvements and a large culvert replacement to provide access to a major 
13 
 employer in Houlton (Tate & Lyle Ingredients) and fish passage on an important 
tributary of the Meduxnekeag River; partnered with the Town of Houlton on a 
$15M road improvement project; and is working closely with the Houlton Water 
Company on water and wastewater infrastructure improvement projects serving 
Maliseet trust lands.  And for more than 30 years the Band has been engaged in 
comprehensive efforts to restore the Meduxnekeag River watershed and restore 
native fish species, including reducing contamination from legacy pollutants such 
as arsenic and DDT, planting riparian buffers, helping farmers implement best 
agricultural management practices, completing more than five miles of instream 
habitat restoration, and partnering with the local Conservation District.  This bill 
will enhance our ability to advance all of these governmental partnerships by 
enabling the Band to participate fully in services, programs, and funding 
opportunities created by future Congresses.              
 
III. Conclusion. 
 
 On behalf of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, I urge you to support the 
An Act to Amend the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Implementing Act and Enact 
Provisions of Law Regarding the Application of Federal Laws Beneficial to the 
Wabanaki Nations.  Each year Congress enacts legislation that gives tribal 
14 
 governments new tools to protect our citizens, create jobs and economic 
opportunities, and provide health care, housing, and other essential services to our 
tribal communities and non-Indian neighbors.  We are only asking for basic 
fairness – to have the same equal access to these programs as the other 570 
federally recognized tribes.   
 
  
 
