Claudine Weatherford
Portland
LD 2004
My name is Claudine Weatherford.  I live in Portland, Maine. I write to express my 
strongest support for LD 2004. Although I “come from away,” I love and respect 
Maine and our people.  I am greatly disappointed that—even disgusted that—we are 
failing our Wabanaki tribes.  
There’s no doubt in my mind that the Wabanaki tribes in Maine have been left behind
and are treated differently—unfairly—compared to the other 570 federally recognized
tribes across the United States.  Because of the 1980 Settlement Act, when Congress 
passes federal legislation for tribes nationwide the tribes in Maine must be explicitly 
written into the legislation, unlike the other federally recognized tribes. This is an 
excessive burden to the tribes. They do not have the resources to track all federal 
legislation and lobby Congress to have them included in each piece of legislation. 
According to an academic report published in 2019, since the 1980 Settlement Act, 
Congress has passed approximately 151 federal laws beneficial to Indian laws.  The 
tribes in Maine do not have access to these laws. Many of the laws which have passed
that the tribes do not have access to would not only benefit the tribes but the 
surrounding rural areas. With the tribes not being able to access various federal 
funding their self-determination and economic vitality have been stunted. Allowing 
access to federal beneficial laws will not only benefit the tribes but rural Maine. 
LD 2004 doesn’t circumvent the 1980’s Settlement Act. This legislation changes a 
provision in the Settlement Act that would at least begin the process of placing the 
tribes in Maine on the same footing as the other 570 federally recognized tribes. 
Please support LD 2004 to start putting the tribes and rural Maine on a path to 
prosperity.
Please vote for LD 2004, and override Governor Mills’ veto if needed.
Thank you for your hard work on behalf of Maine’s citizens.
Sincerely,
Claudine Weatherford
Portland, Maine

