 
 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.org 
 
 
Dear Chair Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary 
Committee, 
 
My name is Devon Stockmayer, I am the Advocacy Supervisor at Preble 
Street. I am writing to encourage you to vote in favor of LD2004: An Act to 
Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations. 
 
At Preble Street, our daily work supporting people experiencing poverty and 
homelessness is, and must be, continually rooted in compassion, mutuality, and 
equity. It is our responsibility to maintain these values in our ongoing 
relationships with clients, and in policy spaces. It is our responsibility to 
uphold these values in a larger arena and to support policies that do so, too. 
Maine is marked, on a national stage, by the inequities experienced by the 
Wabanaki peoples: the Maliseet, Mi’kmaq, Passamaquoddy, and Penobscot, 
which have increased exponentially since the Indian Claims Settlement Act of 
1980. We stand out as a state in our refusal to grant these groups the same set 
of rights as the 570 other federally recognized tribes across the United States. 
Indeed, according to a study published by the Harvard Kennedy School in 
2020, the constraints on Maine tribes imposed by the Indian Claims Settlement 
Act of 1980 have had a markedly negative impact on the economic stability 
and well-being of Maine’s native peoples. Between 1989 and 2020, the 
average per capita gross domestic product growth for tribal peoples in Maine 
was 9%, falling below the 11% national average and paling in comparison to 
the 61% growth for federally recognized tribes in other states. 
   
After repeated attempts at finding a legislative vehicle for tribal sovereignty, 
this bill is the closest Maine has come to offering our native tribes the same 
rights and protections afforded to other federally recognized tribes across the 
country. For decades now, the Maine legislature has danced around the issue of 
sovereignty and come to various states of tension and agreement in efforts to 
improve the rights and access of the Wabanaki nations throughout the state. As 
the bill will allow Maine tribes to benefit from laws made after 1980 and future 
laws that apply to other federally recognized tribes, it is a first step towards 
setting Maine tribes on equal footing with those around the country. 
Particularly of note in the bill’s language is the specific attention drawn to 
issues of tribal land use and environmental protection —which are the realms 
in the Indian Claims Settlement Act that have caused the greatest distress and 
economic damage to Maine’s tribal communities in the decades since.  

 
 To acknowledge and repair the harm caused b the Indian Claims Settlement 
Act of 1980, we must take this significant first step towards restoring full 
rights to the indigenous peoples of Maine. This is also a step in formally 
acknowledging the Wabanaki Peoples as thoughtful stewards of the lands now 
recognized as the state of Maine, long before settlers established a presence 
here. 
 
LD2004 is an opportunity for Maine to right a decades-long error. It is a 
chance to honor the historic presence of the Wabanaki nations in this state and 
to reconsider the nature of our relationships to each other and to the land that 
we all call home.   
 
Please vote ought to pass. 
 
With thanks for your consideration, 
Devon Stockmayer
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to 
homelessness and hunger

 
  
