   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Barbara Burt, Vice -chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lucy Van Hook  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in Support of LD 2004 , “An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the 
Wabanaki Nations ” 
 
May 30, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the J udiciary Committee,  
 
My name is James Myall. I’m an Economic P olicy Analyst at the Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am 
writing on behalf of MECEP  in support of LD 2004 .  
 
The Houlton Band of Maliseet  Indians , Passamaquoddy  Tribe, Penobscot Nation, and Mi’kmaq Nation 
are recognized under federal law . But unlike the 570 other federally recognized  tribes , the four  tribes in 
Maine  are unfairly excluded from the v ery laws and programs expressly created by Congress to benefit 
Indigenous peoples. Contrary to the aims of these federal programs, the intentional exclusion of the 
Wabanaki  nations  has resulted in increased injustice and economic harm  to Indigenous people in Maine.  
LD 2004 , An Act to Res tore Access to Federal laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations , would ensure 
that t ribes in Maine  are included in federal laws and programs intend ed to benefit Indian Country . The 
Maine Center for Econ omic Policy urges  the committee to take action to resto re fairness for Wabanaki 
people by passing this bill.    
 
The exclusion of the Wabanaki nations  is a direct result of  the restrictive language of the Maine Indian 
Claims Settlement Act  (MICSA) and its corresponding Maine legislation, the Maine Implementing Act  
(MIA). When ratified by Congress through MICSA in 1980, MIA diminish ed the tribes’ sovereign claims 
and reduce d their  standing to  that akin to  municipalities . Even more harmful, MICSA contains unusual 
provision s that block most federal Indian  law from  applying to the Wabanaki nations  if the federal law 
affect s the application of Maine  law. The Wabanaki nations are the only federally recognized tribes 
excluded in this way.  
 
Since 1980, the Wabanaki nations  and their surrounding communities  have lost out on the b enefits of  
more than 150 federal laws1 includ ing the Violence Against Women Act , which allows tribes to 
prosecute non -Indian defendants for domestic violence crimes against tribal members  within tribal 
territory ; the Indian Health Care Improvement Act , which allows tribes to hire urgently -needed medical 
professionals licensed in other state s; the Stafford Act , which allows tribes to directly seek disaster relief 
and emergency assistance , and the Clean Air  Act and Clean Water Act , which authorize  tribes to assume 
primary regulatory authority for administering federal environmental programs on tribal  lands. In each 
of these cases , Maine  weapon ized the Settlement Acts’  restrictive language to wage  lengthy and 
expensive legal battles to deny Wabanaki  nations both  the funds and authority granted to all other 
recognized tribes.   
 
 
1 https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/3815  Task Force on Changes to the Maine Indian Claims Settlement 
Implementing Act  
   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Barbara Burt, Vice -chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lucy Van Hook  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Our analysis suggests that exclusion from federal grant programs has cost Wabanaki tribes million s of 
dollars in lost funding  since 1980 . Those funds, targeted to support agriculture, infrastructure, 
education, transpor tation, justice systems, and food security can never be reclaimed. Further studies 
show that the Settlement Acts’ restrictions have resulted in a severe economic lag for all four Wabanaki 
nations in comparison to similarly sized tribes outside of  Maine , representing thousands of lost jobs, 
millions of dollars in lost tax revenue, and loss of opportunity for both tribal and non -tribal citizens2. 
 
In 2019 the Maine legislature authorized a task force to review MIA and recommend consensus changes . 
The task force, which included among its members chiefs of each of the four Wabanaki tribes as well as 
legislators who voted to pass MIA in 1980 , submitted  22 consensus recommendations3. Addressing the 
inability of the Wabanaki to access the benefits of fe deral legislation is among them.   
 
LD 2004  update s MIA to allow the Wabanaki nations  to benefit from f ederal laws enacted to benefit 
Indian Country . These changes would represent  a significant step towards equalizing the federal 
treatment of Wabanaki tribes with that of tribes in the rest of the country. Th e legislation is supported 
by all Wabanaki tribes in Maine  as well as a coalition of more than 90 Maine organizations  represen ting 
tens of thousands  of Mainers . Together we  understand that improving tribal -state relations, reducing 
costly legal battles, and providin g tools for  prosperity benefit all who live in Maine.  
 
I urge you to vote “ought to pass” on the legislation. As al ways, if you have any questions, I can be 
reached at jmyall@mecep.org . Thank you.  
 
 
 
2 https://ash .harvard.edu/publications/economic -and-social -impacts -restrictions -applicability -federal -indian -
policies  Harvard Kennedy School, Economic and Social Impacts of Restrictions on the Applicability of Federal Indian 
Policies to the Wabanaki Nations in Maine  
3 https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/3815  Task Force on Changes to the Maine Indian Claims Settlement 
Implementing Act  
