Episcopal Diocese of Maine, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, Presbyterian Church (USA), 
Religious Society of Friends, Unitarian Universalist Association, United Church of Christ, United Methodist Church  
 
Testimony before the Judiciary Committee 
 
LD 2004: An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations 
 
May 31, 2023 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Committee: 
 
I am Rev. Jane Field, Executive Director of the Maine Council of Churches. The Council has seven mainline 
Protestant member-denominations and two associate member congregations who together represent 437 local 
churches in Maine with 55,000 parishioners in their care. I am testifying on behalf of the Council in SUPPORT 
of LD 2004.   
 
As we have stated in previous testimony before this Committee, the Maine Council of Churches affirms our 
respect for and recognition of the inherent sovereignty of Maine’s indigenous tribes and we are committed (1) 
to support their right to self-determination, self-governance, self-sufficiency, and cultural identity, (2) to address 
our own racism, and (3) to promote social justice.  Toward those ends, we call on our legislature to strengthen 
our state’s actions to honor our collective responsibility to the tribes to interact with them on a mutually 
respectful and appropriate government-to-government basis.   
 
As you know, because of the 1980 Land Claims Settlement Act, the Wabanaki tribes in Maine are currently 
treated differently than the other 570 federally recognized tribes in the United States: unless they are explicitly 
written into a piece of federal legislation, they are excluded from any of the benefits it provides. This is an 
excessive burden. The Wabanaki tribes do not have the resources to track all federal legislation and lobby 
Congress to be included in each separate bill (and even if they did have the resources, they shouldn’t have to 
waste them in such an absurd and unnecessary paper chase!). 
 
One of the reasons the Wabanaki tribes don’t have resources?  Because, since passage of the 1980 Land 
Settlement Claims Act, 151 federal Indian laws have been passed from which they were excluded (Suffolk 
University report, 2019).  Without access to the federal funds attached to those bills, the self-determination and 
economic vitality of the Wabanaki tribes have been stunted. Tribes in other states who did receive these funds 
have achieved over 60% growth in per capita income since 1980, while Wabanaki tribes saw only 9% growth in 
the same period (“Economic and Social Impacts of Restrictions on the Applicability of Federal Indian Policies 
to the Wabanaki Nations in Maine,” Harvard Kennedy School, 2022). And the Wabanaki aren’t the only people 
in Maine who have been harmed by these exclusions—those federal resources would have benefitted rural areas 
surrounding the tribes, too. 
 
LD 2004 does not circumvent the 1980 Land Claims Settlement Act. It simply changes one provision so that we 
can begin the process of ensuring the tribes in Maine have the same opportunities for self-determination and 
economic growth as the other 570 federally recognized tribes already have, thus putting them and their rural 
neighbors on a path to prosperity. 
 
Passage of LD 2004 is one step toward promoting harmony, reconciliation, and mutual understanding between 
our State and tribal communities.  It is a step that is long overdue. For these reasons, the Maine Council of 
Churches supports LD 2004 and urges you to vote OUGHT TO PASS. 

Jane Field
Maine Council of Churches
LD 2004
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Committee:
I am Rev. Jane Field, Executive Director of the Maine Council of Churches. The 
Council has seven mainline Protestant member-denominations and two associate 
member congregations who together represent 437 local churches in Maine with 
55,000 parishioners in their care. I am testifying on behalf of the Council in 
SUPPORT of LD 2004.  
As we have stated in previous testimony before this Committee, the Maine Council of
Churches affirms our respect for and recognition of the inherent sovereignty of 
Maine’s indigenous tribes and we are committed (1) to support their right to 
self-determination, self-governance, self-sufficiency, and cultural identity, (2) to 
address our own racism, and (3) to promote social justice.  Toward those ends, we call
on our legislature to strengthen our state’s actions to honor our collective 
responsibility to the tribes to interact with them on a mutually respectful and 
appropriate government-to-government basis.  
As you know, because of the 1980 Land Claims Settlement Act, the Wabanaki tribes 
in Maine are currently treated differently than the other 570 federally recognized 
tribes in the United States: unless they are explicitly written into a piece of federal 
legislation, they are excluded from any of the benefits it provides. This is an excessive
burden. The Wabanaki tribes do not have the resources to track all federal legislation 
and lobby Congress to be included in each separate bill (and even if they did have the 
resources, they shouldn’t have to waste them in such an absurd and unnecessary paper
chase!).
One of the reasons the Wabanaki tribes don’t have resources?  Because, since passage
of the 1980 Land Settlement Claims Act, 151 federal Indian laws have been passed 
from which they were excluded (Suffolk University report, 2019).  Without access to 
the federal funds attached to those bills, the self-determination and economic vitality 
of the Wabanaki tribes have been stunted. Tribes in other states who did receive these 
funds have achieved over 60% growth in per capita income since 1980, while 
Wabanaki tribes saw only 9% growth in the same period (“Economic and Social 
Impacts of Restrictions on the Applicability of Federal Indian Policies to the 
Wabanaki Nations in Maine,” Harvard Kennedy School, 2022). And the Wabanaki 
aren’t the only people in Maine who have been harmed by these exclusions—those 
federal resources would have benefitted rural areas surrounding the tribes, too.
LD 2004 does not circumvent the 1980 Land Claims Settlement Act. It simply 
changes one provision so that we can begin the process of ensuring the tribes in 
Maine have the same opportunities for self-determination and economic growth as the
other 570 federally recognized tribes already have, thus putting them and their rural 
neighbors on a path to prosperity.
Passage of LD 2004 is one step toward promoting harmony, reconciliation, and 
mutual understanding between our State and tribal communities.  It is a step that is 
long overdue. For these reasons, the Maine Council of Churches supports LD 2004 
and urges you to vote OUGHT TO PASS.

