Joe Hall
Auburn
LD 2004
To the distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee:
My name is Joe Hall, and I live in Auburn. My legislators are Rep. Laurel Libby and 
Sen. Eric Brakey. I am writing in strong support of LD 2004, An Act to Enact the 
Advancing Equality for Wabanaki Nations Act. I write as a professor of history at 
Bates College who has spent many years learning about Wabanaki history.
You will likely hear from many who will note the economic advantages of including 
Wabanaki Nations (the Mi’kmaq, the Maliseet, the Penobscot, and the 
Passamaquoddy) among the 570 other federally recognized tribes to whom federal 
Indian laws directly apply. You will almost certainly hear from many pointing out the 
absurdity of the 1980 settlement for restricting the sovereignty of Maine’s First 
Peoples to the political status of municipalities. I add my voice to those raising these 
points.
I want to add another point. When I wrote to Senator Angus King last year to urge 
him to support Rep. Jared Golden’s federal bill to extend these same federal rights to 
Wabanaki, he offered only one legitimate reason: the 1980 settlement was a product 
of negotiation between the state and the tribes. Adjustments should begin with 
tribal-state negotiations. (Senator Collins offered no response to a similar letter 
addressed to her office.) Those negotiations are what produced the recommendations 
from the 2019 Task Force on Changes to the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act, 
which was a consensus document from state legislators, tribal chiefs, a designee from 
the Governor, a designee from the Attorney General’s Office, and a member of the 
Maine Indian Tribal-State Commission. Subsequent negotiations have produced (and 
will, if necessary, revise) this bill. They are the work of careful advocates and 
legislators over the course of years and even decades. It is time now to act on this 
work and these conversations. 
I am not a legislator, but I know the legislative process requires great care and that 
any result should have clear benefits. This bill is the product of care and will promote 
important benefits for Wabanaki and the state. Thank you for your part in this 
process, and I urge you to submit it to the full legislature as “ought to pass.”
Sincerely,
Joe Hall
Auburn, ME 
Joehall04210@gmail.com

