 
 
An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 2004  
Wednesday, May 31, 2023  
 
 
Chairwoman Carney, Chairman Moonen and distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee, 
my name is John Dieffenbacher -Krall , and I’m the Executive Director of the Wabanaki Alliance. 
I am testifying in support of LD 2004 An Act to  Restore Access to Federal  Laws Beneficial to 
the Wabanaki Nations . 
 
This legislation originated from the 2019 Task Force on Changes to the Maine Indian Claims 
Settlement Act . The bipartisan Task Force consisted of five legislators, five tribal Chiefs, a 
Governor’s designee, an Attorney General’s designee and a member of the Maine Indian Tribal -
State Commission. LD 2004  is just one consensus recommendation (Consensus 
Recommendat ion #20) out of twenty -two that the Task Force supported. This Committee has an 
opportunity to work solely on one recommendation from the report to begin chipping away at 
restoring self -determination to the tribes in Maine.   
 
This legislation begins, albe it incrementally, placing the tribes on a road to a more prosperous 
future for their communit ies and the areas around them  as well . Because the tribes have not been 
able to access approximately 151 federal Indian beneficial laws  (Suffolk University Law, 
Friederichs, N., 2019)  since 1980  due to the rigidity of Settlement Act, they have been left 
behind while other tribes across the country prosper. Passing this legislati on will be a small step 
towards fair and equitable treatment of the tribes in Maine compa red to the other 570 federally 
recognized tribes across the country.  
Wabanaki Nations in Maine drastically underperform economically compared to the rest of 
Maine and other tribes across the country. The report, Economic and Social Impacts of 
Restrictions  on the Applicability of Federal Indian Policies to the Wabanaki Nations  (Kalt, 
Besaw Bedford & Taylor, 2022) , highlights , for example , the child poverty rate in 2019 spanned 
as “low” as 40 percent on some tribal lands in Maine and as high as 77 percent on others, 
compared to Maine’s 15 percent overall. The per capita income growth between 1989 and 2020 
average d 61 percent for tribal citizens elsewhere in the co untry but just a meager 9 percent for 
Wabanaki citizens in Maine.  These statistics illuminate the unfortunate and stark reality that over 
the past 43 years the Settlement Act of 1980 has truly stifled economic prosperity for the tribes  
and depressed surrou nding communities in Maine . The report authors find Maine is losing an 
estimated $330 million in gross domestic product (GDP)  annually , think of it as economic 

activity, 2,743 tribal and non -Indian jobs, and $68 million in tribal government revenue . The 
report concludes that excluding Wabanaki Nations from federal benefic ial acts intended to boost 
Indian Country has constrained their ability to choose their economic path and is what has 
stymied their political development  compared to many of their fell ow tribes .  
LD 2004 is a step forward towards prosperity. The Wabanaki Alliance asks you to help the tribes 
in Maine take that step forward by voting in favor of LD 2004.  
 
