Testimony  in support of LD 2004, An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to 
the Wabanaki Nations  
To the Judiciary Committee  
by Josh Caldwell, Climate & Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  
May 31 , 2023  
  
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and distinguished members of the  Judiciary 
Committee , my name is Josh Caldwell. I am the Climate and Clean Energy Outreach 
Coordinator at the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM), and I am submitting testimony 
today in support  of LD 2004 , An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the 
Wabanaki Nations . 
 
The Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM) is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit membership 
organization with more than 25,000 supporters statewide and beyond. For more than 6 0 years, 
NRCM has been protecting, restoring, and conserving Maine’s environment, now and for future 
generations. We work statewide to:  
• Protect the health of Maine’s rivers, lakes, streams, and coastal waters;  
• Promote sustainable communities through initiatives that reduce toxics pollution and 
waste;  
• Decrease air and climate -changing pollution through energy efficiency and renewable 
sources;  
• Conserve Maine lands and wildlife habitat, including our treasured North Woods; and  
• Defend the federal environmental policies and programs that help protect Maine.  
Our work is conducted upon unceded Wabanaki land, and it is incumbent upon us as an 
environmental advocacy organization to support the Indigenous peoples of this land. NRCM 
recognizes and honors the Penobscot, Passamaquoddy, Mi’kmaq, and Maliseet Tribes in Maine. 
The Wabanaki  have been the steward s of the land that comprises  Maine for more  than 10,000 
years, through periods of coloni zation, attempted extirpation, broken treaties, forced separation, 
and countless injust ices and indignities. Despite this tragic  history, the Wabanaki maintain 
spiritual, cultural, and physical connection with these lands.  

 
We acknowledge this history and recognize Indigenous sovereignty. NRCM is committed to 
actively using our voices, resources, and  influence to support Tribes of the Wabanaki 
Confederacy. We know how important it has been over the 63 years since our organiza tion was 
founded — and how essential it will continue to be — to work together with the Wabanaki to 
protect the land, air, water, and wildlife of Maine.  
 
While the legislation before you would not fully restore sovereignty to the Tribes in Maine, it 
would make significant strides toward putting the Tribes in Maine on equal footing with the 
other 570 federally recog nized Tribes in the country. The Wabanaki are unique in their position 
relative to the state , which does not allow them to benefit  from  federal laws and or access all of  
the same funding as all other tribes . A report from Suffolk University published in 2019 
identified 151 Federal laws passed from 1980 -2019 that are “beneficial to Indians and Indi an 
nations” but that do not apply to Tribes in Maine due to provisions in the Maine Indian Land 
Claims Settlement Act.1 
 
A report by the Harvard Kennedy School published in 2022 found that the inability of the Tribes 
in Maine to self -govern and access the same federal laws and grants as other federally 
recognized Tribes ha s had distinct and measurable negative economic impac ts on the Tribes in 
Maine.2  
 
Although it is late in the legislative session, we urge you to vote Ought to Pass on  LD 2004,  a 
bill that will help put Maine Tribes on an equal footing with those that h ave full access to federal 
laws and funding intended for Tribes across the United States.  
  
 
1 https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/3636  
2 https://ash.harvard.edu/publications/economic -and-social -impacts -restrictions -applicability -federal -indian -
policies  
