June & Roy Smoot
Kennebunk
LD 2004
Sen. Anne Carney
Rep. Matt Moonen
Maine State Legislature Judiciary Committee
Re:  LD 2004, An Act to Enact the Advancing Equality for Wabanaki Nations Act
Wabanaki tribes in Maine are treated differently than all other 570 federally 
recognized tribes across our country.  Because of the 1980 Settlement Act, when 
Congress passes federal legislation for tribes nationwide, tribes in Maine must be 
explicitly written into the legislation unlike all other other federally recognized tribes. 
This is an excessive burden to Wabanaki tribes and unfair in every sense.  They do 
not have the resources to track all federal legislation and lobby Congress to have them
included in each piece of legislation.
Think of this burden if your town had to be written into every piece of legislation 
passed at the Maine legislature where you currently serve to do what is best for all 
Mainers, including your town.  
We live in Kennebunk and our State Senator is Joseph Rafferty and State 
Representative is Daniel Sayre.  If Kennebunk had to be specifically added to each 
piece of state legislation passed, it would be impossible for our state legislators to 
include our town.  With nearly 3,000 pieces of legislation being considered just this 
legislative session, our legislators would never be able to include Kennebunk in each 
one.  They’d be running around frantically to each committee or try putting an 
amendment on each bill before it reaches the floor. THAT is what we’re asking 
Wabanaki tribes in Maine to do at Congress ... in Washington D.C.
In 2019, approximately 151 federal beneficial Indian laws passed by Congress were 
found by Suffolk University since the Settlement Act was implemented in 1980.  
Tribes in Maine do not have access to the benefits of these laws, while all other 570 
federally recognized tribes in America do.  Many of these laws were passed such that 
Wabanaki tribes do not have access to them.  They would not only benefit them, but 
also non-native Mainers in surrounding rural areas.  With the tribes not being able to 
access various federal funding, their self-determination and economic vitality have 
been stunted dramatically.  Allowing access to federal beneficial laws will not only 
benefit Wabanaki tribes, but also citizens in rural Maine. 
Taking each piece of legislation passed on a case by case basis would take decades.  
For example, in 2013 the Violence Against Woman’s Act was finally amended to 
include Native American women.  However, the tribes in Maine were not included.  
Maine finally passed legislation mirroring the federal law to include Wabanaki tribes 
and women in Maine in 2020.  Incomprehensible at best.  Why did it take seven years 
for Wabanaki tribes in Maine to protect their tribal members from domestic violence?
This legislation doesn’t circumvent Maine's 1980’s Settlement Act.  It changes a 
provision in the Settlement Act that would at least begin the process of placing 
Wabanaki tribes in Maine on the same footing as the other 570 federally recognized 
tribes.  Please support LD 2004 to start putting Wabanaki tribes and their non-Native 
neighbors in rural Maine on a path to prosperity, better health and better education. 
June and Roy Smoot

