May  31, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
RE: LD 2004 – An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the 
Wabanaki Nations  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the Government 
Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this 
opportunity to submit written comments in support of LD 2004 – An Act to 
Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization 
dedicated to conserving the lands and waters on which all li fe depends. Guided 
by science, we create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s 
toughest challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We use a 
collaborative approach that engages local communities, governments, the 
private sector, and other partners.  TNC  has been leading conservation in Maine 
for more than 60 years and is the 12th largest landowner in  the state, owning 
and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  
 
Since the passage of  the 1980 Settlement Act, when Congress passes federal 
legislation, the tribes in Maine must be explicitly written into  it in order for them 
to benefit from it . This burden is un ique to the Wabanaki tribes – it does not 
apply to the other 570 federally recognized tribes across the country.  
 
This unique circumstance has put the Wabanaki Tribes and the surrounding 
communities at a disadvantage. A report published by Suffolk Universi ty in 2019 
outlined the federal beneficial Indian laws passed by Congress since 1980. They 
found approximately 151 federal laws  which were passed by Congress but did 
not explicitly include the Wabanaki  tribes. These federal laws cover a wide 
range of beneficial programs and funding opportunities , from infrastructure 
improvements, employment training, conservation, child care, safety, etc. – all 
of which are inaccessible to the Wabanaki tribes. LD 2004 would address this 
longstanding injustice.   
 
When the sovereignty of Indigenous People is respect ed and they have the 
opportunity to manage lands and waters, that management contributes to 
durable conservation and vibrant communities. TNC  has committed to work 
with and in support of the Wabanaki Tribes in Maine to achieve this goal. We 
believe  that the Wabanaki  Tribes ought to be treated like the other federally -
recognized tribes across the country  and that one of the most effective and 
enduring actions we can take is to strengthen Indigenous Peoples’ voices, 
choices, and actions.  This is a major focus of TNC’s work around the world.  
 
LD 2004  is a critical step toward recognizing the rights to self -determination 
and sovereignty of the Wabanaki Tribes of Maine, which TNC  strongly supports.  
We urge this committee to support LD 2004 . Thank you for the opportunity to 
comment.  
