Kerry Sack
Old Town
LD 2004
Please Support LD 2004 
My name is Kerry Sack and I live in Old Town. 
In case you may be unsure about your support for LD 2004, there is reliable data 
available from the U.S. Census Bureau, the American Community Survey, the U.S. 
Government Accountability Office, Federal Reserve Economic Data, the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, and more than 77 additional reference sources.
This demographic and economic data confirms that compared to 48 other states, 
Maine has fallen behind. But supporting LD 2004 will lead to improved economic 
development, education, health, social well-being, housing and environmental 
prosperity for Maine tribes and surrounding communities.      LINK to Report: 
https://ash.harvard.edu/publications/economic-and-social-impacts-restrictions-applica
bility-federal-indian-policies
And from the very beginning of the 1980 Maine Indian Land Claims Settlement Act, 
all Maine leadership stakeholders clearly recognized that continuous assessment and 
recommendations regarding the Act would be needed going forward, so that is why 
State funding has staffed MITSC since the 1980 Act was implemented. From the 
MITSC.org website:
MITSC’s principal responsibilities are to continually review the effectiveness of the 
Settlement and the social, economic, and legal relationship between the Houlton Band
of Maliseet Indians, Passamaquoddy Tribe, Penobscot Nation and the State of Maine.
Your support for LD 2004 additionally aligns with legislation from the 2019 Task 
Force on Changes to the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act. The bipartisan Task 
Force of five legislators, five tribal Chiefs, a Governor’s designee, an Attorney 
General’s designee and a member of the Maine Indian Tribal-State Commission 
proposed that the legislature support its Consensus Recommendation #20 (=LD 
2004). 
We had many years to learn how and why the data now shows how and why Maine 
has fallen behind since 1980, so please vote to find out what it will be like for Maine 
tribes and communities to benefit from improved prosperity going into the future.
Please let ME find out what benefits may be gained by your vote in support of LD 
2004. 
Thank you.
Kerry Sack
