 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.or g 
 
 
 
Joint  Standing  Committee  on The Judiciary  
Testimony  of Mary  Bonauto  for GLBTQ  Legal  Advocates  & Defenders  
In Support of  
LD 2004,  An Act to Restore  Access  to Federal  Laws  Beneficial  to the Wabanaki  Nations - OTP  
LD 1970,  An Act to Enact  the Maine  Indian  Child  Welfare  Act - OTP  
LD 1679, An Act Regarding  the Maine  Indian -Tribal  Commission  -OTP  
LD 1620,  An Act to Amed  the Laws  Regarding  the Mi’kmaq  Nation  -OTP  
 
May 31, 2023 
  
 
Senator  Carney,  Representative  Moonen , and Distinguished  Members  of the Judiciary  
Committee,  
  
My name  is Mary  Bonauto  and on behalf  of GLBTQ  Legal  Advocates  & Defenders  (“GLAD”) , I 
appreciate  the opportunity  to support  these  important  bills.    I also apologize  for the brevity  of 
this testimony  in light of the importance  of the bills.    
 
GLAD  supports  each of these  bills because  each,  in it own way,  seeks  to support  the integrity,  
health,  well-being  of the people  of the Wabanaki  Nations  and of the Mi’kmaq  Nation  who,  
among  many  other  things,  are our neighbors.  
 
LD 2004  
While  GLAD  supported  the sovereignty  bill, LD 1626,  in the 130th Legislature1, we recognize  
that LD 2004  would  include,  as set forth  in the bill and as relevant,  the protections  of many  of 
the federal  laws enacted  since  1980  that create  or extend  protections  of other  laws to federally -
recognized  Tribes.  Those  laws range  from  supports  for public  health , economic  development,  
improve d job and school  opportunities,  veterans,  prevent ing and address ing substance  use 
disorders,  and support ing  first responders  in rural  areas,  among  many,  many  others .2 This can 
only strengthen  the people  who are members  of or affiliated  with the Nations  and Tribes  
represented  here in Maine,  and build  out the common  good  for all of us. 
 
 
 
 
1  GLAD’s testimony can be found at: 
http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=10005571   
The 2020  Task  Force  Report  contained  22 consensus  recom mendations,  each of which  was detailed  in that bill. See 
State  of Maine,  Task  Force  on Changes  to the Maine  Indian  Claims  Settlement  Implementing  Act (January  2020),  
available  at:  https://legislature.maine.gov/maine -indian -claims -tf  at pp. ii-v. (hereafter,  “Report ”). 
2   See Report,  Appendix  N, Report  on Federal  Laws  Enacted  After  October  10, 1980  for the Benefit  of Indians  or 
Indian  Nations . 
1 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advoca tes & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.or g LD 1970  
GLAD also supports LD 1970  because we believe it remains true that Indian children should be 
able to stay in tribal communities, and connected to their cu lture, religion and language, even 
when they are drawn into the child protective/child welfare process.  And of course, it cannot be 
forgotten that states, including Maine, removed children from their families of origin because of 
hostility, misunderstandi ng and a failure to recognize our common humanity and the overriding 
importance of family integrity for all people.3  Downeast Magazine’s reporting in Shattered  is 
among those provid ing a window into urgent issues and lifelong harm of separating Native 
children from their families.4 
 
We also note that in enacting this bill, Maine would join other states, including Alaska,  
California,  Oregon,  Washington,  Colorado,  Iowa,  Minnesota,  Michigan,  Nebraska,  New  Mexico,  
Oklahoma,  Wisconsin  and Wyoming  in having  state level  ICWAs.   This is all the more  
important  as the U.S. Supreme  Court’s  consider s the constitutionality  of the federal  ICWA  law in   
Brackeen  v. Haaland , with a decision  likely  by the end of June.5   
  
LD 1679  
As to the Maine  Indian  Tribal -State  Commission,  LD 1679  is a modest  and sensible  bill that 
makes  adjustments  for the required  quorum  and votes  authorizing  action  when  there  are 
vacancies  in appointed  members.   There  is every  reason  to allow  the Commission’s  work  to 
move  forward  in such a contingency.    
 
LD 1620  
We are not familiar  with the details  of what  is available  as a concept  only,  but urge an OTP  or 
carryover  so this may be developed  in the second  session.    
 
In sum,  GLAD  supports  LD 2004,  1970,  1679  and 1620  and urges  you to vote ought  to pass.   
  
  
Attorney Mary L. Bonauto (she/her)  
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders  
257 Deering Ave., #203  
Portland, ME 04102  
Mbonauto@glad.org  
 
 
3 See, e.g.,  Report of the Maine Wabanaki -State Child Welfare Truth & Reconciliation Commission, available 
through links at https://participedia.net/case/8437  (summary, describing astonishing child welfare removal rates 
of children from Native  families ). 
4 Virginia M. Wrigt, Shattered, Downeast Magazine,  July, 2015,  available at:  
https://downeast.com/features/wabanaki -people -shattered/   
5 Sara Tiano,  Tracking  Efforts  to Pass State -Level  ICWA  Laws,  The Imprint  – Youth  & Family  News, May 10, 2023,  
available  at:  https://imprintnews.org/youth -services -insider/tracking -efforts -to-pass-state-level -icwa -laws/241211  
(identifying  Alaska,  California,  Oregon,  Washington,  Iowa,  Minnesota,  Michigan,  Nebraska,  New  Mexico,  Wisconsin  
and Oklahoma  as states  with previously  existing  state ICWA  laws,  and Colorado,  and Wyoming  as two states  that 
have  done  so since  the U.S. Supre me Court’s  consideration  of the constitutionality  of ICWA  in Brackeen  v. Haaland ,  
https://www.scotusblog.com/case -files/cases/haaland -v-brackeen/   (SCOTUSblog  case page).  
