{mmanahan.1}  
14604397.1  
#16067536v1  
May 30, 2023 
VIA ELECTRONIC PORTAL 
https://www.mainelegislature.org/testimony/  
Senator Anne Carney, Chair  
Representative Matt Moonen , Chair  
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House  Station, Room 438  
Augusta, ME  04333  
Re: LD 2004, An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki 
Nations  
Dear Sen. Ca rney and Rep . Moonen : 
On behalf of a coalition of municipalities and sanitary and sewer districts that have a strong 
interest in ensuring that the State maintains jurisdiction over Maine’s natural resources, I 
am writing to express our opposition to the above -captioned bill.  A list of our coalition 
members is attached as Exhibit A . 
We oppose the bill for multiple reason s: 
•It was submitted too late in the legislative session to allow any reasonable
opportunity for meaningful review to fully understand its potential impacts, and to
allow a meaningful discussion of those impacts.  There is simply no excuse for
waiting until such a late date to submit such significant legislation.   We strongly
oppose use of that strategy.
•These issues are complicated, and changes to the Maine Indian Claims Settlement
Implementing Act (the Maine Implementing Act, or MIA) should not be rushed.
Unintended consequences will result.  By way of background, I am attaching as
Exhibit B a copy of an article I coauthored several years ago, summarizing the
genesis of the Settlement Acts and some of the tribes’ efforts over the years to
displace State re gulation of natural resources.  You will note that at the end of the
article I wrote that it may be appropriate to amend the Settlement Acts, but that in
doing so we must first understand the ramifications relating to Maine's economy and
make sure that any  legislation amending the Settlement Acts is clear.  Our concern is
that this legislation is unclear and too broad and completely guts the delicate balance
the Settlement Acts have achieved over the last 4 3 years, including throug h
lit
igation.  This will result in yet more litigation and another spiral into lega l
u
ncertainty.MATTHEW D. MANAHAN  
Merrill’s Wharf  
254 Commercial Street  
Portland, ME  04101  
P 2
07.791. 1189 
F 207.791.1350  
C 207.807.4653  
mmanahan @pierceatwood.com  
pierceatwood.com  
A
dmitted in: MA, ME, NH  
Judiciary Committee 
May 30, 2023 
Page 2 
#16067536v1  •The bill effectively seeks to repeal the MIA to remove State or municipal jurisdiction
over tribal reservation and trust lands.   This would be done by render ing ineffective
two provi sions in the federal Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act that make it
possible for the State of Maine to apply a uniform set of environmental and land uselaws on all land within the state, including tribal land.  Federal laws that affect or
preempt Maine’s  regulatory  jurisdiction do not apply in Maine, but this language
would allow such laws to apply in Maine.  So, for example, the tribes could obtain
Treatment as a State (TAS) authority under the Clean Water Act,  even though TAS
status would allow the trib es to displace Maine’s environmental laws and would
require Maine DEP to incorporate downstream tribal standards into licenses DEPissues.  These  provisions would make clear that Maine law does not apply to Maine
Tribes’ lands and waters and  that Maine no longer has jurisdiction over those lands
and waters.  That’s what happened in a 1996  federal court case involving the City
Albuquerque wastewater treatment plant, which had to comply  with a downstream
tribal water quality standard that was 1,000 times stri cter than the federal Safe
Drinking Water standard.  City of Albuquerque v. Browner , 865 F. Supp. 733 (D.N.M.
1993), aff’d 97 F.3d 415 (10th Cir. 1996).
•These provisions would allow the tribes to create their own environmental and landuse regulations separate from the State’s environmental laws and regulations, andthe tribes would not be subject to the State’s laws.  This dual system of regulation
would allow Maine’s tribes to regulate Maine municipalities, companies, and citizens.The tribes would have the authority to set standards without considering nontribal
members’ comments or economic interests.  Dual standards would also create
compliance burdens and confusion.   Any person who wants to conduct an activity
(such as removing a dam, doing bridgework, or building a road) that could result in
the discharge of sediment into tribal waters would have to obtain a permit both fromthe United States and from the tribe.
•If you amend the MIA now and later find out that the amendments have created ajurisdictio nal nightmare, and that the State has lost control of its environmental
destiny, you cannot simply repeal or revise the amendments.   Section 6(e)(1) of the
federal Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act allows for amendments to the MIA, but
only if both the State and the tribes agree.  25 U.S.C. § 1725(e)(1).
The 1980 Settlement Act was hotly negotiated by the State and the tribes, and it was a 
compromise that established a unique relationship between the tribes and the State unlike 
that between any other tribes and states in the country.  The settlement gave the tribes 
federal recognition, 300,000 acres of land, and over $81 million (over $250 million in 
today’s dollars).  At the same time, the settlement also recognized the State’s interest in 
having its laws,  including specifically those dealing with the environment and natural 
resources, apply uniformly throughout Maine.   This was very important to the State and is a 
fundamental underpinning of the Settlement Act.   This bill would disregard the State’s and 
municipalities’ legitimate interests in having a uniform system of environmental and land use laws that applies throughout the State and would result in many more decades of 
contentious litigation to resolve new disputes about the scope of tribal authority to displace 
Maine’s authority.  We ask that you oppose this bill.  
#16067536v1  
Judiciary Committee 
May 30, 2023 
Page 3 
Thank you for your consideration . 
Sincerely, 
Matthew D. Manahan  
E
nclosure s 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT A  
  
MAINE NATURAL RESOURCES JURISDICTION COALITION MEMBERS 
May 30, 2023
Baileyville, Town of 
Calais, City of 
Carrabassett Valley, Town of
Dover-Foxcroft, Town of 
East Millinocket, Town of 
Guilford-Sangerville Sanitary District 
Howland, Town of 
Lincoln Sanitary District 
Lincoln, Town of 
Mattawamkeag, Town of 
Millinocket, Town of 
Veazie Sewer District 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT B  
  
Water, Tribal Claitns, and Maine's 
Not-So-Settled Settletnent Acts 
Matthew D. Manahan and Catherine R. Connors 
I n most regions of the United States, control over natural 
resources vis-a-vis American Indian (hereinafter Indian) 
tribes is addressed at the federal level. Maine, however, 
is not like other states. The history of federal-state-tribal 
control over Maine waters tells a unique and at times tortured 
tale still being written in the courts. The moral of the story so 
far is that, with sufficient financing and fading memories, even 
the clearest settlement language will be challenged, over and 
over and over again. 
In examining the period when colonists from England, and 
later Massachusetts, settled throughout the area that eventu­
ally became Maine, historians differ as to how many Indians 
lived in the area, whether they were nomadic or riverine, orga­
nized or conquered, where they could be found, and when. As 
of 1820, however, when Maine became a state, it was clear 
that few Indians remained, and they were regulated by state, 
not federal, authorities. As Congress stated, since 1820, the 
state of Maine "provided special services to the Indians resid­
ing within its borders," while the United States "provided few 
special services to the ... [tribes] ... and repeatedly denied 
that it had jurisdiction over or responsibility" for them." 25 
U.S.C. § 172l(a)(7). 
After 150 years of such state oversight, however, Maine was 
hit with a legal lightning bolt. In 1972, the Passamaquoddy 
Tribe and the Penobscot Nation filed suit in federal court in 
Maine, asking the court to require the U.S. Department of the 
Interior (DOI) to file suit against the state for the return of the 
tribes' aboriginal lands. The tribes argued that certain treaties 
between the tribes and Maine and Massachusetts were invalid 
because they were not approved by Congress, as required by 
the Indian Nonintercourse Act of 1790, 25 U.S.C. § 177. 
This theory about the Nonintercourse Act, combined with 
a U.S. Supreme Court ruling in 1974 finding federal subject 
matter jurisdiction for tribal land claims, led to a cascade of 
similar lawsuits by other tribes in other states. 
In the Maine litigation, the trial court agreed with the 
theory, and the First Circuit Court of Appeals upheld that 
decision. See Passamaquoddy Tribe v. Morton, 528 F2d 370 (1st 
Cir. 1975). After Morton gave the Indians' position traction, 
the first settlement of a tribal land claim in this wave of liti­
gation came in 1978. Congress, which must approve all such 
settlements, agreed to a settlement in Rhode Island with the 
Narragansett Tribe, which had claimed a few thousand acres of 
land. 
Mr. Manahan and Ms. Connors represent the coalition of municipalities 
and businesses supporting the position of the state of Maine in Penobscot 
Nation v. Mills. Mr. Manahan may be reached at mmanahan@ 
pierceatwood. com, and Ms. Connors may be reached at cconnors@ 
pierceatwood . com. 
24 In Maine, however, the stakes were far higher-the tribes 
were claiming two-thirds of the land mass of the state. As 
Congress put it: "Substantial economic and social hardship to 
a large number of landowners, citizens, and communities in 
the State of Maine, and therefore to the economy of the State 
of Maine as a whole, will result if the aforementioned claims 
are not resolved promptly." 25 U.S.C. § 1721(a)(6). The law 
firm of Ropes & Gray issued an opinion that a state munici­
pal bond issue could not go forward using property within the 
claimed territory as collateral. Title companies refused to write 
title insurance for any land claimed by the tribes in Maine, 
causing residential and commercial transactions in these areas 
to come to a halt. 
Much negotiation ensued. At one point, Archibald Cox 
of Watergate fame was on the tribes' side, with famed defense 
attorney Edward Bennett Williams representing the state. 
There were multiple task forces appointed by President Carter; 
the tribes' main ally in Congress was defeated in his Senate 
re-election bid; and Senators Edmund Muskie and George 
Mitchell, among others, played roles. Eventually a final deal 
was struck in 1980, when the possibility of Ronald Reagan's 
election as the next president raised the specter that he might 
veto a settlement favorable to the tribes were he elected. 
The resulting, comprehensive settlement, agreed upon by 
the United States, the state of Maine, the Penobscot Nation, 
and the Passamaquoddy Tribe, is embodied in the federal 
Maine Indian Land Claims Settlement Act and its state law 
counterpart, the Maine Implementing Act (collectively, the 
Settlement Acts). Under the terms of the Settlement Acts, 
the Maine tribes agreed to extinguishment of their claims in 
exchange for the establishment of Indian Reservation and Ter­
ritory lands, and to payment to the tribes of over $81 million 
(about $230 million in 2016 dollars). As the Settlement Acts 
recite, the purpose of the settlement was to remove the cloud 
on titles, settle all the tribes' claims, and clarify the status of 
the other land and natural resources in the state. 25 U.S.C. 
§ 1721(b). 
The Settlement Acts were unique in establishing a new 
type of relationship between the federal, state, and tribal gov­
ernments unlike the relationship of any tribes to any other 
state, with the Indians "subject to all laws of the State of 
Maine." Id. § 1721 (b)(4 ). The Settlement Acts gave the state 
of Maine civil and criminal-including environmental-juris­
diction over Maine Indian lands: 
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, all Indians, 
Indian nations, and tribes and bands of Indians in the 
State and any lands or other natural resources owned by 
them, held in trust for them by the United States or by 
NR&E Fall 2016 
any other person or entity shall be subject to the laws of 
the State and to the civil and criminal jurisdiction of the 
courts of the State to the same extent as any other per­
son or lands or other natural resources therein. 
30 M.R.S. § 6204. 
Thus, this settlement among the federal, state, and tribal 
governments created a jurisdictional arrangement unlike what 
exists in western states, where state laws are generally not 
applicable to tribes or tribal lands. Except as to "internal tribal 
matters," under the Settlement Acts, Maine tribes are subject 
to Maine law, and have the same governmental authority as a 
Maine municipality. Tribal members may catch fish for their 
individual sustenance and not be subjected to state fishing 
license requirements and bag limits, but with limits to prevent 
overfishing. The Settlement Acts explicitly provide that no fed­
eral laws or regulations intended to accord any special right or 
status to any Indians or Indian lands and affect or preempt the 
regulatory jurisdiction of the state of Maine-including envi­
ronmental regulatory jurisdiction-apply to the Maine tribes. 
In sum, the Settlement Acts were designed to be just that: 
a comprehensive and global settlement of all tribal claims in 
Maine. The legal framework adopted was clear, incorporat­
ing a unique state-tribal relationship, in which there was no 
interference with the tribes' self-governance, but regulatory 
authority remained with the state. 
End of story? Oh no. This was just the beginning. 
Tribal Opposition to Maine NPDES 
Delegation 
Time passed, and the Maine tribes no longer wanted to be 
unique. They are federally recognized, and would like the same 
federal sovereign-to-sovereign relationship as their western 
counterparts . Federal administrative bodies, comfortable with 
the general federal-tribal regulatory template, have no stake 
in maintaining the state of Maine's interests. Hence, after a 
short lull to let memories fade, the tribes' pushback began in 
the early 1990s. As a part of this federal-tribal cooperative 
effort, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) even 
entered into "Tribal Environmental Agreements," requiring 
EPA to do everything in its power to prevent disclosure under 
the Freedom of Information Act of its communications with 
the Maine tribes, leaving the state of Maine in the dark about 
their discussions. 
The first avenue pressed to expand tribal regulatory 
authority focused on "internal tribal matters"-the area of self­
control not subject to state regulation under the terms of the 
Settlement Acts. The argument was launched that this self­
governance exemption was far broader than it appears on its 
face, embracing water quality and its regulation. 
The Clean Water Act (CWA) National Pollutant Dis­
charge Elimination System (NPDES) program requires a 
permit for the discharge of any pollutant into navigable waters. 
33 U.S.C. § 1342(a). The CWA assigns permitting responsi­
bilities first to EPA, but a state may apply to EPA to administer 
the NPDES program for discharges into navigable waters 
within its jurisdiction. 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b). The EPA admin­
istrator "shall approve each submitted program unless he 
determines that adequate authority does not exist." Id. 
NR&E Fall 2016 In November 1999, the state of Maine submitted an appli­
cation to EPA seeking NPDES delegation for the entire state, 
including areas that may fall within or near "Indian Territory," 
for authority to issue wastewater discharge permits under 
the CWA. (Indiari Territory is a defined term under the Set­
tlement Acts, including reservations and some additional 
property acquired by DOI for the tribes.) 
The legal framework adopted 
for the Settlement Acts was 
clear, incorporating a unique 
state-tribal relationship, 
in which there was no 
interference with the tribes' 
self-governance, but regulatory 
authority remained 
with the state. 
The tribes in Maine objected, saying they thought the fed­
eral government should retain oversight in tribal territories 
because, they alleged, the state does not have authority over 
tribal waters. In January 2001, EPA approved Maine's applica­
tion to implement the NPDES program, but only in areas of 
the state "outside Indian Country." That partial approval took 
no action on the state's program obligation as it applied to the 
territories and lands of the four federally recognized Indian 
tribes in Maine. EPA said it needed to study further what to do 
in Indian Territory. 
On October 31, 2003, EPA authorized the state to imple­
ment the NPDES program as it applies to the territories of the 
Penobscots and the Passamaquoddies. EPA did not, however, 
delegate permitting authority for "disputed" Indian Territory, 
including tribal facilities located on tribal reservations that 
discharge into Maine's navigable waters, characterizing such 
discharges as "internal tribal matters." EPA said it would apply 
a balancing test to determine whether the state or the tribes 
have jurisdiction over specific discharges, and expressed its 
intent to protect fish that the tribes may catch for sustenance 
purposes by imposing conditions in Maine-issued NPDES per­
mits to non-Indian dischargers not in Indian Territory and by 
taking over Maine's water quality standards . 
The state of Maine appealed EPA's decision to the First Cir­
cuit Court of Appeals. The court agreed with the state and 
rejected EPA's and the tribes' position. In so ruling, the court 
noted that it had no need to wade into any dispute about 
Indian Territory, because Maine has jurisdiction over all dis­
charges in the state, including those within Indian Territory 
and over tribal discharges themselves. See Maine v. Johnson, 
498 F.3d 37 (1st Cir. 2007). 
Did that end the discussion? Guess again. 
25 
i 11 I' 
Penobscot Efforts to Regulate the Penobscot 
Ri'Ver: Application for TAS 
The Passamaquoddy Tribe and the Penobscot Nation have 
applied several times over the past 15 years for treatment 
as a state (TAS) under section 518 of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. 
§ 1377(e). EPA has granted TAS to the tribes, but only for the 
limited purpose of obtaining federal funds to develop water 
quality standards. Notwithstanding that the First Circuit ruled 
in 2007 that the state, not Maine tribes, regulates water qual­
ity under the Settlement Acts, in 2012, the Penobscot Nation 
applied again for TAS status, this time accompanied by water 
quality standards funded by the EPA, which the Nation had 
developed and for which it seeks EPA approval. EPA has not 
yet acted on the 2012 TAS application . 
If EPA grants TAS authority 
to the Penobscot Nation, the 
state of Maine will be required 
to ensure that all nontribal 
discharges licensed by the 
state and that may affect 
Penobscot Nation waters meet 
the Penobscot Nation's water 
quality standards. 
IfEPA grants TAS authority to the Penobscot Nation, then 
the state of Maine will be required to ensure that all nontribal 
discharges licensed by the state and that may affect Penobscot 
Nation waters-wherever these, waters may be-meet the 
Penobscot Nation's water quality standards, regardless of how­
ever stringent and inconsistent the Nation's standards may be 
in comparison with state standards . The Penobscot Nation 
is not required to consider nontribal members' comments in 
adopting their standards, or to consider impacts to economic 
interests. So, for example, if the Penobscot River-the longest 
river located entirely in Maine, running through the middle 
of the state-were deemed to affect Penobscot Nation waters, 
then Maine towns and companies along its banks, already 
meeting some of the most stringent water quality standards 
in the country, could potentially be required to spend mil­
lions of dollars they do not have to meet these additional tribal 
standards. 
Penobscot Efforts to Regulate the Penobscot 
Ri'Ver: Penobscot Nation v. Mills 
The next assault on the Settlement Acts arrived in the form 
of a tribal-federal lawsuit against the state of Maine to define 
the Penobscot Nation's reservation to include much of the 
Penobscot River. 
In August 2012, Maine Attorney General William 
26 Schneider learned that Penobscot Nation officials had stopped 
nontribal duck hunters on the Penobscot River and told them 
a tribal permit was required to hunt anywhere on the river. 
The state later discovered that the tribe had summoned non­
tribal hunters to tribal court, even though the Settlement Acts 
do not subject nontribal members to the jurisdiction of tribal 
courts. 
In the wake of the tribe's actions, Schneider issued an opin­
ion regarding jurisdiction on the Penobscot River and invited 
the tribe to meet with him. With respect to control of the 
Penobscot River, Schneider wrote: 
[T]he River itself is not part of the Penobscot Nation's 
Reservation, and therefore is not subject to its regulatory 
authority or proprietary control. The Penobscot River 
is held in trust by the State for all Maine citizens, and 
State law, including statutes and regulations governing 
hunting, are fully applicable there. Accordingly, mem­
bers of the public engaged in hunting, fishing or other 
recreational activities on the waters of the Penobscot 
River are subject to Maine law as they would be else­
where in the State, and are not subject to any additional 
restrictions from the Penobscot Nation. 
Letter from Maine Attorney General William J. Schneider to 
Chandler Woodcock, commissioner of the Maine Department 
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, and Colonel Joel T. Wilkin­
son, Maine Warden Service, Aug. 8, 2012, at 2. 
The Penobscot Nation responded by filing suit against the 
attorney general in the United States District Court for the 
District of Maine, claiming that its reservation includes the 
entire 60cmile stretch of the main stem of the Penobscot River 
north from its primary reservation island (the Main Stem), 
including the submerged lands, and that it has exclusive juris­
diction over that portion of the river. The Penobscot Nation 
asserted that it has retained aboriginal title to the waters and 
riverbed of the Main Stem. As a result, it claimed that the 
boundaries of the Penobscot Reservation are actually the river 
banks found on either side of the Main Stem. According to 
the Penobscot Nation, these boundaries result in the Penob­
scot Nation having exclusive authority within its Main Stem 
reservation to regulate hunting, trapping, and other taking of 
wildlife for the sustenance of the individual members of the 
Penobscot Nation. 
Although the allegations in the Penobscot Nation's law­
suit focused on whether hunting and fishing by members of 
the Penobscot Nation are subject to regulation by the state 
of Maine, the legal bases for that position, if accepted by the 
court, would support the Penobscot Nation's efforts to regulate 
all activities on the Penobscot River. 
The Maine attorney general is elected by the Maine legis­
lature, so after the Democrats regained control of legislature, 
Schneider was replaced by Janet Mills. Mills continued to 
defend Maine's position in the Penobscot Nation's lawsuit, 
arguing that the Penobscot Nation does not have the right to 
regulate use of the Penobscot River, and that the Penobscot 
Nation reservation does not include any portion of the river. 
DOI intervened in the Penobscot Nation's lawsuit in sup­
port of the Penobscot Nation. Even if the entire Main Stem 
does not fall within the bounds of the Nation's reservation, 
NR&E Fall 2016 
DOI additionally argued that the boundaries of the Penob-
scot reservation would extend to the threads of the channels 
surrounding the Penobscot Nation's reservation islands. 
According to DOI, these "riparian rights" around the islands of 
the Main Stem create "halos" of water into which the reserva­
tion extends. 
Because the Penobscot Nation's litigation efforts are funded 
by federal dollars, taxpayers are paying the bill for all sides in 
this litigation-the tribe's lawyers and experts, the DOI's law­
yers and experts, and lawyers and experts representing the state. 
A coalition of towns and businesses that hold NPDES waste 
discharge licenses authorizing wastewater discharges into the 
Penobscot River or its branches and tributaries also intervened 
to support of the state's position. This coalition was moti­
vated by concern that if the court agreed with the Penobscot 
Nation that its reservation includes any portion of the Penob­
scot River, and if EPA then grants TAS to the Penobscot 
Nation, then all discharges into the Main Stem will be subject 
to Penobscot Nation water quality standards . The tribal-DOI 
suit also could also rewrite the territorial borders for some 
municipalities. 
In December 2015, after three years and voluminous dis­
covery, including testimony from history professors purporting 
to identify what tribal members were thinking when they 
entered into treaties in 1796 and 1818, district court Judge 
Singal issued his decision in the Penobscot Nation v. Mills law­
suit, holding that the Penobscot Nation reservation does not 
include any portion of the Penobscot River, only the islands 
themselves. Penobscot Nation v. Mills, 1:12-CV-254-GZS, 2015 
WL 9165881 (D. Me. Dec. 16, 2015). The basis for this ruling 
was the plain language of the Settlement Acts, although the 
court also found that legislative history supports this reading. 
The relevant language in the Settlement Acts defines the 
"Penobscot Indian Reservation" as certain "lands," and, more 
specifically, "the islands in the Penobscot River reserved to the 
Penobscot Nation by agreement with the states of Massachu­
setts and Maine consisting solely of Indian Island, also known 
as Old Town Island, and all islands in that river northward 
thereof that existed on June 29, 1818." 30 M.R.S. § 6203(8). 
This language, the court held, "plainly defines the Penob-
scot Indian Reservation as the islands in the Main Stem," and 
"is explicitly silent on the issue of any waters being included 
within the boundaries of the Penobscot Indian Reservation ." 
Mills, 2015 WL 9165881, at *28. The court stated: 
In short, the Court concludes that the plain language of 
the Settlement Acts is not ambiguous. The Settlement 
Acts clearly define the Penobscot Indian Reservation 
to include the delineated islands of the Main Stem, but 
do not suggest that any of the waters of the Main Stem 
fall within the Penobscot Indian Reservation. That 
clear statutory language provides no opportunity to sug­
gest that any of the waters of the Main Stem are also 
included within the boundaries of the Penobscot Indian 
Reservation. 
Id. at *29. In other words, "islands" means islands. 
Judge Singal then turned to the question of whether Penob­
scot Nation members have a right to sustenance fish in the 
river, given the Settlement Acts' limitation of the tribal 
NR&E Fall 2016 sustenance fishing right to "within the boundaries of their 
respective Indian reservations." While the state had never 
restricted the tribe's sustenance fishing activities anywhere 
on the Penobscot River, the plaintiffs had sought a declara­
tory judgment on the issue. Noting that the long-standing and 
accepted practice by all parties was that Penobscot Nation 
members have the right of sustenance fishing on the river, the 
court concluded that language limiting the sustenance fishing 
right to the reservation was ambiguous, given the introductory 
language in the Settlement Acts' definitions section, which 
states that those definitions apply "unless the context indicates 
otherwise." 30 M.R.S. § 6203. 
In December 2015, after 
three years and voluminous 
discovery, district court Judge 
Singal issued his decision 
in the Penobscot Nation v. 
Mills lawsuit, holding that the 
Penobscot Nation reservation 
does not include any portion of 
the Penobscot River, only the 
islands themselves. 
In sum, the court ruled that the reservation itself consists of 
the islands alone, but tribal members may sustenance fish in the 
river waters (which the state never contested). With respect to 
the Penobscot Nation's efforts to regulate water quality, while 
Judge Singal wrote that he was "not resolving the right to reg­
ulate water sampling or the right to regulate discharges by 
towns or non-tribal entities that currently discharge into the 
Penobscot River," as a practical matter, his decision effectively 
resolves that issue by ruling that the Penobscot reservation does 
not include any portion of the river. Mills, 2015 WL 9165881, 
at *26. The Penobscot Nation cannot regulate nontribal dis­
charges to the river, or other activities in and on the river, 
because, in the wake of the Penobscot Nation v. Mills decision, 
the Penobscot Nation does not have any waters within its juris­
diction where its water quality standards might apply. 
DOI and the Penobscot Nation filed post-judgment 
motions to amend the court's order, pursuing the DOI's "halo 
argument." These motions were summarily denied the day 
after DOI and the Penobscot Nation filed their reply briefs. All 
parties have since filed appeals to the United States Court of 
Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston. 
Given that EPA has supported the Penobscot Nation's 
efforts to expand the scope of its environmental regulatory 
authority, it seems likely EPA will continue to hold in abeyance 
the Penobscot Nation's pending TAS application until a final, 
unappealable resolution is reached in Penobscot Nation v. Mills. 
27 
EPA Disapproval of Certain State Water 
Quality Standards 
While the ruling in Maine v. Johnson would appear definitive, 
EPA nevertheless refused to approve Maine's water quality 
standards for any waters within Indian Territory, instead simply 
refusing to take any action on those standards. 
Finally, seven years after the decision in Maine v. Johnson, 
the state brought suit against EPA in 2014 to force EPA's hand. 
See Maine v. McCarthy, Civ. No. 1:14-cv-00264 (D. Me. filed 
July 7, 2014 ). In letters issued in February, March, and June 
2015, EPA conceded that Maine has authority to establish 
water quality standards for tribal lands. EPA nevertheless dis­
approved some of Maine's human health criteria (HHC), now 
asserting that they are not sufficiently protective of tribal sus­
tenance fishing. EPA told Maine that the state must rewrite 
those water quality standards, dating from 2004 to 2013, for 
"waters in Indian lands," to ensure that those waters are clean 
enough to allow tribal members to continue sustenance fish­
ing. See 81 Fed. Reg. 23239, 23241-2 (Apr. 20, 2016). In its 
2015 disapproval letters, "EPA requested that the state revise 
its water quality standards to address the issues identified in 
the disapprovals .... EPA disapproved Maine's HHC for toxic 
pollutants based on EPA's conclusion that they do not ade­
quately protect the health of tribal sustenance fishers in waters 
in Indian lands." Id. 
The two categories of Maine 
waters to which EPA's April 20 
proposed rule would apply 
would extend the geographic 
scope of the Indian sustenance 
fishing right well beyond the 
"within their reservations" 
limitation contained in the 
Settlement Acts. 
"Indian lands" is not a term used in the Settlement Acts, 
and EPA did not define "Indian lands" in its decision. Also, 
interestingly, and without explanation, EPA applied its deci­
sion to all four Maine tribes (the Penobscot Nation, the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe, the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indi­
ans, and the Aroostook Band of Micmacs), even though the 
Settlement Acts extend sustenance fishing rights only to the 
Penobscot Nation and the Passamaquoddy Tribe. 
The EPA decision set up two sets of standards, one for 
waters "in Indian lands" (wherever this may be) and another 
for the rest of the state. Contrast this position with the lan­
guage of the Settlement Acts themselves, which provide that 
"all Indians ... and any lands or other natural resources owned 
28 by them [or] held in trust for them ... shall be subject to the 
laws of the State ... to the same extent as any other person or 
lands or other natural resources therein." 30 M.R.S. § 6204. 
"Land or other natural resources" means "any real property or 
other natural resources ... , including, but without limitation 
. .. water and water rights and hunting and fishing rights." 30 
M.R.S. § 6203(3). 
Notably, EPA had already approved Maine's human HHC 
for all non-Indians, concluding that they are sufficiently pro­
tective of human health. In fact, Maine's criteria are at least as 
stringent as HHC in other states, and when the Maine Depart­
ment of Environmental Protection adopted its HHC, it made 
those criteria more stringent in recognition of the fact that 
some Indians may engage in sustenance fishing. For that rea­
son, Maine increased its assumed fish consumption rate to 32.4 
grams per day (gpd), which is a higher fish consumption rate 
than most states use (17.5 gpd), and Maine uses a risk level 
of 10·6, which is ten times more protective than the risk level 
used in many states (10·5). These two considerations mean that 
Maine's waste discharge limits are among the most stringent in 
the country. 
In the wake of EPA's decision, Maine amended its pending 
Maine v. McCarthy lawsuit against EPA, asking the court to 
set aside EPA's disapproval of Maine's water quality standards 
and to declare that all of Maine's water quality standards that 
EPA approved for non-Indian waters are also required to be 
approved for Indian waters. That case is still pending. 
On April 20, EPA went further, proposing federal HHC 
that would apply to certain waters in Maine in place of the 
Maine standards EPA disapproved in February 2015. 81 Fed. 
Reg. 23239 (Apr. 20, 2016). Aside from proposing the most 
conservative risk assessment factors possible, EPA did not 
clearly define the geographic scope of its rule. Support docu­
ments accompanying the proposed rule noted that the rule 
would apply to (1) "waters in Indian lands," which include 
waters within or adjacent to the boundaries of Indian reserva­
tions or Indian trust lands, and (2) waters outside Indian lands 
where the designated use of sustenance fishing may apply, 
based on Judge Singal's Penobscot Nation v. Mills ruling. Taken 
together, these two categories would extend the geographic 
scope of the Indian sustenance fishing right well beyond the 
"within their reservations" limitation contained in the Settle­
ment Acts. 
No End in Sight? 
It may be appropriate to amend the Settlement Acts if that is 
what elected officials want, understanding the ramifications 
relating to Maine's economy, and if they do so clearly in legisla­
tion. But costly, continual, federally funded litigation is not the 
appropriate forum for this debate. Similarly, unless or until the 
Settlement Acts are amended, federal agencies should follow 
the terms of the settlement, should not enter into secret agree­
ments to thwart transparency, and should not fund efforts to 
undermine a state's sovereign rights as established by Congress. 
Hope springs eternal. Perhaps the court's decision in 
Penobscot Nation v. Mills will at least help to bring finality 
and closure. This matter was settled 35 years ago. At some 
point litigation should cease, and the federal executive branch 
should comply. ~ 
NR&E Fall 2016 
