Meret Bainbridge, Saco, ME  
On behalf of the Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network  
P.O. Box 8, Augusta, ME 04330, www.muusan.org , info@muusan.org  
 
Maine 13 1st Legislature – Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
Testimony in Favor of LD 2004 , Public Hearing May 31, 2023  
 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen,  
and esteemed M embers of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary:  
 
My name is Meret Bainbridge. I am a resident of Saco  and a Unitarian U niversalist.  
I am testifying in favor of LD 2004, An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to 
Wabanaki Nations  on behalf of my organization, the Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy 
Network (MUUSAN ), which links Maine’s 26 UU congregations in faith -based advocacy.  
 
We advocate for state laws and policies that promote justice, equity and the inherent worth and 
dignity of all people. The fair and equitable treatment of the Wabanaki Nations in  Maine  and the 
recognition of their tribal sovereignty are among our top priorities.  
 
We sup port legislation to amend  the federal Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act and its state 
companion, the Maine Implementing Act. Due to these settlement acts from 1980, t he Wabanaki 
Nations have been specifically excluded by Congress from more than 150 federal Indian laws  that 
have been enacted in the past 40 years and benefitted the other  570 federally recognized tribes : 
laws meant to improve public health, recover from natural disaster s, and promote economic 
development .  
 
Because of the settlement acts, when Congress passes federal legislation for tribes nationwide 
the tribes in Maine must be explicitly written into the legislation unlike the other federally 
recognized tribes. This is an excessive burden to the tribes. They do not have the resources to 
track all federal legislation a nd lobby Congress to have them included in each piece of legislation. 
With the tribes not being able to access various federal funding their self -determinati on and 
economic vitality have been stunted . We believe giving the Wabanaki Nations access to federal 
benefits and funding  would benef it not only the tribes but the surrounding rural communit ies. 
 
This legislation doesn’t circumvent the 1980’s Settlement Act. It would  change  a provision in the 
Settlement Act that would at least begin the process of placing the tribes in Maine on the same 
footing a s the other 570 federally recognized tribes. Please support LD 2004  to start putting the 
tribes and rural Maine on a path to prosperity.  It is a moral and ethical imperative . 
 
  

