PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444
www.aclumaine.org
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
LD 2004 – Ought To Pass 
An Act to Restore Access to Federal Law s Beneficial to the Wab anaki Nations 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
May 31, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen  and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede , and I am Policy Counsel  for 
the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing 
and preserving civil lib erties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our 
members, I urge you to support LD 2004 because it is necessary to correct a fundamental 
inequity in Maine’s treatment of Wabanaki Nations.  
Since 1980, when Congress passed the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act (“MICSA”) 
and Maine enacted  the Maine Implementing Act (“MIA”), Maine has treated Wabanaki Nations 
not as the sovereigns they are, but as municipalities with a legal status akin to that of Bangor, 
Lewiston, and other Maine town s and cities. This status has meant that as other tribal nations 
have benefited from federal laws designed to improve Indigenous health and welfare, Wabanaki 
Nations have been left behind.  
This bill would help put Wabanaki Nations on equal footing with ot her tribal nations in 
the country . As a matter of basic fairness, tribal nations in Maine deserve no less control over 
their own destiny than those enjoyed by other tribes in other states. If enacted, this bill would 
amend MICSA to make it clear that Waban aki citizens can enjoy the benefits of laws that 
Congress passes specifically for the benefit of tribal nations, with certain exceptions. This bill 
will help ensure that Wabanaki Nations  are not left behind as other tribal nations experience 
higher living standards, better governance, and more prosperity.  
Indeed, this is a bill to lift not just Wabanaki Nations, but also Maine’s rural 
communities. During the COVID -19 pandemic, Wabanaki Nations were alone among tribal 
nations in their inability to declare an emergency. The Stafford Act  made federal funds available 
2 to other tribal nations that declared a state of emergency in response to natural disasters or public 
healt h emergencies. But Wabanaki Nations were denied these funds , because MICSA made the 
Stafford Act inapplicable to Wabanaki Nations. If this bill had been in place before the 
pandemic, Wabanaki Nations could have drawn down federal mone y for COVID-mitigation 
measures, with benefits that ripple out to rural communities. The same Act can still be us ed to 
address the opioid crisis in Indigenous communities in ways that help rural Maine communities.  
This bill aligns with the nationwide trend toward enhancing tribal sovereignty.  For at 
least the past 25 years, the United States, numerous state and local gove rnments, and countries 
around the world have dedicate d themselves to protecting and promoti ng the rights of Indigenous 
peoples. This is reflected, for instance, i n the signing by every member of the United Nations 
(includi ng the United States) of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples. This commitment stems from a recogniti on that many indigenous peoples were treated 
unjustly and unfairly a nd that all of us have a moral duty to promote indigenous recovery and 
recognize indigenous rights. In Alaska, for instance , as recently as 1988, the Alaska Supreme 
Court held tha t the Native villages in Alaska are “not self-governing or i n any meaningful sense 
sovereign.” Native Village of Stevens v. Alaska Management & Planning , 757 P.2d 32, 34 
(Alaska 1988).  Eleven years later, howeve r, that same court reversed itself and hel d that the 
Native villages in the State possess inherent powers of self-government . John v. Baker , 982 P.2d 
738 (Alaska 1999). The Tribal Nations in Maine are among those who suffered mightily at the 
hands of the United States, a nd in some respects, they still do. The improvements that this bill 
would set in motion are both reasonable and modest, and not a single one of them is different 
than the benefits almost all other trib al nations  already possess.  
We urge you to vote ought to pass . 
