Paul Forman
Albion
LD 2004
An Act Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations
LD 2004
➢ My name is Paul Forman and live in Albion. I’m writing in support of LD 2004.
➢ The Wabanaki tribes in Maine are treated differently than the other 570 federally 
recognized
tribes across the country. Because of the 1980 Settlement Act, when Congress passes 
federal
legislation for tribes nationwide the tribes in Maine must be explicitly written into the 
legislation
unlike the other federally recognized tribes. This is an excessive burden to the tribes. 
They do not
have the resources to track all federal legislation and lobby Congress to have them 
included in
each piece of legislation.
➢ Suffolk University published a report in 2019 highlighting the federal beneficial Indian laws
passed by Congress since the Settlement Act was implemented in 1980. They found
approximately 151 federal laws have been passed that the tribes in Maine do not have 
access to.
Many of the laws which have passed that the tribes do not have access to would not 
only benefit
the tribes but the surrounding rural areas. With the tribes not being able to access 
various federal
funding their self-determination and economic vitality have been stunted. Allowing 
access to
federal beneficial laws will not only benefit the tribes but rural Maine.
➢ Some argue that we should take each piece of legislation passed on a case by case basis.
This
would take decades. For example, in 2013 the Violence Against Woman’s Act was 
finally
amended to include Native American women. However, the tribes in Maine were not 
included.
Maine finally passed legislation mirroring the federal law to include the tribes in 
Maine in 2020.
Why should it take seven years for the tribes in Maine to protect their tribal members 
from
domestic violence?
➢ This legislation doesn’t circumvent the 1980’s Settlement Act. This legislation changes a
provision in the Settlement Act that would at least begin the process of placing the 
tribes in
Maine on the same footing as the other 570 federally recognized tribes. Please support
LD 2004
to start putting the tribes and rural Maine on a path to prosperity.
