Testimony in Opposition to LD 2004  
“An Act to Amend the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act Regarding the Application of 
Beneficial Federal Laws to the Wabanaki Nations ” 
May 31 , 2023  
Peter Triandafillou  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen  and distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee . My 
name is Peter Triandafillou, and I live in Orono. I am retired from Huber Resources Corp (HRC) based in 
Old Town. I am submitting testimony in opposition to LD 2004 . 
 
LD2004 makes changes to a very comple x and highly negotiated law, the Maine Indian Claims 
Settlement Act (MICS). The law was negotiated and happily agreed to by the Federal 
government, the State of Maine, and the Maine Tribes. As the name implies, the law settled 
claims by the Tribes, granted  them significant funds to purchase lands, and created policy and 
regulatory stability within Maine.  
 
Given the complexity of the issue, it is difficult to believe that the sweeping new policies and 
language in LD2004 are being heard and considered with le ss than twenty four hours’ notice. 
This lack of notice leaves the Maine public and those with significant concerns with the bill’s 
policy changes almost no time to react or formulate reasonable testimony. For this reason 
alone, the bill should be voted oug ht not to pass and left for another time to allow for proper 
and thorough debate.  
 
At the time of passage of the MICS, it was expected that the Tribes would purchase lands in 
different parts of Maine, and this is what happened. In order to prevent regulato ry chaos and 
conflict caused by the State and the Tribes enacting different environmental laws and 
regulations, the parties agreed that the Tribes be treated as municipalities within Maine. This 
was a reasonable approach, and it has worked very well in the  decades since enactment of the 
MICS. It is impossible to fully understand the ramifications of LD2004, but it seems to me that it 
would unravel this essential part of the MICS, much to the detriment of Maine  and private 
landowners.  
 
LD2004 would enac t sweeping changes to a law that has worked well for many years with no 
clearly articulated purpose. I am not aware of any specific regulatory or policy issues  raised as 
the reason for this legislation. It therefore leaves the policy la ndscape wide open to change. I 
see no reason for Maine to agree to such sweeping changes when the results would almost 
certainly be detrimental to the State.  
 
An open discussion of policy related to the MICS that includes all parties would be reasonable. 
It is often possible to reach amicable and positive outcomes when all parties participate. 
Rushing sweeping legislation  that has seen no such discussion or debate, leaving the parties 
nearly no time to review and respond is unfair and entirely unnecess ary. I urge you to vote 
ought not to pass on LD2004 . 
Thank you for your time.  
