122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Support of:  
LD 2004: An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations  
 Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
State House, Room 438 Wednesday , May 3 1, 2023 
 Dear  Senator Carney , Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary . My name is Rebecca Boulos . I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine 
Public Health Association.  MPHA is in support of LD 2004: “ An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws 
Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations .” 
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical 
public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Mai ne. We are not tied 
to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously.  The Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act (MICSA) of 1980 established a different, more restrictive status for Wabanaki tribes than that of all other 570 federally -recognized tribes in the United States. MICSA dictates that 
when  Congress passes legislation that impacts federally -recognized tribes , which includes the Houlton Band of 
Maliseet Indians, the M i’kmaq Nat ion, the  Passamaquoddy Tr ibes at Motahkom ikuk and S ipayik, and the 
Penobscot  Nation, each of these tribes  must  be explicitly named  in the bill’ s text in order  to receive any of the 
legislation ’s benefits . This incredible and unjust bur den is unique to the Wabanaki N ations ; all other federally -
recognized tribes are , by default, included. Accordingly, MICSA has prevented Wabanaki Nations from 
benefiting from more than 150 federal  laws , includ ing for  drinking water  protection , health care access, 
economic de velopment , and  support  of other public and communi ty he alth endeavors.
 
 Everyone deserves just and fair opportunities to obtain good health. Members of t ribal communities have faced 
unjust and unfair conditions that influence health – including contaminated drinking water , food insecurity, 
cultural disrespect, unsafe housing, hampered economic development, and poverty. We believ e this bill is a 
matter of fairness and justice. We respectfully request you to please vote LD 2004 “Ought to Pass.” Thank you 
for your consideration.  
  
 
