1 Testimony of R ick Bronson  
In Opposition to L.D. 2004  
An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations  
May 31, 202 3 
C
hair Carney, Chair Moonen , and members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is Rick 
Bronson.  I am the Town Manager for the Town of Lincoln.  Our attorney, Matt Manahan, has submitted 
a letter  on behalf of our town and other towns in the Penobscot River watershed, and I won’t repea t 
that testimony here.  But I wanted to emphasize a few key points.   
•This bill is of significant concern to us because of the lack of clarity with respect to what it may meanin terms of state and municipal jurisdiction.  It’s impossible to evaluate the practical impact of this
bill as drafted, particularly with so little time.  We may not be  opposed to having additional fede
ral
l
aws apply in Maine, but we want to know what they are, so that we can understand the
consequences.
•As I understand this bill, i t would allow all federal laws for the benefit of Indians to apply in Maine
even if they affect or preempt the application of the laws of Maine, including those relating tomunicipal jurisdiction and authority o n municipal land.  That’s a significant chang e from th
e
j
urisdictional arrangement agreed to in the Settlement Act.
•To the extent the Maine tribes can argue that a federal law benefits Maine Indians and that an
Maine Implementing Act (MIA) provision addresses that same issue in a different way, the n it seems
likely the change would mean that the MIA  provision no longer applies.   There are thousands of
federal laws that benefit Indians and could be used in this way – the Treatment as a State  (TAS)
provision of the Clean Water Act, cited in our lawyer’s letter to you, is just one, and it could be used
to support the position that Maine and Maine municipalities no longer have jurisdiction over Indiantrust lands with respect to clean water act issues, contrary to Section 6204 of the MIA.  It’s almost
impossible to get a full understanding of all federal laws that could be used in this way.
•All this uncertainty is a significant concern for us, and we request that you reject this bill as comingtoo late and raising too many questions at the last minute.
T
hank you.  
