 
 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health 
In Support of LD 2004, “An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki 
Nations” 
Before the Judiciary Committee 
May 31, 2023 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee. My name is 
Sarah Woodbury. I am the director of advocacy for Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health’s mission 
is the make sure that everyone has equal access to safe food and drinking water, healthy homes 
and products that are toxic-free and climate friendly.  Please accept this testimony in support of LD 
2004, “An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the Wabanaki Nations”. 
 
We at Defend believe that issue of Wabanaki tribal sovereignty is one of the great injustices of our 
time. Restoring sovereignty to the Wabanaki tribes will change a system of oppression that has 
impacted the Wabanaki people for over 40 years. The Wabanaki people have been stewards of this 
land for thousands of years before white settlers arrived. They have lived in harmony with the land 
and water, managing natural resources so that future generations can thrive. Since the arrival of 
European settlers, the Wabanaki people have lost 98% of their population as well as access to most 
of their land and water. While this bill does not restore sovereignty, it does provide a path forward to 
allow the tribes to benefit from federal legislation that benefits all other tribes. 
 
The Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act that was signed in 1980 has kept the tribes from benefitting 
from 151 federal laws which all other tribal nations have benefitted from in the U.S. There are 570 
federally recognized tribes that have more rights than the Wabanaki tribes here in Maine. In order for 
Maine tribes to benefit from federal law, they must specifically be named in that law. This puts an 
excessive burden on the tribes, requiring them to track all legislation that may benefit them and 
making sure that the legislation is amended to specifically name the Wabanaki people in that 
legislation. If Maine tribes had to work to amend every single piece of legislation that impacted them, 
it could take decades. 
 
LD 2004 does not circumvent the 1980’s Settlement Act. It simply changes a provision within the 
Settlement Act that would at least begin the process of placing the tribes in Maine on the same 
footing as the other 570 federally recognized tribes. 
 
Maine’s tribes are an integral part of the fabric of life here in Maine. While we believe that Maine 
needs to restore the sovereign rights of all tribal nations in Maine, until the state can come to 
agreement on that process, LD 2004 will provide a step in the right direction by allowing Maine tribes 
access to federal law that benefits other tribes without having to have those laws amended to 
specifically name them. Defend Our Health urges you to vote unanimously “ought to pass” on LD 
2004. 
  
