May 31, 2023 
 
To: Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary 
 
From:  Shirley Hager, 129 Chesterville Hill Road, Chesterville, ME 04938 
Member, Friends Committee on Maine Public Policy (FCMPP) and Clerk of FCMPP’s 
Committee on Tribal-State Relations 
 
Re:  Support for L.D. 2004, An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to the 
Wabanaki Nations 
 
In testifying in support of LD 2004, I speak on behalf of the Committee on Tribal-State Relations 
of the Friends (Quaker) Committee on Maine Public Policy, a statewide advocacy group. For 
over thirty years, one of our primary goals has been to support a right and just relationship 
between the State of Maine and our Wabanaki neighbors. We align ourselves with the 
advancement of Wabanaki interests to the betterment, we believe, of all who live in Maine. 
Friends in Maine are also members of the Maine Council of Churches, and I am pleased to say 
that the Council unanimously supports this bill and has asked me to speak on their behalf as 
well. The Maine Council of Churches is an ecumenical coalition of seven mainline Protestant 
denominations who have 437 congregations in Maine with 55,000 members in their care. 
 
LD 2004 would enable the Wabanaki Tribes in Maine to access certain federal laws benefitting 
Tribes; laws that are available to all other federally recognized Indigenous Nations in the 
country. According to terms dictated by the 1980 Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act, access to 
these laws is denied the Wabanaki unless each Tribe can manage to be specifically named in 
the law, a near-impossible feat to achieve. A Suffolk University report from 2019 found that 
since 1980 the Wabanaki in Maine have missed out on the benefits of over 150 bills passed by 
Congress intended for Tribal health, safety, welfare and self-determination. These bills have 
resulted in Tribes in other states achieving an over 60% growth in per capita income, while 
Wabanaki Tribes achieved only a 9% growth in the same period according to a recent Harvard 
study. Notably these bills, in creating access to federal resources, would also have brought 
economic and social benefits to the rural areas surrounding existing Tribal communities. 
 
Health, safety, prosperity, self-determination, a hopeful future for our children: aren’t these 
goals we all strive for? Yet here in Maine we have laws that systematically and systemically 
place obstacles in the paths of our Wabanaki neighbors, preventing them from pursuing these 
goals for themselves. Surely, we have reached a point in this State where our collective 
conscience cannot allow this egregious situation to continue. 
 
The Tribal-State Relations Committee of the Friends Committee on Maine Public Policy and 
the Maine Council of Churches strongly urges you to unanimously vote “ought to pass” on LD 
2004.  Let us remove one more obstacle to a sustainable, more prosperous future for our 
Wabanaki neighbors, and for us all. Thank you. 
Shirley Hager
Friends Committee on Maine Public Policy and the Maine Council of Churches
LD 2004
May 31, 2023
To:Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary
From: Shirley Hager, 129 Chesterville Hill Road, Chesterville, ME 04938
Member, Friends Committee on Maine Public Policy (FCMPP) and Clerk of 
FCMPP’s Committee on Tribal-State Relations
Re: Support for L.D. 2004, An Act to Restore Access to Federal Laws Beneficial to 
the Wabanaki Nations
In testifying in support of LD 2004, I speak on behalf of the Committee on 
Tribal-State Relations of the Friends (Quaker) Committee on Maine Public Policy, a 
statewide advocacy group. For over thirty years, one of our primary goals has been to 
support a right and just relationship between the State of Maine and our Wabanaki 
neighbors. We align ourselves with the advancement of Wabanaki interests to the 
betterment, we believe, of all who live in Maine. Friends in Maine are also members 
of the Maine Council of Churches, and I am pleased to say that the Council 
unanimously supports this bill and has asked me to speak on their behalf as well. The 
Maine Council of Churches is an ecumenical coalition of seven mainline Protestant 
denominations who have 437 congregations in Maine with 55,000 members in their 
care.
LD 2004 would enable the Wabanaki Tribes in Maine to access certain federal laws 
benefitting Tribes; laws that are available to all other federally recognized Indigenous 
Nations in the country. According to terms dictated by the 1980 Maine Indian Claims 
Settlement Act, access to these laws is denied the Wabanaki unless each Tribe can 
manage to be specifically named in the law, a near-impossible feat to achieve. A 
Suffolk University report from 2019 found that since 1980 the Wabanaki in Maine 
have missed out on the benefits of over 150 bills passed by Congress intended for 
Tribal health, safety, welfare and self-determination. These bills have resulted in 
Tribes in other states achieving an over 60% growth in per capita income, while 
Wabanaki Tribes achieved only a 9% growth in the same period according to a recent 
Harvard study. Notably these bills, in creating access to federal resources, would also 
have brought economic and social benefits to the rural areas surrounding existing 
Tribal communities.
Health, safety, prosperity, self-determination, a hopeful future for our children: aren’t 
these goals we all strive for? Yet here in Maine we have laws that systematically and 
systemically place obstacles in the paths of our Wabanaki neighbors, preventing them 
from pursuing these goals for themselves. Surely, we have reached a point in this 
State where our collective conscience cannot allow this egregious situation to 
continue.
The Tribal-State Relations Committee of the Friends Committee on Maine Public 
Policy and the Maine Council of Churches strongly urges you to unanimously vote 
“ought to pass” on LD 2004.  Let us remove one more obstacle to a sustainable, more 
prosperous future for our Wabanaki neighbors, and for us all. Thank you.

