 April 1 1, 2023  
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government:  
My name is Alan Cobo -Lewis. I live in Orono. I am testifying FOR LD 1243 , “Resolve, to Establish 
the Committee to Study the Creation of a State Calendar” . 
Two years ago I received notice of an in -person (and zoom) public comment opportunity on a 
state agency rule that was central to my job.  
I was very frustrated that the public comment was scheduled for Yom Kippur, the holiest day on 
the Jewish calendar.  A day of fasting, contemplation, and refraining from work.  
I brought the matter to the attention of the state agency representatives who scheduled the 
hearing. They were very conscientious and apologetic, and they assured me that they consulted 
the agency’s calendar before scheduling the hearing. Understandable, since no one sought to 
create a conflict.  
Yet there was the conflict. And not because of malice. Because the state not only didn’t have a 
policy to  avoid conflicts with major religious holidays, but the state didn’t even disseminate the 
information internally about major religious holidays.  
Imagine having a hearing scheduled on Easter. Or on Christmas. It’d never happen. But Yom 
Kippur is fair game. As is Eid al -Adha.  
Seeing one’s major religious hol y day  erased through inattention —while the majority religion’s 
holy days are explicitly recognized in law —is alienating from one’s own government. While it is 
far from the most egregious transgression agai nst minority religions, it is nevertheless hard to 
reconcile with the sentiment of the First Amendment of the US Constitution or with the “sects 
equal” provision in Section 3 of the Maine Constitution , which reads in part  “no subordination 
nor preference of any sect o r denomination to another shall ever be established by law”.  
The University of Maine  and the University of Maine System  disseminate information about 
major religious holidays, and this has also been supported in motions passed by the UMaine 
Faculty Senate . 
Policies to avoid scheduling special events that conflict with religious holidays and to 
dissem inate information about such religious holidays to personnel are also included in model 
school policies adopted in several school districts in Maine, including my own district of RSU 26 
(NEPN/NSBA Code IMDE – Cultural and Religious Holidays) . 
You can take a st ep toward respecting all residents of the State of Maine by passing LD 1243, to 
start an inclusive and thoughtful process of creating a state calendar so that at least state 
personnel will have the information they need to be respectful of the religious practice of all 
Mainers.  
 
