Hello Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and honorable members of the State and Local 
Government Committee. I am Jacob Hinz, and I am a third-year Political Science major at the University 
of Maine-Orono. Thank you for allowing me to express my support for LD 1243: Resolve, to Establish 
the Committee to Study the Creation of a State Calendar. 
 
To give some background, I’m also Jewish. LD 1243 would establish a committee to start 
building a state calendar. The necessary reasons for creating a state calendar would be to identify the 
holidays of religious and ethnic minorities in Maine. This will allow religious minorities and Jews like me 
to celebrate their holidays without fearing consequences from their school or employers.  
 
Many religious minorities year after year often cannot miss work to celebrate their culture and 
observe their holy days. Some people may need the money from their job to keep up with bills or simply 
can’t afford to miss a day of work for a minority holiday because they may fall behind on work and/or 
risk being terminated. 
 
This is a problem of equality, as Christian Americans have no issue when it comes to observing 
their religion on their holidays. This inequality can be resolved by establishing a state calendar that lists 
the holidays of religious minorities and grants them the leniency they deserve to celebrate their religion 
freely. 
 
The calendar will also help eliminate confusion for employers and schools that wish to respect the 
rights of religious minorities. So that employers or school admins can simply go to a state calendar and 
find out if their employees or student are celebrating a holiday they have never heard of. If the State of 
Maine wishes to respect the diversity of its citizenry, the legislature should pass LD 1243, as this bill will 
help grant minorities the rights granted in the 1st amendment to express their faith and the ability to 
practice their religion without fearing repercussions. 
Jacob Hinz
Orono
LD 1243
Hello Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and honorable members of the State and
Local Government Committee. I am Jacob Hinz, and I am a third-year Political 
Science major at the University of Maine-Orono. Thank you for allowing me to 
express my support for LD 1243: Resolve, to Establish the Committee to Study the 
Creation of a State Calendar.
To give some background, I’m also Jewish. LD 1243 would establish a committee to 
start building a state calendar. The necessary reasons for creating a state calendar 
would be to identify the holidays of religious and ethnic minorities in Maine. This 
will allow religious minorities and Jews like me to celebrate their holidays without 
fearing consequences from their school or employers. 
Many religious minorities year after year often cannot miss work to celebrate their 
culture and observe their holy days. Some people may need the money from their job 
to keep up with bills or simply can’t afford to miss a day of work for a minority 
holiday because they may fall behind on work and/or risk being terminated.
This is a problem of equality, as Christian Americans have no issue when it comes to 
observing their religion on their holidays. This inequality can be resolved by 
establishing a state calendar that lists the holidays of religious minorities and grants 
them the leniency they deserve to celebrate their religion freely.
The calendar will also help eliminate confusion for employers and schools that wish 
to respect the rights of religious minorities. So that employers or school admins can 
simply go to a state calendar and find out if their employees or student are celebrating
a holiday they have never heard of. If the State of Maine wishes to respect the 
diversity of its citizenry, the legislature should pass LD 1243, as this bill will help 
grant minorities the rights granted in the 1st amendment to express their faith and the 
ability to practice their religion without fearing repercussions.

