A M |\/loine Municipal 
Association 
60 COMMUNITY DRIVE 
AUGUSTA, MAiNE 04330-9486 
(207) 623-8428 
WWW.lT18mUl'i.Ol'g 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition To 
LD 548- An Act to Amend the Duties of County Sherzﬁfs 
March 23, 2023 
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, and distinguished members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony in opposition LD 548, An Act to 
Amend the Duties of County Sherzﬂs, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the 
interests of municipal government before the Legislature.V 
As drafted, municipal ofﬁcials object to the language in section lA which is a new deﬁnition ofa 
Sheriff establishing the elected role as chief law enforcement officer of the county, instead of the chief 
county law enforcement officer. This seems to supersede the chief law enforcement ofﬁcer ofa 
municipality, for which communities have direct control over their enforcement priorities, community 
programs, and operations. 
Municipalities have no control to shape county policing priorities or procedures which often can 
place additional burdens on municipal police in a service center community which has a shared resource 
such as a hospital or homeless shelter that become the natural place for protective custody, and similar 
activities from rural and surrounding areas to migrate. Often, the court as well as county operations, 
places a burden on municipal police in service center communities for activities like bail required check 
ins for cases that never occurred in the community or involved the municipal police department in 
question. 
While currently, those issues are ones based on mutual respect and communication with policing 
partners, a change in the deﬁnition of the role of sheriff could undermine that relationship based on the 
personality of the person in that office, and be used to assert authority over the operations of municipal 
police chiefs and create a hierarchy of law enforcement detrimental to public safety. Municipal police 
chiefs are not elected. They are highly skilled, executively trained law enforcement professionals and 
should only be answerable to their communities and their professional standards. 
Officials ask that this section of law be amended to maintain that the Sheriff is the “chief county 
law enforcement officer” not the “chief law enforcement officer of the county.” 
Additionally, the language in Sec. 1C (2) suggests that each county has as jail and further ascribes 
in statute the class of inmates that are held there as part of the duties of sheriff. This seems to conflict with 
30-A §454 which allows the county to provide detention facilities either in the county or by contract with 
another county or enter into an agreement under chapter 115 for interlocal cooperation. 
By placing the class of inmate based on charge in statute, it may remove the necessary ﬂexibility 
officials are seeking to encourage the appropriate use of county facilities in the face of state pressures on
the judicial system, make it hard for a sheriff with a problematic inmate to enact a transfer to a state 
forensic facility if pretrial detainees are codiﬁed in statute to reside in the county facility based on charge. 
Municipal ofﬁcials are working with county jails to address habitual shortfalls in the necessary 
funding for jail service provision, balancing the ever-expanding obligations places on county operations 
as a result of statewide priorities that remain unfunded with appropriate correctional standards. Both jails 
and municipal ofﬁcials need ﬂexibility to better support counties in this tremendous task and feel this 
section of deﬁned duties pertaining to corrections operations should be removed or amended to read: 
(2) Detention and corrections operations as established in §454 or by county charter. 
Ofﬁcials thank you for your sensitive review of these changes and ask that you work with all 
stakeholders to ﬁnd appropriate language to address any issues that are behind this bill respecting the 
delicate balance between the levels of government that are paying for the operations and ones with agency 
to change or respond to emerging pressures beyond county boundaries.
