Maine County Commissioners Association 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
- ‘?,,_;,. 
LD 548, An Act to Amend the Ditties of County Sheriffs 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local 
Government, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners 
for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy cormnittee of the Maine 
County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee in 
oggosition to LD 548. County commissioners very much respect and appreciate the important work undertaken 
by county sheriffs, and we recognize the independent role that sheriff’ s take with regard to their law 
enforcement activities; however, county commissioners believe it is inappropriate to pass legislation that divests 
commissioners from their current legal responsibilities over the hiring and terms of employment of all county 
employees, including employees within the officeiof sheriff. 
About MCCA. Brieﬂy, the Maine County Corrnnissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efﬁcient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all of Maine’s l6 counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county. 
LD 548 seeks to divest county commissioners of any role in overseeing employees of sheriff departments. 
Recently, some counties have been debating whether county commissioners or county sheriffs are vested with 
the authority to direct employees of county sheriff offices. Lawyers for both sides have reached different 
conclusions. This bill seeks to resolve the dispute by determining that sheriffs have the ﬁnal say over employees 
of county sheriff ofﬁces. 
County commissioners have a key legal role regarding county employees. Under Maine law, the 
employment, dismissal, suspension, and discipline of county employees is described in 30-A M.R.S § 501 (titled 
“Employment and Dismissal of County Employees ”). That section states that “all county ofﬁcers or department 
heads shall submit to the county commissioners . . . the name of any person the county officer or department 
head proposes to employ or the names of more than one person from which the county commissioners or 
personnel board are to select a person for employment, ” and that the “county commissioners . . . may approve 
the employment of the person or select a person for employment. ” § 5 0] . Such directive evidences the broad 
oversight responsibility that county commissioners have over all county employees. 
The authority of county commissioners with respect to county employees is further spelled out in 30-A M.R.S. 
§] 02 which states: “The county commissioners have ﬁnal authority over the operation of all county ofﬁces by 
elected or appointed county officials, except in circumstances for which a County Personnel Board has been 
established under subchapter VII, article 2 with the powers and duties set forth in that article and in section 
5Ol.” 3 0-A MR.S § 102. Under this provision of law, county commissioners have “final authority ” over all 
county offices, and this provision clearly relates to the employees of county ofﬁces — not the “brick and mortar” 
of a physical office. 
A sheriff’ s authority to appoint and remove deputies is described in 30-A M.R.S. § 381, and is more limited than 
with regard to other county employees. Section 381 states that a county sheriff may appoint, subject to the
Comments of MCCA re LD 548 
March 28, 2023 
Page2 
requirements of Section 501, full-time or part~time deputies. Thus, a sheriffs authority to appoint and remove 
deputies remains subject to oversight by county cormnissioners under section 501. The only exception to the 
county employee and personnel oversight authority of county commissioners is explicitly laid out in statute and 
refers to a sheriff’ s appointed Chief Deputy. 3 0-A M.R.S. § 383. That section states that a sheriff shall appoint a 
Chief Deputy, and that person “serves at the will of the sheriff. ” Id. Unlike the statutory provisions applicable to 
regular sheriff deputies set forth in 30-A M.R.S. § 381, section 383 is silent regarding any reference to the 
process of the hiring, discipline, and removal of regular deputies other than the Chief Deputy, and as such, the 
clear implication is that such employees are subject to the broader oversight function of county commissioners 
as set forth in Section 501. 
Additionally, with regard to employees and personnel at county jails, current Maine law expressly provides that 
county commissioners maintain the oversight function. Section 1501 states that the “appointment, discipline, 
supervision or dismissal of the jailer master and keeper is subject to 501” (emphasis added). As noted earlier, 
Section 501 gives county connnissioners oversight of county employees. Similarly, the appointed Jail Warden 
has certain oversight responsibilities with regard to county jails, including the “appointment of all subordinate 
assistants and employees. ” 30-A MRS./1 § 1501. However, this same provision also makes clear that the Jail 
Warden’s authority is still “subject to the requirements of Section 50 l” . The clear meaning of this provision is 
that employees of county jails are subject to the oversight of county commissioners. 
Moreover, a recent Law Court decision provides that county commissions are accountable for the assets and 
actions of a_ll its employees, including sheriffs. See Clark v. Hancock Cmfy. Comm ’rs, 2014 ME 33, 1] l, 87 A.3d 
712 (noting that sheriff department employees are county employees). To suggest that county commissions are 
legally accountable for employees of the sheriff, but have no oversight role with regard to such employees, 
would make little sense. 
Finally, all county union contracts, including those of a sheriff’ s staff, are between county connnissioners and 
the respective union. This fact further evidences the oversight authority of county commissioners over all county 
employees, including those within the ofﬁce of sheriff. 
Oversight of sheriff employees is not related to law enforcement functions of the sheriff. County 
commissioners are well aware that county sheriffs are directly elected by county voters, and the position of 
sheriff is expressly recognized in the Maine Constitution. Sheriffs are clearly responsible for undertaking the 
role of law enforcement and county jail operations for county governments, and no one is suggesting that county 
cormnissioners have a role in carrying out law enforcement or directly operating a county jail. However, county 
commissioners are responsible for the administrative functions of counties, like human resources and county 
ﬁnances, and this includes ultimate authority over the terms of employment of individuals in the sheriffs ofﬁce 
other than the Sheriff and the Chief Deputy. 
LD 548 is not the best course, and current law should instead be clarified. If LD 548 were to pass, it would 
codify that sheriffs would have sole responsibility to hire and supervise their staff, and county commissioners 
would have no role other than to raise revenue to support such efforts — even though county commissioners are 
elected by voters to run and ﬁnance county operations, and current law unambiguously provides county 
commissioners with oversight responsibilities regarding all county employees. 
If the Legislature feels it is important to clarify the law, we would suggest clarifying that county sheriffs have 
day-to-day management responsibility over their employees, but subject to the authority of county 
commissioners to set overarching employment terms and conditions, including with respect to pay. Otherwise, 
the ofﬁcials legally responsible for the assets and actions of all its employees, including sheriffs, and for raising 
taxes and financing county operations, would have no say over their largest operations, which is poor policy. 
Conclusion. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know.
Comments of MCCA re LD 548 
March 28, 2023 
Page3 
Respectfully submitted, 
%<z/20% 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel
