 
Sen. Donna Bailey, Senate Chair  
Rep. Anne Perry, House Chair  
Committee of Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee  
 
 
Dear Senator Donna Bailey, Senate Chair  and the Members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee  
 
The American Heart Association (AHA) is the nation’s oldest and largest voluntary 
organization dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke, whose mission is to be a 
relentless force for a world of longer, healthier lives. We are writing i n opposition of 
LD896 "An Act to Exempt Nonprofit Agricultural Membership Organizations from 
Insurance Requirements" .  
 
This bill exempts health plans offered for sale by a “nonprofit agricultural membership 
organization” from state laws that regulate health insurance coverage. These plans are 
often referred to as “farm bureau plans” and allowing their proliferation has the 
potential to weaken the overall effectiveness of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) by 
exposing consumers, particularly th ose with pre -existing conditions, to significant 
financial risk, segmenting the individual market risk pool and unnecessarily inflating 
insurance premiums for people who rely on comprehensive coverage provided through 
the ACA marketplaces.  
 
As with other u nder - and unregulated arrangements, like short -term limited duration 
health plans, association health plans, and allowing for the sale of insurance across 
state lines, enrollees in Farm Bureau plans risk financial hardship and difficulties 
accessing needed  care. Healthier individuals are likely the only ones that will make it 
through the medical underwriting process and enroll, leaving older, sicker individuals in 
the more comprehensive plans, driving up the cost of those plans.  
We ask you to vote “ought n ot to pass” on LD#896. I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have about this testimony.  
 
Sincerely  
Allyson Perron Drag   
American Heart Association/ Stroke Association  
Government Relations Director      
 

