W LEL.ii€Ei‘viiA E; 
t.‘{NiF>%tiZ3l\rl.£\ 
~ 
§@CliETY “ 
March 28, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Cross Building, Room 220 
Augusta, ME 04333 . 
Dear Chair Bailey, Chair Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, insurance, and Financial Services, 
The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society urges the members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, insurance, and Financial Services to vote ought not 
to pass on LD 896. 
At the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society, our mission is to cure leukemia, lymphoma, 
Hodgkin's disease, and myeloma and to improve the quality of life of patients and their 
families. LLS exists to find cures and ensure access to treatments for blood cancer 
patients. 
The plans created by LD 896 would be explicitly removed from oversight or regulation 
by the state Bureau of Insurance and exempt from compliance with state laws, rules, 
and regulations that exist to protect Maine consumers. That includes laws that require 
insurance carriers to provide coverage for pre-existing conditions, that prohibit carriers 
from charging higher premiums for individuals with a pre-existing condition, that 
provide financial safeguards for consumers by limiting out-of~pocket costs, or that 
require insurance carriers to be appropriately capitalized or to spend the majority of 
their premium intake on actual benefits for enrollees. Even if somebody with blood 
cancer was allowed to enroll in one of these plans, they could be forced to pay 
exorbitant premiums for a plan that would refuse to cover their treatments or 
medications and subject them to uncontrolled costs for even basic services. 
As written, LD 896 would not limit who could join an association selling this product 
type. Since the only people likely to pass medical underwriting and be allowed to enroll 
in these plans are young and healthy enrollees, allowing their proliferation could lead to 
erosion or fracturing of the risk pool in Maine. This would very likely increase prices for 
those Maine residents, such as blood cancer survivors, who have no choice but to 
maintain comprehensive coverage. 
Two years ago, 30 patient organizations, including LLS, published a comprehensive 
report called "Under—covered: How ‘insurance-Like ’ Products Are Leaving Patients 
Exposed. “ This report examined, among other product categories, the experience of 
farm bureau plans in the handful of states that had allowed them up to that point. The 
report confirmed that these products engage in extensive medical underwriting, leading 
to waiting periods, lockouts, premium spikes, or outright coverage denials for
individuals with pre-existing conditions. And by explicitly exempting these plans from 
any state regulation or oversight, as LD 896 proposes, people in Maine would be left 
with no recourse, due process, or options if they ended up in a plan that they realized, 
only too late, left them high and dry when it mattered most. 
Over the past several years, Maine has embarked on a series of ambitious, consumer- 
focused, patient-friendly reforms to make better coverage more affordable to more 
people. LD 896 presents a serious step backward. 
For these reasons, we ask that you vote ouqht not to pass on LD 896 
Sincerely, 
Ernie Davis 
Regional Director, Government Affairs 
The Leukemia and Lymphoma Society 
Qffice at ﬁashiie Pﬁlicy 
1.0 G 5%‘ 
Suite <~lGi3 
Vxlasltizlgtsii, DC 20902 
www . L15 . org; BEATINE 
BANBEH 
ISIN
