 
 
Hilary Schneider  
Maine Government Relations Director  American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Inc.  
PO Box 350, Westbrook, ME 04092 -3438  
207.373.3707  / 1.800. 227.2345  Email: hilary.schneider@cancer.org  
fightcan cer.org  
 
Testimony of Hilary Schneider, Maine Government Relations Director,  
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network  
 
In Opposition to LD 896 “An Act To  Exempt Nonprofit Agricultural Membership Organizations 
from Insurance Requirements ” 
 
March 28, 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey,  Representative Perry,  and members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee. My name is Hilary Schneider,  and I am the Maine 
Government Relations Director for the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS 
CAN). ACS  CAN, the nonprofit, nonpartisan advocacy affiliate of the American Cancer Society, 
supports evidence -based policy and legislative  solutions designed to eliminate cancer as a 
major health problem. As the nation’s leading advocate for public policies that are helping to 
defeat cancer, ACS CAN ensures that cancer patients, survivors, and their families have a voice 
in public policy mat ters at all levels of government.  
 
I would like to thank you for this opportunity to submit the following testimony in opposition to 
LD 896. This bill exempts health plans offered for sale by a “nonprofit agricultural membership 
organization” from state la ws that regulate health insurance coverage. These plans are often 
referred to as “farm bureau plans”  and allowing their proliferation has the potential to weaken 
the overall effectiveness of the Affordable Care Act  (ACA)  by exposing consumers, particularly 
those with pre -existing conditions, to significant financial risk, segmenting the individual market 
risk pool and unnecessarily inflating insurance premiums for people who rely on comprehensive 
coverage provided through  the ACA marketplaces . 
 
Having adequate and affordable health insurance coverage is a key determinant for surviving 
cancer. Research from the American Cancer Society shows that uninsured Americans are less 
likely to get screened for cancer and thus are mor e likely to have their cancer diagnosed at an 
advanced stage when survival is less likely and the cost of care more expensive.i This not only 
impacts the nearly 10,490ii Mainers  who will be diagnosed with cancer this year, but also the 
more than 88,000iii Mainers  living today who have a history of cancer.  
 
Whether federal health insurance standards apply to a particular coverage arrangement 
depends in significant part on whether t he arrangement is defined as insurance, and regulated 
as such, under state law.iv As a result, the default approach of most states is to define insurance 
broadly. However, certain arrangements have been deliberately excluded from the definition of 
insuranc e and therefore may operate outside of both federal and state insurance regulation.  
 
 
Hilary Schneider  
Maine Government Relations Director  American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Inc. 
PO Box 350, Westbrook, ME 04092 -3438  
207.373.3707  / 1.800. 227.2345  Email: hilary.schneider@cancer.org  
fightcancer .org  
  
As of March 2021, six states  — Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, South Dakota , Tennessee  and Texas — allow the 
Farm Bureau, a member -based organization, to sell to its members health benefit plans that have been 
carved out from the definition of insurance and exempted from the states’ insurance code. As a 
consequence of this deliberate exclusion, the Fa rm Bureau plans in these states are also exempt from all 
federal standards governing health coverage  — meaning that they are effectively unregulated.v Such 
plans may (and do) utilize extensive medical underwritingvi, deny enrollment based on an individual’s 
health status, impose waiting periods and refuse to provide coverage for pre -existing conditions. They 
are not required to provide E ssential Health Benefits (E HB), may charge higher premiums based on 
whatever factors they wish and may impose a nnual and lifetime limits on benefits, practices now 
outlawed by the ACA . It’s also important to note that while the entities are called “Farm Bureaus,” you 
don’t have to be a farmer to be a member  – anyone who pays the membership fee can enroll.  
 
In previ ous sessions, this committee has discussed many proposals to advance several types of u nder - 
and unregulated arrangements  that are similar to farm bureau plans and includ e short -term limited 
duration health plans , association health plans, and allowing for  the sale of insurance across state lines . 
With all of these types of plans, enrollees risk financial hardship and difficulties accessing needed care , 
especially when they are faced with an unexpected health care diagnosis like cancer . Last session, this 
committee and the Maine legislature considered and rejected an identical proposal to allow for the sale 
of farm bureau health plans . 
 
Healthier individuals are likely the only ones that will make it through the medical underwriting process 
and enroll, leaving older, sicker individuals in the more comprehensive plans, driving up the cost of those 
plans.  As a result, policies that cancer patients need – those that provide more robust coverage of 
products and  services – would become more expensive over tim e. 
 
The sale of policies that do not have to comply with Maine laws that compete with policies that do can 
be very confusing to consumers especially when they switch plans and assume the coverage will be 
subject to the same standards. This is true even whe n consumers are provided with notice about the 
inadequacies of such coverage. Many consumers assume if they are purchasing health coverage, it will 
cover health care services they need. While the competing coverage option may have lower premiums 
than other  plans on the market, these policies can be  costlier to the consumer in the long -run because 
these plans are exempt from  many of the key requirements that provide comprehensive coverage and 
protect consumers from high  out-of-pocket costs  and surprise medic al bills . Moreover, most individuals 
do not predict a cancer diagnosis. While the individual may be healthy when they enroll in coverage, a 
cancer diagnosis can leave them without any coverage at all and facing serious medical bills and debt. 
When individu als cannot pay for health care services, the costs of those services do not disappear. 
Instead, the costs of bad debt and charity care are spread across all of those who have health coverage, 
driving up premiums for all who have health coverage.  
 
For these  reasons, we ask you to vote “ought not to pass” on LD 896. I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have about this testimony.  
 
 
 
Hilary Schneider  
Maine Government Relations Director  American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Inc. 
PO Box 350, Westbrook, ME 04092 -3438  
207.373.3707  / 1.800. 227.2345  Email: hilary.schneider@cancer.org  
fightcancer .org  
 
i E Ward et al, “Association of Insurance with Cancer Care Utilization and Outcomes,” CA: A Cancer Journal for  
Clinicians 58:1 (Jan./Feb. 2008), http://www.cancer.org/cancer/news/report -links -health -insurance -status -withcancer -care .  
ii American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts & Figures 20 23. Atlanta: American Cancer Society; 20 23. 
iii American Cancer Society. Cancer Tr eatment & Survivorship Facts & Figures 2022 -2024 . Atlanta: American Cancer Society; 
2022. 
iv Federal health insurance standards apply to “issuer[s],” a term defined in part as any entity “which is licensed to engage in  
the business of insurance in a State a nd which is subject to State law which regulates insurance.” 42 U.S.C. § 300gg -91. 
v More specifically, the plans are not “health insurance coverage” offered by an “issuer” for purposes of the ACA and other 
federal law standards governing individual market insurance. Nor are they “group health plans” subject to ERISA, since the 
benefits are offered to individuals outside the context of employment . 
vi https://www. wellmark.com/ -/media/b93b03f03eb349c486d24e5a8fbfa3e5 , accessed on March 22, 2023 .  
