\(_\\\\G F QQ 0% ii) 
Maine Farm Bureau Association 
MA|NE.FA]7z~r§ no R;lF;.Z,X; _LJ_- 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF 
LD 896 An Act To Exempt Nonprofit Agricultural Membership Organizations from 
Insurance Requirements 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services: 
My name is Julie Ann Smith and l am the Executive Director of the Maine Farm 
Bureau Association. We are a non-proﬁt, non-partisan grassroots state-wide membership 
organization that was formed in 1951 to speak as the collective voice of the thousands of farmers 
throughout Maine. Each year, our farmer-members meet to discuss, decide and prioritize policy 
for our organization. One of the biggest discussions that arises every year is the increasing and 
unmanageable cost of health insurance. If 
am grateful to-havetthe opportunity to serve as the‘_ 
voice ofour farmers today to-support LD 896; -V 
at ~ 
r » ~ V 
Agriculture in Maine is struggling. In the past decade, we have seen a loss of nearly 10% of our 
farms, a decrease in the average size of acres farmed and an overall loss of land i11 agricultural 
production. In the last year alone, we have lost 25% of our dairy farms. Maine has a very short 
growing season with very high production expenses, making proﬁtability for farms very 
challenging. The COVID pandemic and its aftermath have increased these costs between 30% to 
50%, while the price farmers are paid for their crops has remained stagnant. Production expenses 
such as seeds, fertilizer, machinery and labor are costs that must be paid for before the farm 
owner can be paid. While this is similar to many businesses in Maine, the difference for farmers 
is that they are price-takers. Farmers cannot set what price they will be paid for the food they 
grow and Maine farmers are competing with international imports and even farms in other states 
that are able to grow crops and ship them to Maine for less than what it costs a Maine farm to 
produce the same vegetable. Maine imports 90% of its food to meet the consumer need for 
inexpensive food. This leaves many farmers in the gap of uninsured.u 
As the COVID‘ pandemic showed us, production of local food is imperative. We cannot predict 
when the next disruption in the food supply chain will happen. If we cannot ﬁnd a way for more 
Maine farms to produce moreifood, we may ﬁnd ourselves in a very dire situationin the future. 
This bill would address one aspect of farm expenses that are forcing farms out of business: health 
insurance costs. '' 
Several state Farm Bureaus (Tennessee (1993), Iowa (2018), Kansas (2019), Indiana (2020), 
South Dakota (2021), and New Hampshire) offer affordable health coverage options to their 
members. These innovative programs, which have received bipartisan support in other states, 
provide an alternative to farmers that are unable to afford the high cost of conventional 
insurance. Tennessee Farm Bureau, who we hope to partner with if this legislation passes, is able 
to offer affordable coverage with premiums that are up to 77% lower than what is available on 
the individual market, and offer more affordable deductibles. They have a 98% renewal rate and 
a consumer with a complaint about coverage does have recourse through the Termessee Bureau 
of Insurance. The Tennessee Health Plan does have to maintainiminimum funding and actuarial 
review of its health beneﬁt liabilities and is a plan that has been successfully saving farms money 
-' 
~4 _Gabl‘i6l Drive Suite l,i iAugust'a.l\/iaine , 04330‘ ‘ ~ 
(207) 622-4l ll // p wWvv.mainefarmbureau.com // info@mainefarmbu.reau.com'
for nearly 30 years. Furthermore, it has allowed farm workers to have consistent coverage 
regardless of employment status, allowing seasonal workers year-round coverage. 
There are too many farmers in Maine that delay preventative care because they cannot afford the 
upfront cash costs of their current deductibles. We all know the-huge costs to our health care 
industry when preventative care does not happen. 
With a Farm Bureau Plan, a family of four with two parents in their early 40s and two kids under 
14 would experience savings of nearly $10,000 per year. This $10,000 is easily an amount of 
money that makes or breaks a farm.~
_ 
LD 896 requests an exemption similar to the Health care sharing ministry exemption already in 
statute. We respectfully urge the Committee to vote Ought To Pass to provide farmers with an 
affordable alternative that would help keep farms in Maine operational. 
Thank you for your time and service to the people of Maine. I would be happy to answer any 
questions youmay have.‘ 
_ _ ' ‘ 
V0 
4 Gabriel Drive Suite l, Augusta, Maine 04330 
(207) 622-4111 // WWw.mainefarmbureau.com // info@mainefarmbureau.com
