Affordable Telephone: 1-800-965-7476 Consumers for P-0 B°*249° 
Augusta, ME 04338 
Hﬂalth cafe Fax: 1-sss-214-5233 
Advocating the right to quality affordable wwwmnaineca he org 
heath care for an Mainem ' 
consumerhealth@mamecahc org 
Testimony In Opposition T o: 
l.D 896, “An Act To Exempt Nonproﬁt Agricultural Membership 
Organizations from Insurance Requirements" 
Tuesday, March 28, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representatives Perry, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. Thank you for the opportunity to provide 
this testimony. My name is Kate Ende and I am the policy director at Consumers for Affordable 
Health Care (CAHC), a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates for Maine people to 
be heard, respected, and well-served in a health system that provides coverage, access and 
quality, affordable care to all. 
CAHC is designated by Maine's Attorney General as Maine's Health Insurance Consumer 
Assistance Program (CAP). The CAP program provides toll-free and in-person access to certified 
application counselors and trained individuals who help Mainers understand their health 
coverage options and apply and enroll in private health insurance. The program also provides 
assistance to Mainers in appealing inappropriate health insurance denials and links people to 
safety net programs when necessary, to meet health care and other basic needs. CAHC also 
serves as the Ombudsman program for Maine's Medicaid program, MaineCare, and helps 
people with applying for and navigating the enrollment process for MaineCare coverage. lt is 
from our experience assisting Mainers in navigating health coverage programs that we offer the 
following comments. 
While we oppose this bill, we appreciate and support the overall intention to expand access to 
affordable coverage for those who are falling through the cracks of our current healthcare 
system. However, we do not believe this bill will achieve this goal, and would likely have the 
opposite of its intended impact, by causing premiums to increase and become less affordable to 
individuals and small businesses in Maine. 
This bill proposes to exempt health care benefits provided by a nonprofit agricultural 
membership organization from the definition of ”health insurance." These plans would not 
have to cover essential health benefits, comply with consumer protections, including 
protections against surprise medical bills and protections for people with pre-existing 
conditions. Plans would not be regulated by the Bureau of Insurance and if someone was 
denied coverage for health care services, they would not be able to turn to the Bureau for 
assistance and would not be entitled to the complaint and appeal rights that are ensured to 
members of qualified health plans.
lt is important to note that this bill does not limit enrollment in these proposed plans to farmers 
or others engaged in agricultural work. Under this bill, anyone in Maine could enroll into one of 
these plans. That is, anyone who is approved by the organization. Since these plans would not 
have to follow federal or state consumer protections, they would be allowed to discriminate 
against people with pre-existing conditions. Farm Bureau plans in other states have employed 
exclusions or limitations on coverage for pre-existing conditions and reject applicants from 
purchasing plans based on their pre-existing conditions or medical history. All other individual 
and small group plans must comply with guaranteed issue requirements and are prohibited 
from discriminating based on health conditions or medical history. Introducing plans that are 
exempt from these rules would create a parallel market of unregulated Farm Bureau plans with 
stripped down benefits that could cherry pick its enrollees, pulling younger and healthier 
individuals out of Maine's individual and small group market. This worsens the individual and 
small group market risk pool, leading to higher premiums for people and small businesses 
purchasing comprehensive, ACA-compliant health insurance in Maine. 
ln fact, a few years ago, there was an expansion in the availability of another type of non-ACA 
compliant plan, short-term, limited duration (STLD) health plans. Maine's Legislature has since 
taken action to limit the availability of these plans. However, at the time, carrier rate filing 
documents cited the expansion of STLD plans as one of the factors contributing to rate 
increases for health plans in 2019. 
People with health conditions need comprehensive coverage and need that coverage to be 
affordable. If healthy people buy into Farm Bureau plans, it will create an increasingly 
segmented market. Older people and individuals with health conditions will make up more of 
the market for more comprehensive, ACA-compliant health coverage, and these individuals and 
small business in Maine will seeing the cost of their coverage rise, possibly to a level where they 
cannot afford and are left without coverage. 
Tennessee has allowed unregulated Farm Bureau plans since the early 1990's. Tennessee alsoa 
risk pool that is sicker than most other states, and has previously struggled to ensure the 
availability of Marketplace qualiﬁed health plans in all areas of the state, likely in part due to 
enrollment in Farm Bureau plans.1 
ln addition to making health insurance premiums more expensive, unregulated plans can also 
leave consumers on the hook for thousands of dollars in unexpected medical costs. Through 
our Helptine, we have heard from many people over the years who thought they had 
purchased a comprehensive, qualified health plan, when in fact they had purchased a type of 
unregulated, non-ACA compliant health coverage. Unfortunately, many of these people ended 
up in medical debt due to thousands, or sometimes tens of thousands of dollars of uncovered 
medical bills. Some services were uncovered due to a pre-existing condition, while others were 
for an excluded category of service, such as plans that excluded maternity and newborn care. In 
om 1httpzljchirblogorglwhats-g ‘ gjennesseeeone-possiblewreason¢aiiorclgble-care~act-chalienges/
