 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  
 
L.D. 204 
 
AN ACT TO ENSURE SAFE ACCESS TO SCHOOLS BY IMPLEMENTING  
INTERLOCKING DOOR CONTROLLER TECHNOLOGY  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee.  I 
am Eileen King, deputy executive director  of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association , neither for nor against  L.D. 204. 
 
The safety of our students and staff is a paramount responsibility of school leaders , but do not feel that this 
type of door can or should be legislated.  We have hundreds of school buildings in our state and they are all 
built differently. Many of our schools cannot accommodate interlocking door controller technology due to 
where the school campus is located, the structure of the school, and the location of the doors in the school.  
 
School safety requires a framework composed of technology, training, education , and community 
engagement. We n eed to make sure that school districts are implementing safety measures that meet the needs 
of their students and staff based on the size, design , and age of the facility . 
 
We also note that while the bill r equires the state to provide funds for installing t hat technology, there is no 
fiscal not e on L.D. 204 at this time . One can reasonably anticipate that fiscal note will be substantial given the 
age of many  of our school buildings in Maine.  
 
One suggestion is to turn this bi ll into a resolve to look at what it would cost to install interlocking doors in all 
schools and over what time frame.  
