Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
' 
‘“' ‘ " °‘ ‘ P‘ 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director Hi: »_-;;;:.m. ts»; talmiglf 
Testimony 
In Support of 
LD 1898 An Act to Ensure That a Teacher Who Participates in the Prevention of Dangerous 
Behavior Is Protected Under a Collective Bargaining Agreement 
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
May 24, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certiﬁed teacher. The MEA represents 
nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-12 schools as well as in our 
institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine Community 
College System, along with students in teacher prep programs as well as many retired educators. 
I am here to testify on behalf of MEA in support of LD 1898, An Act to Ensure That a Teacher Who 
Participates in the Prevention of Dangerous Behavior Is Protected Under a Collective Bargaining 
Agreement. 
In my ﬁrst year in this position, in the spring of 2019, I presented the attached testimony in support of 
what was then LD 1370, a bill proposed by then Senator, now Representative, Millett. As you read that 
testimony, you see that many of our educators had been dealing with some very troubling, and 
dangerous, behaviors and that in too many instances, there was too little, or even at times nothing, being 
done to improve these situations, to address the student’s or educator ’s needs and provide support to try 
to prevent reocurrences. Just the number of responses we had to a survey that asked about what 
educators were dealing with was telling. 
Thankfully, that legislation was passed and now is law as Title 20-A, §'6555: Dangerous behavior 
prevention and intervention (mainegov). We were grateful to have worked with the other 
organizations ——MPA, MSMA, MADSEC—on how to implement it. Together, we developed ‘uniﬁed 
guidance ’ . I want to emphasize, that these organizations worked together on developing the guidance 
that was to be followed when such situations occurred. We were in the process of informing our 
educators about this and then—March 2020. It’s not that there weren’t still serious situations to deal 
with—in fact, as we returned to in-person learning in the fall, and especially when we were no longer in 
‘hybrid’ situations but were fully in-person the following year—we were hearing about an increase in 
the instances, and in the severity, of dangerous behaviors. We have continued to hear about these and 
have supported bills aimed at helping to increase support for students, such as LD 829. 
But what we are hearing now, again, is that at times, even when a dangerous behavior is reported, the 
process is not being followed as it should be. Not in every instance, but in some. For example, a student 
engaged in behavior that damaged an educator ’s vision. The educator had to seek medical care for 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME D4330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207~622-5866 I 207~888—2070 fax I www.maineea.org
damage to their eye. Unfortunately, when the district ’s attorney weighed in on this situation, he 
determined that ‘there was no dangerous behavior ’-even though there was an injury in need of medical 
care! But since the attorney decided there was no ‘dangerous behavior ’ , the process for dealing with this 
was not followed. Eventually, the administrator was convinced that that was not the case-eventually. 
We are glad that happened in this instance, of course. But it should not have taken as much time as it did 
to be dealt with properly, unnecessarily causing additional stress in an already stressful situation. In 
other instances, situations might not be resolved —too often it depends on the relationship between 
administration and staff, and the role of attorney plays. Even now, in some places, educators are still 
being told that being injured is ‘pait ofthe job’. 
We have spoken with the leaders of MSMA, MPA, and MADSEC about this of course. We are all 
working on ways to address the needs of our students and support our students and our educators. We 
are working on being sure that everyone —educators and administrators —are informed about the law 
found in Title 20-A, Section 6555, and about the unified guidance. But in an instance where the process 
is not being followed properly, too often the educator has no recourse. 
With LD I898, we are hopeful that the added language will help to ensure that the process is followed 
correctly in all instances. We will all continue to work on better support for our students to better meet 
their needs so that there are fewer, or no, instances of dangerous behavior. But we need to ensure that the 
correct process is followed whenever there is a report of a dangerous behavior, and LD 1898 will help 
see that it is. 
We urge you to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 1898. 
Thank you for your time and I am glad to answer any questions you may have.
Testimony in support of LD 1370 April 17, 2019 
Senator Millett, Representative Kornfield, and esteemed members of the Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs, 
My name is Grace Leavitt. I am a high school Spanish teacher, National Board Certified, on leave from 
MSAD #51 to serve as President ofthe Maine Education Association, representing nearly 24,000 
educators in the state. 
I am here today to testify in support of LD 1370, ”An Act to Address Violent Behavior in the Classroom" . 
First, I want to be sure to thank Senator Millett for proposing this legislation. While this won't provide a 
‘quick fix’ to what has become an ever increasing, and increasingly serious, problem in our schools, this 
legislation does begin to provide some relief and most importantly, it is raising awareness around this 
deeply troubling issue. 
Have any of you ever—-ever—been spit at? Hit? Kicked? Scratched? Bitten? Had a stapler or other 
heavy object thrown at you? 
What if there were a very real possibility ofthat happening to you as a ‘routine’ part of your daily job? 
What would you do in this case? 
l first became aware of what was happening a few years ago. Sitting at a meeting of local association 
presidents, I was horriﬁed to hear one talk about the violent behaviors of some students in her school 
and the injuries that several staff had sustained as a result. More troubling was what seemed likea 
woefully inadequate response to these instances. We began to hear about this more and more 
frequently and reached out to members to try to get a handle on the extent of the problem in our state. 
We knew we needed to do something about this alarming situation. Of course, at the same time we are 
trying to attract more people to the profession. 
With our most recent poll, we had a record response. Well over 1300 members took the time to answer 
questions about their experiences, what they had witnessed either directly or indirectly. Many shared 
details, while maintaining confidentiality. The results from the survey were shocking, even to those of 
us who had been hearing about these incidents for a while. 
Some shared specifics but of course required anonymity in order to maintain confidentiality. 
A teacher, pushed down by a young student. 
Broken ribs. 
Concussions.
Many educators who stated that although they themselves had not been injured, their colleagues had 
but did not feel able to speak up about it. 
At a recent meeting of the Presidents of other state associations, it was the number one concern. This is 
a nation-wide problem. I guess you could think of that as ‘good news’ , because there are many efforts 
in other states working to address it. Of course, the situation is actually extremely ‘bad news’ and we all 
must do much, much more to address not just the violent behaviors, but also and just as importantly if 
not more so, the causes of these. 
Thankfully, there has also come before you other legislation aimed at addressing some of the causes. 
And I will remain optimistic that these proposals will go forward and will go a long way towards helping. 
But meanwhile, we cannot let our educators on the front lines continue to suffer injuries without some 
immediate remedies to diminish these acts, to avert them, or at least to do right by anyone who is 
injured. There needs to be a clear process, a protocol, that will be followed when such acts occur. 
To be hurt and feel that you either cannot report it because you might be seen as ’incapable' of doing 
the job (one concern expressed by a member!) or be accused of being ’insubordinate ’ (also stated bya 
member)—this isjust plain wrong. 
We have been quiet about it for too long. After all, how does a teacher who is still in her probationary 
period confront an administrator who sends a student right back to her class after he has shown 
increasingly violent behavior towards her and towards fellow students? How does this young woman 
handle this situation? When she told me about this, she understandably broke down into tears. She has 
felt on the verge of quitting teaching at any moment, and is constantly in fear of something tragic 
happening, either to her or to a student. She tried to speak up to others about the situation and to 
advocate for help, but as of the time she related this to me, no help was yet offered. She felt at least 
some degree of relief when l told her that we are working on this issue—and l can only hope that 
meanwhile, nothing befalls her, and that we do not lose her from the profession. But how can she 
continue to teach effectively in a constant state of fear? 
One other point she made was that her school was, at least in name, a ’restorative justice school’ . I 
caution those who believe this is a silver bullet. Certainly, when done properly and with integrity, 
restorative practices have been shown to help immensely and are so much more effective than punitive 
measures. But the proper training is needed, and the time needed for these practices to function as 
intended also must be provided. MEA is doing what it can to work with others to help with the effort of 
providing adequate training in this area so that schools adopt such practices in an authentic way and not 
merely as a band aid approach which may do more harm than good. But even so, there may be 
instances where even this is not the most appropriate approach. 
I cannot end my testimony without talking specifically about our education support professionals, 
especially our ed techs. it is nothing less than tragic that many of our education support professionals 
have come to believe that being harmed is nowjust ‘part of the job’ . Even a superintendent is reported 
to have said just that—it is ‘part of the job’ and then said that if the employee didn't want to deal with 
it, the person should seek a job elsewhere. 
Recently I was shown the protective gear—yes, protective gear——that some ed techs must wear while 
working with some students. A face shield, arm guards—it looked more like what the goalie in an ice
hockey game must wear! No wonder that we have such difficulty filling these positions. Perhaps more 
troubling is what another ed tech told me, that her administrator does not want staff wearing such 
protective gear because it would disturb the students. Understandable, it does look disturbing —but 
then what protects the employee from the scratching, biting, spitting, or worse? Often, a new ed tech 
begins a position only to find out what it entails——indeed, if they were ‘warned’ , would they accept the 
job in the first place? —and once they see what happens, there is often once again a vacant position to 
fill. 
There are now numerous articles about "Secondary Post Traumatic Stress”—this is what our educators 
are now feeling as a result of working with students with such serious needs. 
Our students have many dire needs and we must do much more to help meet these needs. We are 
currentlyjust scratching the surface. Another member told me that in her position, as a behavior 
strategist, she was only doing just that—just minimally addressing her students ’ needs because her 
caseload numbers were so high, and the students ’ needs were so great, that she could only meet with 
each of her students individually for a very minimum amount of time. Her frustration was enormous, to 
say the least. She wants to help more, but there are simply too many needs and too few hours in the 
day. And how many schools, or even districts, have a behavioral strategist on staff? 
At least with the passage of LD 1370 we will be taking steps toward improving things immediately for 
many educators while we continue to work toward improved sen/ices to better meet the needs of our 
most challenging students. 
Educators care about their students. And we must show that we care about our educators and their 
safety as well as the safety of all students in our schools. 
I strongly urge the Committee to vote unanimously ‘ought to pass’ on LD 1370. Something needs to 
happen now—right now-—before things get worse, before another educator is harmed. We must not 
simply continue to let this happen without trying to address it. 
Thank you for your time, and l am glad to answer any questions.
