49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
ms a ON Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBLIC EDUCATION AOVOCATES Websltei WWW'msmaWeb'c0mI 
Maine School Superintendents Association 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 1898 
AN ACT TO ENSURE THAT A TEACHER WHO PARTICIPATES IN THE PREVENTION OF 
DANGEROUS BEHAVIOR IS PROTECTED UNDER A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in opposition to L.D. I898. 
The statute is fashioned around teachers providing services to students. While we would not attempt to 
broaden the interpretation of the proposed law change, examples of staff participating in the prevention of 
dangerous behavior include educational technicians as well as teachers. This would broaden the results of this 
change in law as is described below. 
The dispute resolution process is designed to address issues that are perceived to have not been followed 
properly within the collective bargaining agreement. We do not see how this law should trigger the dispute 
resolution process (a grievance) when the actions occurring did not pertain to content within the collective 
bargaining agreement. If it was moved forward within the grievance procedure anyway and if resolution 
cannot be reached at the superintendent or school board level, it is possible it may move to the level of an 
arbitrator. 
If these disputes go to arbitration, an arbitrator will determine what’s best for the child, perhaps in violation of 
the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act or Chapter 504. 
The arbitrator is not a certiﬁed administrator familiar with managing student behavior and will never even 
meet the student. 
The arbitrator would need to review legally protected conﬁdential records without parental consent and make 
decisions about student matters without any parent notice or involvement. 
There is already an enforcement mechanism. The Commissioner of Education and the Attorney General 
already have the obligation to enforce all of title 20-A under 6801-A. It is a robust mechanism. Subsidy can be 
withheld, and they have the authority to force compliance with injunctive relief. 
Arbitrations occur many months after a dispute arises, in some cases a year later. Arbitrator costs are as high 
as $3,000 per day and typically an arbitration will involve a day of testimony and a day of writing and 
analysis; they also charge their travel time when they drive up from Boston. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Exacmive Director
These disputes would be very complex - likely with many witnesses needed to provide detailed context of the 
student. There will be many legal disputes over record conﬁdentiality. 
What is missing on L.D. 1898 is a robust ﬁscal note on this L.D. We see this resulting in considerable costs to 
schools. 
We urge you to vote ONTP on L.D. 1898.
