Regarding Environmental Considerations of LD584 
March 29, 2023 
To the members of the Health and Human Services Committee: 
It’s important to state up front that Good Ground Great Beyond is not advocating for open-air cremation 
as an environmental panacea.  From both a carbon emissions and land-use standpoint, almost any kind 
of cremation is better than a modern burial involving embalming fluid, caskets, and concrete-lined 
graves.  Good Ground, Great Beyond supports resomation, composting of human remains, and other 
forms of green burial, but we aren’t specifically billing this as a “green burial” option.  That said, we 
approach this in the spirit of “do no harm.” 
The environmental considerations of open-air cremation are not lost on us, and no one involved in this 
project holds that emissions of CO2 and other pollutants are irrelevant.  There have been significant 
negative environmental and human health consequences in India, where funeral pyres are the preferred 
means of disposition for millions of Hindu people each year.  Efforts have been made since the 1960s to 
encourage modern, natural gas-fueled cremation, but these efforts have largely failed due to 
incompatibility with other key Hindu death rituals.  Recognizing the environmental cost of so many 
wood-fired, open-air cremations, the Mokshda Green Cremation System was developed around 15 years 
ago.  This system uses a metal brazier, and has improved combustion efficiency tremendously, reducing 
the amount of wood needed per cremation by half. 
The pyre used successfully for many years in Crestone, CO, and which we propose to establish here in 
Maine, operates in a similar manner to the Moksdha system.  Thoughtful air-flow design allows 
temperatures to reach 1500°F, comparable to that of a modern natural gas-fueled crematory.  With this 
design, particulate matter, thick black smoke, and odor are largely eliminated due to complete 
combustion.  Since its inception in 2008, the Crestone pyre has received no complaints for any of the 
above – one of the criteria for its approval by regulatory agencies. 
It’s critical to bear in mind a few things when evaluating the potential for environmental fallout here in 
Maine. The first and arguably most important is that no matter how much “buzz” this bill has attracted, 
this will never be a mainstream disposition option.  Good Ground, Great Beyond is not “marketing” or 
selling open-air cremation to the masses.  Even a highly efficient, open-air pyre is still labor intensive and 
brings an intimacy and proximity to the process of saying goodbye that is not going to appeal to many 
folks.  Based on that alone, the emissions generated by a year’s worth of open-air cremations are 
probably negligible, especially relative to that heralded fall tradition of burning your brush pile.   
That said, carbon emissions can’t entirely be disregarded in this age of a worsening climate crisis.  The 
combustion of wood and wood products generates carbon dioxide.  Per BTU, wood emits more CO2 
than natural gas or propane.  But it isn’t as simple as comparing the amount of CO2 produced by wood 
versus natural gas combustion.  The carbon emitted by wood and wood products has been sequestered, 
or stored, for a relatively short amount of time – maybe 50 to 100 years.  The carbon released by 
burning natural gas, propane, coal, or any other “fossil” fuel was sequestered hundreds of millions of 
years ago, and the rate of its release can’t be offset by growing more trees.  I don’t think we can call 
wood and wood products “carbon neutral,” exactly, since chainsaws and trucks run on gas, oil, and 
diesel.  But from an overall carbon budget standpoint, the release of short-term carbon into the 
atmosphere can be balanced by its rapid uptake by growing vegetation (as long as we maintain a 
generally forested landscape).  I will take this opportunity to mention that unlike natural gas and 
propane, firewood is a local product. 
CO2 isn’t the only emissions concern, of course.  Sulfur oxides (SOx), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and mercury 
are all potential pollutants, among others.  Using untreated, natural wood greatly lowers emissions of 
SOx and NOx gases, though the question of mercury remains.  Mercury in dental amalgam fillings 
volatilizes at the high temperatures that occur during cremation and can then precipitate out in rain.  
Contamination is a legitimate concern.  A 2015 study in Minnesota attempted to quantify how much 
mercury was actually released over a year of cremations, and found that number to be roughly a third of 
what had previously been estimated, however.  Further, that study noted declines in the use of mercury 
amalgam fillings, and in dental fillings in general.  A 2020 study conducted in British Columbia found an 
average of 1.2g of mercury were emitted to the atmosphere per cremation, for a yearly total of 36 kg 
elemental mercury (corresponding to around 30,000 cremations) in 2016. This accounted for around 7% 
of total mercury emissions in BC, and the study’s risk assessment determined no significant risk to 
human health.  While we do not advocate in any way for loosening on pollution restrictions here in 
Maine, based on these studies we offer that the amount of mercury emitted by any kind of cremation is 
still extremely low when viewed in the context of other permitted activities like mining, coal burning, 
cement production.  Further, given how few open-air cremations we expect to actually be performed 
should LD584 pass, we do not expect mercury emissions to be anywhere close to the level that would 
lead to environmental or human health impacts. As a final offering, it is entirely possible for dental 
fillings to be removed prior to cremation of any kind, essentially voiding concern about resulting 
mercury emissions.     
Sincerely, 
Amanda Devine, Board Member, Good Ground Great Beyond 
 
References  
Meyers, Dr. Sandra.  2015.  Quantifying Mercury Emissions Resulting from the Cremation of Dental 
Amalgam in Minnesota: Final Results presented to Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
Piagno, Haley, and Reza Afshari.  Mercury from crematoriums: human health risk assessment and 
estimate of total emissions in British Columbia. Canadian Journal of Public Health. 2020 Dec; 111(6): 
1011–1019. 
 
