Regarding An Act to Permit the Conduct of Open Air Cremation at Designated Sites, LD 584
Testimony of Angela Lutzenberger
April 4, 2023
Ladies and Gentlemen of the Health and Human Services committee.
I am here today in support of LD 584 
Two years ago we brought a bill to this same committee aimed at legalizing open air cremation in Maine. I then made the case for why this should be available to folks who ﬁnd it meaningful and resonant. I continue to be motivated to help legalize this option for Mainers. 
Open air cremation is a sacred disposition option utilized in many present day cultures. It is viewed as signiﬁcant and meaningful by many all over the world, particularly in India and Nepal, but also within the United States. Since founding my non proﬁt, Good Ground Great Beyond, I have heard from countless folks who resonate with this option, who ﬁnd it very meaningful and sacred. The folks I have interacted with do not ﬁt in any one category. They are old and young, religious and secular. They are independently minded and curious. They are beautiful, ordinary folks.
One of the primary concerns raised in our last bill attempt was the environment. It continues to be the case that research into the environmental impact of small scale open air cremation has not been done. We have much anecdotal evidence from Crestone Colorado, the home of the only public open air pyre in the country. They have a pathologist on their board who has talked about the minimal environmental impact of singular burns that reach a temperature of 1500 degrees. What we are proposing is something that will not be environmentally detrimental. The impact of what we are proposing, at the scale we are suggesting, is less than the impact of wood burning stoves.
As a result of listening to and integrating concerns expressed in 2021, we intentionally adjusted the language of our bill this session to reﬂect sensitivity to environmental impact. We suggested a limited number of pyres in the state that would not exceed 6. We also proposed any pyre built would have to be at least 40 miles apart from any other pyre. We suggested a cap on the number of cremations allowed per month after a probationary period of a year. During that probationary year, only one cremation per month would be allowed. These latter adjustments are oriented toward empowering towns to determine their level of comfortability with any given proposed pyre. They would ultimately determine the viability of having a pyre in their town, after having some time to directly experience what open air cremation is actually like. We continue to see the building and establishment of any pyre as a collaborative endeavor that honors and involves our communities and that requires active engagement. It takes work to conduct an open air cremation. Enough work that it is does not lend itself to being a proﬁt generating business, which is why our language is geared toward keeping this very small scale and community oriented. This option is a relevant and important for those willing to put in signiﬁcant eﬀort. And these folks very much exist in Maine, though they are a small fraction of those who seek modern cremation.
The last thing I cannot over emphasize as we consider whether to allow open air cremation in Maine is meaning. Ritual and ceremony help us process and integrate impactful life experiences and loss. In well over a decade of work as a hospice chaplain I have encountered time and time again in so many diﬀerent ways, the longing people feel to be more engaged and guided within signiﬁcant transitions, to feel the sacredness and connectivity that mark all thresholds leading us into new phases of being. This is some of what our rituals give us, the 
rituals of our traditions and the rituals we create together in times of challenge and celebration. Being with our people in their dying and death, and being present as their forms transform, grants those present a diﬀerent way of moving forward. These rituals we engage in death are always twofold. We grieve which is both lament and celebration and we remember the temporary nature of our lives here on earth. And we change through that remembering. 
I remain committed to helping folks access this form of disposition because I am committed to serving people who are dying and who are grieving as they discover the healing in letting go of life, the healing in loss and in the beauty inherent in even the most devastating experiences. Open air cremation allows people an intimacy in ritual that many long for and have a right to. I wish to support those for whom this option is meaningful, 
I encourage you all to vote to allow this bill to pass. Thank you for your time and attention. 

