Testimony to the Committee on Health and Human Services 
Regarding LD 584: An Act to Permit the Conduct of Open Air Cremation at Designated Sites 
Tuesday April 4, 2023 By Christopher St John, Brunswick resident 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Committee. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support of LD 584, An Act to Permit the Conduct of 
Open Air Cremation at Designated Sites. 
My interest in this issue arises from having been a student and practitioner of Buddhist 
meditation for the last forty years. 
As a meditation instructor, I have officiated at several weddings and several funerals. In the 
Tibetan Buddhist funeral liturgy used in our community, there is a moment when a picture of the 
deceased is burnt. This moment in the service symbolizes the literal open air burning of the body 
that remains common in India, Nepal and Tibet, and the liberation of the spirit from the suffering 
in this realm. I have found this gesture to be very meaningful for the family and friends gathered 
in accepting the inevitable transformation that we all go through at the end of this life. 
While I have not had the opportunity to be present for an open air cremation, I was present for 
the death of both of my parents and sat with their bodies several hours after their deaths. LaterI 
met their bodies at the crematories, was allowed to see their faces at the moment before the 
bodies were placed in the crematoiy furnace, and walked outside to see the smoke arising from 
their burning. 
It was important to me to have those opportunities to witness the actual dissolution of their 
forms. I would like to see open air cremations open to people in Maine who seek that option for 
the disposition of their bodies. 
The bill before you authorizes simply that the state permit, with the town’s consent, open air 
cremations to be conducted at approved sites by approved organizations with required training. 
For the last 48 years, I have lived in many small Maine towns and have found a tolerance fora 
variety of choices, and a common perspective that you should be allowed to believe what you 
ﬁnd to be true and to do things on your own property so long as it does not interfere witha 
neighbors ’ enjoyment of their property. I believe that this bill is one example of that spirit andI 
ask that you support its passage.
