Katelyn Estes
Good Ground Great Beyond
LD 584
My name is Katelyn Estes, Licensed Funeral Director with over 15 years in the 
funeral industry, and also a Member of the Board for Good Ground Great Beyond. 
I am speaking today in Support of LD 584, An Act to Permit the Conduct of Open Air
Cremation at Designated Sites in Maine. 
I believe it’s important to reexamine our relationship to death and dying and the ways 
we can improve on traditional funeral practices.  There’s a movement across the 
nation toward more meaningful ways of mourning the departed and with it more 
nature based practices. I feel Maine can be a leader to begin offering new methods of 
disposition for our dead, especially those that add greater options for those in 
mourning and are beneficial to Maine’s ecosystem.  
There is great value and benefit of offering the option of Open Air cremation to the 
people of Maine. According to the Cremation Association of North America the US 
cremation rate has grown over 1% between 2020 and 2021. By 2025, the US 
cremation rate is projected to reach 64.1%. Cremation is by far the most popular 
method of disposition in Maine with a current rate of 80.2%. I believe there is a 
percentage of those desiring modern cremation that would choose open air cremation 
if it was an option.  
The reason cremation is so popular in Maine is clear to me. Maine people are 
typically frugal, simple, and practical. For those who prefer traditional funerals, we 
have those options. For others, however, there is a need for greater personal 
involvement, more spiritually affirming practices, and environmentally friendly 
options. For me, and many others, the appeal of Open Air Cremation is less about the 
actual cremation process, and more about a sacred, deeply moving ceremony. 
Gathering in nature, being present for the personal experience of witnessing the open 
air cremation, participating in placing fragrant branches upon a loved one, sharing 
stories and songs, hugging each other, and saying goodbye together. It’s a powerful 
experience that facilitates healing, healthy grieving, and symbolizes releasing 
someone from this life to the next.  
As both a Funeral Director and in my private life, I have conducted surveys, made 
personal observations, and talked to clients and nonclients alike to determine what 
people like and dislike about current funeral practices. The feedback is overwhelming.
People are ready for new options, and ways to better facilitate the grieving process. 
Open air cremation is a niche, yet it’s a niche worth pursuing for the growing number 
of people who are interested in remaining connected to nature in their disposition 
options. Speaking as a professional, I see no negative impact this would place on 
funeral directors or their practices. The environmental impact is minimal and could 
actually benefit Maine’s forests and forestry industry while relying less on fossil 
fuels. There is no need to overhaul current legislation. The value to those who choose 
open air cremation and the participants of the ceremony would be immeasurable.
I believe this is only the beginning of what Maine can do to move towards more 
sustainable options and ceremonies that offer something meaningful to those whose 
spiritual connection and practice exists in settings outside the traditional funeral home
or church.
My goal here is to encourage you to consider passing LD 584 in support of the people
of Maine who desire an option that’s different, powerful, and beautiful. Open Air 
Cremation may not be for everyone, but it is certainly worth adding to traditional 
funeral and direct cremation options. 
Thank you for your time and consideration 
