 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 30, 2023  
 
Senator  Joe Baldacci , Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 536  An Act to Provide Natural Organic Reduction Facilities for Maine Residents for 
the Conversion of Human Remains to Soil  
LD 584  An Act to Permit the Conduct of Open Air Cremation at Designated Sites  
LD 762  An Act t o Authorize Burials with Biodegradable Containers, Including Tree Pods  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and Members of the  Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 536, LD 584, and LD 762 , bills that all affect the 
disposition of human remains, and the potential impact of the proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
The Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention , Department of Health and Human 
Services  (the Departme nt or DHHS ) offers the following information for your consideration.  
 
LD 536 provides for the treatment of human remains by natural organic reduction as an 
alternative to burial in a casket or cremation. Natural organic reduction is the contained 
accelerat ed conversion of human remains to soil.  
 
LD 584 allows a nonprofit corporation to conduct open air cremations by pyre if it  meets certain 
requirements.  
 
LD 762 authorizes the burial of biodegradable containers, such as a casket or an urn, containing 
human remains or cremated remains, including tree pods, which are containers buried directly 
underneath the roots of a tree.  
 
The Department  does not consider the activities outlined in these three bills  a threat to public 
health or the environment  if properly carried out in accordance with the conditions outlined in 
the proposed legislation. However, Maine CDC does not have the staff required to do this 
oversight ; at this time, no staff person is availab le to perform  any cemetery or crematoria work, 
so the current permitting oversight within the Department  is split among staff with other full -
time duties.  Should the Legislature seek to implement any or all of  these programs, the bill(s) 
should be amended to include clear oversight authority and complementary staff capacity for 
Maine CDC. Without such an amendment, the Department opposes these bills.  
 
 
 Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  

