 
 
 MAINE AFL-CIO  
A Union of Unions Standing for Maine Workers 
21 Gabriel Drive, Augusta, Maine 04330 
Tel. (207) 622-9          
(207) 622-9675 
Visit our website: www.maineaflcio.org  
 
President 
Cynthia Phinney Vice President 
Pat Carleton Secretary Treasurer 
Doug Born 
 
 
Testimony of Maine AFL-CIO Legislative & Political Director, Adam Goode, in Support of LD 1709, 
"An Act to Establish a Baseline of Consistency and Safety for the Operation of Construction Cranes and 
Elevators" 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Innovation, Development and Economic 
Advancement Committee, my name is Adam Goode. I’m the Legislative and Political Director of the Maine AFL-
CIO. We represent 40,000 working people in the state of Maine. We work to improve the lives and working 
conditions of our members and all working people. We testify in support of LD 1709.                        
 
LD 1709 requires operators of construction cranes and elevators to be trained and to register with the 
Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation. It prohibits contractors from hiring persons who are not 
in compliance with the training and registration requirements, prohibits general contractors from contracting with 
contractors who hire persons not in compliance with the training and registration requirements and provides for 
civil penalties for violations of the training and registration requirements and the hiring prohibitions. 
More and more buildings are being constructed vertically in our state. This means we see outside elevators and 
outside hoists on construction sites on a regular basis. We work closely with IUOE Local 4, who are leaders in 
their industry and who follow high standards in operations training and safety. IUOE Local 4 has shared that after 
an elevator is installed by a licensed elevator mechanic, there is not a licensed operating engineer to turn that 
elevator over to someone who understands safety and operating issues related to the hoist. 
We anticipate that IUOE leaders can share with the committee the specific skills their trained staff are carrying 
out on job sites regularly. Any heavy equipment operation poses some level of threat to worker and public safety. 
IUOE is heavily invested in joint labor-management training programs that are committed to safety. Ensuring 
licensed operating engineers are working on job sites will help protect everyone’s safety. 
There are currently safety concerns in having an unlicensed person run a crane. If a car has unintended movement 
there is a potential situation that could put people in danger. It is easy for a person not familiar with the hazards 
associated with a crane to cause such a situation to develop. The easy scenario to think of is a person entering an 
elevator hoist to retrieve a dropped item prior to that elevator being “made safe” by a licensed professional. 
LD 1709 provides protection from scenarios where unlicensed people might fail to eliminate a hazard on a jobsite. 
We urge the committee to support LD 1709. 
 
 
Printed In House with Union 
Labor

  
