
It is not evident that state registration of crane operator/trainers or elevator operator/trainers 
makes Maine citizens safer. Nor is it clear that state oversight would enhance public safety not 
already provided by required federal certification and required employer training. Asa 
reminder, the sole purpose of licensure is to protect the public’s health safety and welfare. 
The 129th Legislature initiated a sunrise review pursuant to LD 904, “Resoive, Directing the 
Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation T0 Conduct a Sunrise Review 
Regarding the Proposal To License Heavy Equipment Operators. ” That report is available at 
https:;’/vvwvv.maine. gov/pfr/sites/maine. gov. pfr/ﬁles/inline-tilest Crane_operators_4.pdf. 
The Sunrise report concluded that crane operators and their employers are currently regulated by 
the US DOL Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”). OSHA laws and rules 
impose full legal responsibility on employers to train and evaluate the individuals they hire to be 
crane operators. OSHA requires crane operators to undergo a stringent certiﬁcation process that 
includes written and practical examinations. This certiﬁcation process is mandatory and is, in 
effect, a federal license. In addition, OSHA rules require crane operators to be formally 
evaluated in writing by their employers. Per OSHA rules, it is the employers ’ legal 
responsibility to employ only nationally certiﬁed crane operators and to document, through 
ongoing written evaluation, that their employee crane operators are qualiﬁed to perform their 
duties. 
LD 1709 also proposes regulation of individuals operating personnel hoists. Personnel hoists are 
installed on a temporary basis during construction and are used to carry supplies, materials, and 
workers to the ﬂoors of a multi-ﬂoor structure. There are only ﬁve (5) currently installed and 
operating construction hoists in Maine. 
Under current Maine law, construction elevators (the equipment, not the operators) are regulated 
by OPOR’s Elevator and Tramway Program (Program) within the statutory deﬁnition of 
“elevator. ”1 
Elevator installation and inspections must comply with the national standards that have been 
adopted by the Program through rulemaking. Personnel hoists are regulated by the Elevator 
Program by enforcing standards of the American National Standards Institute (ASNI) standard 
AlO.4. Accordingly, Maine law and rule already requires plans for personnel hoists to be 
submitted and approved, and the hoists to be installed by a registered elevator contractor that 
employs a Maine-licensed elevator mechanic and inspected by a State elevator inspector. 
The owner of the hoist employs and trains their personnel hoist operators, who must maintain an 
operational maintenance and inspection log. 
We have not seen evidence of poorly trained construction elevator operators. However, we have 
suggested to proponents of this bill that a reasonable way to address their concerns might be to 
memorialize an employer ’s responsibilities in a Program rule similar to the requirements placed 
‘ 32 M.R.S. § l5202(5) (“Elevator ” . . . means a guided hoisting and lowering mechanism equipped with a car, 
platform, or load-carrying unit, including doors, well, enclosures, means and appurtenances. ”)
2
on Tramway owners. I have included the Tramway rule below. We might need authority to 
adopt such a rule although that may not be necessary. 
9. Maintenance Personnel 
A. Training and Competence. Tramway owners shall ensure that maintenance personnel 
employed to work on tramway equipment are trained and competent. Maintenance 
personnel shall possess demonstrable ability to solve problems related to tramways and 
to perform work necessary to ensure saﬁz operation of the equipment. Such ability may be 
demonstrated by a recognized degree or certificate of professional standing, or by 
extensive knowledge, training, and experience. 
B. Training and Technical Proﬁciency. It is the tramway owner ’s responsibility to 
ensure that all maintenance personnel are properly trained on the types of equipment that 
they maintain. Training must ensure that maintenance personnel possess technical 
proﬁciency in the equipment for which they are responsible and that they are familiar 
with the applicable national codes speciﬁed in Chapter 5] 1 and the provisions of this 
section. 
Training may include, but is not limited to: 
(1) Manufacturers ’ training seminars; 
(2) Other technical seminars; and 
(3) On-the-job training. 
C. Scope of Obligation; Documentation. The owner ’s responsibilities under this section 
extend to the owner ’s employees; contractors and subcontractors who work on or 
maintain the owner's tramways; and employees of such contractors and subcontractors. 
The training of all such individuals shall be documented in records maintained by the 
owner. The owner shall make these records available upon request to the Director and 
the Director and the Chief Inspector. 
It is well-established that state licensure requirements create barriers to entering a state’s 
workforce. The Committee has heard how hard the Department is working to create licensing 
ﬂexibilities to help expand the workforce. New regulatory programs should only be considered 
if there is evidence that without state regulation, public safety is threatened. Licensing proposals 
that duplicate existing safety regulations, such as this one, should not be enacted. Many of the 
crane operator licensing programs were enacted prior to the OSHA rule and just this past year 
West Virginia eliminated its state licensure to rely instead on the OSHA certiﬁcation 
requirements. 
Finally, the role of licensing programs is public safety — not employee safety. Many of the 
examples shared in past legislative sessions involved employee safety. While employee safety is 
extremely important, it should remain within the purview of labor laws. 
We also note that the two-year $50 fee proposed in the bill is unrealistic. This is a new program 
and as such Will need to support all aspects of establishing and implementing the program and all 
expenses related to its ongoing regulation. There will be ﬁxed and ongoing costs including staff
3
salaries and beneﬁts, Attorney General Ofﬁce legal services, lease and facility expenses, and 
expenses associated with the reconﬁguration of the electronic licensing system. These costs 
must be borne solely by the potential licensees whose number is unknown but is likely small. A 
small licensing pool will necessarily result in very high fees for each licensee since the licensees 
themselves will have to fully fund all costs associated with any license (or registration) program. 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions now or at the work session.
