188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
   
 
 
May 12, 2023  
 Senator Curry  
Representative Roberts  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
100 State House Station Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: AGC Maine ’s Opposition to LD 1709 : “An Act to Establish a Baseline of Consistency and Safety for the  
Operation of Construction Cranes and Elevators ” 
 
My name is Matt Marks, I  am a Principal at Cornerstone Government Affairs , and submitting this on 
behalf of my client, AGC Maine. Prior to the adoption of the National Crane Standards , AGC Maine and 
its members were in discussion with state officials , labor, and others to determine a path forward o n 
crane safety . Our goal was to establish education  and testing standards to ensur e the safe operation  of 
crane s. While we were mee ting it was anno unced the new national stan dards would be mo ving ahead . 
The federal requirements to certify crane operators were  entered into th e Federal Register in November 
2018. It was long overdue, and quickly embraced by Maine ’s lea ding commercial contra ctors.  
 AGC Maine supports the  existing mandatory federal certification of crane operators. OSHA regulation 29 
CFR 1926 1400  Subpart CC, specifies all crane operators in construction must be nationally certified and 
must be re- tested every 5 years . Well before the new standard , Maine  companies  that already 
embraced the certification  process continued with their own individual programs and through 
associations like AGC Maine. For pe rspective , below are the dates of the rollout:  
 
• November 10, 2018— Crane operators must be  certified.  Certifications may be by type alone and 
must be issued by an accredited certifying body such as NCCCO.  
• February 7, 2019 —Employers must  evaluate  their crane operators according to specified criteria 
and a stipulated process.  
• April 15, 2019 —Employers must  ensure all  documentation relating to their evaluations is 
current.  
Many firms were already working with one of the approved certification agencies, the National 
Comm ission for the Certification of Crane Operators  (NCC CO). Cianbro , for example, has been working 
with NCCO since 1997 . Twelve years ago , along with other Maine -based contractors , they assisted AGC 
Maine with a program that could serve  both large and small contractors, members and non -members 
with the classroom, written test, and practical test program.  
NCC O has been the gold standar d in certification with rigorous inspections of the testing process, third -
party requirements for written test oversight, and constant  updating to ensure the integrity of the 
188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741 system. This bill creat es an additional, unnece ssary  requirement that doesn ’t address field compliance , 
which is e nforced by OSHA in the private sector .  
AGC America developed a revised  book  in 2010 titled , AGC's Professional Mobile Crane 
Operations Program . We’ve been using this manual in conjunction with our NCCCO 
training program to help with our classroom training of existing and new operat ors. This 
program covers rules and regulations , site review and set- up, operations, conditions 
affecting operations, bas ic rigging and wire rope, maintenance and inspection, load 
charts, and crane types.  
NCCCO requires a written and practical test; both are issued for each  
different type of crane the operator is seeking a credential. AGC  Maine 
does not conduct the written test; an independent third -party  firm 
manages the testing. The practical exam is conducted in a closed  course 
where the operator must carefully move through a timed  obstacle 
course. Both tests are subject to audit.   
Additionally, OSHA has existing requirements for th e safe op eration of equi pment included in the 
stan dard:  
“OSHA standard subpart c (general safety conditions) 1926.20 (b)(4) states The employer shall permit 
only those employees qualified by training or experience to operate equipment and machinery. ” 
OSHA also requires that the employer instruct each employee in the recognition and avoidance of 
unsafe conditions and the regulations applicable to their  work environment to control or eliminate any 
hazards or other exposure to illness or injury. (29 CFR l926.2l(b)(2))  
According to the report issued by the Department of Professional and  Financial Regulations in 2020, the 
number of operators estimated in  2018 in Maine ranged from 287 -383, and 386 operators that reside in 
Maine  are NCCCO certified. Maine’s rate of certification proves  the serious attention to safety  and 
regulatory compliance.  I should note, NCCER crane certification , while less utilized in Maine, is another 
option.  
AGC Maine created a general education course  to share the federal crane s tandards with gener al 
contractors who might not operate or have direct ownership of cranes but  employ  subcontractors to 
operate on their job site . The purpose of the training is to understand  compliance and the process for 
our testing and ongoing education for operators.  
Thank you for co nsidering my comments, I will be availab le at the w ork session.   
Sincerely,  
Matt Marks  
207-530-3001  
 

