 
 
 
May 12, 2023  
 
To: Members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business.  
 
Subject: Testimony –  LD 1 709 
 
Dear Chair Roberts and Chair Curry and Honorable Members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business.  
 
My name is Robert Burr, I live in Scarborough M E and I am a member of the International Union of Operating 
Engineers (IUOE), Local 4 based in Medway, Massachusetts with offices in Portland Maine. The IUOE has 
approximately 500 members in the Great State of Maine . If you are unfamiliar with the role of the IUOE, our Members, 
Operating Engineers, operate the bulldozers, t he motor graders, the backhoes, the cranes  and outside construction hoists  
helping to form and shape the infrastructure and skylines.  We work the mines;  we dig the wells.  We operate the boilers, 
the generators, and the heating and cooling systems, as well as maintain the buildings and grounds, that help make you 
comfortable at work and play. Operating Engineers are the first on a construction job and the last off. When it involves a 
commercial or industrial complex, stationary engineers are there long after  the construction is finished, operating, and 
maintaining the completed facility.  
           The IUOE is dedicated to serving and protecting the needs and interests of its Members and their families through 
the collective bargaining process, legislative action and extensive training and skills improvement programs. In continuous 
operation since th e 1800’s, the IUOE’s dedication to Members is unmatched with its efforts focused on safety and 
continued employment in a quality work environment where pay and benefits match the skill of IUOE Members. I am 
here to express the IUOE’s commitment to work wit h the Department and Administration  on public safety 
surroun ding the hoisting industry in Maine.  
As you know we have been discussing this legislation over the past few years . The IUOE Local 4 and our 
Certified Crane Instructors have been to this committee and discussed continuing education needs around these large 
pieces of equipm ent. They in fact share data and work together  on a personal  level with OSHA and Stat e Officials  within 
our jurisdiction.  
In conclusion, this bill will help us g et much needed data on  crane operation and safety within the State of 
Maine. We welcome working wi th ALL stakeholders in this effort t o develop structure in addition to Federal guidelines . 
Thank you for your consideration. I hope that you will support the advancement of this legisl ation:  
 
Thank you for allowing me to testify today.  
  
  
Robert A. Burr  
Business Representative  
 
     

