p 
p % HoUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
;f, 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333~0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Tiffany Roberts TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
35 Buttonwood Road 
South Berwick, ME 03908 
Home: (207) 210-3287 
T1ffany.Roberts@legi slaturemaine. gov 
May 12, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Tiﬂany Roberts presenting 
LD 1709, An Act to Establish a Baseline of Consistency and Safety for the 
Operation of Construction Cranes and Elevators 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
and Business 
Good afternoon, Senator Curry and esteemed colleagues on the Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business Committee. My name is Tiffany Roberts and I represent 
House District 149 and the communities of North Berwick and South Berwick. I am here before 
you today to present LD I 709, An Act to Establish a Baseline of Consistency and Safety for the 
Operation of Construction Cranes and Elevators. 
As the state and its construction industry continue to build vertically, there is a need to 
understand the size and reach of the industry, especially as it pertains to the individuals 
performing potentially dangerous construction work. The use of heavy equipment (construction 
cranes in this case) and external construction hoists will continue to increase. As this occurs, we 
must ensure the safety of those operating those pieces of equipment, the workers engaged in and 
below them and the broad swath of the public who are directly impacted. As some of you may 
recall, we looked at these two issues last session, but it was determined that licensing and 
separating the two was not the path forward, so that brings us to this bill before you. 
In order to set a baseline of situational awareness for the state, this bill establishes a framework 
for the registration of operators of construction cranes as well as hoists. It also streamlines and 
creates consistency among the training expectations and certiﬁcations with regard to the 
operation of these pieces of equipment. Finally, it allows for a review of the validity of the 
information provided in the case of a suspected and/or documented discrepancy. 
Conﬁrming, standardizing and streamlining training for operating construction cranes and 
construction hoists ensures a reduced risk of injury and/or loss of property, reduces the risk (and 
its severity) for both the employer and the staff working at the construction site 
We have heard over the years that operators in the state of Maine all have the safety training, 
certiﬁcations and credentials necessary to keep the worksite and the general public safe. We have 
also heard the number of those operators varies depending on who you ask. This committee's 
District 149: Part of North Berwick and Part of South Benvick
numbers have added up to 150 all‘ the way to 800. This bill provides industry-level situational 
awareness which is critical at this time. 
There have been multiple conversations with the Department over the past years. I understand 
that, as it is currently written, they are not in support. Stakeholders and I are committed to 
continuing these conversations, as well as working with the committee, to try to land in a place 
that gets us on the right path forward. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I would be "happy to answer any questions but would 
defer to those more knowledgeable coming after me.
