Good Afternoon Ladies and Gentlemen of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, 
Thank you so much for taking the time to hear public comments on this critical and timely issue 
today. My name is lsabelle Weyl and I am a resident of Portland. l currently work as a Libraiy 
Media Specialist at Deering High School in Portland. We are currently the most diverse high 
school North of Boston and are appreciative of the ways in which the state has supported all our 
students in the past. 
What brings me here before you today is the issue of compassion and quality of life for our 
Educational Technicians. Ed Techs as they are commonly referred to are tasked with 
maintaining some of the riskier and more exacting tasks that allow the rest of the staff to do their 
best work, and allow every student access to the fullest and most vibrant education possible. 
Before I worked at Deering, my mother served for many years as a substitute ed tech in the 
Functional Life skills program. This work involved notjust making every student feel 
comfortable, welcome and understood, but also helping them get around in wheelchairs, and 
sometimes assisting them in eating and using the bathroom. She is now retired. 
Still, this enormous labor of love, creativity and energy must be carried and to do so we must 
properly compensate these individuals for their labor. This work is rewarding but also can be 
exhausting and feel overwhelming. 
When the pay does not match the critical amount of skill and passion for the job we lose great 
people. We lose them to other industry and organizations with better compensation. This means 
we risk being out of alignment with students lEPs. That is nor good for anyone. Perhaps it is 
impossible to describe how a great one on one can change the trajectory of a student’s life, butI 
can attest that it happens all the time. Please give these men and women the dues they deserve 
and the recognition of so many jobs well done. 
I therefore urge you to support the proposals in front of you. This will encourage more people to 
take and stay in these jobs while also knowing they can take care of themselves at the same 
time. 
Thank you for hearing testimony today and for you service to our state.
