Senator Curry representative Robert's and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business. My name is Primo 
Bellarosa. l live in Corinna Maine and own a business in Pittsfield. l'm testifying today in support of 
LD950 "An act to define kickboxing & muay thai in the laws governing mixed martial arts & boxing". 
As a former amateur and professional competitor and now a full-time trainer/business owner 
these are sports that are extremely near and dear to my heart. They have literally given me my life. I've 
been able to compete all over the United States and in 5 different countries. I've had the honor of 
representing our country at the World Championships in Thailand, the precursor to the Olympics. There 
is not one stamp in my passport that isn't a direct result of muay thai & kickboxing, but all of this started 
with local competition. 
As a point of reference for the Committee members both muay thai & kickboxing were awarded 
"Recognized Sport“ status by The International Olympic Committee. The 14 states that make up the East 
coast 13 allow for muay thai & kickboxing through either state or 3rd party sanctioning. Only Maine 
does not. l would like to pass on the opportunities I had to my students and athletes but as of now we 
are forced to compete out of state. 
For them to pursue their dreams of competing Maine residents have no other option but, to 
travel and spend money in other states. Gas, hotel stay, and restaurant bills are just some of the money 
we spend that could be spent locally. 
Combat sport promotions stimulate the local economy. New England Fights, a Maine MMA 
promotion, regularly sells out The Cross Insurance Center and other venues across the state. While 
Portland Boxing Club recently sold out The Portland Exposition Building. Between venue rental, payment 
to staff, parking, hotel and restaurant sales from competitor's and spectators combat sports promotion 
already is, and with the addition of muay thai and kickboxing could be an even bigger economic boom to 
the state if Maine. 
In summary LD950 would benefit your constituents in a number of ways: 
Economically, through revenue generated in venue and hotel rentals, service personnel and 
restaurant patronage. Not to mention the opportunity for local professional athletes to compete and be 
paid. 
Safety, the safety standards implemented by athletic commissions or 3rd party sanctioning 
bodies, including blood testing, pre- and post-fight doctor examinations and suspension lists are 
invaluable in a contact sport. 
Finally, opportunities, both boxing and MMA athletes are able to compete locally. Kickboxing 
and muay thai athletes are asking for nothing more. They should be afforded the opportunity to pursue 
their competitive goals locally. You have the ability to grant that to them. 
Thank you so much for the opportunity to speak today. If anyone has any questions I am at your 
disposal and would be more than happy to help in any way I can.
