T 
c..;@rrimun1'tv 
as 
"FE? ha’ “~<°iKmew~' Q» 
rs of the med Membe 'l 
18th, 2023 
Representative Subica. and Estee 
n Veterans & Legal Aﬁalfé .-\0r| 
'ckman, 
'tteeo To: Senator Hi 
Joint Standing Comm: 
From: Alex Mclvianat 
Lewiston, Maine 0424L 
Subject: Support of LD 1529 
1", nere todav to testifv in support of LD 1529. 
This bill is a continuation of the batch tagging work last session. Batch tagging for plants 
Iecame iaw in the fall of last vear (although it still hasn't been implemented yet by OCP). Batch 
tagging of products was part of the initial bill, but it got removed in order to push piam batch 
tagging through. This was done with the understanding that OCP was going to implement batch 
tagging for products on their own which has not happened. OCP did finally reiease detaiis or 
their new plan for batch tagging last week, after finalizing the contract renegotiation with iVl9Iiu, 
before running their idea by the industry or the legislature. 
i’m sure we will have plenty of time to get into the weeds on that, so for my testimony l will focus 
an the logic behind batch tagging for products and the lack of logic behind batch tagging 
individual products. 
l own a small market at Sunday River that carries snacks and groceries. We order products from 
manv vendors. and l’m going to use one as an example: Capital Candy. Our typical Capital 
Candy order during ski season has about a hundred skus including cheese, crackers. tobacco 
products, juice, you name it. When we receive our Capital Candy order for the week, it comes 
with a few yellow pieces of paper stapled together that itemize the shipment. Every individual 
sku is not tagged. lt would be pretty ridiculous if they were. Sometimes we get cases of tnmgs, 
but sometimes not; for example, we might only get 3 units of ﬁnger polish remover. Instead of 
tagging individual batches of items. businesses in the modern world simplv include all of the 
necessary information on the delivery manifest. Then, in the event of a recall, they pull the 
information required to complete the recall from their internal system. 
This may be so obvious to everyone that I may seem to be wasting your time. That is of course 
not my intent, rather my intent is to point out that the cannabis industry, both operators and 
regulators, can quite often be caught attempting to reinvent the wheel. This is one of those 
scenarios. We are reinventing the wheel here. Frankly, our entire track and trace system isa 
reinvention of the wheel. Except instead of shaping it like a circle, for some reason we’ve 
shaped it like a dodecahedron. lt sure is complex, but it just doesn’t roll right.
Writuaiili to ~ct;i“»'oiio"i"iurwity 
mr 
This bill is a step in the direction of a circular wheel. l implore the legislature to use this session 
to carve the dodecahedron that is our tack and trace system (and really our entire regulator ‘ 
system) into the tried and true circular shaoe of a whee. 
Metro isn't going to like it. But should Maine State policy be dictated by a Florida based software 
company? ‘ 
Sincerely,
F 
/Z 
/’ ,/‘ 
1//
\ \__ 
Alex McMahar. 
The Healing Communitv MEDO;
