$3 b STATE or MAINE 
OFFICE OF CANNABIS POLICY KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
162 STATE HOUSE STATION ¢°~MSS1°"E “ 
{" 
_ 
1 19 UNION STREET' 3 
FIRST FLO OR OFFICE or CANNABIS POLICY 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0162 
JANET T. MILLS JOHN HUDAK GOVERNOR DIRECTOR ADMINISTRATIVE & FINANCIAL SERVICES 
April 19, 2023 
Re: LD 1529 — An Act to Reform the State's Adult Use Cannabis Seed-to-sale Tracking System to 
Allow for Canopy Tagging 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs: 
I am John Hudak, Director of the Office of Cannabis Policy (OCP) and I am before you today to 
provide testimony on behalf of our ofﬁce in strong opposition to LD 1529. As you know, OCP 
just completed a contract amendment with Metrc to effectuate the batch tracking changes from 
last year that were included in LD 1817 and to improve the customer service experience for 
licensees across the adult use cannabis program. Given that those changes will be fully 
implemented by this fall, we strongly recommend this committee defer further changes to the 
state’s inventory tracking law until our office and program participants have an opportunity to 
realize the impact of those changes. 
Flexible standardized batch tracking (FSTB), the ﬁrst-in-the-nation solution developed to 
implement LD 1817 is intended to reduce the time and resources licensees expend to comply 
with existing inventory tracking requirements. The bill before would upend that new system by 
requiring yet another system modiﬁcation to allow cultivation facilities to track cannabis plants 
not just as one batch of plants that are the same strain, planted in the same area at the same time, 
but by “canopy.” Canopy tracking encompasses the total surface area within a cultivation facility 
that is used to cultivate adult use cannabis plants. Let me say that again: this bill would require 
OCP to go back to the drawing board to develop yet another ﬁrst-in-the-nation inventory 
tracking system that can accommodate the tracking of an entire cultivation facility ’s cannabis 
plants using one tag. This change would make tracking at the point of cultivation entirely 
useless. 
The remaining changes contemplated in this bill, while not entirely clear, appear to be aimed at 
allowing multiple kinds of cannabis items or products to be tracked using a single inventory 
tracking number. As We explained last year in discussions around LD 1817, it is critical that 
each batch of carmabis items be tracked separately to l) ensure that all mandatory testing has 
been conducted on each batch of cannabis or cannabis products and 2) maintain OCP’s ability to 
implement targeted recalls of contaminated cannabis or cannabis products. 
At present, there is no cannabis inventory tracking system in the country that can accommodate 
the changes in this bill in a manner that will satisfy licensees. We have reached out to our 
Phone: (207) 287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
www.maine.gov/dafs/ocp/
colleagues across the country to determine whether a model exists within any regulated cannabis 
market that accommodates the kind of inventory tracking contemplated in this bill, while 
preserving the ability to maintain visibility into mandatory testing and recall capability. To be 
clear: these discussions have included states like Washington and Vermont, which have 
developed their own in-house tracking systems instead of contracting with any private inventory 
tracking system vendor. We have heard these states’ inventory tracking systems held up as 
alternatives to the way Maine and most other states with regulated cannabis markets do inventory 
tracking. While we don’t want to speak for those states, those discussions made clear to us that 
those systems are no less fraught than those developed by private vendors. 
Simply put: No state in the country tracks their cannabis inventory in the Way contemplated in 
this bill for a reason. 
As always, we thank you for your time and We’ll do our best to answer any questions you may 
have. 
Phone: (207) 287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
www.maine.gov/dafs/ocp/
