 
Neither for Nor Against LD 1529  
An Act to Reform the State's Adult Use Cannabis Seed -to-sale Tracking System to Allow 
for Canopy Tagging  
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
April 19 , 2023  
Senator Hickman , Representative Supica , and Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs ,  
My name is Krista Simonis  and I am the Director of Governmental Affairs  at the Maine Credit 
Union League . The Maine Credit Union League is the trade association for Maine’s 50 credit 
unions and over 725,000 members statewide. We respectfully submit  the following testimony 
neither for nor against LD 1529 . 
Since 2014 , a small number of our credit unions have been providing financial services to 
members of the cannabis industry.  Doing so comes with corresponding risks and required 
regulations. Credit unions must comply with  the guidance set forth by the Federal Financial 
Crimes Enforcement Network  (FinCEN)  and are subject to regular examinations to by the 
National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) to ensure that they are following th at guidance.  
Part of these requirements are that cannabis companies engage in tracking to prevent money 
laundering and ensure  funds  and product  are not being diverted for illegal activity.  
The 2014 FinCEN guidance1 on providing financial services to cannabis related businesses 
cites seven requirements for financial institutions serving these businesses, these  
requirements incl ude:  
(I)verifying with the appropriate state authorities whether the business is duly 
licensed and registered;  
(ii) reviewing the license application (and related documentation) submitted  by 
the business for obtaining a state license to operate its marijuana -related 
business;  
(iii) requesting from state licensing and enforcement authorities available 
information about the business and related parties;  
(iv) developing an understanding of the normal and expected activity for the 
business, including the types of products to be sold and the type of customers 
to be served (e.g., medical versus recreational customers);  
 
1 BSA Expectations Regarding Marijuana -Related Businesses | FinCEN https://www.fincen.gov/resources/statutes -
regulations/guidance/bsa -expectations -regarding -marijuana -related -businesses  
 
(v) ongoing monitoring of publicly available sources for adverse informatio n 
about the business and related parties;  
(vi) ongoing monitoring for suspicious activity, including for any of the red flags 
described in this guidance; and  
(vii) refreshing information obtained as part of customer due diligence on a 
periodic basis and commensurate with the risk.   
Requirement (iv) requires businesses to keep track of the normal and expected activity. 
According to federal regulators, this includes the t racking and tagging of plants. By allowing 
the use of canopy tagging, our concern is that LD 15 29 would once again loosen the 
requirements for cannabis companies to maintain compliance with state law. Any proposed 
change that would widen the gap between what is accepted by federal guidance and what is 
required at the state incre ases the challenge in providing cannabis banking in Maine. 
Currently cannabis b usinesses need to  decipher the differing regulations between what is 
required by the state and what is required to access banking services. As much as  possible, 
we would urge th e committee to cr eate parity between  these regulatory requirements . Doing 
so will increas e access and availability to banking service for cannabis businesses.  
Credit unions exist to serve their communities. We want to make sure that the cannabis 
industry in Maine has a safe way to bank their cash and receive financial services . Large 
amounts of cash can pose dangers to businesses and community members alike. Tracking is 
a key component in offering financial s ervices to both Adult -Use and Medical Cannabis. We 
would caution this committee to be judicious in any change in  the tagging and tracking 
requirements.  
The League would like to thank the committee for the opportunity to share our viewpoint s. 
We are ready to assist  the committee  further if called upon.  
