p V HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
~31 , 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Laura Supica TTY. MAINE RELAY 711 
34 Highland Avenue 
Bangor, ME 04401 
(207) 7 l 7-5702 
Laura.Supica@legislature.mainegov 
April 19, 2023 
Representative Laura Supica introducing 
LD 1529, An Act to Reform the State's Adult Use Cannabis Seed-to-sale Tracking System 
to Allow for Canopy Tagging 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Senator Hickman and fellow members of the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, I am 
Representative Laura Supica and I am honored to represent part of Bangor here in the Maine 
Legislature. Thank you for the opportunity to present LD 1529, An Act to Reform the State's 
Adult Use Cannabis Seed-to-sale Tracking System to Allow for Canopy Tagging for your 
consideration. 
This bill builds on legislation I sponsored, and which we passed last session, to expand batch 
tagging from plant canopy to include products. LD 1529 would establish a deadline for our track 
and trace vendor, Metre, to comply with Maine law while also providing additional clarity 
around. 
The most important change is in Sec. 1, subsection 105 simply changing the word “may” to 
“shall” . In effect this requires the Ofﬁce of Cannabis Policy (OCP) to expand batch tagging to 
include the transfer of products. 
Last session, we included permissive language allowing the authority to begin batch tagging 
products. OCP had to renegotiate Maine’s contract with the company Metro, so we are proposing 
this change which will provide greater clarity on the policy and establish a deadline by which it 
must be complete. 
As you know, the stated purpose of Maine’s track and trace system is to prevent the inversion 
and diversion of camiabis products. If it is grown and manufactured in Maine, we want it to be 
sold in Maine. We also don’t want Maine’s market ﬂooded with product produced outside the 
state. It is also important to make sure that a product which is deemed unsafe will be easily 
identiﬁable so it can be pulled from shelves. The adult use industry supports track and trace, but 
reasonably enough, wants that process to be as simple as possible. 
At its core, cannabis is an agricultural product. We should regulate it like an agricultural product. 
When a pallet of lettuce is delivered to the grocery store, not every box of greens has a Lmiquely 
identiﬁed tag. Instead, it comes with a manifest. Every box of lettuce is part of a batch. If there 
is E.coli contamination, the entire batch can be identiﬁed and pulled from the shelf. Production 
District 22 Bangor (part)
of cannabis and cannabis products is nearly equivalent. If a batch has contamination, the entire 
batch needs to be pulled, whether it is ﬂower or a gummy. 
Instead of painstakingly tagging individual products, a pallet of products can simply have its 
manifest appended to the single tag and uploaded into Metrc. Tagging individual products is 
extraordinarily time consuming and provides no additional safety for consumers. Nor does 
individual tagging better protect against diversion. Application programming interface systems 
already help cultivators and manufacturers build a manifest of the products being delivered toa 
retail shop. Using that manifest to track a product is more efﬁcient and provides equivalent 
information to OCP. 
Tracking and tracing products is important. Flexibility and reasonableness is also important. 
Finding the least burdensome way to provide accurate information to OCP is the goal of this 
legislation. I hope you Will join me in supporting this small change in Maine law which Will have 
a big impact on Maine’s adult use cannabis entrepreneurs.
