HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
V AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Morgan Rieuy TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
16 Blue Spruce Farm Road, Apt #6 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Phone: (207) 228—5'767 
Morgan.Riellv_@§gislaturemaine.20v 
April 19, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Morgan Rielly in support of 
LD 1529, “An Act to Reform the State's Adult Use Cannabis Seed-to-sale Tracking System 
to Allow for Canopy Tagging” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Good moming Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. I am Morgan Rielly, and I represent House 
District 127, which includes part of Westbrook. I am here today in support of LD 1529, “An Act 
to Reform the State's Adult Use Cannabis Seed-to-sale Tracking System to Allow for 
Canopy Tagging. ” 
I decided to cosponsor this legislation for many reasons. Perhaps the most important is the effort 
to create a more efficient way to track from seed to sale by allowing for canopy tagging. This not 
only is more efﬁcient for our cannabis growers, but it also ensures that they are compliant with 
state laws and protects our consumers. 
LD 1529 also touches upon Metrc. After reviewing OCP’s recent report on Metrc and talking 
with industry members, along with observing Metrc ﬁrsthand, it became obvious to me that the 
state needs to part ways with the company. As a progressive, it does not make sense to me thata 
private company should be acting as a quasi-regulatory agency, nor why the state of Maine 
should hand over tracking, a key part of regulating the cannabis industry, to a private third party. 
I’m sure my colleagues of different ideological backgrounds can come to the same conclusion as 
I have that Metre is not for Maine. "Whether through this bill or another piece of legislation, 
moving away from Metrc will allow for the legislature to have oversight of tracking and hold 
regulators responsible. And it will continue to allow us to hold those who opt to sell on the black 
market accountable. 
I urge my colleagues to vote ought to pass on LD 1529 and thank Chair Supica for bringing this 
piece of legislation forward. 
Thank you very much for your time and consideration. 
District 127: Westbrook
