Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
April 1 8, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 945, An Act to Allow Maine Families to Increase Their Savings by Removing Asset 
Limits for Eligibility for the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
Thank yo u for the opportunity to provide input  on LD 945, An Act to Allow Maine Families to 
Increase Their Savings by Removing Asset Limits for Eligibility for the Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families Program . This bill would eliminate the asset limit for the Temporary Assistance 
for Needy Families (TANF) program.  
 
The TANF and Parents as Scholars (PaS) programs provide temporary cash assistance to Maine 
families as they work on their education and employment g oals leading to self -support. Maine’s 
TANF State Plan, which is approved by the federal Administration for Children and Families 
(ACF), sets the eligibility requirements based on the state definition of “needy family,” which 
includes those with income and resource limits.    
 
While the Office for Family Independence is open to a discussion about the asset limit, the 
Office for Family Independence opposes the passage of this bill as proposed . 
 
Primarily, the proposal to remove the asset limit is  inconsistent with the Department’s 
interpr etation of federal regulation , specifically as it relates to the definition of a TANF eligible 
family as a  “needy family .”   
 
TANF block grant funds are u tilized  to support programs that  are designed to meet one o r more 
of the purposes of TANF  pursuant to 45 CFR § 260 .  These are, paraphrased: providing 
assistance  so that children may be cared for in their own home, promote job preparation and 
work, and support whole family structures.  
 
Current TANF program rule s establish  the asset limit at $2000 per household  with exclusions , 
including a vehicle and a residence . This asset limit has not been updated  since 1997 . 
 
 
2 
 There are options to update the asset limit and revise exemptions through rulemaking  without a 
complete removal of the asset limit . The Committee could consider , for example: increas ing, but 
not eliminatin g, the asset limit . The Committee could also review and update  the current list of 
exempt assets , such as chang ing the vehicle exemption rule from one vehicle per household, to 
one vehicle per licensed driver in the household.  
 
These changes would support the program intent of providing cash assistance to needy families, 
while updating  the program rule to better serve Maine families.  
  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide input on this bill. We welcome the opportunity to be 
part of the discussion around this bill and are happy to answer any questions you have.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Anthony Pelotte  
Director  
Office for Family Independence  

