April 1s, 2023 S 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and 
Honorable Members of the Health and Human Services Committee. 
I am Kandie Cleaves, a resident of Garland and I am here to testify in 
favor of, 
LD 945 “An Act to Allow Maine Families to Increase Their Savings by 
Removing Asset Limits for Eligibility for the Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families Program”. 
A little over 30 yrs. ago I was awarded my disability claim. We had been 
living in extreme poverty for over a year, so I treated my children and then 
husband to a new outfit each from Walmart, and I bought myself a pair of 
shoes, all for under $50. We then ate at a restaurant for lunch and spent 
just over $10. for the 4 of us. I then went to the realtor I had found and 
placed the rest into an escrow. I knew what I wanted, land. I would have 
liked it with a home on it, but time was of the essence. The ones I found 
with a home I didn't feel comfortable I could afford the payments on, I found 
one and waited several days to find out the bank would approve me ifI 
could do a higher payment. Life had taught me to be afraid of what bad 
thing would come next, so I was too scared to go with a higher payment. I 
finally found the land that I knew was where I should be, I am still there. 
Because I no longer had time to wait for a mobile home company to get me 
approved, I purchased an extremely old trailer, had it hauled, then boughta 
chain saw and an axe and moved in. I diligently did my best to follow the 
rules for both Social Security and for the TANF I still received for my 
children. If I had been allowed to save my money, and not had my land 
count against me, I could have waited a few more months and founda 
mobile that wouIdn’t require me to teach myself and my then husband how 
to do our own electrical or plumbing or add on. Unfortunately, I didn’t learn 
how to do the stove pipe, and just a few years later while we were both 
focused on our daughter who had just returned home following a suicide 
attempt, Dan put the stovepipe together in a rush, I didn’t realize there was 
a missing insulation pipe. We lost our home that day, with no insurance. 
My credit hadn’t been an issue, but not being allowed time was. All of this 
created more issues for our mental health. The next several years created
so much trauma for me and my family. If I had been able to have time to 
get a HUD approved mobile, I could have had insurance. I could have had 
a small sense of security. These rules that are designed to keep people in 
poverty did just that. Instead of allowing me a hand up, it gave me a boot to 
the face. Sadly, this hasn’t changed much for people in the past 30 yrs.I 
don’t think this change will fix the whole issue, but I do believe that it isa 
step in the right direction. I would rather see people be able to place larger 
amounts of money into an account that can be used for a place to live. 
$10,000 doesn’t go far when used for housing, car repairs or medical. 
When housing is at such a crisis level, allowing people the opportunity to 
focus on saving for a piece of earth to call home should be a priority. Now 
as a taxpayer I would like to see us make moves to truly help people. This 
bill is a start. In closing I would like to ask again that you please vote in 
favor of LD 945. 
Kandie Cleaves 
Garland
