  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Written Testimony of  Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
In support of LD 945  
An Act to Allow Maine Families to Increase Their Savin gs by Removing Asset Limits for 
Eligibility for the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program  
Before the Committee on Health and Human Services  
Tuesday, April 18, 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Committee 
on Health and Human Services. Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony  in 
support of L D 945, An Act to Allow Ma ine Families to Increase Their Savings by Removing Asset 
Limits for Eligibility for the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program . 
 
The Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence supports LD  945 and encourages you to do so 
as well. The 8 Domestic Violence Resource Centers  who are members of MCEDV serve 
around  12,000  individual survivors of domestic abuse & violence yearly. Economic abuse 
affects a significant proportion of these survivors and the decision  of whether  to separate 
from  an abusive partner is often more affected by a person’s access to cash resources than 
about whether remaining in the relationship is safe. Nationally, 99% of people who 
experience domestic violence have experienced economic abuse.1 Being able to save more 
money and still access social support such as SNAP and MaineCare is key to improving a 
survivor’s ability to become and remain safe from abuse.  
 
In the Economic Abuse Report,  authored by MCEDV in 2019, we found that 37% of Maine 
respondents indicated that their partners kept them from earning income outside of the 
home. This means that t hose survivors may not have a cohesive employment history and 
have many unexplainable gaps in their resume. This is a significant barrier to obtaining the 
high -wage job needed to begin building a new life from scratch after separating from the 
abusive part ner. When the ex-partner refuses to pay child support it only compounds the 
stress put on a family as they work to pay bills and decide whether food or rent is more 
important.  
 
Asset limits make it impossible for families accessing support to follow the co nventional 
wisdom about saving and "getting ahead," which then feeds into the stigmatizing idea that 
 
1 “Measuring the Effects of Domestic Violence on Women’s Financial Well -Being.” Adams, Adrienne. Center for 
Financial Security Research Brief. May 2011.  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
they keep making "bad choices."   The expectations and asset limits of public assistance are 
what keep survivors trapped in a cycle of poverty.  
 
TANF was developed to provide support for families as they build financial stability and be 
able to transition safely from support to independence. But being restricted to having assets 
that don’t exceed $2000 and one car per household negatively affects a  survivor’s ability to 
get and keep a job or to repair that car when it breaks down. We all know that not having a 
car in Maine can be a severe hindrance; now imagine when your wheel -bearings go or the 
windshield washer fluid motor dies. So now you must pa y for the repairs but can’t get to 
work. Having less than $2000 in the bank doesn’t last long when rents around the state are 
sky-high ; healthy, high -quality food is expensive ; bills are due ; children need school clothes ,  
and car repairs are looming.  
 
We are asking you to support removing the $2000 asset limit for TANF, bringing it into 
alignment with the SNAP and MaineCare programs, and let Maine lead the way to stronger 
economic security for all.  
 
