PARTNERING TO END HUNGER 
C) 
Good Shepherd 
Date April 17"‘ , 2023 
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee on Health and Human Services in support of 
LD 945: An Act to Allow Maine Families to Increase Their Savings by Removing Asset Limits for Eligibility for 
the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program. 
To Chairperson Baldacci, Chairperson Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services. 
My name is Rebekah Lane and I am the Community Organizer for Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine. I am 
here today to express our support, and ask for your support, of LD 945: An Act to Allow Maine Families to 
Increase Their Savings by Removing Asset Limits for Eligibility for the Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families Program. 
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access to nutritious 
food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the public in the fight to end 
hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 600 organizations to help distribute food 
to community members in need. Our network of partner agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior 
centers, school programs, and healthcare facilities. In our work centering equity, we are increasingly working 
with communities of color to address food security in a culturally responsive way. 
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in Maine. Working in partnership with the state 
legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make Maine a stronger, better 
place to work and live. 
The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program has the goal of helping the most vulnerable, children 
who are living in poverty. Current benefit amounts in our state, or across the country, are not enough to lift 
families out of poverty, but instead reduce the depth of poverty reached. Removing asset limits can help 
those families lift themselves out of poverty with a stronger foundation and ability to handle financial 
emergencies. 
As a previous TANF recipient, these asset limits felt like I had to bring myself to the deepest depth of poverty 
to prove that I was in need, a depth that made it feel nearly impossible to recover from. Having the ability to 
keep a piece of land for a future home, put aside savings for emergencies or even just known upcoming 
expenses like rent, provides not just a sense of security but real security for those working so hard for a more 
stable life. 
We talk in our advocacy work about how luck is playing a role for those living in poverty — knowing someone 
generous enough to give you a place to stay can keep you housed, saying hello to a stranger can mean 
learning about a unfamiliar resource that can help you in unexpected ways, being next in line to receive a 
voucher or rental assistance but the funding ran out just before you can mean more months of being 
PO Box 1807 - 
3121 Hotel Road - 
Auburn, ME 04211 - Tel: 207-782-3554 - Fax: 207-782-9893 - feedingmaine.org 
MEMBER Ol- 
FEED?NG' 
AMERCA
PARTNERING TO END HUNGER 
Good Shepherd 
FOOD BANK OF MAINE 
unhoused. I am here because of luck, my appointment at a TANF office back in 2019 luckily aligned with an 
informational meeting about a Good Shepherd Advocacy opportunity, which started me on the course to 
now working full time for the organization. 
But it shouldn't be luck, and the ability to save for the moments when bad luck happens can mean the 
difference between those setbacks being a day or a week of not having your car while it is being repaired or 
losing your job due to being unable to fix your car, which means you lose your ability to purchase the food 
your family needs, then losing your housing due to a lack ofjob, all of which can take months or years of 
recovery. 
Removing asset limits from the TANF program means more dignity, more stability, and more agency for those 
who are working hard towards a more stable life. I ask that you vote in support of LD 945. 
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony. 
Sincerely, 
Rebekah Lane 
Community Organizer 
rlane@gsfb.org 
PO Box 1807 - 
3121 Hotel Road - Auburn, ME 04211 - Tel: 207-782-3554 - Fax: 207-782-9893 - feedingmaine.org 
Mi;~"lBl:ROl-? 
FEED NG’ 
AMERICA
