Maine Children ’s Alliance * Advocating forthe vvellbeing ofall Maine families. 
Testimony of Stephanie Eglinton 
quf Executive Director, Maine Children's Alliance 
ln support of LD 934, An Act to Allow Maine Families to Increase Their Savings by Removing Asset 
Limits for Eligibility for the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program 
April 18, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Stephanie Eglinton and I am the executive 
director of the Maine Children's Alliance. We are a statewide, non-partisan organization whose mission 
is to promote sound public policies and promote best practices to improve the lives of all Maine 
children, youth, and families. 
M4 l offer testimony in support of LD 934 to help families achieve economic security by removing the asset 
limit for TANF eligibility. The Maine Children's Alliance believes that all Maine children should be able 
to grow up in safe and stable homes, and their families should have access to the resources they need 
to stay out of poverty and achieve economic stability. 
The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program is intended to help families achieve 
economic security and independence. Yet the current $2000 asset limit works against this goal, by 
making it impossible to save for the unforeseen circumstances in life that happen for any family —a 
needed car repair or an illness that requires taking unpaid time off from work — for fear of losing the 
essential TANF benefits they are receiving. Without being able to save up for these potential future 
needs, families are left on an edge of economic instability, wondering whether and how they will be 
able to afford those expenses when they do happen. 
I would like to speak to the connection between family economic security and child welfare 
involvement. The first statutory goal of TANF is to support needy families so that children can remain 
safely at home or with relatives. ‘ Material hardship and economic shocks overload families and 
increase the risk for child welfare involvement. Evidence shows that these hardships can be offset by 
accessing sufficient public benefits, including TANF." The provision of these economic supports in times 
of need is a family protective factor that is associated with a decreased risk for child abuse and neglect. 
In this way, when we ensure families under financial stress are better able to meet their basic needs, 
we work to strengthen families, and make it more likely their children will be able to stay with their 
parents in a safe, stable, and supportive environment. 
By removing the $2,000 asset limit, we can ensure the TANF program is structured to achieve the goals 
of family economic independence. Maine has an opportunity to be a leader in this work, joining eight 
other states that have designed their TANF programs to allow families to save for unexpected 
expenses, providing them with an opportunity to buffer against economic shocks in the future that 
would otherwise threaten their stability. 
331 State Street ~ 
Augusta, Maine 04330 - 
(207) 623-1868 ~ 
www.mekids.org
We urge you to vote ought to pass on this bill and ensure families transitioning out of the TANF 
program have the financial security they need to achieve independence and success. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
‘https://www.acf.hhs.gov/ofa/programs/tanf/about#:~1text:Provide%2Oassistance%20to%20needy%20families,job%20prepar 
ation%2C%20work%2C%20and%20marriag§ 
ii 
https://www.chapinhalI.0rg/research/economic-sugpons-child-welfare/
