
Cooper & Kirk  
Lawyers  
A Professional Limited Liability Company  
1523 New Hampshire Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20036 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operation Choke Point 2.0:  
The Federal Bank Regulators Come F or Crypto  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
David H. Thompson 
John D. Ohlendorf 
Harold S. Reeves  
Joseph O. Masterman  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Page 
I. Executive Summary  .............................................................................................................1  
II. History Repeats Itself: The Rise of Operation Choke Point 2.0. .........................................3 
A. Operation Choke Point 1.0. ......................................................................................3 
B. Operation Choke Point 2.0 and the Prudential Bank Regulators’ War on the 
Innovation of the Blockchain. ..................................................................................7 
1. The Prudential Bank Regulators Issue Informal Guidance Warning  
Banks of the Risks of Serving Crypto Businesses. ..................................... 7 
2. The Banks Feel the Pressure to Refuse to Accept New C rypto  
Customers and to Drop Crypto Customers. ...............................................11 
3. Shuttering banks that serve crypto. ............................................................14 
4. The Federal Bank Regulators  Refuse to Charter Banks that S erve the 
Crypto Industry. .........................................................................................20 
III. The Agencies’ Backroom War Against Crypto is  Unlawful  and Unconstitutional,  
As Well As Arbitrary, and Capricious. ..............................................................................23 
A. Operation Choke Point 2.0 is Unconstitutional. ....................................................23 
1. Operation Choke Point 2.0 Violates the Due Process Clause. ...................23 
2. Operation Choke Point 2.0 May Violate Structural Constitutional 
Protections..................................................................................................27 
B. The Federal Bank Regulators Are Fa iling To Perform Their Statutory Duties.  ... 27 
1. The Bank Regulators are Exceeding  their Statutory Authority. ................27 
2. The Federal Banking Regulators are Not Perform ing their Statutory 
Duties.  ........................................................................................................28 
C. The Prudential Bank Regulators are Violating the Administrative  
Procedure Act. ........................................................................................................29 
1. The Prudential Bank Regulators Have Acted Beyond Their Statutory 
Authority. ...................................................................................................29 
2. The federal bank regulators have evaded the notice and comment 
rulemaking requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act. ...............30   
3. The Agencies have acted arbitrar ily and capricious ly by denying access  
to the banking system to new technologies they do not understand. ........ 32 
IV. Congress Should Perform its Duty and R ein in the se Regulatory abuses.  .......................33  
1 
 I. Executive Summary  
Recent stories in the financial press have uncovered a coordinated campaign by prudential 
bank regulators  to drive crypto businesses out of the financial system.    Bank regulators have  
publish ed informal guidance documents that single out cryptocurrency  and cryptocurrency 
customers as a risk to the banking system.  Businesses in the cryptocurrency marketplace are losing 
their bank accounts, or their access to the ACH network, suddenly, and with n o explanation from 
their bank ers.  The owners and employees of cryptocurrency firms are even having their personal 
accounts closed without explanation.  And over the past two weeks, federal regulators have shut 
down a solvent bank that was known to be serving the crypto industry and, although it is required 
to resolve banks through the “least cost resolution” to the Deposit Insurance Fund, the FDIC chose 
to shutter rather than sell the part of the bank that serves digital asset customers , costing the Fund 
billions of dollars. 
This pattern of events is not random, and we have seen it before. This is not the first time 
that federal bank regulators, working with their State -level counterparts, have abused their 
supervisory authority to label businesses unworthy of having a bank account and worked in secret 
to purge disfavored lines of commerce from the financial system.  Beginning in 2012, the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System carried out a coordinated campaign to weaponize the 
banks against industries that had fallen out of favor with the administratio n—including gun stores, 
pawn shops, tobacco stores, payday lenders, and a host of other brick and mor tar businesses .  That 
campaign was called Operation Choke Point. 
 Our firm successfully challenged Operation Choke Point, and it was brought to a halt.  The 
current bout of regulatory overreach against the crypto industry is illegal  for much the same 
as reason as its predecessor.   Specifically : 
• Operation Choke Point 2.0  deprives business of their constitutional rights to due 
process  in violation of the Fifth Amendment.  It is well settled that  when a federal 
agency attaches  a derogatory label to  an individual or business , and this 
stigmatizing label  causes the business to  lose a bank account or broadly preclude s 
them  from the pursuit of their chosen trade, the agency ha s violated  the Due Process 
Clause of the Fifth Amendment, u nless if first afforded the  individual or business a 
right to be heard.   This is precisely what the federal bank regulators responsible for 
Operation Choke Point 2.0 have done and continue to do by labeling crypto 
businesses a threat to the financial syste m, a source of fraud and misinformation, 
and a risk to bank liquidity. 
 
• Operation Choke Point 2.0 violates both the non-delegation doctrine and the 
anticommandeering doctrine, depriving Americans of key structural constitutional 
protections against the arbitrary exercise of governmental power. 
 
• By leveraging their authority over the banks to acquire the power to pick and choose 
the customers  whom the banks may serve, the bank regulators have exceeded their 
2 
 statutory authority.  The bank regulators are charged with supervising the safety 
and soundness of the banks; their effort to anoint themselves the gatekeepers of the 
financial system and the ultimate arb iters of American innovation and American 
economic life cannot be permitted to stand. 
 
• The federal bank regulators  are also refusing to perform their non-discretionary 
duties when doing so will benefit the cryptocurrency industry .  State banks that are 
statutorily entitled to access the federal reserve system are being denied their rights 
solely because they serve the crypto industry.   The federal bank regulators are not 
free to pick and choose which statutory obligations they duties they wish  to 
perform.  
 
• The federal bank regulators are evading the notice and comment rulemaking 
requirements of the administrative procedure act by imposing binding requirements 
on the banking industry through informa l guidance documents.  This is 
undemocratic, since it deprive s the public of the  right to comment on proposed 
rules, and  it also runs contrary to the principle of judicial review, since  courts lack 
the power to review “informal” agency actions.  
 
• Finally, the federal bank regulators are acting in an arbitrary and capricious fashion 
by failing to adequately explain their decisions, by failing to engage in reasoned 
decisionmaking, and by failing to treat like cases alike.  It is difficult to imagine a 
more arb itrary and capricious agency action than simultaneously placing a solvent 
bank into receivership solely because it provided financial services to the crypto 
industry, while permitting insolvent institutions not tied to the crypto industry  to 
continue operating. 
We therefore urge Congress  to perform its oversight role and hold these agencies to 
account.  In section IV of this paper, we propose a series of questions that need to be answere d—
and a series steps that Congress should take in an effort to obtain those answers. 
• First , Congress should require the bank regulators to produce their communications 
with supervised financial institutions and state regulatory agencies regarding the 
denial or regulation of  access to the financial system  by crypto businesses and banks 
that serve the crypto industry.  
 
• Second , Congress should require the federal bank regulatory agencies to explain 
the basis for their conclusion that the safety and soundness of the financial system 
require the insulation of the banks from blockchain technology, from customers 
who operate in the crypto space, and from state -chartered depository institutions 
that are currently serving those customers.   
 
• Third , Congress should make clear to the federal bank regulators , and all federal 
agencies,  that the notice and comment rulemaking requirements of the 
3 
 Administrative Procedure Act are not optional.  The requirements imposed by the 
APA are not obstacles to be evaded by the use of informal guidance documents.   
 
• Fourth , Congress should investigate  the role of federal regulators in the decision 
by the New York Department of Financial Supervision’s decision to shutter 
Signature Bank.   Congress should also determine the FDIC ’s role in excluding 
bidders who wished to acquire Signature’s digital asset businesses from the bidding 
process.  
 
• Fifth , Congress should investigate whether bank regulators are acting to squelch 
private sector innovation in order to clear the field of competition for the benefit of 
existing federally regulated banks or for a fede ral cryptocurrency alternative.   
The persistent unwillingness of the nation’s bank regulators to follow the law and obey the 
Constitution calls out for Congressional action.  Cracks are starting to form in the American 
financial system as its regulators i ncreasingly abuse their power to achieve aims outside their 
authority and beyond their competence.   
II. History Repeats Itself: The Rise of Operation Choke Point 2.0.  
A. Operation Choke Point 1.0. 
 
Beginning in 2012, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”), the Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency (“OCC”), and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
(“the Federal Reserve”), with the prompting and the assistance of the Oba ma Administration’s 
Department of Justice, conspired to choke off and strangle disfavored lines of commerce by 
depriving them of their access to the financial system.  Reputations were tarnished through a 
whisper campaign carried out by federal bank examin ers.  Law -abiding businesses that presented 
no threat to the safety and soundness of the banking system had their ability to open a bank account 
or even to deposit a check now taken from them.  Runaway regulators, acting well beyond their 
statutory authority and without any regard for the rule of law, deprived American businesses of 
their good names, of their right to pursue their chosen line of trade, and of their very right to exist, 
without affording them any right to defend themselves or to respond to t he charges secretly being 
leveled against them.  This campaign was dubbed Operation Choke Point  by the federal regulators 
themselves, since it worked by “choking off” the disfavored business from access to the modern 
financial syste m. 
 
Operation Choke Point had two components: the publication of informal guidance 
documents by the prudential bank regulators and a cover t campaign of coercion, threats, and 
backroom pressure  carried out by agency examiners and officials .  The federal bank regulators  
first published a series of guidance documents, policy statements, and informal articles  advising 
the financial institutions that they supervised to structure their account agreements with a selection  
4 
 of “risky” customers to “permit immediate account closure [and] contract termination.”1  They 
also warned  the banks to be wary of  customers who maintained banking relationships with more 
than one bank, a practice that the businesses in the regulators ’ crosshairs  would , predictably,  soon 
be forced  to adopt in order simply to survive .2  These informal guidance documents pave d the way 
for the campaign of regulatory coercion that was to come.    
The critical fulcrum of Operation Choke Point, however,  was the redefined concept of 
“reputation risk”  that was promulgated through these informal guidance documents .  A series of 
guidance documents  redefined the  concept of “reputation risk” in a manner that was vague, 
manipulable, and wholly foreign to customary bank examination practices.  Slowly and 
incrementally , the prudential bank regulators  transform ed reputation risk  from  a requirement that 
a bank take car e to guard its own good name ,3 which could be damaged when the services  provided 
by the bank and its agents failed to measure up to customer expectations, to a concept that  require d 
banks first to evaluate the reputations of third parties  with whom the bank does business , even 
when th at third -party  provides no customer -facing services  on behalf of the bank, and  finally  to 
evaluate the reputations of the bank’s customers.   
 
1 FDIC, Financial Institution Letter: Revised Guidance on Payment Processor 
Relationships, FIL -3-2012 (Jan. 31, 2012) , available at https://www.fdic.gov/news/financial-
institution -letters/2012/fil12003.html   
2 FDIC, Managing Risks in Third -Party Payment Processor Relationships, 
SUPERVISORY INSIGHTS, Summer 2011, at 3. 
3 As traditionally understood in the banking industry and as previously defined by the 
agencies, “reputation risk” reflects “the potential that negative publicity regarding an institution’s 
business practices, whether true or not, will cause a decline in th e customer base, costly litigation, 
or revenue reductions.” FRB, Supervisory Letter: Risk -focused Safety and Soundness 
Examinations and Inspections. SR 96 -14 (May 24, 1996) , available at 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/SRLETTERS/1996/sr9614.htm .  See also OCC, Risk 
Management Guidance: Third Party Relationships, OCC Bull. No. 2001 -47 (Nov. 1, 2001) 
(“Reputation risk is the risk to earnings or capital arising from negative public opinion.”) , available 
at https://www.occ.gov/static/rescinded -bulletins /bulletin -2001-47.pdf ; FDIC, Foreign -Based 
Third -Party Service Providers: Guidance on Managing Risks in These Outsourcing Relationships, 
FIL-52-2006 (June 21, 2006) (“Reputational risk is the risk that potential negative publicity about 
a financial institution’s business practi ces will cause a decline in the customer base, costly 
litigation, or the loss of revenue.”) , available at https://www.fdic.gov/news/financial- institution -
letters/2006/fil -52-2006.pdf .  As previously defined by these three agencies, therefore, reputation 
risk was exclusively the risk that a bank might suffer harm to its reputation either by itself failing 
to serve its customers well or by contracting with a third party provider who then, acting in the 
bank’s name, failed to serve those customers well.  See, e.g., OCC, Risk Management Guidance: 
Third Party Relationships, OCC Bull. No. 2001 -47 (Nov. 1, 2001) , available at 
https://www.occ.gov/static/rescinded -bulletins /bulletin -2001-47.pdf ; FDIC, Foreign -Based 
Third -Party Service Providers: Guidance on Managing Risks in These Outsourcing Relationships, 
FIL-52-2006 (June 21, 2006) , available at https://www.fdic.gov/news/financial- institution -
letters/2006/fil -52-2006.pdf .   
5 
 The threat created  by requiring banks to stand in judgment of their  customers was 
recognized and understood even at the time.  As Congressman Hensarling warned  early in 20 14, 
this newly -defined concept of  reputation risk could easily “be invoked to compel a depository 
institution to sever a customer relationship with a small business operating in accordance with all 
applicable laws and regulations but whose industry is deemed ‘reputationally risky’ for no other 
reason than that it has been the subject of unflattering press coverage, or that certain Ex ecutive 
Branch agencies disapprove of its business model.”4   
And the banks were most certainly not left to decide for themselves when an individual 
customer’s  reputation required their banishment from the financial  system.  The prudential bank 
regulators made clear that only specific  industries—t hose that were out of favor with the 
administration or with the federal regulators  themselves —presented  reputation al risks  to the banks 
that served them . In the summer of 2011, FDIC warned the banks  of the heightened reputational 
risks associated with doing business with specific  groups of merchants.5  FDIC identified  30 
merchant categories, including gun dealers, ammunition s ellers , pawn shops, and payday lend ers 
that were engaged in what the agency had deemed to be reputationally  risky activities.   And, of 
course, pornography, online gambling, and even racist materials were included on the list to create  
that “good picture regarding the unsavory nature of the businesse s at issue” that the bank regulators 
were  striving to create.  
Indeed, bank regulators went to extraordinary lengths  to smear the disfavored businesses. 
For example, FDIC personnel ensured that Chairman Gruenberg’s talking points and 
correspondence with Congress always mentioned pornography alongside payday lending in an 
effort to convey a “good picture regarding the unsavory nature of the busi nesses at issue.”6  One 
official candidly explained that “including payday lenders in the same circle as pornographers and 
on-line gambling businesses will ultimately help with the messaging on this issue.”7 
 
4 Letter from Rep. Jeb Hensarling, Chairman, H. Comm. on Fin. Servs., to Janet Yellen, 
Chair, The Fed. Reserve Sys. (May 22, 2014). 
5 FDIC, Managing Risks in Third -Party Payment Processor Relationships, 
SUPERVISORY INSIGHTS, Summer 2011, at 3.   
6 STAFF OF H. COMM. ON OVERSIGHT AND GOV’T REFORM, 113TH CONG., 
FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION’S INVOLVEMENT IN “OPERATION 
CHOKE POINT,” at 10 (Dec. 8, 2014) [hereinafter “REP.”] , quoting  email from a Counsel, Legal 
Division, FDIC, to Marguerite Sagatelian, Senior Counsel, Consumer Enforcement Unit, FDIC 
(Aug. 28, 2013 9:32), FDICHOGR00007424 , available at https://oversight.house.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2014/12/Staff-Report- FDIC -and-Operation -Choke-Point-12-8-2014.pdf   
7 Rep. at 11, quoting email from a Counsel, Legal Division, FDIC, to Marguerite 
Sagatelian, Senior Counsel, Consumer Enforcement Unit, FDIC (Aug. 28, 2013 9:32), 
FDICHOGR00007424.  Pornography was among the first targets of Operation Choke Point. Citing 
“compliance issues,” ban ks began in early 2013 to close the accounts not only of adult 
entertainment businesses, but also of hundreds of individual actors and actresses in the industry. 
J.P. Morgan Chase closed the accounts of former porn actress Teagan Presley and her husband, 
who had never been part of the business. The bank also refused to renew the home mortgage of 
studio head Marc Greenberg on account of “reputational risk.” See Mary Emily O’Hara, Is the 
 
6 
 Of course, Operation Choke Point had nothing to do with reputation  or reputational risk, 
much less with  bank safety and soundness.  Instead, the personal biases of the bank ing regulators  
determined which businesses would be targeted for financial exile.   Evidence soon emerged that 
payday lenders  were  being targeted  because agency official s found them  “unsavory,”8 and 
believed  payday lending was “a particularly ugly practice.”9  One senior official even admitted 
that he “literally [could] not stand pay day lending” and that he “sincerely” and “passio nate[ly]” 
believe [d] that payday lenders “do not deserve to be in any way associated with banking.”10  
Having laid the groundwork  by labeling  these lawful businesses  reputationally risky, the 
federal bank regulators, working together with their state counterparts, turned to the task of purging 
their accounts  from each of the banks subject to their supervision.  In the back rooms of banks 
around the country, bank examiners explained that those financial institutions that continued to 
serve customers tha t the federal regulators had labeled “reputationally risky” would suffer the 
consequences.  As one examiner reportedly told a banker who hesitated to succumb to this 
pressure: “I don’t like this product and I don’t believe it has any place in our financial  system . . . 
Your decision to move forward will result in an immediate, unplanned, audit of your entire bank.” 
The message could not be clearer: “ Turn against your customers , or your regulators will turn 
against you.” 
   In the end, no bank that wants to remain in business can stand up to their prudential 
regulator forever.  For over two years, the nation’s gun dealers, pawn shops, tobacco  stores , and 
payday lenders watched as one bank after another yielded to this campaign of regulatory coercion 
and closed their accounts.  In the vast majority of these  cases, no explanation was ever provided  
by the banks.  This is unsurprising;  it is the rare bank that will bear witness against its prudential 
regulator.   These businesses thus had no opportunity to defend their good names from  the 
regulatory smear campaign .  They had no way even of knowing that it was their own government 
that was trying to destroy them.   
It took over three years of contentious litigation , several Congressional investigations, and 
ultimately a change in presidential administration  to put an end to Operation Choke Point ’s 
campaign against American business.   
 
DOJ Forcing Banks to Terminate the Accounts of Porn Stars? , VICE NEWS (Apr. 27, 2014), 
available at https://bit.ly/3lGhyoD ; Chris Morris, Porn and Banks: Drawing a Line on Loans , 
CNBC. COM (May 17, 2013), available at https://cnb.cx/3JY3253  . 
8 Email from a Counsel, Legal Division, FDIC, to Marguerite Sagatelian, Senior Counsel, 
Consumer Enforcement Unit, FDIC (August 28, 2013; 9:32AM), FDICHOGR00007424. 
9 Email from a Counsel, Legal Division, FDIC, to Marguerite Sagatelian, Senior Counsel, 
Consumer Enforcement Unit, FDIC (March 9, 2013; 2:53PM), FDICHOGR00005178. 
10 E-mail from Thomas J. Dujenski, Regional Director, Atlanta Region, Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation, to Mark Pearce, Director, Division of Consumer Protection, Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (Nov. 27, 2012, 20:40:05), FDICHOGR00006585. 
7 
 B. Operation Choke Point 2.0 and the  Prudential Bank Regulators’  War on the 
Innovation of the Blockchain . 
 
The victims of Operation Choke Point 1.0 are thus all too familiar with what the 
participants in the crypto economy are now experiencing .  The campaign  begins with a series of 
vague policy pronouncements and ominous warnings issued in the form of  informal guidance to 
the banks.  Then there is a  flurry  of decisions by banks to terminat e their banking relationships  
with the targeted industry , of accounts closed either without any explanation  or with the decision 
being attributed to “compliance requirements,” to “your business being outside of our risk 
tolerances,” or to “risks associated with your business .”  As the pattern becomes apparent, there 
follow the Orwellian  assurances from federal regulators that they “neithe r prohibit nor discourage 
banks” from doing business with an y specific  industr ies or business es.  Finally, a handful of brave 
and conscientious individuals at the agencies and at the banks, outraged by the abuse of the rights 
of their fellow Americans, com e forward and bear witness to the misconduct.  Past performance 
may not always be indicative of future results, but what the federal bank regulators have tried to 
get away with in the past  is, it would seem,  highly similar to  what they are trying to get away with 
today.  
1. The Prudential Bank Regulators Issue Informal Guidance Warning 
Banks of the Risks of Serving Crypto Businesses.   
One of the first acts of the OCC under the Biden Administration was to kill a rule 
designed  to “ensure fair access to banking services for several industries —including debt 
collection —previously cut off during the controversial Obama -era program Operation Choke 
Point.”11  “The Fair Access to Banking Rule emerged after what some have seen as a series of 
decisions by ‘systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), including Citibank, Bank of 
America, JP Morgan Chase … to use their market dominance to financially discriminate against 
legal and co mpliant businesses for political reasons. ’” 12 It would have  prohibited national banks 
and federal savings associations with at least $100 billion in assets from denying financial services 
to corporate entities, businesses, nonprofits, or individuals solely on a “subjective basis” and would 
set standards to impartially evaluate customer risk.13  The rule, was finalized on January 14, 2021, 
after being subjected notice and comment rulemaking, and was to take effect on April 1, 2021.14  
On January 28, 2021, the Biden OCC announced that it had paused publication of the rule in the 
 
11 “Ending Operation Choke Point: Fair Access to Banking Services Addressed in Proposed 
Rule,” ACA International  (Nov. 22, 2020), available at https://bit.ly/3njOzaX          
12 M. Maureen Murphy,” Office of the Comptroller of the Currency’s Fair Access to 
Financial Services Rule,” Congressional Research Service: Legal Sidebar (Feb. 5, 2021) , available 
at https://bit.ly/3K9UNDg . 
13 Id. 
14 OCC News Release 2021 -8, “OCC Finalizes Rule Requiring Large Banks to Provide 
Fair Access to Bank Services, Capital, and Cr edit” (Jan. 14, 2021) , available at 
https://www.occ.gov/news- issuances/news -releases/2021/nr- occ-2021-8.html . 
8 
 Federal Register.15  Just s even days after taking office, therefore, the Biden OCC  had suspended a 
rule specifically  designed to guard against the resumption  of Operation Choke Point.  
On May 7, 2021, Secretary of the Treasury  Janet Yellen appointed Michael J. Hsu as a 
Deputy Comptroller and announced that he would serve as Acting Comptroller of the Currency.16  
As Mr. Hsu’s subsequent statements stigmatizing the crypto industry have demonstrated, 
the Biden Administration had selected a  self-proclaimed “crypto skeptic,”  who sees crypto  
and digital assets  as dependent on “hype” and promoting “ ‘innovation’ for innovation’s sake,’”17 
to lead the regulat ion of U.S. national banks .  Mr. Hsu has proven a staunch foe of the digital 
economy, committed “ to requir[ing] that blockchain -based activities, such as stablecoin issuance, 
be conducted in a standalone bank -chartered entity, separate from any other insured depository 
institution (IDI) subsidiary and other regulated affiliates. ” In other words, Mr. Hsu apparently 
believes that crypto and crypto-banks should be choked off from the national banking system.18 
On November 18, 2021,  the OCC fired the first shot in Operation Choke Point 2.0, issuing 
informal guidance  documents that curtailed  the authority of banks to engage in cryptocurrency 
activities —authority that  had been recognized  under earlier  guidance issued in 2020 and earlier in 
 
15 OCC News Release  2021-14 , “OCC Puts Hold On Fair Access Rule (January 28, 2021) , 
available at https://www.occ.gov/news- issuances/news -releases/2021/nr-occ-2021-14.html . 
16 Press Releases, “Secretary Yellen Announces Intention to Appoint Michael J. Hsu as 
First Deputy Comptroller  of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency” (May 7, 2021) , 
available at https://home.treasury.gov/news/press- releases/jy0167 . 
17 Remarks of Acting Comptroller Michael J. Hsu at the  DC Blockchain Summit 2022: 
“Crypto: A Call to Reset and Recalibrate” (May 25, 2022) , available at Acting Comptroller  
Michael J. Hsu remarks at the DC Blockchain Summit 2022 - Crypto: A Call to Reset and 
Recalibrate (occ.gov) . 
18 Remarks of Acting Comptroller of the Currency Michael J. Hsu before the Institute of 
International Economic Law at Georgetown University Law Center: “Thoughts on the 
Architecture of Stablecoins” (April 8, 2022) , available at Acting Comptroller of the Currency 
Michael J. Hsu Rema rks Before the Institute of International Economic Law at Georgetown 
University Law Center "“Thoughts on the Architecture of Stablecoins” on April 8, 2022 (occ.gov) . 
9 
 202119—and also limited  the OCC’s authority, recognized  in Interpretive Letter 1176,20 to charter 
a national trust bank  involved in cryptocurrency -related activities .21  Interpretive letter 1179  
announced that, before engaging in any cryptocurrency activities, a bank must now notify its 
supervisory office, in writing, of the proposed activities and must receive written notification of 
the supervisory non -objection.22  Banks that ha d not yet engage d in cryptocurrency activities  were 
instructed to  refrain from doing so until they receive d notice of supervisory non -objection from 
the OCC; those banks that had already commenced cryptocurrency activities were  not required to 
discontinue those activities, but  would now be obliged to  notify their supervisory office.23  Finally, 
the letter notes that all OCC -regulated banks should expect their cryptocurrency activities to be 
reviewed as part of the ongoing supervisory process.24 
On April 7, 2022, the FDIC joined the campaign  in earnest , issuing a financial 
institution letter requesting that all FDIC -supervised institutions that are considering engaging in 
crypto- related activities to notify the FDIC of their intent and provide all necessary information 
that would allow the FDIC to engage  with the institution regarding related risks, and that any 
FDIC -supervised institution already engaged in crypto -related activities promptly notify the 
 
19 Specifically, Interpretive Letter 1170, had announced  that banks could provide custodial 
services for cryptocurrencies as a modern form of traditional bank custodial and safekeeping 
services, noting “that providing cryptocurrency custody services is a permissible form of a 
traditional banking activity that b anks are authorized to perform via electronic means.”  OCC, 
Interpretive Letter 1170 (July 22, 2020) , available at Interpretive Letter 1170, Authority of a 
National Bank to Provide Cryptocurrency Custody Services for Customers (occ.gov) .  Interpretive 
Letter 1172 had concluded that banks may hold deposits serving as reserves for stablecoins that 
are “backed on a 1:1 basis by a single fiat currency where the bank verifies at least daily that 
reserve account balances are always equal to or greater than the number of the issuer’s outstanding 
stablecoins” and that are and held in hosted wallets under banks’ existing authority to receive 
deposits.  OCC, Interpretive Letter 1174 (Sept. 21, 2020), Interpretive Letter #1172 OCC Chief 
Counse l's Interpretation on National Bank and Federal Savings Association Authority to Hold 
Stablecoin Reserves .  Finally, Interpretive Letter 1174 had concluded that national banks “may 
use new technologies, including INVNs and related stablecoins, to perform bank -permissible 
functions, such as payment activities.”  OCC, Interpretive Letter 1174 (Jan. 4, 2021), Microsoft 
Word - Interpretive Letter #1174 -Crypto 1 INVN Stablecoin Letter (occ.gov) . 
20 Interpretive Letter 1176 (Jan. 11, 2021), avail able at Interpretive Letter 1176 (occ.gov) .  
21 Interpretive Letter 1179 (November 18, 2021), available at Interpretive Letter 1179 
(occ.gov) .   
22 Id. at 1.   
23 Id. at 2 n.3.   
24 Id.   
10 
 FDIC.25  These institutions were also encouraged to notify their state regulators.26 The FIL warned 
that crypto –related activities may pose significant safety and soundness and compliance risks, raise 
financial stability concerns, and present risks to consumers.27 
On January 3, 2023 , the Federal Reserve Board,  the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation , and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency  released a joint statement 
informing banks that the three agencies had “safety and soundness concerns with business 
models that are concentrated in crypto -asset -related activities or have concentrated 
exposures  to the crypto -asset sector .”28  The policy statement contains a series of anodyne 
platitudes about safety and soundness, encouraging the banks to be aware of the “risk of fraud and 
scams among crypto -asset sector participants” and of “inaccurate or misleading representations 
and disclosures by crypto- asset companies.”   
These warnings are, of course,  as true for crypto currencies as they are for cash , gold coins,  
and credit cards, for mortgages and car loans, for foreign exchange and Internet commerce.  If the 
regulators wished to ensure that these types of risks were managed properly, then they would 
provide guidance on how to properly manage them across  all of these contexts .  But instead, the 
regulators have chosen to single out one  set of bank customers  and signal that they expect bank s 
to subject those customers to special scrutiny .  Like the guidance documents issued by the agencies 
during Operation Choke Point, this has nothing to do with managing specific risks, and everything 
to do with steer ing clear of specific customers.    
Later in the same month , the Federal Reserve  issued a policy statement that discourage d 
banks from holding crypto  assets , putting state banks on notice that “legal permissibility is a 
necessary, but not sufficient, condition to establish that a state member bank may engage in a 
particular activity.”29 Even though  providing banking  service s to crypto companies is not 
prohibited by law, in other words, that does not mean that serving these customers is not prohibited 
by your regulator .  Days later, and without public comment, the statement was entered into the 
Federal Register as a final rule .30  
On February 23, 2023, the three federal banking agencies issued a second joint statement 
warning banks of potentially heightened liquidity risks presented by the crypto  industry: s ome 
deposits by crypto companies may be subject to sudden withdrawals should the customers of those 
companies decide in tandem to use those deposits to buy cryptocurrencies; some deposits may  
represent stable -coin reserves that may need to be withdrawn should market fluctuations result in 
 
25 FDIC: FIL -16-2022: Notification of Engaging in Crypto- Related Activities  
26 Id. 
27 Id. 
28 Joint Statement on Crypto -Asset Risks to Banking Organizations ( Jan. 3, 2023 ), 
available at https://bit.ly/3TSfhDP . 
29 Policy Statement on Section 9(13) of the Federal Reserve Act , Bd. of Gov. of the Fed. 
Reserve Sys. (Feb. 7, 2023), available at https://bit.ly/42xegop. 
30 Id. 
11 
 unanticipated stable -coin redemptions.  One question s whether these concerns about liquidity 
risk—which  did not materialize in 2022, even as Bitcoin alone  declined by 65%, resulting in a $2 
trillion decline in the market capitalization of that one cryptocurrency— are misplaced.   Indeed, as 
the turmoil of the past few weeks has confirmed, banks would appear to face far less liquidity risk 
from serving crypto -customers than they do from holding long -dated U.S. Treasury securities  or 
uninsured deposits.  But what is beyond dispute is that these are risks and warnings that should 
apply to  any line of business or commerce —from  stockbrokers, homebuilders, automakers, and 
airlines  to hospitals, doctors, drug companies,  and military contractor s—that may need to access 
their deposits quickly during an  economic dis ruption , a health crisis, or a  national emergency.  
Why , then, does the Guidance not speak to the risk that all bank customers pose , rather than 
singling out only those customers in the crypto industry ?  
As with the guidance issued as part of  Operation Choke Point  1.0, all of these recent 
guidance documents contain the proviso that “Banking organizations are neither prohibited nor 
discouraged from providing banking services to customers of any specific class or type.” But this 
assurance once again rings hollow, given  that these documents name customers of only one 
specific class and type.   Internal bank compliance officers get the message loud and clear.   Imagine 
that th e one class of customer singled out by the bank regulators were not crypto -companies, but 
women applying for consumer credi t, or minority -owned businesses  taking out commercial loans, 
or first -generation immigrants applying for home mortgage loans . Would  such a boilerplate  
disclaimer transform a warning to consider credit risk, or reputation risk, or liquidity risk  when 
lendin g to that group into  an entirely unobjectionable statement about risk that left banks perfectly 
free to choose their customers ? Obviously not; and just as obviously, the stigma caused by urging 
banks to  single out and  discriminate against customers in the cryptocurrency space  is not cured by 
the disingenuous disclaimer appended to the stigmatizing  guidance documents. 
2. The Banks Feel the Pressure to Refuse to Accept New C rypto 
Customers  and to Drop Crypto Customers . 
While the evidence of backroom coercion is only beginning to emerge, c ryptocurrency 
businesses are experiencing  exactly what  gun owners, pawn shops, and payday lenders 
experienced in 2012 and 201 3 during the opening months of Operation Choke Point.  First,  
Crypto businesses are being systematically and methodically cut off from the ACH network ,  
as their third -party payment processors announce one-by-one that they will no longer be providing 
service to cryptocurrency businesses.   Recently , for example,  a key third party payments processor 
for the crypto industry, Circle, announced that it had “made the decision to stop processing ACH 
and wire payments for all of their partner companies….”31   
Banks are also reportedly being pressured to limit or terminate their banking 
relationships with companies in the crypto industry.   In August 2022, Senator Pat Toomey 
revealed that whistleblowers had informed him that the FDIC had instructed its regional offices to 
 
31 Important Update Regarding Payment Methods , DAPPER  (last visited Mar. 23, 2023), 
available at https://bit.ly/3K2zK5k.  
12 
 send letters to banks to discourage them from doing business with crypto companies.  As Senator 
Toomey described the accusations to Chairman Gruenberg: 
According to whistleblower communications that we have 
corroborated, personnel in the FDIC’s Washington, D.C. 
headquarters are urging FDIC regional offices to send letters to 
multiple banks requesting that they refrain from expanding 
relationships with crypto -related companies, without providing any 
legal basis for sending such letters. … Whistleblower reports have 
also alleged that the FDIC may be ab using its supervisory powers to 
deter banks from extending credit to crypto -related companies. 
According to these reports, FDIC headquarters employees have 
contacted FDIC regional office bank examination staff to question 
their review of a loan made by a bank to a crypto -related company 
and to urge them to downgrade their classification of the loan.32 
Senator Toomey was clear that “[g] iven the FDIC’s involvement under your leadership in the 
Obama administration’s notorious Operation Choke Point, which sought to coerce banks into 
denying services to legal yet politically disfavored businesses, it is important to better understand 
the actions the FDIC is now taking and the legal basis for them.”33   
 As a result  of these pressure tactics , it is becoming harder and harder for crypto companies 
to obtain and maintain banking relationships .  And while “some banks continue to open accounts 
for crypto companies, some in the industry speculated that regulators will try to cut off bank 
access.”34  “Opera tion Chokepoint 2.0 might have overplayed its hand this time,” the official 
Twitter account for the trading Platform Kraken announced on March 12, 2023, “but the threat 
remains. They will continue to attack the rails, products and companies facilitating di rect crypto 
ownership and DeFi use.”35  
Operation Choke Point 2.0 is targeting not only digital asset  businesses, but also the 
personal accounts of individual employees of crypto businesses for termination.   Just as 
Operation Choke Point targeted the owners and employees of the disfavored businesses, so too 
 
32 Letter from Senator Patrick Toomey, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban 
Affairs to Martin Gruenberg, Director and Acting Chairman, Federal Deposit Insurance Company 
(August 16, 2022) , available at https://bit.ly/3Zc55Hd.  
33 Letter from Senator Patrick  Toomey, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban 
Affairs to Martin Gruenberg, Director and Acting Chairman, Federal Deposit Insurance Company 
(August 16, 2022) , available at https://bit.ly/3Zc55Hd . See also  Claire Williams, Toomey questions 
FDIC over ‘Choke Point’ -esque crackdown on banks and crypto , AM. BANKER  (Aug. 16, 2022), 
available at  https://bit.ly/42rcc18. 
34 Joe Light, Crypto is Being De -Banked. What It Means for Bitcoin and the Industry , 
BARRONS  (Mar . 13, 2023) , available at  https://bit.ly/42terkJ.  
35 Kraken Exchange (@krakenfx ), TWITTER  (Mar. 12, 2023, 10:48 PM),  
https://bit.ly/3Z9IUBi.    
13 
 Operation Choke Point 2.0 is now targeting the men and women who work in the crypto industry.  
In January 2022, for example, Hayden Adams, the CEO and founder of Uniswap, a popular 
decentralized exchange, revealed that J.P. Morgan Chase had closed his personal bank accounts  
“with no notice or explanation.”36  Mr. Adams further revealed that he knew “many individuals 
and companies who have been similarly targ eted simply for working in the crypto industry.”37 
Swan Bitcoin CEO Cory Klippsten revealed that, in late 2022,  Citigroup had shut down both his 
company’s and his personal accounts without explanation. And several banks have pulled back on 
their exposure t o the asset class.38  While the banks have been  unwilling to offer any explanation 
for their actions, the former Commodity Futures Trading Commissioner Brian Quintenz was clear  
that the move was likely an instance of shadow de -banking of crypto by Federal Reserve and O CC 
bank examiners.39 
The Biden A dministration’s anti -crypto crusade has not been limited to the federal bank 
regulators.  The Securities and Exchange Commission has opened a second front, targeting both 
the banks that serve as the custodians of digital assets and the issuers of crypto -currencie s and 
other digital assets  including stablecoins.  On April 11, 2022, the Commission issued Staff 
Accounting Bulletin No. 121, which instructed those entities required to file reports under 
Sections 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act that they must include digital assets held in custody 
among the assets an d liabilities on their balance sheets.40 In contrast, conventional assets do not 
appear on the custodian bank’s balance sheet, because  those assets are recognized as belonging to 
the bank’s clients, not the bank.  This raises series questions regarding how custodianship of digital 
assets could impact a bank’s balance sheet risk for purposes of its Basel III capital requirements.41  
By imposing this requirement , the SEC effectively placed a sword of Damocles over the head of 
any bank considering acting as a custodian of digital assets.  
Finally, after having repeatedly  invited the industry to “come in and talk with us,”  and 
many firms having done so  the SEC nonetheless embarked on an aggressive regulatory and 
 
36 hayden.eth (@haydenzadams), T WITTER  (Jan. 23, 2023, 11:52 AM),  available at  
https://bit.ly/3yYScFB .  
37 Id. 
38 Declan Harty, “Crypto industry poised for clash with government over crackdown,” 
PoliticoPro  (Mar. 24, 2023). 
39Brian  Quintenz (@BrianQuintenz), TWITTER  (Jan. 23, 2023, 2:10 PM),  
https://bit.ly/40gXqJ6 (“Likely a shadow de -banking of crypto by @federalreserve or @USOCC 
bank examiners, with direction from the top. If the examiner told a bank that a certain customer is 
too risky and the bank ended that relationship, the bank is contractually prevented from telling that 
customer why.”) 
40 Securities and Exchange Commission, Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 121 (Apr. 11, 
2022), available at SEC.gov | Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 121 . 
41 “SEC crypto custody accounting rule: a serious blow for bank custodians?” Ledger 
Insights  (Apr. 1, 2022) , available at SEC crypto custody accounting rule: a serious blow for bank 
custodians? - Ledger Insights - blockchain for enterprise . 
14 
 enforcement campaign against the digital asset  industry.   In December 2020, the SEC  filed a 
lawsuit against  cryptocurrency platform Ripple  , its CEO, and  its chairman, for illegally selling 
unregistered securities worth $1.3 billion .42  The following March, the Commission brought an 
enforcement action against LBRY, claiming that its unregistered offerings of LBC violate sections 
5(a) and (c) of the Securities Act.43   On February 12, 2023, the Commission issued a Wells notice 
to Paxos  Trust Co. announcing that it plans to sue the company for violating investor protection 
laws by issuing a stablecoin that the SEC claims is an unregistered security.44  On March 22, 2023, 
after meeting with the SEC more than 30 times in nine months, Coinb ase received a Wells notice 
from the Commission regarding “regarding an unspecified portion of our listed digital assets, our 
staking service Coinbase Earn, Coinbase Prime, and Coinbase Wallet.”45  “We asked the SEC for 
reasonable crypto rules for American s,” Coinbase responded: “We got legal threats instead.”46  
3. Shuttering banks that serve crypto.  
The primary stick wielded by the agents of Operation Choke Point was the threat of 
unending audits and examinations : that federal and state regulators would smother the bank in red 
tape if the bank did not agree to smother its own customers .  But a far more menacing  threat was 
implicit in the statements and actions  of the examiners .  The banks knew that their  regulators have 
the power to  shutter any bank that refuse s to bend the knee and toe the line from Washington .  In 
one instance, when a bank expressed reluctance to terminate a longstanding and law -abiding 
customer simply because that customer was  disliked by the bank’s regulators, this implicit threat 
was made explicit  when the head examiner  openly threatened that the FDIC was simply not 
 
42 See Complaint, Securities and Exchange Commmission v. Ripple Labs, Inc. et al ., ECF 
No. 1, Case No. 1:20- cv-10832 (S.D.N.Y. Dec. 22, 2020). 
43 See Complaint, Securities and Exchange Commission v. LBRY, Inc.,  ECF No.1, Case 
No. 1:21- cv-00260-PB (D.N.H. March 29, 2021). 
44 Vicky Ge Huang, Patricia Kowsmann, and Dave Michaels, “Crypto Firm Paxos Faces 
SEC Lawsuit Over Binance USD Toke: The agency has been intensifying its enforcement of major 
crypto players,” WSJ (Feb. 12, 2023), available at Crypto Firm Paxos Faces SEC Lawsuit Over 
Binance USD Token - WSJ . 
45 Paul Grewal , “We asked the SEC for reasonable crypto rules for Americans. We got 
legal threats instead. Coinbase.com (March 22, 2023), available at We asked the SEC for 
reasonable crypto rules for Americans. We got legal threats instead. (coinbase.com)   On the same 
day, the Commission also announced that it would sue Justin Sun, the creator of the Tron 
cryptocurrency ecosystem, accusing him of illegally selling crypto securities and conspiring to 
artificially inflate trading volume in crypto assets. Press Release, SEC Charges Crypto 
Entrepreneur Justin Sun and his Companies for Fraud and Other Securities Law Violations (Mar. 
22, 2023), available at SEC.gov | SEC Charges Crypto Entrepreneur Justin Sun and his Companies 
for Fraud and Other Securities Law Violations .  The Commission simultaneously charged eight 
celebrities for illegally touting these cryptocurrencies.  
46 Paul Grewal, “We asked the SEC for reasonable crypto rules for Americans. We got 
legal threats instead. Coinbase.com (March 22, 2023), available at  We asked the SEC for 
reasonable crypto rules for Americans. We got legal threats instead. (coinbase.com)  
15 
 concerned if a “piss ant, $200 million bank failed.”47  The prudential bank regulators, in other 
words, have more potent weapons than harassing banks with audits and visitations. 
There is reason to fear that this weapon has now been fired and that bank regulators 
have placed a solvent financial institution into receivership to punish it for failing to toe the 
administration line on crypto .  On March 8, 2023,  Silvergate Bank , which served as one of the 
two main banks offering real time ledgering for crypto companies, through its “SEN” network , 
announced that it would be winding down operations “[i]n light of recent industry and regulatory 
developments.”48 Five days later, New  York State bank regulators ordered the closure of Signature 
Bank.  Signature was the other main bank offering 24/7/365 ledgering capabilities for the digital 
asset  companies. It  was founded in 2001 as a more business -friendly alternative to the big banks.   
In 2018, Signature began to serve customers in the cryptocurrency  industry.  It created a 24/7 
payments network for its crypto clients and had $16.5 billion in deposits from digital -asset -related 
customers.  In the wake of the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank, Signature had experienced $10 
billion of withdrawals on Friday, March 10 .49  But by Sunday, management had shored up the 
bank’s capital situation, the deposit exodus had slowed, and the situation had stabilized.50 
Nonetheless , the regulators moved in, summarily removed management, shuttered the 
bank, and began conducting a sale of the bank’s  assets.  The move was suspicious.  At that same 
time they closed Signature, the b ank’s regulators were  moving to shore up the finances of other 
banks, including First Republic, that were in far more dire straits than Signature .  Signature, after 
all, had $110.36 billion of assets to cover $88.59 billion of deposits at the end of 2022,51 and the 
regulators had conceded that the bank was not insolvent  at the time it was closed .52  The New 
York Department of Financial Services Superintendent, Adrienne A. Harris, also sits on the 
Financial Stability Oversight Council, and would surely have been well aware that the FSOC 
 
47 OFFICE  OF INSPECTOR GENERAL , REPORT NO. OIG-16-001,  REPORT OF INQUIRY INTO THE 
FDIC’ S SUPERVISORY APPROACH TO REFUND ANTICIPATION LOANS AND THE INVOLVEMENT OF 
FDIC  LEADERSHIP AND PERSONNEL  70 (Feb. 2016), available at  https://goo.gl/fjR8JH.  
48 Press Release, “Silvergate Capital Corporation Announces Intent to Wind Down 
Operations and Voluntarily Liquidate Silvergate Bank” (Mar. 8, 2023) , available at 
https://ir.silvergate.com/news/news -details/2 023/Silvergate -Capital -Corporation-Announces-
Intent- to-Wind -Down -Operations- and-Voluntarily-Liquidate- Silvergate -Bank/default.aspx ).  See 
also MacKenzie Sigalos, “Crypto -focused bank Silvergate is shutting operations and liquidating 
after market meltdown” (Mar. 8, 2023). 
49 Hugh Son , Why regulators seized Signature Bank in third -biggest bank failure in U.S. 
history , CNBC  (Mar. 13, 2023), available at https://cnb.cx/3Z8ZtgW. 
50 Id. 
51 Id. 
52 Id. 
16 
 liquidity program would have obviat ed any risk of Signature’s failure .53 There was essentially 
no need  for regulatory intervention. 
Signature had, however,  been the first FDIC -insured bank to enable its commercial clients 
to access a blockchain -based, real -time payments platform.   Signature launched Signet in January 
of 2019 and, in 2020,  integrated the service with digital asset custodian Fireblocks to facilitate the 
secure movement, storage , and issuance of digital assets.54  At the time Signature was closed, 
Signet was the only  24/7 cryptocurrency bank ledgering platform, a fact that would have made 
Signature an appealing target for Operation Choke Point 2.0.55 
Former Representative Barney Frank, a principal author of the Dodd -Frank legislation 
enacted in the wake of the 2008 fi nancial crisis and a member of Sign ature’s Board of Directors, 
agreed that  there was “no real objective reason” for the bank’s seizure  and drew the conclusion 
that the bank was likely closed because of Operation Choke Point 2.0.56    The pretext offered by 
regulators, i.e., that they wanted more complete data from the bank, simply did not justify the 
draconian action of shuttering the bank and liquidating its assets; even though it was doing crypto 
responsibly, the bank was shuttered because its  regulators do not want banks doing crypto at all: 
Now, the question is, why did they react so harshly to what they said 
was our inability to give them the sufficient data? I believe it was 
probably to send the message that even though we were doing crypto 
stuff responsibly, they don’t want banks doing crypto. They denied 
that in their statement, but I don’t fully believe that. I think that they 
overreacted to what they saw was our problem with data, which may 
well have existed, but the data was  improving. I think sloppy data is 
not a reason to close a bank that you have not decided was insolvent, 
and they’ve never said we were insolvent. 
Representative Frank concluded  that “part of what happened was that regulators wanted to send a 
very strong a nti-crypto message ,” and Signature “became the poster boy because there was no 
insolvency based on the fundamentals.”57  Signature was closed to send an unambiguous message 
to the other banks:   
 
53 CSBS, Press Release, State Bank Supervisors Appoint New York Superintendent 
Adrienne A. Harris to FSOC (Dec. 13, 2022), available at State Bank Supervisors Appoint New 
York Superintendent Adrienne A. Harris to FSOC | CSBS  
54  Press Release, Signature Bank Launches its Digital Payment  Platform, Signet, on the 
Fireblocks Network, Signature Bank (June 23, 2020), available at https://bit.ly/40rsGoc. 
55 Frederick Munawa , Signature Bank’s Signet Platform Still Works, but Some Clients 
Have Moved On , COINDESK (Mar. 14, 2023), available at https://bit.ly/3LHcyeh. 
56 Hugh Son, Why regulators seized Signature Bank in third -biggest bank failure in U.S. 
history , CNBC (Mar. 13, 2023), available at https://cnb.cx/3Z8ZtgW. 
57 Id. 
17 
 No, I don’t think they have to [ begin a larger crackdown on crypto] . 
I think that there’s already a retreat by banks from crypto. There’s 
an old French expression — they were interested in the 18th century, 
how strict the discipline was in the British Navy, and in one case, 
the British Navy executed a guy for a relatively minor infraction 
because they were worried about the behavior of all the sailors. And 
the French said, “Oh, those peculiar English. They shoot one man to 
encourage the others.” And that phrase, pour encourager les autres , 
people understand what that means. And I think it’s probably 
working. 
The FDIC had shown it was  willing to destroy a “piss ant, $200 million bank ” to signal its 
commitment to harming payday lenders; that the regulators were willing to  precipitate the second  
largest bank failure in American history would send  a message that is unmistakable  and powerful , 
a message that banks ignore only at their extr eme peril.  
FDIC , it has been widely reported, continued to send this anti-crypto message as it w ound 
down Signature.  According to two anonymous sources, the FDIC requir ed bidders for Signature 
to agree not to bid for the bank’s assets with ties to the cry pto industry.58  An FDIC spokesperson 
denied these allegations, claiming  that the agency would not require divestment of crypto activities 
as part of any sale, and referred concerned banks  to prior statements by  FDIC Chairman Martin 
Gruenberg that they are “neither prohibited nor discouraged” from providing services to any sector  
of the economy.59   
These denials were  all too familiar to the victims of Operation Choke Point, who were 
similarly assured by Chairman  Gruenberg in 2015 —indeed, in the very same words Chairman 
Gruenberg continues to use in 2023 —that supervised banks were “neither prohibited nor 
discouraged from providing services to any category of business customers or individual 
 
58 David French and Pete Schroeder, Exclusive -U.S. regulator eyes Friday bids for SVB, 
Signature Bank – sources , REUTERS  (Mar. 15, 2023), available at https://bit.ly/40rCiPR (“The two 
sources added that any buyer of Signature must agree to give up all the crypto business at the 
bank.”).  See also Cheyenne Ligon,  Signature Bank’s Prospective Buyers Must Agree to Give Up 
All C rypto Business: Reuters , COINDESK (Mar. 16, 2023) , available at  https://bit.ly/40tXxQZ  
(“Many in the crypto industry – including former acting Comptroller of the Currency, and one -
time Binance.US CEO, Brian Brooks – have speculated the closure of the three  banks is indicative 
of a coordinated effort by regulators to choke the crypto industry off from the banking system.”). 
59 Nikhilesh De, FDIC Denies Report Signature Bank Purchaser Must Divest Crypto , 
COINDESK (Mar. 16, 2023), available at  https://bit.ly/3lBz6T4.  See also Joint Statement on 
Liquidity Risks to Banking Organizations Resulting from Crypto -Asset Market Vulnerabilities 
(Feb. 23, 2023) , available at https://bit.ly/3FJ7QbS  (“Banking organizations are neither prohibited 
nor discouraged from providing banking services to customers of any specific class or type, as 
permitted by law or regulation.”) 
18 
 customers .”60  It thus came as no surprise when the FDIC announced on March 19, 2023, that the 
winning bidder for the assets of Signature Bank would not be acquiring  the firm’s digital  asset  
business, “SIGNET”: 
Depositors of Signature Bridge Bank, N.A., other than depositors 
related to the digital banking business, will automatically become 
depositors of the assuming institution. All deposits assumed by 
Flagstar Bank, N.A., will continue to be insured by the FDIC up to 
the insurance limit. Flagstar Bank ’s bid did not include 
approximately $4 billion of deposits related to the former Signature 
Bank's digital banking business. The FDIC will provide th ese 
deposits directly to customers whose accounts are associated with 
the digital banking business.61 
In spite of its strenuous denials, therefore, the FDIC had in fact not been seeking to sell SIGNET 
and Signature’s other digital assets. This decision resulted in a $2.5 billion hit to the FDIC’s deposit 
insurance fund ; the deal nevertheless closed just a week after the bank was closed, and, remarkably, 
was approved by regulators within one day.62  Clearly, “the FDIC seemed to be in a hurry to c lose 
this one on terms very favorable to NYCB, ” Flagstar ’s parent.63  As the editors of the Wall Street 
Journal opined, the action taken by the FDIC “confirms Mr. Frank’s suspicions —and ours —that 
Signature’s seizure was motivated by regulator’s hostility toward crypto.”64  
This crackdown on crypto is not only harming bank customers, but also is a violation  
of the FDIC’s statutory obligations to wind -down failing banks in the way that “is the least 
 
60 FDIC, Financial Institution Letter, FIL -52-2015, “FDIC Clarifying its Approach to 
Banks Offering Products and Services, such as Deposit Accounts and Extensions of Credit, to 
Non-Bank Payday Lenders” (Nov. 16, 2015) , available at FDIC: Inactive FIL -52-2015: FD IC 
Clarifying Its Approach to Banks  Offering Products and Services, Such as Deposit Accounts and 
Extensions of Credit, to Non-Bank Payday Lenders . 
61 Press Release, Subsidiary of New York Community Bancorp, Inc., to Assume Deposits 
of Signature Bridge Bank, N.A., From the FDIC, FDIC (Mar. 19, 2023), available at 
https://bit.ly/40hdfzu. 
62 Emily Mason, “Signature Bank’s Quick Sale Leaves Crypto Customers In The Lurch, 
FDIC $2.5 Billion Poorer ,” Forbes (Mar. 22, 2023) (“It would be nice for someone to explain to 
the public how they are spending that $2.5 billion in just one week,” Owen Lau, an analyst covering 
exchanges and asset managers for Oppenheimer, s ays. “It’s a stunning expense.”), available at 
Signature Bank’s Quick Sale Leaves Crypt o Custome rs In The Lurch, FDIC $2.5 Billion Poorer 
(forbes.com) . 
63 Id. 
64 Editorial, Barney Frank Was Right About Signature Bank: The FDIC all but confirms it 
closed the bank over crypto , WSJ  (Mar. 21, 2023) , available at https://on.wsj.com/401B2TL. 
19 
 costly to the Deposit Insurance Fund.”65 Instead the FDIC is wasting the assets of  the Deposit 
Insurance Fund  and aggravating the very risks and harms to the financial system that the bank 
regulators are charged with mitigating.66  In response to Operation Choke Point 2.0, crypto firms 
are predictably moving their accounts off -shore, to banks in Puerto Rico, Bermuda, and the 
Bahamas.67  Customers are also fleeing to offshore havens. The Chokepoint crackdown has driven  
at least $12 billion of US Dollar Stablecoin assets from regulated and US domiciled firms into an 
unregulated offshore issuer.68  
As the editors of the Journal observed, “[m]oving  dollar deposits of U.S. crypto companies 
and their customers offshore will make them less safe and potentially more vulnerable to money 
laundering.”69 
In other words, regulators are undermining their ostensible goals. 
Their crypto crackdown will cost other banks and their customers. 
The FDIC says it “estimates the cost of the failure of Signature Bank 
to its Deposit Insurance Fund to be approximately $2.5 billion.” If 
Flagstar had assumed crypto deposits, there would be no need for 
the insurance fund to gu arantee them.70 
“As usual, financial regulators shoot first, and make others pay later.”71   
 
65 12 U.S.C. § 1823(a)(4)(A) (“Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the 
Corporation may not exercise any authority under this subsection or subsection (d), (f), (h), (i), or 
(k) with respect to any insured depository institution unless … (ii) the total amount of the 
expenditures by the Corporation and obligations incurred by the Corporation (including any 
immediate and long -term obligation of the Corporation and any direct or contingent liability for  
future payment by the Corporation) in connection with the exercise of any such authority with 
respect to such institution is the least costly to the Deposit Insurance Fund of all possible methods 
for meeting the Corporation's obligation under this section.”).  See also  12 C.F.R. § 360.1. 
66 Emily Mason, “Signature Bank’s Quick Sale Leaves Crypto Customers In The Lurch, 
FDIC $2.5 Billion Poorer ,” Forbes (Mar. 22, 2023) (“‘It's not fair to sit there and pick winners 
and losers,’ Greg Ohlendorf, CEO of First Community Bank and Trust, says. ‘We're going to 
protect the deposits of the largest institutions and their customers but if my community bank were 
to fail, it doesn't seem like I'm going to get the same treatment. Yet I pay my fee and my check for 
my FDIC assessment clears every single time.'”), available at Signature Bank’s Quick Sale Leaves 
Crypto Customers In The Lurch, FDIC $2.5 Billion Poorer (forbes.com) . 
67 Editorial, Barney Frank Was Right About Signature Bank: The FDIC all but confirms it 
closed the bank over crypto , WSJ  (Mar. 21, 2023), available at https://on.wsj.com/401B2TL. 
68 Vicky Ge Huang and Caitlin Ostroff, “Tether Becomes Unlikely Crypto Winner in 
Banking Crisis: The stablecoin’s market cap has risen 10% this year,” WSJ (Mar. 14, 2023), 
available at Tether Becomes Unlikely Crypto Winner in Banking Crisis - WSJ . 
69 Id. 
70 Id. 
71 Id. 
20 
 4. The Federal Bank Regulators  Refuse to Charter Banks that Serve the Crypto  
Industry . 
Having decided that they will not permit banks that serve a broad base of customers to 
serve the crypto industry, the federal bank regulators are now taking steps to ensure that those 
banks that specialize in serving the crypto industry are unable to do business in the United States.  
This marks a reversal of the approach that at least one of the prudential bank regulators had been 
taking under the prior presidential administration .  
The past few years have seen the rise of regulated and unregulated financial institutions 
that provid e digital asset services. These institutions offer different  products and services , 
including the issuance of digital token s, facilitat ing tokenization of traditional assets by their 
customers , providing both custody services  and trading platforms for their  customers . Some of 
these institutions have avoided government oversight, others are regulated as state money 
transmitter service businesses and others have sought state trust charters. At least three have sought 
national trust charters  through the OCC . Stablecoins are the most common form of digital token 
issued or custodied by these trust institutions. Regulated payment Stablecoins  are convertible with 
a traditional currency, e.g., the U.S. Dollar or Euro, on a 1 -to-1 basis.  T he issuer  backs its 
stablecoin  by holding an equivalent amount of the hard currency or, in the case of U.S. Dollar 
stablecoins, in cash, short duration U.S. Treasuries  and allowable overnight repo collateral .  
Stablecoins are used for common virtual commercial transactions , whether as an onboarding or 
offboarding to cryptocurrency transactions or as electronic transactions of traditional payments .  
A fully backed and properly custodied stablecoin carries  no liquidity, duration, or credit risk. 
The firms  that focus on the block chain and digital assets are subject to federal and state 
legal and regulatory requirements. They are required to implement BSA/AML compliance 
programs and must satisfy the  same know-your- customer requirements as traditional banks. The 
issuing bank must be in a know -your- customer relationship with the party who is purchasing  a 
stablecoin issued by the bank and who is transferring money to that bank through the banking 
system ; the redeeming bank must be in a know -your- customer relatio nship with the party who is 
sending stablecoins back to the bank for redemption and to whom that bank is transferring money 
in exchange for those stablecoins.   
Just as physical currency handed over the counter and placed in a customer’s physical 
wallet  will subsequently be passed from person to person without the bank’s knowledge , however, 
a stablecoin can be passed to subsequent individuals who may not be  in a know -your- customer 
relationship with the bank. Only the redeemer, who brings the stablecoin back  to the bank for 
redemption, need s to be known to the bank.  Unlike physical currency issued by the U.S. M int, 
however, stablecoins issued on the blockchain  can be traced as they move in commerce. Because  
the blockchain s record  all transactions  publicly and  in real time , stablecoins are more readily 
traceable than money moving through legacy  commercial  and financial system s.  
Regulators and law enforcement personnel  can thus trace  the movement of  stablecoins  
from account to account  in real time , across state and national jurisdictional lines, without the need 
for subpoenas or the cooperation of foreign law enforcement agencies .  The Department of 
Justice’s 2022 arrest of individuals involved in the 2016 hack of Bitfinex, a virtual currency 
21 
 exchang e, and its recover y of $3.6 billion in stolen cryptocurrency , confirmed that 
“cryptocurrency is not a safe haven for criminals” and that DOJ “can follow money through 
the blockchain.”72  Indeed, in the case of stablecoins, the issuers have made clear that they have 
“the ability and the right to freeze and upgrade” their U.S. Dollar stablecoins “regardless of where 
the USD stablecoins are being held.” O ne stable coin permits law enforcement to freeze and wipe 
that stablecoin .73  The blockchain  therefore  makes cryptocurrencies  far less  amenable to fraud, 
money laundering, or tax evasion than currencies.    
On January 13, 2021, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency announced that it had 
granted a national trust bank charter to Anchorage Digital Bank subject to the condition that 
Anchorage enter into an operating agreement setting forth, among other things, capital and 
liquidity requirements and the OCC’s risk management expectations.74 The OCC explained that 
bringing Anchorage into the national banking system would permit the bank to benefit from the 
OCC’s expertise and experience while demonstrat ing that the National Bank Act is sufficiently 
flexible to accommodate innovation and new financial technologies.75  By the end of April, two 
other crypto banks had been granted provisional trust charters.76 
This marked  the high -water mark of  federal bank regulator’s engage ment  with the 
blockchain.   Over the last year and a half, the federal bank regulators have exhibited a growing 
unwillingness to permit banks to serve customers doing business in the crypto industry . The 
Federal Reserv e, for example,  has slow- walked applications by two special purpose depository 
institutions . It has not explained  why it has failed to process these applications, nor has it  respond ed 
to the charge that it is acting based  on bias and fear  rather than evidence and sound reasoning .  
This has led Senator Lummis to  question the Fed’s “lack of responsiveness” : 
Mr. Powell and Ms. Brainard have said they want  to promote 
responsible financial innovation, when Wyoming provided a perfect 
opportunity the Fed instead inexplicably chose to ignore its legal 
obligations. I want to know why but haven’t received an answer. 
 
72 Department of Justice, Office of Public Affairs, “Two Arrested for Alleged Conspiracy 
to Launder $4.5 Billion in Stolen Cryptocurrency: Government Seized $3.6 Billion in Stolen 
Cryptocurrency Directly Linked to 2016 Hack of Virtual Currency Exchange” (Feb. 8, 2022) , 
available at https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/two -arrested -alleged -conspiracy -launder -45-billion -
stolen -cryptocurrency . 
73 David Canellis, “PAX stablecoin has backdoor for freezing and seizing cryptocurrency: 
Devs built them for ‘LawEnforcement’”, The Next Web (Sept. 20, 2018), available at 
https://thenextweb.com/news/stablecoin -backdoor- law-enforcement.  
74 Press Release, OCC Conditionally Approves Conversion of Anchorage Digital Bank , 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (Jan. 13, 2021), available at https://bit.ly/40yUOGd . 
75 Id. 
76 OCC Conditionally Approves Conversion of Protego Trust Bank | OCC      
OCC Conditionally Approves Chartering of Paxos National Trust | OCC  
22 
 The Fed’s lack of responsiveness is becoming a trend. Recently, the 
central bank thumbed its nose at Sen. Pat Toomey’s request for its 
research into climate and equity. As the Senate considers Mr. 
Powell’s and Ms. Brainard’s nominations, they must address these 
concerns.77  
“The American people expect ” the ir federal bank regulators, Senator Lummis concluded, “ to 
follow the law without bias or delay.”78 
The Federal Reserve has delayed resolution of the requests from state -chartered 
banks to access the Federal Reserve system .  Wyoming-chartered Custodia Bank applied to the 
Federal Reserve for a master account  on October 29, 2020.  The Fed is required to “take final 
action on any application to the agency before the end of the 1 -year period beginning on the date 
on which a completed application is received by the agency.” 12 U.S.C. § 4807.  After nineteen 
months of inaction, Custodia Bank was at last forced to bring a lawsuit seeking  to compel the 
agency to act.  On January 27, 2023, the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank communicated that  
the application was denied.  Th is decision was reached in  patent violation of 12 U.S.C. § 248a, 
which requires that Custodia, as a state -chartered bank, be able to access all “Federal Reserve bank 
services.”  
  The Biden OCC has announced that it will subj ect the provisional approvals granted 
under former Acting Comptroller of the Currency Brooks’ leadership to heightened 
scrutiny.   “Charters that were in the pipeline as well as those that were conditionally approved” 
are “in the scope of the review,”  accor ding to Hsu.79  “As a member of the FDIC board and of the 
Financial Stability Oversight Council, Hsu said ‘I want to use all the seats I have’  ” to pursue “an 
overall strategy and overall view about where the regulatory perimeter should be set” for 
cryptocurrencies.80 
The strategy Hsu appears to be implementing is consistent with Operation Choke Point 
2.0’s war on crypto.  In April 2022, OCC fired a shot across the bow of Anchorage Digital Bank, 
issuing a consent order for Anchorage’s purported failure to meet Bank Secre cy Act/anti -money 
laundering requirements imposed under its operating agreement with the OCC.81 The other two 
national bank charters conditionally granted to crypto -banks by OCC in 2021 remain in regulatory 
limbo.  In the case of one, Protego Trust Bank, the OCC appears to have allowed the conditional 
 
77 Cynthia Lummis, The Fed Ba ttles Wyoming on Cryptocurrency , WSJ (Nov. 30, 2021), 
available at https://on.wsj.com/3JD6DnF. 
78 Id. 
79 “OCC’s Hsu: Recent Approvals of Crypto Charters ‘On the Table’ for Review,” 
ABA Banking Journal (June 2, 2021) , available at  www. bit.ly/3FQPCpg . 
80 Id. 
81 “OCC Issues Consent Order Against Anchorage Digital Bank,” News Release 2022 -
41 (April 21, 2022) , available at https://www.occ.gov/news -issuances /news -releases/2022/nr -
occ-2022 -41.html . 
23 
 charter to expire on February 4, 2023.  According to an OCC spokesperson, the “pre-conversion 
requirements included policies, procedures, systems and other measures to ensure the safe and 
sound operation of th e bank as well as meeting minimum capital and liquidity requirements.”82  
As a result, on March 1, 2023, Protego was forced to lay off most of its workforce, and wiped out 
the $70 million raised by Protego specifically to pursue a national trust charter.83   It goes without 
saying, moreover, that since the OCC issued Interpretive Letter 1179, announcing that the path to 
chartering a national trust bank that is engaged in cryptoasset -related activities is far narrower than 
previously announced, no new national trust bank charter for a crypto -native company has been 
approved by the OCC.84 
Caitlin Long of Custodia Bank reports  that there is  mounting evidence of coordination in 
the build -up to both the Fed’s denial of Custodia’s applications, as well as the non-approvals of 
the other institutions’ charter applications . 85  Several leaks made in the days leading up to these 
decisions appear to have been  made to pressure Custodia and the other banks to withdraw their 
applications, and thereby save  the agenc ies from having to issue final (judicially reviewable) 
decisions.86  
III. The Agencies’ Backroom War Against Crypto is  Unlawful  and Unconstitutional , As 
Well As Arbitrary, and Capricious. 
A. Operation Choke Point 2.0 is Unconstitutional . 
1. Operation Choke Point 2.0 Violates the Due Process Clause. 
Pressuring banks to drop or refuse to accept crypto customers, shuttering a bank that served 
crypto customers —Operation Choke Point 2.0 is following the same plan as the first version to 
destroy a legitimate industry by defaming participants in that industry. This violates, among other 
constitutional provisions, the fundamental protections of the Fifth  Amendment’s Due Process 
Clause.  
Standing alone, government defamation does not violate  due process. But  due process is 
implicated when the government (1) defames ( i.e., stigmatizes ) a person or entity, and (2) that 
 
82 Derek Anderson, “Protego’s conditional national bank status expired without approval: 
Report,” Cointelegraph  (Mar. 17, 2023) , available at https://cointelegraph.com/news/protego -s-
conditional-national- bank -status -expired -without-approval-report. 
83 Ian All ison and Nikhilesh De, “Crypto Bank Charter Firm Protego Lays off Most of its 
Workforce: Source,” CoinDesk (Mar. 1, 2023), available at Crypto Bank Charter Firm Pr otego 
Trust Lays Off Most of Its Workforce: Source (yahoo.com) . 
84 David L. Portilla and Danjie Fang, “Cryptoasset -related Activities of Banks: An 
Overview of Trust Charters and the Use of M&A,” American Bar Association: Business Law 
Today (Nov. 1, 2022), available at https://bit.ly/3 z73TKs . 
85 Bitcoin 200T (@Bitcoin200T), TWITTER  (Mar. 14, 2023, 7:29 PM), available at 
https://bit.ly/3z1jefv.  
86 Id. 
24 
 stigmatization causes or is connected to an adverse impact on one of that person or entity’s  liberty 
or property rights. This sort of due-process violation can occur in two general ways, one forward-
looking and the other backward-looking. 
Beginning with  the Supreme Court’s decision in  Wisconsin v. Constantineau , 400 U.S. 433 
(1971), courts have held that due process must be afforded be fore the government can stigmatize 
a person in a way that alters his background legal rights or status. This “stigma -plus” theory is a 
forward -looking  inquiry, asking whether stigmatizing actions or statements alter or extinguish a 
right, previously held, to engage in some activity  in the future . Where the right in question is the 
right “to follow a chosen trade or profession,” Cafeteria & Rest. Workers Union, Local 473 v. 
McElroy , 367 U.S. 886, 895 –96 (1961), courts have more specifically asked whether  the plaintiff  
has been  “broadly precluded” from engaging in a chosen line of business. See Trifax Corp. v. 
District of Columbia , 314 F.3d 641, 645 (D.C. Cir. 2003).  
A separate line of cases holds that due process must be provided where the government 
stigmatizes a plaintiff in the course of extinguishing the plaintiff’s  protected rights or benefits. 
This “reputation -plus” inquiry, arising from the Supreme Court’s decis ion in Board of Regents of 
State Colleges v. Roth , 408 U.S. 564 (1972), is generally backward-looking , asking whether the 
government denied the plaintiff a legal  entitlement and damaged his reputation at the same time . 
Where the government is guilty of a s tigma -plus or reputation -plus violation, the court will 
order it to provide adequate process, that is, a process by which the plaintiff may rebut the 
stigmatizing charges that caused his loss of liberty or property. The plaintiffs that challenged 
Operation  Choke Point 1.0 brought stigma - and reputation -plus claims. And though the claims 
were not ultimately resolved —the case was voluntarily dismissed after the Federal Government 
finally ended the Operation —the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia  found a legally 
valid claim was stated . The background right at issue there was  the right to access the banking 
system in common with the rest of the citizenry. The stigma came from  the Government’s repeated 
statements tarring payday lenders as “high -risk” banking customers and from  its pressuring banks 
to drop these customers . Many banks conclude d that th is disfavored relationship was not worth 
the expense  that this government hostility imposed , and they proceeded to drop or turn away  
payday-lending clien ts as demanded .  
Operation Choke Point 2.0, like the previous version, raises due process concerns under 
both the stigma-plus and reputation-plus theories.  
Stigma -plus. In Wisconsin v.  Constantineau , 400 U.S. 433 (1971), the Supreme Court 
addressed a Wisconsin statute  that allow ed government officials to prohibit businesses from selling 
alcohol to certain persons through “postings” that labelled them as excessive drinkers. The chief 
of police  had posted such notice about the plaintiff in retail liquor establishments in a particular 
town —effectively forcing her to drive to the next town to purchase alcohol. The Court held that 
the Wisconsin statute violated the Due Process Clause  by allow ing the govern ment to label 
individuals as excessive drinkers and alter their background legal right s without providing them 
any procedural protections. “Where a person’s good name, reputation, honor, or integrity is at 
stake because of what the government is doing to him,” the Court explained, “notice and an 
opportunity to be heard are essential.” Id. at 437. 
25 
 The Court reaffirmed Constantineau ’s central holding in Paul v. Davis , 424 U.S. 693 
(1976). The “[p]osting” in Constantineau , the Court reasoned, had “deprived the individual of a 
right previously held under state law . . . to purchase or obtain liquor in common with the rest of 
the citizenry.” Id. at 708. In that way, “a right or status previously recognized by state law was 
distinctly altered or extinguished ,” and this “alteration of legal status . . . combined with the injury 
resulting from the defamation . . . justified the invocation of procedural safeguards.” Id. at 708 –
09, 712. 
The backroom war against the crypto industry violates the Due Process Clause under 
the very same reasoning. Whereas  Constantineau concerned a relatively minor burden on the 
right to purchase alcohol, here, as in Operation Choke Point 1.0,  the background right at issue is 
the right to access the banki ng system in common with all other citizens and businesses . Indeed, 
the growing evidence of regulators’ backroom efforts to force a general debanking of crypto 
clients, coupled with federal regulators’ refusal to charter banks that serve the crypto industr y, 
suggest an attempt to “broadly preclud[e] ” crypto companies from existing at all, a separate and 
equally sufficient liberty deprivation. See Trifax Corp. , 314 F.3d at 645. 
As in any defamation case, the plaintiff in a stigma -plus (or reputation- plus) case must 
show that the government “ utter[ed] . . .  a statement sufficiently derogatory to injure his or her 
reputation, that is capable of being proved false, and that he or she claims is false .” Vega v. Lantz , 
596 F.3d 77, 81 (2d Cir. 20 10). Based even on the evidence that has come to light so far, that 
requirement is likely to be readily met . As in Operation Choke Point 1.0, regulators began with 
public statements raising “safety and soundness concerns with business models  that are 
conce ntrated in crypto -asset -related activities or have concentrated exposures to the crypto -asset 
sector.”  And as in Operation Choice Point 1.0, regulators appear to be using these purported 
“concerns” to coerce banks to drop crypto clients. Certainly, the crypto companies that find 
themselves on the sharp end of these tactics will claim that these statements —conveying that 
crypto currencies and crypto companies in particular raise concerns that in fact are shared by other 
currencies, financial instruments, and  financial sectors —are false, and are capable of being proven 
false.  In other words, regulators have effectively labeled crypto clients as high -risk just as they 
labeled banks’ payday -lending clients as high -risk in the first Operation  Choke Point . This label  is 
akin to the “excessive drinker” label in Constantineau .  
The label also has the effect of depriv ing those in the crypto industry of their legal rights. 
“Many people” would consider the right to “hold bank accounts” to be “more important than the 
right to purchase liquor” at issue in Constantineau , and it therefore deserves at least as much 
procedural protection. See National Council of Resistance of Iran v. Department of State , 251 F.3d 
192, 204 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (“ NCRI ”). As seen, this label has deprived crypto -industry participants 
of the right to hold a bank account. And they received no  procedural protection before  being tarred 
in this way. They  were given no notice that regulators were planning to adopt a de facto policy of 
stigmatizing the m as high -risk and pressuring banks to terminate their business.  Nor were they 
given any opportunity to contest the label. Shortly after the policy statements identifying purported 
risks in their industry, they simply, and suddenly, found themselves deban ked.  Due process 
demands more and better of the government than this. 
26 
 To be sure, labeling  the plaintiff as an “excessive drinker” in Constantineau  prohibited her 
from purchasing alcohol in her hometown, whereas  bank s are not officially forbidden from 
allowing crypto clients to hold accounts. But due process is required before a pre -existing right is 
“distinctly altered or extinguished .” Paul , 424 U.S. at 711 (emphasis added). In Constantineau  
itself , the burden on the plaintiff’s right to purchase alcohol was relatively minor: because the state 
law at issue prohibited her only from purchasing alcohol in one particular town, the effect of the 
law was merely to make her drive to the next town to buy liq uor. The Supreme Court  has thus 
described the right at issue in Constantineau  as the right “to purchase or obtain liquor in common 
with the rest of the citizenry ,” not the right to purchase or obtain liquor at all . Id. at 708 (emphasis 
added).  
Regulators have stigmatized crypto companies by labeling them as risky banking clients, 
both in public statements and, the evidence suggests, in statements directly to banks. As a result, 
crypto companies are losing the right to maintain banking relationships and, be cause many will 
surely fail without such relationships, they face broad preclusion from operating in the industry of 
their choice. The government cannot stigmatize businesses and alter their background rights in this 
way without due process, which the government has not even arguably provided here. 
Reputation -plus. The y ear after deciding Constantineau , the Supreme Court decided 
Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth , 408 U.S. 564 (1972) . The plaintiff t here (Roth ), who 
had been a non -tenured professor at a  state university in Wisconsin, was informed that he would 
not be rehired when his teaching contract expired. Roth argued that the decision violated his due 
process rights. Although  the Supreme Court rejected this claim , it emphasized that it  did so only 
because  the “State, in declining to rehire the respondent, did not make any charge against him that 
might seriously damage his standing and associations in his community . . . . Had it done so, . . . 
due process would accord an opportunity to refute the charge before University officials.” Id. at 
573. As the Court later reiterated in Paul : “Roth recognized that governmental action defaming an 
individual in the course of declining to rehire him could entitle the person to notice and an 
opportuni ty to be heard as to the defamation.”  424 U.S. at 709.  Following Roth  and Paul , the D.C. 
Circuit, like other courts, has repeatedly  recognized that “defamation in the course of the 
termination of employment is” actionable under the Due Process Clause. O’Do nnell v. Barry , 148 
F.3d 1126, 1140 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (quotation marks omitted) ; see also, e.g. , Lyons v. Barrett , 851 
F.2d 406, 407 (D.C. Cir. 1988). 
Victims of Operation Choke Point 2.0 can also establish the elements of a reputation -
plus cla im. Loss of the right to a banking relationship is akin to the loss of government 
employment. See NCRI , 251 F.3d at 204 (due process implicated where the government impaired 
the “right to . . . hold bank accounts”); Old Dominion Dairy Prods., Inc. v. Secretar y of Defense , 
631 F.2d 953, 964 (D.C. Cir. 1980) (extending reasoning of Roth to reach denial of government 
contracts, explaining that to “rule otherwise would drain Roth of meaning”).  And these 
terminations  have occurred against the backdrop of the govern ment’s false claims  that serving 
crypto clients—and crypto clients uniquely— threaten s the safety and soundness of banks. 
As described above, these debanking  efforts appear to be an attempt to broadly preclude 
crypto companies from doing business as crypto companies. L ike the stigma -plus theory,  however, 
27 
 the reputation -plus theory would not require a crypto company  to show that it have been cut off 
from the banking system entirely. Rather, the company would only  need to show defamation  “in 
the course of the termination” of its bank  accounts. See O’Donnell , 148 F.3d at 1140; see also 
Owen v. City of Independence, Mo. , 445 U.S. 622, 633 n.13 (1980). To be sure, it would also  need 
to show a relationship between these terminations and regulators’ actions —that is what makes the 
loss of bank accounts equivalent to the loss of government employment in other reputation -plus 
cases. But the e xisting evidence already strongly suggests if not proves that regulators  caused the se 
terminations  by making false statements about the riskiness of crypto clients and then using such 
statements to pressure banks to drop them.  
2. Operation Choke Point 2.0 May Violate Structural Constitutional 
Protections.  
The r egulators’ attempt to strangle the entire  crypto industry also may run afoul of the non -
delegation doctrine.  “The nondelegation doctrine bars Congress from transferring its legislative 
power to another branch of Government. ” Gundy v. United States , 139 S. Ct. 2116, 2121 (2019) . 
If, as appears to be the case, regulators have adopted and are now enforcing a de facto policy that 
the crypto industry is too risky to be banked (and therefore to exist),  then regulators have exercised 
legislative power. ). Indeed, they have acted as the judge, jury, and executioner of American 
businesses, the greatest threat to liberty that the Founders could conceive. See Gundy , 139 S. Ct. 
at 2133 –35 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting). Here, for the reasons below, regulators could not show that 
Congress did delegate them the authority to adopt this anti -crypto policy. But even if the applicable 
statutes could be construed in that way, regulators’ exercise of that purported authority would 
violate the nondelegation doctrine. 
To be sure, though attention to the nondelegation doctrine has been revived, the doctrine 
has been enforced against few federal actions to date. But the remedy for federal actions that 
violate this doctrine would  be to enjoin those legally baseless actions. And based on the facts 
already known, regulators have at least subjected themselves to potential litigation under th is 
doctrine, too.      
B. The Federal Bank Regulators Are Failing To  Perform Their Statutory Duties.  
1. The Bank Regulators are Exceeding  their Statutory Authority.  
The federal prudential bank regulators are charged with ensuring that law -abiding 
Americans have access to banks that are “safe and sound.”87  They do so not by managing the risks 
for the banks, but by ensuring that the banks themselves have adequate standards, practices, and 
procedures in place for managing risk.  Section 1831p-1(a) authorizes the prudential regulators to 
promulgate standards relating to the risk -management systems and controls that the banks use to 
protect their own safety and soundness.   
 
87 See 12 U.S.C. § 1831p- 1. 
28 
 To be sure, the federal bank regulators are more closely engaged with the banks they 
supervise than are the regulators of other industries.88 And th is supervision of the banks can 
involve stringent evaluation of the bank’s business decisions.  But this supervisory authority is not 
plenary . The regulators  are not authorized to make business decisions for the banks , much less  to 
demand that the banks close  the accounts of law-abiding customers.  By seeking to coerce banks 
to stop doing business with specific lawful industries, the Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and the OCC  
have thus gone beyond their statutory authority to ensure that banks manage risk.  They are making 
the day -to-day business decisions for the banks.  The prudential bank regulators have no  authority 
to do this.  
This abuse is all the more striking given that the regulators, here, are effectively  leveraging 
their statutory  authority over the banks to set economic and technology policy for the United States 
economy as a whole.  The blockchain is bringing changes to the global financial system that could 
rival those ushered in by the rise of the Internet and electronic commerce.  The regulators of the 
nation’s banks have no warra nt to unilaterally wall off the American economy from these emerging 
changes.  
2. The Federal Banking Regulators are Not Perform ing their Statutory 
Duties.  
At the same time as they are  usurping the role that belongs to the banks, the  federal banking  
regulators are failing to  perform the duties that are  statutorily assigned to them . The Federal 
Reserve  has failed , for example,  to adjudicate the applications submitted by State -chartered banks  
and Special Purpose Depository Institutions to join the federal reserve system in a timely fashion . 
This is  a clear violation of 12 U.S.C. § 4807 and the Administrative Procedure Act.  Section 4807, 
as discussed above, requires the Fed to review applications “before the end of the 1 -year period 
beginning on the date on which a completed application is received by the agency.” 12 U.S.C. § 
4807.  Custodia Bank’s application for a master account was denied only after 27 months had 
elapsed , and even then  the Board issued its decision  only after Custodia had brought suit in federal 
district court to compel it to act.    
The Federal Reserves’  outright denial of Custodia’s application for a master account is 
likewise directly contrary to law .  The Federal Reserve has no discretion to deny a state -
chartered depository institution’s application for a master account.  Section 248a(c)(2) of Title 
12 provides that “[a]ll Federal Reserve bank services covered by the fee schedule shall be available 
 
88 The Supreme Court memorably described this supervisory authority in United States v. 
Phila. National Bank , 374 U.S. 321, 329 (1963) (“ But perhaps the most effective weapon of federal 
regulation of banking is the broad visitorial power of federal bank examiners. Whenever the 
agencies deem it necessary, they may order ‘a thorough examination of all the affairs of the bank,’ 
whether it be a member of the Federal Reserve System or a nonmember insured bank.   Such 
examinations are frequent and intensive. In addition, the banks are required to furnish detailed 
periodic reports of their operations to the supervisory agencies.   In this way the agencies maintain 
virtually a day -to-day surveillance of the American banking system. And should they discover 
unsound banking practices, they are equipped with a formidable array of sanctions.”) (cleaned up).  
29 
 to nonmember depository institutions …”89 12 U.S.C. § 248a(c)(2).  Custodia is a state -chartered 
bank whose charter expressly permits U.S. dollar deposit -taking, and is thus a “nonmember 
depository institution[]” under the statute.  Because Custodia must have a master account to access 
the “Federal Reserve bank services” enumerated under Section 248a, the refusal to grant it such 
an account is contrary to the command of Section 248a(c)(2). 
The most troubling failure  that has come to light so far, however, is the decision by state 
and federal regulators to force banks into receivership when they do not bend to the regulator s’ 
wishes .  Ensuring the s afety and soundness of the banks is the raison d’etre  of federal bank 
regulation.  An insolvent  bank is placed into receivership in order to ensure that the contagion does 
not spr ead and the soundness of the financial system  is protected .  That a solvent financial 
institution may have been placed into receivership  solely  “pour encourager les autres” means that 
the federal regulators now  appear  willing to sacrifice the very safety and soundness they are 
charged with protect ing in order to give th eir private biases the force of law.    
C. The Prudential Bank Regulators are Violating the Administrative Procedure 
Act. 
The prudential bank regulators ’ campaign against the crypto industry is  not only 
substantively unlawful, it is procedurally defective as well.  In conducting their campaign of 
informal regulation, surreptitious defamation, and backroom coercion, the bank regulators have 
violated the Admini strative Procedure Act by acting beyond their statutory authority, without using 
the notice and comment rulemaking procedures required by law, and in an arbitrary and capricious 
manner.  
1. The Prudential Bank Regulators Have Acted Beyond Their Statutory 
Authority.  
By leveraging their authority over the banks to pick and choose the customers a bank may 
serve , the bank regulators  have exceeded their statutory authority.90  As noted above, the federal 
bank regulators are charged with ensuring that law-abiding Americans have access to banks that 
are “safe and sound.”91  They are not charged with regulating new technologies  or policing the 
nation’s economy ; nor are  they permitted to  confer the  force of law on their personal biases and 
prejudices. Putting aside the fundamental unfairness and the patent unconstitutionality of what 
these agencies are doing , there is simply no law that authorizes them  to regulate the activities they 
are seeking to prohibit. 
 
89 The services covered by the schedule of fees are: “(1) currency and coin services; (2) 
check clearing and collection services; (3) wire transfer services; (4) autom ated clearinghouse 
services; (5) settlement services; (6) securities safekeeping services; (7) Federal Reserve float; and 
(8) any new services which the Federal Reserve System offers, including but not limited to 
payment services to effectuate the electron ic transfer of funds.” 12 U.S.C. § 248a(b). 
90 The APA requires a reviewing court to set aside agency action “in excess of statutory 
jurisdiction, authority, or limitations, or short of statutory right.” See 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(C). 
91 See 12 U.S.C. § 1831p- 1. 
30 
 2. The federal bank regulators have evaded the notice and comment 
rulemaking requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act.  
 The federal agencies responsible for Operation Choke Point 2.0 have also violated the 
federal law that governs how agencies are to implement the laws enacted by Congress . The 
guidance documents and other actions decreeing who may and who may not access the financial 
system have all been issued without resort to any kind of formal rulemaking  procedure. But t he 
Administrative Procedure Act  requires federal agencies to provide the public with notice whenever  
they plan to impose a binding norm and to permit the public to comment on that proposed norm 
before it is given the force of law.92 
The requirements of “notice and comment ” rulemaking ensure that the people know what 
their government is doing, while at the same time allowing the agencies themselves to benefit from 
the input of those who are going to be regulated, and who might be harmed, by a proposed rule.  
An administrativ e decision “can only be a well reasoned and informed decision if it is reached 
through the safeguard procedures established by law to ensure that result, namely, the notice and 
comment requirements of the APA.”93 And only “if the Agency, in carrying out it s ‘essentially 
legislative task,’ has infused the administrative process with the degree of openness, explanation, 
and participatory democracy required by the APA, [will it] thereby have ‘negate(d) the dangers of 
arbitrariness and irrationality in the form ulation of rules.’”94 Compliance with both the letter and 
the spirit of the APA’s “notice and comment” rulemaking procedures is thus essential if democratic  
and informed government is to endure in the age of the regulatory state. 
The bank regulators behind  Operation Choke Point 2.0 are by no means the first federal 
agencies  that have worked to evade the accountability inherent in the requirements of notice and 
comment rule -making.  The mass proliferation of informal guidance  has resulted in  “[l]aw [being] 
made, without notice and comment, without public participation, and without publication in the 
Federal Register or the Code of Federal Regulations.”95 An agency operating  through informal 
 
92 5 U.S.C. § 553(b). The APA defines a “rule” as “the whole or a part of an agency 
statement of general or particular applicability and future effect designed to implement, interpret, 
or prescribe law or policy or describing the organization, procedure, or  practice requirements of 
an agency ....” Id. § 551(4). 
93 Housing Study Group v. Kemp , 736 F.Supp. 321, 335 (D.D.C. 1990).  See also Chocolate 
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. Block , 755 F.2d 1098, 1103 (4th Cir. 1985) (“The notice -and-
comment procedure encourages public participation in the administrative process and educates the 
agency, thereby helping to ensure informed agency decisionmaking.”); State of New Jersey, 
Department of Environmental Protection v. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency , 626 F.2d 
1038, 1045 (D.C. Cir. 1980) (“It is now a commonplace that notice -and-comment rule -making is 
a primary method of assuring that an agency's decisions will be informed and responsive. ”).  
94 Weyerhaeuser Co. v. Costle , 590 F.2d 1011, 1027 -28 (D.C.Cir.1978) ( quoting 
Automotive Parts & Accessories Association v. Boyd , 407 F.2d 330, 338 (D.C.Cir.1968).  
95 Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA , 208 F.3d 1015, 1020 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
31 
 guidance more easily aggrandizes its power, moreover , by “ immunizing its lawmaking from 
judicial review. ”96 
 Operation Choke Point 2.0’s refusal  to follow notice and comment rulemaking has 
produced the very result that the authors of the APA were seeking to avoid: arbitrary , capricious , 
and above all undemocratic agency action.  The SEC’s informal guidance requiring custodians to 
keep crypto assets on their books results in the drawing of unreasoned and unreasonable 
distinctions between assets held in custodianship and introduces substantial regulatory  uncertainty 
into the Basel III regime.97  By abandoning a final rule duly adopted after notice and comment 
rulemaking, and pursuing a course announced in informal guidance, the OCC has subjected 
provisionally chartered crypto banks to shifting standards and substantial unfairness.98  The 
Federal Reserve’s decision to create a rebuttable presumption that crypto poses heightened risks 
by issuing informal guidance on February 7, 2023, has resulted in the distinctions between national 
and local banks, and thei r respective abilities to meet the needs of customers engaged in the 
cryptocurrency business, being ignored by federal regulators.99  The vague and platitudinous 
statements contained in the other guidance documents issued by the banking regulators  do nothi ng 
but provide an opportunity for open -ended interpretations, arbitrary application, and regulatory 
abuse.100 The result is that the feder al regulators have established a  scheme of de facto  regulation 
of the blockchain that is ill-informed, ill -conceived, and capriciously executed.  It has resulted in 
the banks not knowing what they must do to comply with the law, in regulators conferring the 
force of law upon their personal biases and capricious whims, and in the American people being 
left in the dark about what its government is saying about them in the backrooms of America’s 
banks.  
The blockchain cannot be un-invented.  The role that this technology  and the 
cryptocurrencies that it has made  possible will ultimately come to  play in our economy and in our 
democracy  remain to be discovered .  If the agencies behind  Operation Choke Point 2.0 have their 
way, however, that role will be determined by uninformed regulators, acting in the shadows, 
subject to none of the checks and balances the authors of the Administrative Procedure Act, and 
the framers of the Constitution, deemed essential to sound and democratic government.   
 
96 Id. 
97 Securities and Exchange Commission, Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 121 (Apr. 11, 
2022), available at SEC.gov | Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 121 . 
98 OCC News Release 2021 -14, “OCC Puts Hold On Fair Access Rule (January 28, 2021) , 
available at https://www.occ.gov/news- issuances/news -releases/2021/nr-occ-2021-14.html .  
99 Policy Statement on Section 9(13) of the Federal Reserve Act , entered into the Federal 
Register on 7 February 2023. 
100 Joint Statement on Crypto -Asset Risks to Banking Organizations (Jan. 3, 2023), 
available at https://bit.ly /3TSfhDP . 
32 
 3. The Agencies have acted arbitrar ily and capricious ly by denying access 
to the banking system to new technologies they do not understand .  
Whatever the motivation of the banking regulators in waging war against the 
cryptocurrency industry  may be, one thing is clear: their actions are not the product of the reasoned 
decisionmaking that the APA requires . Instead, their actions  constitute the very type  of arbitrary 
and capricious agency action that the APA prohibits.101   
Although the arbitrary and capricious standard is “narrow,” “as courts defer to the agency’s 
exerptise,”102 it “is not toothless.”103 For administrative  action to pass muster under the APA, an 
agency must “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory  explan ation for its action 
including a rational connection between the facts found and the choice  made.”104 This requirement  
includes a duty to account for relevant distinctions ,105 to treat like  cases  alike ,106 and to explain 
why Americans are being treated differently one from another.107  “Moreover, an agency cannot 
fail to consider an important aspect of the problem or offer an explanation for its decision that runs 
counter to the evidence before it.”108  
 
101 See 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A) (providing that a reviewing court must set aside agency action 
that is “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law”). 
102 Center for Food Safety v. Salazar , 898 F. Supp. 2d 130, 138 (D.D.C. 2012) ( quoting 
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n of U.S., Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. , 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)). 
103 Shawnee Tribe v. Yellen , 483 F.Supp. 3d 36, 46 (D.D.C. 2022). 
104 Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. , 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) 
(quotation marks omitted). 
105 See American Trucking Ass’ns Inc. v. Federal Motor Carrier Safety Admin. , 724 F.3d 
243, 253 (D.C. Cir. 2013) (finding that an unexplained decision to apply same safety re gulations 
to short- and long-haul drivers is arbitrary and capricious) ; American Wildlands v. Norton , 193 F. 
Supp. 2d 244, 256 (D.D.C.2002) (finding that failure to distinguish between threatening and 
benign conduct is arbitrary and capricious). 
106 Westar Energy, Inc. v. FERC , 473 F.3d 1239, 1241 (D.C. Cir. 2007) (“A fundamental 
norm of administrative procedure requires an agency to treat like cases alike. If the agency makes 
an exception in one case, then it must either make an exception in a similar case or point to a 
relevant distinction between the two cases.”). See also Consolidated Edison Company of New York 
v. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission , 45 F.4th 265, 279 (D.C.Cir. 2022) (same); Kirk v. 
Commissioner of Social Security Administration , 987 F.3d 314, 321 (4th Cir. 2021) (same).  
Indeed, a federal agency “can be said to be at its most arbitrary” when it “treat[s] similar situations 
dissimilarly.” Steger v. Def. Investigative Serv. Dep't of Def. , 717 F.2d 1402, 1406 (D.C. Cir. 
1983).  
107 See City of Mesa v. FERC , 993 F.2d 888, 896 -98 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (distinguishing 
regulated entities based on unexplained factors also arbitrary and capricious). 
108 Dist. Hosp. Partners, L.P. v. Burwell , 786 F.3d 46, 57 (D.C. Cir. 2015) (cleaned up). 
33 
 Indee d, one of the leading cases addressing the contours of arbitrary and capricious review, 
Camps v. Pitts , involved a failure by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to articulate its 
reasons for denying an application for a national bank charter.109  Although the Comptroller is not 
required to hold a hearing or to make formal findings on the hearing record when passing on 
applications for new banking  authorities, he was required to offer a reasoned explanation for his 
decision to deny the application for a national bank charter.110  Here it appears that the OCC 
committed precisely the same mistake again. Rather than respond to the filings submitted by 
Protego, it would appear that the OCC simply allowed Protego’s  conditional charter to expire 
without rejecting that filing or formally explaining why it deemed that filing inadequate.111  It 
would appear , therefore,  that the Comptroller has learned nothing in the 50 years that have 
intervened since the Court handed down its decision in Pitts.  
Failure to engage in reasoned decisionmaking is the  hallmark of Operation Choke Point  
2.0.    The regulators have articulated  simply  no reason why the presence of a cryptocurrency 
business would raise serious liquidity concerns  with examiners and regulators, while a customer 
base consisting almost exclusively  of venture capitalists and startups,  the cause of the collapse of 
Silicon Val ley Bank, or one dominated by commercial real estate developers, the cause of the fall 
of Signature Bank, would raise no ne. Why would banking crypto business raise concerns about 
“inaccurate or misleading representations and disclosures ,” but banking marijuana businesses —a 
line of commerce prohibited by federal law —draw a wink and a nod ?  Why would  the 
government force  a solvent bank into receivership, while engineering a rescue package  for a 
different bank  that was  hopelessly illiquid ? There are no apparent  reasons for the distinctions 
being drawn or for the actions being taken  by the agents of Operation Choke Point 2.0 .  That is the 
halmark  of arbitrary and capricious agency action.  
IV. Congress Should  Perform its Duty and R ein in the se Regulatory abuses.   
It has been 2000 years since the Roman poet Juvenal first posed th e question: Who will 
watch the watchmen?  Today, Operation Choke Point 2.0 poses the question anew : who will 
supervise the supervisors of our nation’s banks ?  In our cons titution al system of checks and 
balances , the answer  to that question  is clear:  Congress. And in light of the mounting evidence of 
persistent misconduct by our nation’s financial regulators, the time to perform that role is now.  
There are  at least five  specific steps that Congress can and should take.  
 First , Congress should require the bank regulators to produce their communications with 
supervised financial institutions and with state regulatory agencies regarding the provision of 
banking services to customers in the crypto industry.  Due process, fundamental  fairness, and 
common sense demand that those businesses that federal regulators are labeling as risky or 
unsound be given an opportunity to respond to these charges and defend themselves.  It is  
particularly important that Congress exercise this supervisory responsibility and obtain these 
 
109 411 U.S. 138 (1973). 
110 411 U.S. at 141-43. 
111 Weekly Bulletin for Period 03/05/2023 -03/11/2023, OCC (last visited Mar. 23, 2023), 
available at https://bit.ly/3G8FQyX.  
34 
 documents because in private litigation, the government is likely to try to hide behind various 
privileges to avoid disclosing damning evidence. 
 Second , Congress should require the federal bank regulatory agencies to exp lain the basis 
for their conclusion that the safety and soundness of the financial  system require the insulation of 
the banks from blockchain technology, from customers who operate in the crypto space , and from 
state-chartered depository institutions that are currently serving those customers.  The federal bank 
regulators have elected to single out a specific industry for exclusion from the banking system.  If 
those regulators have concluded that a specific industry can never be banked in a safe and sound 
fashion, then the basis and the reasoning behind that decision need to be subjected to review and 
to scrutiny.   The Agencies should be required to explain whether their obsessive focus on 
campaigning against crypto diverted their resources away from the broad and systemic risks that 
were growing in the financial system and that have contributed to the current loss  of confidence in 
the banking system.  
 Third , Congress should make clear to the federal bank regulators  that the notice and 
comment rulemaking requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act are not optional.  These 
protections were put in place  to promote informed, reasoned, and democratic decisionmaking by 
all federal agencies , including the prudential bank regulators.  Final agency actions are likewise 
subject to judicial review to ensure that the agencies have done their jobs and to preserve our 
syste m of checks and balances in the administrative state.  The requirements imposed by the APA 
are not obstacles to evaded by improper reliance on  informal guidance documents.  The Federal 
bank r egulators should be made to explain their decision to forego seeking input from experts and 
industry participants through notice and comment rulemaking and to rely instead  exclusively on 
informal guidance when regulating this new technology. 
 Fourth , Congress should require FDIC to reveal whether any banks responded to its April 
7, 2022, Guidance requesting that they inform the Corporation if they are considering engaging in 
crypto- related activities , that they  provide all necessary information that the FDIC  would need to 
engage with the institution regarding related risks, and that any FDIC -supervised institution 
already engaged in crypto -related activities promptly notify the FDIC.  Congress should require 
FDIC to explain how it responded to these requests, and whether any of these banks were 
discouraged from engaging in crypto- related activities.  
Fifth , Congress should investigate the role of federal regulators in the decision by the New 
York Department of Financial Supervision to shutter Signature Bank.  It should require production 
of communications between federal regulators and officials and New York State regulators and 
officials, including N ew York  Department of Financial Services Superintendent Adrienne A. 
Harris, related not only to the closure of Signature Bank, but to the coordination of efforts to limit 
bank participation in crypto -related activities.  The American  people need to know what role, if 
any, federal regulators played in the decision by New York’s  regulators to place Signature into 
receivership .  They deserve to know whether this bank was allowed to fail because of its financial 
condition, or forced to fail, in spite of its soundness, because of its customers.  Furthermore, the 
FDIC needs to come c lean on whether it encouraged or required banks that sought to bid on the 
assets of Signature Bank to exclude the digital assets of Signature from their bids.  And if the FDIC 
35 
 in fact received bids that would have covered those assets, then it needs to exp lain why it selected 
a bid that left the FDIC on the hook for those digital deposits and cost  Signature’s digital asset 
team their jobs .  
Sixth , Congress shoul d require the bank regulatory agencies to explain why First Republic 
Bank and PacWest, which had no exposure to crypto -activities but were in a worse financial 
position than Signature, were given an opportunity to save themselves, while Signature was given  
neither time nor opportunity to seek needed liquidity.  
Finally , Congress should investigate whether bank regulators are acting to curtail  private 
sector innovation to clear the field of competition for a federal cryptocurrency alternative.  Clearly, 
a dec ision to restrict the use of blockchain technology by private companies  so that the  technology 
may be reserved  for the agents of the federal bureaucracy is the sort of major policy decision that 
the elected representatives of the people assembled in Congress must make.   
The price of congressional inaction would be high.  If federal bank regulators are permitted 
to transform their supervisory authority over the  Nation’s banks into a supervisory authority over  
the Nation’s  economic and commercial life, it will be a short step to regulatory tyranny, a regime 
where  Americans are ruled not by laws  but by men  operating free  from  the bonds of law and from  
the need to answer at the ballot box. 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK   SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION,     Plaintiff,  v.        20 Civ. 10832 (AT) (SN)          RIPPLE LABS INC., BRADLEY GARLINGHOUSE, and CHRISTIAN A. LARSEN,      Defendants.     BRIEF OF AMICUS CURIAE, XRP HOLDERS, IN OPPOSITION OF PLAINTIFF’S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT               Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 1 of 39
 i TABLE OF CONTENTS                Page  TABLE OF AUTHORITIES…………………………………………………………………….iii PRELIMINARY STATEMENT………………………………………………………………….1 I.  RELEVANT FACTS PRIOR TO THE SEC ALLEGING XRP IS A SECURITY…………...3 A. Decentralized Cryptocurrencies - Like Bitcoin And XRP - Do Not Satisfy Howey………3 B. SEC Confirms Sufficiently Decentralized Digital Assets Are Not Securities……….…….6 C. SEC’s Other External Conduct Also Strongly Suggests XRP Is Not A Security………….6 II.  UNPRECEDENTED ALLEGATIONS CAUSE UNPRECEDENTED LITIGTION………...8 A. Amici’s Writ of Mandamus……………………………………………………………….8 B. Amici’s Motion To Intervene……………………………………………………….…….9 C.  The SEC Responds that All XRP, Including Amici’s XRP, Are Securities………………9 III. AMICI CURIAE’S INTEREST………………………………………………………….….10 A. Amici’s Interest……………………………………………………………………….….10  B. Section 4 Exemptions Do Not Protect Amici’s Interests………………………………...10 C. Exemptions Are Amici’s Burden………………………………………………………...11 IV. LEGAL STANDARDS AND LAW TO BE APPLIED………………………….………….11 A. Summary Judgment……………………………………………………………………….11  B. The “Character in Commerce” Test………………………………………………………11 C. The Howey Test……………………………………………………………….………….12 V.  ARGUMENT………………………………………………………………………………...12  A. The Token Itself Is Never The Security…………………………………………….…….12 B. The SEC Claims XRP Itself Is A Security………………………………………….…….14  C.  SEC Offers No Precedent Supporting Its Theory And Abandons Its Expert…………….16  Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 2 of 39
 ii D. XRP’s Utility And Non-Investment Use Is A Material Fact In Dispute…………………17  E. The SEC Has Failed To Establish Or Even Identify A Common Enterprise….………….21  F. The SEC Cannot Prove Howey’s Third Prong……………………………………………22  VI. VICTIMS OF REGULATORY OVEREACH………………………………………………28 VII. CONCLUSION……………………………………………………………….…………….30                     Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 3 of 39
 iii TABLE OF AUTHORITIES Cases                      Page(s)  SEC v. Telegram Grp. Inc., 448 F. Supp. 3d 352 (S.D.N.Y. 2020) .................................................3, 6, 12, 13, 19, 25, 26  Deaton v. Roisman, No. 1:21-cv-00001-WES-PAS (D.R.I. Jan. 1, 2021) ………………………………8, 9, 29  SEC v. C.M. Joiner Leasing Corp., 320 U.S. 344 (1943) …………………………………………...…………….10, 11, 25, 27  SEC v. Cavanagh, 155 F.3d 129 (2d Cir. 1998) ……………………………………………...……………...11  Giannullo v. City of New York, 322 F.3d 139 (2nd Cir. 2003) ……………………………………………………...…….11  Glen-Arden Commodities, Inc. v. Costantino, 493 F.2d 1027 (2d Cir. 1974) ………………………………………………...……....11,14  United Hous. Found, Inc. v. Forman, 421 U.S. 837 (1975) ……………………....………………………………......…12, 19, 22  SEC v. W.J. Howey Co., 328 U.S. 293 (1946) ..............................................................................................12, 13, 27    Revak v. SEC Realty Corp., 18 F.3d 81 (2d Cir. 1994) …………………………………...……………………….12, 28  SEC v. Telegram Grp. Inc., No. 19-cv-9439 (PKC), 2020 WL 1547383 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 1, 2020) ..........................12, 13  Miller v. Cent. Chinchilla Grp., Inc., 494 F.2d 414 (8th Cir. 1974) …………………………………………………...……….14  Kemmerer v. Weaver, 445 F.2d 76 (7th Cir. 1971) ……………………………………………………...……...14  SEC v. Shavers, No. 4:13-cv-00416, 2013 WL 4028182 (E.D. Tex., Aug. 6, 2013) ………..….………...14  SEC v. Aqua-Sonic Prods. Corp., 524 F. Supp. 866 (S.D.N.Y. 1981) …………………………………...………....15, 23, 25   Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 4 of 39
 iv Bobrowski v. Red Door Grp., Inc., No. CV 09-02077-PHX-FJM, 2011 WL 3875424 (D. Ariz) Aug. 31, 2011) ...................22  SEC v. Kik Interactive Inc., 492 F. Supp. 3d 169 (S.D.N.Y. 2020) ………………………………...………………...25   Statutes  15 U.S.C. § 77d(a)(1)-(2) ………………………………………..……………………………...11  Regulations  Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a)……………………………………………………………………….….…11  Other Authorities  Selected SEC Accomplishments: May 2017 – December 2020. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Available at https://www.sec.gov/selected-sec-accomplishments-may-2017-2020…………………...........................................................................................................4  Attachment A: Statement of facts and violations. U.S. Financial Crimes Service Network. Available at https://www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/shared/Ripple_Facts.pdf…………4  GAO Virtual Currencies Report: Emerging Regulatory, Law Enforcement, and Consumer Protection Challenges. U.S. Government Accountability Office. Available at https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-14-496.pdf…………...................................….4, 5, 18, 28  Coinflip, Inc. et al, CFTC Docket No. 15-29, Order Instituting Proceedings Pursuant To Sections 6(C) And 6(D) Of The Commodity Exchange Act, Making Findings And Imposing Remedial Sanctions. U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Available at https://www.cftc.gov/sites/default/files/idc/groups/public/@lrenforcementactions/documents/legalpleading/enfcoinfliprorder09172015.pdf………...........................................……..5   2019 Annual Report. U.S. Financial Stability Oversight Council. Available at https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/261/FSOC2019AnnualReport.pdf……......….5, 28   Bailard, Inc. Code of Ethics. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Available at   https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1048702/000119312521047532/d119950dex9928p7.htm…………..............................................................................................................5, 6   Framework for “Investment Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Available at https://www.sec.gov/corpfin/framework-investment-contract-analysis-digital-assets ....……………………………..............…………………6, 13, 21, 28  Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 5 of 39
 v Hinman, W. (2018) Digital Asset Transactions: When Howey Met Gary (Plastic). U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Available at https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/speech-hinman-061418 …………………………………………………………………….6, 13, 28  Securities Purchase Agreement By and Between MoneyGram International, Inc. and Ripple Labs Inc. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Available at https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1273931/000119312519174813/d766773dex101.htm………………..........................................................................................................……7  MoneyGram Announces Strategic Partnership with Ripple. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Available at https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1273931/000119312519174813/d766773dex991.htm……………………...................................................................……………………….7  SEC Office of Investor Education and Advocacy Email correspondence………………………...8  Mar. 7, 2019, Ltr. from Chairman J. Clayton to Congressman Ted Budd. Coin Center. https://www.coincenter.org/app/uploads/2020/05/clayton-token-response.pdf ..................13  Press Rel. No. 33-5347. Guidelines As To The Applicability of the Federal Securities Laws To Offers And Sales Of Condominiums Or Units In A Real Estate Development (Jan. 4, 1973). U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Available at  https://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/1973/33-5347.pdf  .……………………………………14  Gensler Remarks. SEC Emblem. (2021, August 3) available at https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/gensler-aspen-security-forum-2021-08-03 ……….….30   Other Materials  Duggan, W. (n.d.). The History of Bitcoin, the First Cryptocurrency. U.S. News. Available at https://money.usnews.com/investing/articles/the-history-of-bitcoin……........................…3  Former SEC Commissioner Grundfest’s Dec. 17, 2020 Ltr. to SEC Chairman Clayton. Available at CryptoLaw. https://www.crypto-law.us/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/FOIA-12092020-Grundfest-Ltr-to-SEC-Commsnrs-Copy.pdf ………..................................................4, 8, 29  McKenzie, W. (2018) Ethereum, the ICO craze of 2017 and the Platform Wars. Medium. Available at https://medium.com/@williammckenzie1997/ethereum-the-ico-craze-of-2017-and-the-platform-wars-d3c79fc2cf93……………..............................………………4  Peterson Institute for International Economics. (2018) The Impact of Blockchain Technology on  Finance. YouTube. Available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v0zAadukczY …...5  Ripple (XRP) overtakes Ethereum as second largest cryptocurrency on CEO's bullish bet. Forbes. Available at https://www.forbes.com/sites/billybambrough/2018/09/26/ripple-Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 6 of 39
 vi xrp-overtakes-ethereum-as-second-largest-cryptocurrency-on-ceos-bullish-bet/?sh=52bedbaa1c22 ………………………………………………………………..…..6  Cryptocurrency Market Capitalizations. CoinMarketCap. Available at https://web.archive.org/web/20180103125710/https:/coinmarketcap.com/………..........…6  Lewitinn, L. (2019) Coinbase announces acceptance of XRP, ripple ensues. Modern Consensus. Available at https://modernconsensus.com/cryptocurrencies/xrp/coinbase-pro-xrp-trading-ripple/…………………..............................................................................………7  MGI February 24, 2020 Earnings Report. MoneyGram International, Inc. Available at https://ir.moneygram.com/node/20741/html…………………..................................……..7  Wang, N. (2021) Gensler Says Most Crypto Trading Platforms Need to Register With SEC. CoinDesk. Available at https://www.coindesk.com/policy/2021/09/13/gensler-says-most-crypto-trading-platforms-need-to-register-with-sec/………....................................…….11  Beyoud, L. (2022) SEC’s Gensler Steps Up Push to Get Crypto Exchanges to Register With Regulator. Bloomberg. Available at https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-07-28/sec-chair-gensler-hardens-line-on-crypto-exchange-registration?leadSource=uverify%20wall………..........................................................…11  Price, M. (2022) Crypto intermediaries should register with U.S. SEC, agency chair says. Thomson Reuters. Available at https://www.reuters.com/technology/crypto-intermediaries-should-register-with-us-sec-agency-chair-says-2022-09-08/………..…..11  Hadjiloizou, L. (2020) The XRP TipBot lives on through Uphold. XRP Arcade. Available at https://www.xrparcade.com/news/the-xrp-tipbot-lives-on-through-uphold/….................18  Khatri, Y. (2021) Time Magazine now accepts bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies for digital subscriptions. The Block. Available at https://www.theblock.co/linked/102166/time-magazine-bitcoin-digital-subscription-payments…………..........................................….18  XRP directory - Top companies accepting XRP. Cryptwerk. Available at https://cryptwerk.com/pay-with/xrp/…….........................................................................18  GlobaliD. (2021) Introducing the XRP MasterCard® Debit Card. Medium. Available at https://medium.com/global-id/introducing-the-xrp-mastercard-debit-card-827c0b37445b…................................................................................................................18  Pirus, B. (2020) Uphold's New Debit Card Lets You Pay With Bitcoin, XRP and Gold. Cointelegraph. Available at https://cointelegraph.com/news/upholds-new-debit-card-lets-you-pay-with-bitcoin-xrp-and-gold………...............................................................……19    Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 7 of 39
 vii FTX Partners With Visa To Offer XRP And BTC To Millions Of Users. ProCoinNews.  Available at https://procoinnews.com/ftx-partners-with-visa-to-offer-xrp-and-btc-to-millions-of-users/……........................................................................................................19  Weeks, R. (2020) Andreesen Horowitz-backed Deel launches crypto payroll tool. The Block. Available at https://www.theblock.co/linked/84255/andreesen-horowitz-backed-deel-launches-crypto-payroll-tool……...................................................................................…20  BigCommerce Support - Connecting with BitPay. BigCommerce. Available at https://support.bigcommerce.com/articles/Public/Connecting-with-BitPay………….......20  Thinking Crypto. (2021) Hester Peirce Interview - The SEC & US Crypto Regulations, Bitcoin ETF, Gary Gensler, Ripple. YouTube. Available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_qihfMbIk_g……........……………………………..22   Coinbase advertisement promoting the utility of XRP for international transfers………………24  Alexandre, A. (2019) Coinbase Expands Into Cross-Border Payments. Cointelegraph. Available at https://cointelegraph.com/news/coinbase-expands-into-cross-border-payments…....…24  Haselton, T. (2018) How to buy XRP, one of the hottest bitcoin competitors. CNBC. Available at https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/02/how-to-buy-ripple.html……..............................…….24  Khanzadaev, G. (2022) XRP Can Now Be Easily Bought in Europe Straight from Bank Account, Here's How. U.Today. Available at https://u.today/xrp-can-now-be-easily-bought-in-europe-straight-from-bank-account-heres-how………...............................................……24  XRPL Use Cases - Powering Innovation Technology. XRPL.org. Available at https://xrpl.org/uses.html…….............................................................................................26  Binance Rewards - Calculate your crypto earnings. Binance. Available at https://www.binance.com/en/earn/xrp…….........................................................................27  Get a Loan Backed by Your XRP. CoinLoan. Available at  https://coinloan.io/crypto-backed-loans/xrp-loan/…..........................................................27  Ponnezhath, M., & Wilson, T. (2022) Major crypto lender Celsius files for bankruptcy.  Thomson Reuters. Available at https://www.reuters.com/technology/crypto-lender-celsius-files-bankruptcy-2022-07-14/…......................................................................................…27  Gary Gensler, Ethics and Governance in the Blockchain Era, Gary Gensler, MIT,  April 23, 2018 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bx4Q19xA7Oc….........................…30  XRPL services. XRPL Services. Available at https://xrpl.services/xrpl-statistics…............…….30 Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 8 of 39
 1 PRELIMINARY STATEMENT Amici curiae respectfully submit this brief in opposition of the Securities Exchange Commission’s (SEC) motion for summary judgment that “a purchase of XRP is an investment in a common enterprise with other XRP holders and with Ripple.” ECF 640 at 2. Had the SEC limited its allegations to specific XRP transactions by the Defendants, amici would not have engaged in the extensive litigation that transpired because of those sweeping allegations. From the Complaint to the motion for summary judgment, including all pleadings and arguments asserted in-between, the SEC asks this Court to conclude that XRP is always a security, and therefore that every offer, sale, or transaction involving XRP is subject to registration under Section 5 of the Securities Act of 1933 or must qualify for a Section 4 exemption. Hr’g Tr. 44:7-16 (Mar. 19, 2021) (SEC Attorney stating that not all sales of XRP are necessarily Section 5 violations because some sales may qualify under Section 4 exemptions); also ECF 556 at n.2 (stating “Section 4 could exempt investors in the market from registration."). More alarming, the SEC asks this Court to grant summary judgment in favor of the SEC, effectively giving the SEC jurisdiction over non-parties to this litigation, consisting of an entire digital asset ecosystem. Incredibly, the SEC asks this Court to effectively grant it carte blanche jurisdiction over the entire cryptocurrency market after proving nothing more than a Defendant sold an asset and undertook efforts to promote that asset.  ECF 640 at 49 (“Defendants do not dispute that they offered and sold XRP in exchange for ‘money’, which suffices to establish the ‘investment of money’ aspect of the Howey test. Defendants’ statements and efforts as to XRP…establish the other aspects of the Howey test as a matter of law.”) (citations omitted). Respectfully, that is not how the Howey test is applied, nor is it an example of how the law functions. Simply put, the allegations contained in the Amended Complaint are quite possibly the most overbroad far-Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 9 of 39
 2 reaching claims ever made in an SEC enforcement action. ECF 46 ¶ 1 (“a digital asset security called XRP”); ¶ 291 (“Because XRP is fungible”); ¶ 293 (“The nature of XRP itself made it the common thread among Ripple, its management, and all other XRP holders”); ¶ 353 (“The very nature of XRP”). Frankly, the SEC’s unconstrained allegations are likely what caused this Court to grant amicus status in the first place. ECF No. 372 at 5 (“Even if the allegations in the complaint are as far-reaching as [amici] contend”). Since filing the original Complaint (ECF 4), the SEC had multiple opportunities to back-off the extraordinary and unprovable allegations necessitating amici’s involvement. Truth be told, had the SEC limited its theory to specific transactions offered by the Defendants, amici may not have been granted amicus status. ECF 86 at 3 (Defendants contending that if the SEC clarified that “the SEC does not seek to establish that XRP is, per se, an investment contract, [it] would minimize any interest [amici] have in the outcome of this litigation.”); Id. at 4 (Defendants stating “[i]f the SEC confirms…that it will not seek to establish that secondary market XRP transactions violate the Securities Act… [amici’s] need for participation…may be limited.”).  Clearly, the SEC’s goal here, and true intention, is to expand its regulatory reach beyond specific sales offered by Ripple and regulate the secondary market. ECF 153 at 24 (“The XRP traded, even in the secondary market, is the embodiment of those facts, circumstances, promises, and expectations and today represents that investment contract.”) (emphasis added). When amici attempted to intervene (ECF 122), the SEC’s response confirmed what the Court, itself, quickly recognized: that under the SEC’s all-encompassing theory, “every individual in the world who is selling XRP [is] committing a Section 5 violation.” Hr’g Tr. 44:7-9 (Mar. 19, 2021) (Netburn, J.). Amici curiae respectfully submit this brief because if the SEC is successful in its claims against XRP, the SEC would have the authority to regulate a vast number of non-Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 10 of 39
 3 parties, including digital asset exchanges, developers, vendors, and ordinary users and holders of XRP, including amici. This would dramatically affect the entire secondary market for XRP and possibly, the entire cryptocurrency market. While the SEC uses this enforcement action as a test case for expanding its jurisdictional reach, millions of innocent holders suffer the harm.  I.  RELEVANT FACTS PRIOR TO THE SEC ALLEGING XRP IS A SECURITY  A. Decentralized Cryptocurrencies - Like Bitcoin And XRP - Do Not Satisfy Howey. Cryptocurrencies (sometimes called tokens or digital assets) are a lawful means of storing or transferring value and may fluctuate in value as any commodity would. In the abstract, an investment of money in a cryptocurrency utilized by members of a decentralized community connected via blockchain technology, which itself is administered by this community of users rather than by a common enterprise, is not likely to be deemed a security under the familiar test laid out in S.E.C. v. W.J. Howey.  SEC v. Telegram Grp., Inc., 448 F. Supp. 3d 352, 358 (S.D.N.Y. 2020) (emphasis added). When Judge Castel wrote the above passage, he perfectly summarized the application of securities laws to cryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies, like XRP and the XRP Ledger (XRPL). In fact, one would think Judge Castel had XRP in mind because his description and analysis is remarkably accurate. Although XRP has been around for a decade, it was not the world’s first cryptocurrency. Bitcoin, created in 2009, was the world’s first blockchain cryptocurrency. See The History of Bitcoin, the First Cryptocurrency, Deaton Decl. Ex. A. Three years later, three Bitcoin developers set out to build a better Bitcoin and thus, developed XRP and the XRPL. ECF 643 at 4. A blockchain’s job is to validate the authenticity of a transfer of a unit of cryptocurrency. 448 F. Supp. 3d at n.2. A blockchain network, like Bitcoin and the XRPL, is an open source, widely distributed, secure ledger of transactions. Id. Each blockchain produces a native cryptocurrency. Id. The Bitcoin Network produces Bitcoin; the Ethereum Network, Ether; and the XRPL, XRP. Prior to filing this case on former Chairman Clayton’s last full day in Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 11 of 39
 4 charge,1 he lauded the enforcement actions brought against companies and individuals participating in the offer and sale of securities involving digital assets. See Selected SEC Accomplishments: May 2017 – December 2020, Deaton Decl. Ex. C (“The SEC brought 57 cases involving ICOs, blockchain or distributed ledger technology, and/or digital assets since the July 2017 issuance of [The DAO Report] regarding the offers and sales of digital assets.”). These 57 cases “involved efforts to defraud investors through the use of digital asset securities as well as violations of the registration provisions of the federal securities laws in the offer and sale of digital asset securities.” Id. This period of time, 2017 to 2020, has been described as the “ICO Craze,” wherein dozens of digital assets were introduced to the Howey test via an enforcement action. See Ethereum, the ICO craze of 2017…, Deaton Decl. Ex. D. Notably, these enforcement actions were being filed while XRP was one of the most known and visible digital assets in the world. By 2015, XRP was so well known and visible, it became the first digital asset regulated in the U.S. when FinCEN declared XRP “virtual currency.” See FinCEN Ripple Facts, Deaton Decl. Ex. E at 1 (stipulating that “Ripple Labs facilitated transfers of virtual currency”). According to the terms, “XRP [was] the second-largest cryptocurrency by market capitalization, after Bitcoin.” Id. FinCEN, however, was not the first agency to classify XRP as a virtual currency. A year earlier, the Government Accountability Office (“GAO”) issued a report highlighting XRP as a “virtual currency” utilized in “a decentralized payment system.” See GAO, Virtual Currencies Report, 10-12 (May 2014), (“GAO Report”), Deaton Decl. Ex. F (“One of the  1 See Former SEC Commissioner Grundfest’s Dec. 17, 2020 Ltr. to SEC Chairman Clayton (“Grundfest Letter”) Deaton Decl. Ex. B (stating no exigency exists for filing this case; warning it will cause “substantial harm to innocent holders of XRP”; that the SEC “has offered no material distinction between Ether and XRP”; that “XRP and Ether should be treated similarly”; and stating that the “mass exodus” immediately following the filing of this case by “every senior staffer” responsible for bringing the case “calls into question the exercise of Commission discretion.” Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 12 of 39
 5 more prominent examples is XRP, which is used within a decentralized payment system called Ripple. Ripple allows users to make peer-to-peer transfers in any currency.”). Also in 2015, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), declared: “Virtual Currencies Such as Bitcoin are Commodities.” See Coinflip, Inc. et al, CFTC Docket No. 15-29, Deaton Decl. Ex. G (“Bitcoin and other virtual currencies are… properly defined as commodities.”). Before becoming Chairman and expanding the SEC’s power beyond constitutional norms, Gary Gensler agreed with the GAO Report and described XRP as a “bridge currency.” See Gary Gensler comments at Peterson Institute for International Economics. ECF 124-2 at 1:30:10. By 2019, XRP had become so well-known to the U.S. Government, it was highlighted again, except this time in the Financial Stability Oversight Council’s (FSOC) 2019 Annual Report to the U.S. Treasury. See 2019 FSOC Annual Report. Deaton Decl. Ex. H.  at 96 (“The market capitalization of digital assets, such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, XRP, and Litecoin, has increased in recent years”). Ironically, former Chairman Clayton is a signatory on the FSOC 2019 Report. Id. at 1. Because XRP was never offered in an ICO, was created 5 years before the ICO Craze, declared a virtual currency and commodity by the U.S. Government, it is not surprising that XRP was not one of the 57 cryptocurrencies introduced to Howey via an SEC enforcement action. XRP was not involved in any of those prosecutions because, for almost a decade before former Chairman Clayton disregarded the Grundfest Letter, market participants generally accepted that three cryptocurrencies were not securities: Bitcoin, Ether, and XRP. See e.g. Bailard, Inc.2 Code of Ethics, January 4, 2021, at 2-3, Deaton Decl. Ex. I, (“Bailard has decided to allow investments  2 Bailard Inc., because it is an SEC registered investment adviser and serves as a sub-adviser to certain registered investment companies, is required by the SEC to adopt a code of ethics. See Rule 204A-1, Investment Advisers Act of 1940; and Rule 17j-1, Investment Company Act of 1940. Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 13 of 39
 6 in three cryptocurrencies – Bitcoin, Ethereum, and XRP – that are generally accepted to be currencies and not currently subject to regulation by the SEC.”).  B. SEC Confirms Sufficiently Decentralized Digital Assets Are Not Securities.  It is well-established that the SEC “does not contend that Bitcoins transferred on the Bitcoin blockchain are securities.” Telegram, 448 F. Supp. 3d. at 358. On June 14, 2018, it was also established that the SEC does not consider Ether and other equally sufficiently decentralized networks, securities. See William Hinman, Digital Asset Transformations: When Howey Met Gary (Plastic) (“Hinman Speech”), ECF 124-3 (“[B]ased on my understanding of the present state of Ether, the Ethereum network and its decentralized structure, current offers and sales of Ether are not securities transactions…there may be other sufficiently decentralized networks and systems where regulating the tokens or coins that function on them as securities may not be required.”). After the Hinman Speech, the SEC’s next form of guidance also strongly suggested XRP was not a security. See Framework for “Investment Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, (“Framework”), ECF 429-4 (stating Howey is unlikely met when “a virtual currency…can immediately be used to make payments…or acts as a substitute for real (or fiat) currency.”).  C. SEC’s Other External Conduct Also Strongly Suggests XRP Is Not A Security.   Until January 16, 2018, “the SEC had no trading policy regarding digital assets.” ECF 354 at 1. Around this time, XRP had regained the title of second largest cryptocurrency in the world. See Ripple (XRP) Overtakes Ethereum…, Deaton Decl. Ex. J. In fact, Bitcoin, Ether and XRP combined, represented well over 60% of the entire cryptocurrency market capitalization. CoinMarketCap Archive, Deaton Decl. Ex. K. These “Top 3” digital assets were generally accepted to be currencies, not subject to regulation by the SEC. See Ex. I. From amici’s perspective, one of the most significant events related to XRP is when XRP was listed and began Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 14 of 39
 7 trading on the Coinbase platform on February 26, 2019. See Coinbase announces acceptance of XRP, Deaton Decl. Ex. L. Although Rule 56.1 statements and exhibits are under seal, publicly available information shows in January 2019, Coinbase met with the SEC and informed the SEC of Coinbase’s determination that XRP was not a security and intended to list XRP immediately, unless the SEC disagreed. See Ripple Labs Answer, ECF 51 at 98 (discussing the Coinbase meeting with the SEC but identifying Coinbase as “Platform A”); and ECF 643 at n.46 (identifying Platform A referenced in the Complaint as Coinbase). The SEC offered no disagreement because Coinbase listed XRP the next month and arguably began promoting XRP and XRP’s unique utility on a much greater scale than the Defendants ever did. See infra at 24.  In June 2019, a Securities Purchase Agreement between MoneyGram International (“MGI”) and Ripple was filed with the SEC. See Securities Purchase Agreement, Deaton Decl. Ex. M. This SEC form indicated that Ripple acquired an ownership stake in MGI. Id. More significantly, MGI notified the SEC, that “[t]his agreement will enable MoneyGram to utilize Ripple’s xRapid product (XRP) in foreign exchange settlement as part of MoneyGram’s cross-border payment process.” See MGI Announces Strategic Partnership with Ripple, Deaton Decl. Ex. N. Hence, the SEC was well aware Ripple would be utilizing XRP to compensate MGI, who would then sell that same XRP into the secondary market to retail holders, like amici. See MGI February 24, 2020 Earnings Report, Deaton Decl. Ex. O (“Revenue excludes $8.9 million of benefit from Ripple, which will be accounted for as a contra expense rather than revenue based on a recent consultation with the SEC.”) (emphasis added). From amici’s perspective, similar to the Coinbase listing, the MGI deal and its use of XRP, was very significant. If it was clear that XRP was a security, the SEC would have never allowed these so-called unregistered securities to flood the public market. Yet, at summary judgment, the SEC’s theory is that all XRP sales - past, Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 15 of 39
 8 present, and future - regardless of the seller - Ripple, Coinbase, MGI, or Amici - are securities. A truly remarkable claim.  Until filing this case, the SEC always provided exactly the same answer for Bitcoin, Ether and XRP, never making a material distinction between them. In October 2020, the SEC informed the public, that it had not determined XRP to be a security and that it may never do so.  OIEA Emails, Deaton Decl. Ex. P. In other words, two months before this case was filed, and prior to the “mass exodus of every senior staffer responsible for [this] major enforcement decision”, XRP was treated no differently than Bitcoin and Ether. Id., Grundfest Letter at 2. II.  UNPRECEDENTED ALLEGATIONS CAUSE UNPRECEDENTED LITIGTION   A.  Amici’s Writ of Mandamus. Although the SEC purportedly filed this case to protect amici and other XRP Holders, the SEC has opposed amici at every turn. ECF 85, 153, 556. It even attacked amici’s counsel - twice. ECF 153 at n.2, 556. The SEC has only itself to blame for amici’s involvement, including the involvement of other amici curiae. ECF 649, 660, 661, 681-1, 683, 684. Candidly, the SEC’s legal theory regarding XRP is likely the most overbroad far-reaching claim ever made in a non-fraud enforcement action. Simply put, since Howey, there has not been a single case where an investment contract has been found and there exists no privity whatsoever between the buyer and the promoter. Yet, according to the SEC, every purchase of XRP “is an investment in a common enterprise with other XRP holders and with Ripple.” ECF 640 at 2. The SEC’s theory first appeared in the original Complaint (ECF 4), filed on December 22, 2020. Almost immediately, on January 1, 2021, amici filed a Writ of Mandamus requesting the SEC “amend its complaint against Ripple to exclude the claim that the XRP owned by [amici] constitute securities.” Pet. for Writ of Mandamus ¶ 89, ECF 1 at 26, Deaton v. Roisman, Case No. 1:21-cv-00001-WES-PSS (D.R.I. Jan. 1, 2021) (“Writ”). At its core, the Writ Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 16 of 39
 9 challenged the SEC’s good faith basis alleging that XRP is a security per se. ECF 4 ¶ 1 (“a digital asset security called XRP”); ¶ 267 (“The nature of XRP itself”); ¶ 327 (“The very nature of XRP”). After being served with amici’s Writ, the SEC doubled down on its theory and filed the Amended Complaint (“AC”), re-asserting the same allegations. ECF 46 (¶ ¶ 1; 293; 353). The Court itself probed the SEC regarding its implausible theory. Hr’g Tr. 44:7-9 (Mar. 19, 2021) (“Presumably under this theory then, every individual in the world who is selling XRP would be committing a Section 5 violation based on what you just said.”). The SEC could have “confirm[ed] that its suit is not intended to affect the secondary retail market for XRP in the United States.” ECF 86 at 4. Instead, the SEC acknowledged that its theory on XRP may not be validated by this Court. See Writ at 12 (The “[SDNY] supplies the exclusive method for testing the validity of the Commission’s complaint”) (emphasis added).  B.  Amici’s Motion To Intervene. The SEC was provided yet another opportunity to clarify its theory. In fact, defense counsel’s response to amici’s motion letter (ECF 75) stated: “The SEC Must Clarify Its Theory.” ECF 86 at 3 (original emphasis). In short, “[i]f the SEC [had] confirm[ed]…it [would] not seek to establish that secondary market XRP transactions violate the Securities Act…[amici’s] need for participation…may be limited.” Id. at 4.  C.  The SEC Responds That All XRP, Including Amici’s XRP, Are Securities. In response to amici’s Motion to Intervene (ECF 122) and Defendants’ letter (ECF 86), the SEC tripled down on its implausible theory and remarkably declared: “The XRP traded, even in the secondary market, is the embodiment of those facts, circumstances, promises, and expectations and today represents that investment contract.” ECF 153 at 24 (emphasis added). In part, because of that remarkable declaration, this Court granted amicus status. ECF 372. When it granted amicus status to six individual XRP holders, this Court acknowledged that never before Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 17 of 39
 10 had there been a case where thousands of individual asset holders3 petitioned a Court, requesting an order for the SEC to sue and name them as defendants in a pending action. Id. at 5  III. AMICI CURIAE’S INTEREST  A.  Amici’s Interest. This Court already determined six individual XRP holders, representing a broader public interest, “shall be permitted to act as amici curiae in this action.” Id. at 11. This Court “contemplate[d] that such assistance [would] be most beneficial during briefing on dispositive motions.” Id. Thus, this Court found that amici hold a significant interest in the outcome of this case. Id. In fact, this Court “views the amici briefs as desirable because [amici] represent third parties whose particular interests may be affected by the Court’s ruling and whose particular interests are echoed in broader public interests.” Id. at 10.  B.  Section 4 Exemptions Do Not Protect Amici’s Interests. When the Court probed the SEC over its theory that every individual in the world selling XRP is violating the law, the SEC did not dispute the premise of the Court’s question. Hr’g Tr. 44:7-24 (Mar. 19, 2021) (“That’s not quite correct, your Honor…Section 4 specifically exempts these transactions that the court put in the hypothetical of all these other people [i.e. amici] buying and selling XRP in the market.”). Section 4 exemptions only apply to a security subject to registration under Section 5. SEC v. C.M. Joiner Leasing Corp., 320 U.S. 344 (1943) at n.3 (“They had to be securities to be exempt securities under the Act.” (citing 15 U.S.C. Sec.77c)). In short, the SEC confirmed  3 XRP Holders are a putative class, from the United States and 143 countries from around the world, of users, investors, holders, developers, content providers and small businesses who acquired and utilize XRP and the XRP Ledger, most of whom were completely unaware of Ripple or its executives when acquiring XRP. ECF 665-1-26.  When amici filed ECF 123, over 12,600 XRP Holders requested to join. ECF 123 at n.1. All parties opposed class-certification and due to concerns of delay, the Court instead, granted amicus status to six individual XRP holders. ECF 372 at n.1. Today, the putative class stands at 74,502 XRP holders. Although the public interest in this case cannot be overstated, amici continue to act in their individual capacities. Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 18 of 39
 11 that - regardless of the seller or circumstances surrounding the sale - XRP is always a security, including the XRP owned by amici - a claim stretching Howey beyond recognition.   C.  Exemptions Are Amici’s Burden. If XRP are securities “the burden shifts to [amici] to show that the securities [are] exempt from the registration requirement.” S.E.C. v. Cavanagh, 155 F.3d 129, 133 (2d Cir. 1998). Section 4(a)(1) exempts “transactions by any person other than an issuer, underwriter, or dealer,” while 4(a)(2) exempts “transactions by an issuer not involving a public offering.” 15 U.S.C. § 77d(a)(1)-(2). Section 2(a)(11) defines “underwriter” as “any person who has purchased from an issuer with a view to . . . the distribution of any security.” Id. Thus, any holder with an intent to sell, could be deemed an issuer or underwriter. Id. Exchanges, like Coinbase, by definition, constitute an issuer, underwriter or dealer, which likely explains why the SEC is pursuing its breathtakingly overbroad theory in this case - clearly a test case - attempting to expand the SEC’s jurisdictional reach into a new emerging asset class. See Gensler Comments Insisting Crypto Platforms Register with the SEC, Deaton Decl. Ex. Q, R, S. IV. LEGAL STANDARDS AND LAW TO BE APPLIED  A. Summary Judgment. The SEC’s motion for summary judgment must be denied because the SEC has failed to show that no genuine issue of material fact exists. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). All reasonable inferences must be drawn in the Defendants’ favor. Giannullo v. City of New York, 322 F.3d 139, 140-41 (2nd Cir. 2003).   B. The “Character in Commerce” Test. Considering the inherent characteristics of the underlying asset (XRP) is critical before conducting a Howey analysis. Glen-Arden Commodities, Inc. v. Costantino, 493 F.2d 1027, 1034 (2d Cir. 1974). “The test rather is what character the instrument is given in commerce by the terms of the offer, the plan of distribution, and the economic inducements held out to the prospect.” 320 U.S. at 352-53. The bottom line is Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 19 of 39
 12 that “[w]hen a purchaser is motivated by a desire to use or consume the item purchased…the securities laws do not apply.” United Hous. Found, Inc. v. Forman, 421 U.S. 837, 852 (1975).   C. The Howey Test. An investment contract is “a contract, transaction or scheme whereby a person invests his money in a common enterprise and is led to expect profits solely from the efforts of the promoter or a third party.” 328 U.S. at 298-99. Thus, the three Howey factors are “(i) an investment of money (ii) in a common enterprise (iii) with profits to be derived solely from the efforts of others.” Revak v. SEC Realty Corp., 18 F.3d 81, 87 (2d Cir. 1994).  V. ARGUMENT  A. The Token Itself Is Never The Security. Fellow Amicus Digital Chamber of Commerce (“DCC”) avowed that “there is no precedent that analyzes whether an underlying asset of an investment contract is itself a security.” ECF 649 at 3. The reason there is no precedent, is because the underlying asset, in an investment contract, is never the security. Howey, 328 U.S. at 301 (“If that test be satisfied, it is immaterial… whether there is a sale of property with or without intrinsic value.”); Telegram, 448 F. Supp. 3d at 379 (“the security…is not simply the Gram, which is little more than alphanumeric cryptographic sequence.”). The same must be said about XRP. ECF 640 at 10 (“Stripped down, XRP is just computer code.”). Claiming the token itself is the security is akin to calling the oranges, in Howey, the securities. In Telegram, the Court made it clear that the central issue in Howey and Telegram was not the underlying product, agreement, or the underlying asset. Id. The Court confirmed that the underlying asset (whether oranges or digital tokens) are not themselves investment contracts. Id. Any doubt or confusion regarding whether the Court considered the token itself a security was laid to rest when Judge Castel issued a second ruling in Telegram. 2020 WL 1547383 at *1 (clarifying that the central point of the Court’s holding was that “the ‘security’ was neither the Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 20 of 39
 13 Gram Purchase Agreement nor the Gram.”) (emphasis added). In Telegram, there existed actual written contracts between the promoter and the investors, yet the underlying written contract, itself, was not the security. Id. Considering Telegram involved a pure ICO, with a blockchain yet to be built, if there ever existed a case where the token itself constituted the security, it would be Telegram. However, the Court made it crystal clear that the underlying asset, in an investment contract, is not the security. Id. In addition to disregarding precedent spanning from 1946 (Howey) to 2020 (Telegram), the SEC’s farfetched XRP theory also contradicts the SEC’s own guidance. The most litigated piece of evidence in this case, the Hinman Speech, is instructive. Director Hinman unequivocally stated: “the token – or coin or whatever the digital information packet is called – all by itself is not a security, just as the orange groves in Howey were not.” Hinman Speech (emphasis added). Director Hinman also noted “the digital asset itself is simply code.” Id. Director Hinman emphasized “that the analysis of whether something is a security is not static and does not strictly inhere to the instrument.” Id. Just like any other commodity, “investment contracts can be made out of virtually any asset (including virtual assets).” Id. Former Chairman Clayton agreed. See Mar. 7, 2019 Ltr. from Chairman J. Clayton to Congressman Ted Budd, ECF 124-5 (“I agree that the analysis of whether a digital asset is offered or sold as a security is not static and does not strictly inhere to the instrument.”) (emphasis added). Even more significant, the SEC’s 2019 Framework stated that a virtual currency being utilized in payments – the very thing XRP was designed to do - is unlikely to satisfy Howey. ECF 429-4. The Hinman Speech and the Framework made perfect sense considering 76 years of caselaw has shown that practically any asset or commodity can be offered as a security, whether that asset be orange groves, whiskey, chinchillas, condos, beavers, or Bitcoin. See Howey, 328 U.S. Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 21 of 39
 14 293 (1946); Glen-Arden Commodities, Inc. v. Costantino, 493 F.2d 1027, 1034 (2d Cir. 1974); Miller v. Cent. Chinchilla Grp., Inc., 494 F.2d 414 (8th Cir. 1974); SEC Rel. No. 33-5347 (Jan. 4, 1973); Kemmerer et al. v. Weaver et al., 445 F.2d 76 (7th Cir. 1971); and SEC v. Shavers, 4:13-cv-00416, 2013 WL 4028182, Aug. 6, 2013, respectively. When an asset is offered and sold as an investment contract, therefore a security, it does not transform the underlying asset itself into a security. Oranges remain oranges and XRP remains XRP – digital code. Therefore, even if Ripple offered XRP as a security - related to specific transactions – XRP would still remain exactly what multiple government agencies classified it as, in 2014, 2015, and 2019 - a decentralized virtual currency.  B. The SEC Claims XRP Itself Is A Security. From the filing of the original complaint (ECF 4) to the motion for summary judgment (ECF 640, 674), and filings in-between (ECFs 153, 556), the SEC has consistently argued XRP itself is a security. Although the SEC admits that “Howey requires courts to look at the economic reality of a transaction” (ECF 640 at 2) (emphasis added), and, that the SEC must prove specific transactions offered by Ripple violated Section 5 of the Securities Act, the SEC is not pursuing specific transactions. Instead, it is asking the Court to rule that every XRP transaction is either a section 5 violation or qualifies for an exemption under Section 4. ECF 556 at Fn.2. The SEC asks this Court to validate its shorthand and analytically lazy contention that Ripple has engaged in the functional equivalent of a nine year-long, on-going, 24/7 ICO, and that each and every sale of XRP, from anywhere in the world, offered by anyone, including amici, was, is, always has been, and always will be, the offer and sale, of a security. ECF 640 at 49-50 (“a purchase of XRP was an investment of money into a common enterprise with other XRP investors and with Defendants.”) (emphasis added); Id. at 2 (“a purchase of XRP is an investment in a common enterprise with other XRP holders and with Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 22 of 39
 15 Ripple.”) (emphasis added); also, ECF 153 at 24 (“The XRP traded, even in the secondary market…today represents that investment contract.”) (emphasis added). The SEC’s XRP theory is so farfetched, it travels through space and time, into the future, capturing all possible future sales, even in far-away lands. ECF 46 ¶ 391 (“Even if some country were to recognize XRP as fiat “currency” at some point in the future, that would result from Defendants’ significant entrepreneurial and managerial efforts to date (and likely in the future), on which public investors expecting profit relied when making an investment of money into Defendants’ common enterprise.”) (emphasis added). The scope of the SEC’s Howey argument has become so stretched that it is truly indefinable, in space, or in time. As discussed, infra at 23-24, the SEC asks this Court to assume private statements made by Ripple employees many years ago, to a handful of individuals, equals evidence that Ripple offered XRP to the world. The SEC is not allowed to shortcut the Howey analysis by alleging each and every sale of XRP from the beginning of time until the end of the world, meets all three Howey prongs, and therefore, doesn’t have to offer specific transactional evidence. The Howey test must be applied to each transaction and “examined as of the time that the transaction took place.” S.E.C. v. Aqua–Sonic Prods. Corp., 524 F. Supp. 866, 876 (S.D.N.Y. 1981). Instead, the SEC argues: “[t]he XRP traded, even in the secondary market, is the embodiment of those facts, circumstances, promises, and expectations, and today represents that investment contract.” ECF 153 at 24.  Notably missing at the end of that sentence is a single cite to any precedent or authority supporting such an inimitable claim. Id. Amici, and likely the SEC itself, have no idea what that sentence means under the law. The SEC’s theory is the equivalent of arguing individual oranges were not only oranges, but also represented the investment contract with the W.J. Howey Company. The SEC’s theory would be a bit amusing, if innocent holders weren’t being severely harmed. Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 23 of 39
 16  C.  SEC Offers No Precedent Supporting Its Theory And Abandons Its Expert. The SEC has offered no precedent supporting its representation theory. Because no precedent exists, the SEC’s original intent was to rely on the rank speculation of an alleged expert (“Expert One”), who failed to interview a single XRP holder before forming his opinions. ECF 555 at n.1 The SEC intended to rely on Expert One to try and prove today’s XRP, traded in the secondary market, represents an investment contract with Ripple. ECF 153 at 24. After significant litigation regarding Expert One (ECF 489, 555, 556, 567, 572), including the SEC’s request for the Court to bar the undersigned from continued participation (ECF 556 at 4), the SEC chose not to rely on the opinions of Expert One. The SEC’s reversal speaks volumes. According to the Court’s scheduling Order (ECF 620), Rule 56.1 statements, exhibits and supporting documents remain sealed. The evidence available to amici, however, reveals why the SEC chose not to rely on this alleged expert –which serves as a fatal blow to the SEC’s case. The SEC offers no evidence related to knowledge or conduct attributable to amici or any XRP holders. See ECF 556-8 at 4, line 24 (SEC expert testifying that he “didn't interview [XRP] purchasers”); Id. at lines 17-18 (SEC expert admitting that he “would need to do a lot more work analysis” upon learning that XRP holders, like amici, “acquired XRP because it was a top 10 cryptocurrency by market cap and listed at a lower price compared to others, not because of anything that Ripple said or did”); Id. at 5, lines 20-23 (SEC expert admitting that he “might have come to a different conclusion” upon learning that XRP holders acquired XRP for noninvestment purposes, such as to pay for goods and services or to use as a substitute for fiat currency); see also XRP Purchaser affidavits (ECF 665-1-26). The AC has entire sections dedicated to XRP holders/purchasers. See e.g., ECF 46 at 50-51. Yet, at summary judgment, the SEC avoids any evidence regarding XRP purchasers. It avoids such evidence because it destroys the false narrative being presented by the SEC.  Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 24 of 39
 17  D. XRP’s Utility And Non-Investment Use Is A Material Fact In Dispute. Instead of satisfying Howey’s three prongs, the SEC asks this Court to declare, as a matter of law, all Howey prongs satisfied because Ripple sold XRP, for investment, to certain individuals (likely accredited investors) and undertook efforts to promote XRP. ECF 640 at 49 (“Defendants’ statements and efforts as to XRP… establish the other aspects of the Howey test as a matter of law.”) (citations omitted). The SEC literally asks this Court to skip over conducting an analysis of the second and third prongs of the Howey test – a truly remarkable ask. Even worse, the SEC, has failed to meet its burden regarding Howey’s first prong. Throughout this case, the SEC has failed to take into account the non-investment use of XRP. ECF 46 at 63 (“No Significant Non-Investment ‘Use’ for XRP Exists”) (original emphasis). No single statement offered by the SEC could be further from the truth. While the SEC remains in a stage of perpetual denial, the rest of the world, including the Court, accepts XRP’s unique utility. ECF 673 at n.50 (Japan, Switzerland, Singapore, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), and the United Kingdom (U.K.) have all declared XRP a currency - not a security.); also, Hrg Tr. at 11:4-7 (Mar. 19, 2021) (“My understanding of XRP is that not only does it have a sort of currency value, but it also has a utility, and that utility distinguishes it, I think, from Bitcoin and Ether.”) (Netburn, J.). Disturbingly, despite the overwhelming and indisputable evidence to the contrary, the SEC disputes XRP’s utility. Id. at 51:15-16 (“Now, the court referenced a utility for XRP. We dispute whether that utility actually exists, your Honor.”). The truth is that amici, and millions like amici, use XRP for non-investment purposes. ECF 655-1-26. By asking this Court to find, as a matter of law, that all past, present and future sales of XRP are securities, the SEC wants this Court to ignore the millions of times XRP is used each day, as well as ignore all the non-investment acquisition of XRP. The SEC asks this Court to disregard companies like TapJets Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 25 of 39
 18 (ECF 661), I-Remit (ECF 660) and SpendTheBits (ECF 684); and, of course, ignore the nearly three thousand XRP Purchaser affidavits. ECF 655-1-26. Since the 2014 GAO Report, the SEC has known that XRP is utilized “within a decentralized payment system” allowing “users to make peer-to-peer transfers.” GAO Report. XRP holders have been utilizing this peer-to-peer decentralized payment system ever since. See The XRP TipBot Lives, Deaton Decl. Ex. T. (Describing the XRP TipBot as a “multi-platform application that monitors social media posts on Twitter, Reddit, or Discord, and allows one person to send another person XRP…The XRP TipBot has also been used for good, helping many charities.”). According to the SEC’s outlandish theory, those who received XRP as tips, for providing social media content, and the charities accepting XRP, are all holding unregistered securities and if they intend to sale the XRP they receive, they may need to prove a Section 4 exemption. Thousands of vendors, like Time Magazine, accept XRP as a form of payment or medium of exchange. See Time Magazine Accepts Bitcoin and Other Crypto, Deaton Decl. Ex. U (“Time will accept all cryptocurrencies currently supported by Crypto.com Pay [including] bitcoin, ether, dogecoin, XRP and Litecoin”); Pay with XRP, Deaton Decl. Ex. V (listing 1,500 plus companies, stores, services accepting XRP as a payment and helping XRP Holders, “[f]ind where to spend [their] XRP.”); see also ECF 684 (showing how XRP is utilized to spend Bitcoin). Incredibly, the SEC writes: “And Ripple specifically did not target those who might view XRP as a currency.” ECF 640 at 57 (original emphasis). The SEC emphasizes the fact that “Garlinghouse explained in multiple public interviews: ‘[T]hese aren’t currencies…I can’t buy coffee with XRP.’” Id. Yet, it is an indisputable fact that amici and millions like them, acquire and use XRP as a form of currency, including to buy coffee. See Introducing The XRP Mastercard Debit Card, Deaton Decl. Ex. W. (explaining the XRP Card is the first ever decentralized community-linked debit card of its kind, Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 26 of 39
 19 available exclusively to members of the XRP community and accepted wherever Mastercard is accepted, while earning up to 5% cash back in XRP rewards); Uphold XRP Debit Card, Deaton Decl. Ex. X. (explaining that the XRP Uphold Debit Card will be accepted globally wherever Mastercard is accepted); also, FTX Partners with Visa to offer XRP And BTC to Millions of Users, Deaton Decl. Ex. Y (“This means that digital assets like XRP and Bitcoin are now available to Visa’s large customer base to conduct transactions without having to convert crypto to fiat or actually having to withdraw the crypto from the exchange. As a result, this is a significant milestone that will boost the adoption of crypto assets like XRP to be used for every-day transactions.”) (emphasis added). XRP debit cards, provided by MasterCard and Visa would not exist if XRP wasn’t considered a currency or medium of exchange. To be granted summary judgment, the SEC must prove no dispute exists regarding the non-investment use of XRP. Forman, 421 U.S. at 852. Telegram, again, is instructive. To prove non-consumptive intent, in Telegram, the SEC relied on the same expert it has abandoned in this case. 448 F. Supp. 3d at 373. Judge Castel held that “a rational economic actor would not agree to freeze millions of dollars for up to 18 months…if the purchaser’s intent was to obtain a substitute for fiat currency.” Id. (citing Expert One’s Report ¶ 5). In this case, the SEC offers no similar evidence proving non-consumptive intent. Defendants, on the other hand, submitted affidavits of XRP holders from the U.S. and abroad. ECF 655-1-26. All of the nearly three thousand XRP holders, represented in the affidavits, acquired XRP in the secondary market - not from Ripple or its executives. Id. The affidavits provide this Court with a complete picture of the truth and utterly destroys the false narrative promulgated by the SEC. Id. The SEC previously provided this Court with copies of unsigned affidavits, along with declarations and exhibits associated with the affidavits. See ECF 556-1, 556-10. The XRP purchaser affidavits establish Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 27 of 39
 20 critical points for the Court’s consideration regarding: (i) whether securities laws even apply to XRP transactions; and (ii) if certain XRP transactions fall within the scope of securities laws, the affidavits provide important factors to consider when conducting a Howey analysis.  The affidavits show, in addition to acquiring XRP for investment purposes, many holders acquired XRP for non-investment reasons. ECF 655-1-26.  XRP was acquired for use as a form of currency utilized to pay for goods and services. Id. For example, XRP has been used for payroll in the U.S. and abroad. See Crypto Payroll Tool, Deaton Decl. Ex. Z (reporting how Deel, a company partnered with Coinbase, launched a crypto-payroll service allowing international workers to be paid in Bitcoin, Ether, and XRP). The XRP holder affidavits include people who, prior to this lawsuit, received their paycheck in XRP. As an example, a company called BitPay, launched a massive crypto payments service for businesses in 225 countries allowing people to be paid in certain cryptocurrencies including Bitcoin, Ether, XRP, Litecoin, Bitcoin Cash and others. See Connecting with Bitpay, Deaton Decl. Ex. AA. Because of the grossly overbroad allegations asserted by the SEC, Bitpay today, only offers XRP payments outside of the United States. Id. In short, some international XRP holders, represented in the XRP purchaser affidavits (ECF 655-1-26), withdraw their paychecks in XRP because XRP is utilized as a substitute for fiat currency. Id. Included in the purchaser affidavits (ECF 655-1-26), are international XRP holders, being paid in XRP, living in Japan, Switzerland, Singapore, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), and the United Kingdom (U.K.). Id. In every one of those countries, XRP was evaluated by foreign regulators and declared a currency - not a security. ECF 673 at n.50. Yet, according to the SEC, these workers receiving XRP for pay, living in a country where their regulator designated XRP a non-security, is in a common enterprise with Ripple and all other XRP holders in the world, and must prove to the SEC that a Section 4 exemption Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 28 of 39
 21 applies, if they use their XRP in the U.S. The SEC’s argument is truly irrational. The XRP purchaser affidavits also include holders who acquired XRP to establish a trust-line on the XRPL, to send value, utilizing XRP as a bridge currency and to access the XRPL’s decentralized exchange (DEX), as described in the SpendTheBits brief. ECF 684 at 3-6. Simply put, the non-investment acquisition of XRP creates a material issue of fact.  E. The SEC Has Failed To Establish Or Even Identify A Common Enterprise. The Defendants’ opposition brief discusses how the SEC has shifted its theory regarding the common enterprise XRP holders allegedly “bought into.” ECF 675 at 19-21. In sum, the SEC has struggled to pinpoint a viable common enterprise in this case. The SEC’s struggle is understandable considering the SEC has admitted that it ignores Howey’s pesky second prong when applied to digital assets. See Framework at n.10 (“The Commission, on the other hand, does not require vertical or horizontal commonality per se, nor does it view a ‘common enterprise’ as a distinct element of the term ‘investment contract.’”). Whenever the SEC struggles to reconcile its own position (which is often), it always falls back on “the token itself” as its catchall answer. Discussed earlier, the SEC’s theory is that “XRP traded, even in the secondary market…represents [the] investment contract.” ECF 153 at 24. Incredibly, the SEC not only argues that XRP represents the investment contract, but that it also represents the common enterprise. ECF 640 at 17 (“The escrow account’s purpose was to remind investors of the common enterprise XRP represented.”); Id. at 63 (“Ripple offered and sold XRP, for money, as a common enterprise”). According to the SEC, since it represents both the common enterprise and investment contract, any purchase of XRP automatically satisfies all prongs of Howey. ECF 640 at 49. The SEC’s obsession with focusing on the token, and not on the circumstances surrounding the offering as a whole, allows the SEC to sidestep a legitimate Howey analysis. The Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 29 of 39
 22 SEC’s unconstitutional shortcut was criticized by Commissioner Hester Peirce. See Mar. 9, 2021 Hester Peirce Interview, Thinking Crypto ECF 124-8 at 18:58 (“We tend at the SEC to talk about the token itself as a security and that’s really a shorthand…what we’ve done now is said that orange groves are kind of like the security.”) (emphasis added). Focusing on the token itself, the SEC argues XRP meets the second and third prongs of Howey “as a matter of law.” ECF 640 at 49. The SEC’s argument takes unconstitutional bootstrapping to the highest level. The SEC is forced to argue XRP is the common enterprise because its expert “pivoted, pointing instead [of Ripple] to an amorphous ‘XRP ‘ecosystem’ as the supposed common enterprise.” ECF 675 at 20. Considering the SEC is no longer relying on its expert, it cannot satisfy Howey’s second prong. The Defendants, on the other hand, have provided affidavits which establish that the majority of first-time purchasers, who acquired XRP as an investment, were unaware of a company named Ripple, selling software to banks. ECF 655-1-26. XRP investors affirm that they “did not believe they were acquiring a legal or financial interest in Ripple when acquiring XRP.” Id.  The SEC conflates common enterprise with common interest. ECF 640 at 15. It asks the Court to substitute the latter for the former. The word “align(ed)” appears 22 times in the SEC’s brief. ECF 640 at 2, 14-19, 24, 39, 50, 52-53, 61-62. But an alignment of interests is not enough to satisfy the common enterprise factor. Bobrowski v. Red Door Grp., Inc., 2011 WL 3875424, at *1 (D. Ariz. Aug. 31, 2011). If the Court were to adopt the SEC’s argument, the SEC could substitute any cryptocurrency for XRP, and the same argument would apply. Then again, maybe that is the SEC’s ultimate goal here because clearly, enforcing U.S. securities’ laws, are not.   F. The SEC Cannot Prove Howey’s Third Prong. To meet Howey’s third prong, the SEC must prove XRP holders, like amici, had a reasonable expectation of profits derived from Ripple’s efforts. 421 U.S. at 852. The evidence currently available in the public record, proves Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 30 of 39
 23 the SEC cannot satisfy Howey’s third prong. See ECF 556-8 at 6-7 (SEC expert admitting he “did not interview specific XRP purchasers or attempt to validate” XRP holder’s reliance on Ripple) (emphasis added). Without evidence or an expert to establish a link between Ripple’s efforts and the acquisition of XRP, the SEC cannot prevail at summary judgment. Although the SEC admits that “Howey requires courts to look at the economic reality of a transaction” (ECF 640 at 2), it does not attempt to establish each Howey factor with respect to any particular transactions. The failure to do so proves fatal to their motion for summary judgment because each transaction “must be examined as of the time that the transaction took place.” Aqua–Sonic Prods. Corp., 524 F. Supp. at 876. More troubling, is that the SEC references statements made by the Defendants almost a decade ago and then pretends that those statements led or induced present day XRP purchasers to acquire XRP in the secondary market. The SEC literally offers Tweets from April 2013, by Ripple, promoting Ripple and XRP price increases. ECF 640 at 12. However, not one of amici’s six-individual XRP holders were on Twitter in 2013. The SEC refers to three documents from 2013 and 2014 as evidence of an aggressive marketing campaign promoting Ripple and XRP. Id. One example, involves the Gateways brochure that was sent to “at least 100 people.” Id. The SEC has failed to demonstrate whether those 100 or so individuals, who actually received the Gateways brochure, were led to expect profits from Ripple’s efforts, let alone prove anything related to present day holders. The SEC writes: “[i]n February 2017, Larsen and Miguel Vias…encouraged an XRP investor to think of XRP’s potential appreciation over the long-term, including based on Ripple’s entrepreneurial efforts.” Id. at 20. Arguably, because there is at least some level of privity, communication and contact between Ripple and those identified in these isolated examples, the SEC could attempt to establish each Howey factor with respect to these specific transactions. The SEC does not! Instead, the SEC offers this decade Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 31 of 39
 24 old marketing material in support of its request to classify every sale of XRP, past, present and future, as an investment contract with Ripple. There is no evidence that the information Ripple provided, many years ago, ever reached XRP holders, who then considered Ripple, or its management team, before acquiring XRP in the secondary market. From amici’s perspective, companies, unrelated to Ripple, promoted XRP much more significantly. See Coinbase Ad Deaton Decl. Ex. BB (advertising the ability to “[s]end money across borders virtually instantly using XRP or USDC” and allowing users to experience “[n]o fees to send or receive XRP or USDC to another Coinbase account”). In the secondary market, it was Coinbase, and others, who exploited XRP’s independent utility, attracting customers by offering them the ability to “[s]end money internationally for free.” Id. Coinbase, not Ripple, promoted that it was expanding Coinbase’s business into cross-border payments. See Coinbase Expands into Cross Border Payments Using XRP & USDC, Deaton Decl. Ex. CC. The SEC also references how Ripple undertook efforts to inform the public how to acquire XRP. ECF 640 at 33 (“Ripple listed on its website crypto trading platforms that traded XRP.”). The SEC, however, offers no evidence that such efforts by Ripple led to a single transaction. The SEC asks this Court to assume a causal connection even though XRP was one of the Top 3 most popular digital assets in the world, and financial news outlets were encouraging and showing investors and users how to acquire XRP. See CNBC’s How to buy XRP, one of the hottest bitcoin competitors, Deaton Decl. Ex. DD (walking viewers through the process of how to acquire XRP by first acquiring Bitcoin or Ether); see also, XRP Can Now Be Easily Bought in Europe Straight From Bank Account, Deaton Decl. Ex. EE (explaining how in the Netherlands XRP can be easily bought straight from a person’s bank account.). Even assuming that the Court accepts the marketing efforts by Ripple as statements or promises intended to induce XRP holders to purchase XRP, there is no evidence Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 32 of 39
 25 regarding the reasonable perspective of XRP purchasers who acquired XRP in the secondary market. The SEC writes: “Howey is an objective test” and “[c]ourts evaluate the ‘entirety of the parties’ understandings and expectations’” ECF 640 at 5. Yet, the SEC offers no evidence of the “understandings and expectations” of amici and all other XRP holders. Again, each Howey factor must be satisfied for each transaction and each transaction “must be examined as of the time that the transaction took place.” 524 F. Supp. at 876. If underlying contracts, like the ones in Kik or Telegram, or some written communication constituting an offer, like in Joiner, existed between Ripple and specific XRP purchasers, thus establishing some level of contact or privity between them, then maybe the SEC could rely solely on Ripple’s statements and efforts when applying an objective standard. But before this Court can evaluate the entirety of the parties’ understandings and expectations, it requires some level of privity to exist between Ripple and the purchaser. Amici’s extensive research has not found a single case where an investment contract was found absent some level of privity or contact between the promoter and the buyer. In sum, the SEC cannot offer this Court a single citation in 76 years of caselaw, handed down from the Supreme Court, or any federal appellate court within the U.S., where an investment contract was found when there existed absolutely no contact or privity between the promoter/seller and the purchaser. In fact, every single case the SEC cites in its motion papers (ECF 640, 674), involves actual contracts, express or implied, written or oral, between the promoter and the purchaser. Yet, even in cases where there were actual contracts between the promotor and the purchaser, the SEC often relies on expert testimony to provide a causal link, establishing the purchaser’s reasonable expectation of profits derived from the promoter’s statements and efforts. For example, in Telegram, to establish a reasonable expectation of profits derived from the promoter, the SEC relied on the same expert it discarded in this case. 448 F. Supp. 3d at fn.11 (Citing Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 33 of 39
 26 Expert One’s report at ¶ 28 establishing that the Gram token purchasers expected profits derived from Telegram’s efforts because no consumptive intent or use existed).   In sum, the SEC has failed to show that XRP purchasers relied on Ripple’s efforts. If anything, the SEC’s own argument proves the exact opposite to be true. According to the SEC, Ripple failed to find a “use for XRP until the ODL product, which did not occur until 2018.” ECF 674 at 45. Even worse, Ripple “did not sell XRP for its purported 'use’ to any ODL customer until mid-2020.” Id. According to the SEC, in 2012 “no use case existed” for XRP. ECF 46 ¶ 396. Thus, it took Ripple over 6 years to find a “use” for XRP and 8 years to make its first sale of XRP for “its purported use.” ECF 674 at 45. No XRP holder could have a reasonable expectation of profits based on those efforts. The SEC’s argument here, demonstrates a fundamental misunderstanding of how an open permission-less decentralized distributed ledger blockchain technology operates and functions. While Ripple was spending years attempting to disrupt an entrenched half-century old legacy banking system, XRP holders, comprising of users, developers, vendors, merchants, content distributors, and small businesses, like TapJets (ECF 661) and SpendTheBits (ECF 684) were developing independent use cases for XRP. See e.g., XRPL Uses, Deaton Decl. Ex. FF (listing companies and developers “around the world that leverage the XRP Ledger to solve interesting problems across a variety of industries and use cases.”). The XRP purchaser affidavits demonstrate that XRP holders “do not need to rely on the efforts of Ripple to generate a profit or to receive any financial benefit.” ECF 655-1-26. XRP holders explain how they receive a financial benefit - independent of Ripple - by owning XRP itself. Id. XRP holders explain how they “utilize [their] XRP as collateral to obtain financing” for a fiat loan or they “stake (i.e., loan) [their] XRP on digital trading platforms (i.e., Nexo, Celsius, Bitrue, and/or other trading platforms).” Id. XRP holders explain that by “staking/loaning [their] Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 34 of 39
 27 XRP on these platforms, [they’re] able to earn interest and/or receive additional compensation.” Id. In short, the token itself generates a benefit to the holders by loaning or collateralizing their XRP. Id.; see also, Binance Earn, Deaton Decl. Ex. GG (offering 1-4% APR for staking XRP); also, CoinLoan, Deaton Decl. Ex. HH (stating “Get a loan backed by your XRP” at “4.9% annually”). The ability to loan or collateralize XRP requires denial of the SEC’s summary judgment because the Supreme Court made clear that when a buyer “(has) been left to (its) own devices for realizing upon (its) rights” there is no investment contract. 320 U.S. 344 at 348. The SEC fails to understand, that if Ripple ceased to exist, XRP, XRP holders, and companies, like SpendTheBits (ECF 684) could flourish. In fact, if Ripple’s XRP escrow were burned or confiscated, basic supply and demand economics suggests a price increase for XRP (assuming half of the existing supply were destroyed). In short, individual holders and businesses within the XRP ecosystem, could benefit in Ripple’s demise. See ECF 684 (“[I]f STB were to scale, it could, in theory, become a competitor to Ripple’s ODL system”). Amici are confident in stating, that such a scenario, certainly does not “fit” into the common enterprise or joint venture scheme the Howey Court envisioned capturing when determining an investment contract. See Howey, 328 U.S. at 300 (“The Howey test asks whether the transaction involves “all the elements of a profit-seeking business venture.”). The indisputable truth is that XRP holders are not in a common enterprise with Ripple or each other. Some XRP holders loan out their XRP, while others do not. Thus, some XRP holders, who choose to stake/loan or collateralize their XRP, benefit financially while Ripple or other XRP holders do not. The opposite is also true. Recently, a company called Celsius, filed for bankruptcy. See Celsius files for bankruptcy, Deaton Decl. Ex. II. XRP holders who loaned Celsius their XRP, suffered financial losses Ripple and other XRP holders did not. The Celsius bankruptcy example destroys any claim of horizontal Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 35 of 39
 28 commonality. Revak, 18 F.3d at 88 (“[t]he rents and expenses attributable to each unit were not shared…but were instead the sole responsibility of the unit owner.”). XRP holders, like amici, maintain sole responsibility and can “make profits or sustain losses independent of the fortunes of other purchasers.” Id. VI. VICTIMS OF REGULATORY OVEREACH  As noted by Judge Netburn, XRP “has a utility, and that utility distinguishes it…from Bitcoin and Ether.” Hrg Tr. at 11:4-7 (Mar. 19, 2021). XRP’s unique utility is what attracted amici and millions of others to acquire XRP, not Ripple. Since “Howey is an objective test” (ECF 640 at 5), objectively speaking, XRP holders relied more on the statements regarding XRP, made by federal agencies, including the SEC, than by Ripple. To summarize: six years before this lawsuit was filed, the 2014 GAO Report classified XRP as a “virtual currency” utilized in “a decentralized payment system”; the 2015 FinCEN settlement declared XRP “virtual currency”, forcing Ripple to comply with banking laws, not securities laws - making XRP the first regulated cryptocurrency in the U.S.; in 2015, the CFTC stated Bitcoin and other virtual currencies were properly classified as commodities; in 2018, during the time period XRP was either the second or third largest crypto in the world, the Hinman Speech gave Bitcoin, and more significantly, Ether, a regulatory free pass, but suggested that there were other cryptocurrencies not considered securities; in 2019, the FSOC Report highlighted only Bitcoin, Ethereum, XRP, and Litecoin and was signed by then-Chairman Clayton; also in 2019, SEC disclosure forms acknowledged that XRP was being utilized by MGI; and, the 2019’s Framework, made it clear that a virtual currency that can “be used to make payments” (the use case that makes XRP the most popular crypto) (ECF 661 at 5) – “is unlikely to satisfy Howey.” ECF 429-4. Considering these indisputable facts, it is difficult to comprehend, after seven and half years of XRP being publicly Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 36 of 39
 29 traded, why the Grundfest warning was completely disregarded. The SEC was well aware that the mere filing of this case would cause “multi-billion losses to innocent third parties.” Grundfest Letter at 2. His warning was more than accurate because the damages were “more than $15 billion, and the disruption of numerous innovative applications of XRP” resulted. ECF 86 at 2; see also, ECF 684 at 2. Buried underneath the $15 billion in losses are real people who have been severely harmed (ECF 665-1-26), not by market volatility, but because, at best, the SEC fundamentally misunderstands the underlying technology, or at worst, has been “deliberately misleading so as to arrogate for the SEC optionality as this litigation progresse[d].” ECF 86 at 2.  Considering how this case was filed, coupled with unprovable allegations, “raises fundamental fairness questions about the exercise of Commission discretion.” Grundfest Letter at 2. Ex. B; see also ECF 186 at 6, 567 at 4, n.2. There is no doubt that many acquired XRP for consumption. ECF 655-1-26. There is no doubt, XRP was also acquired for investment, usually in conjunction with Bitcoin and Ether. Id. XRP holders who did invest, however, didn’t because of Ripple. But because of the sweeping allegations, thousands of innocent holders’ life savings and retirement accounts are frozen, unable to convert their XRP into Bitcoin, Ether or USD. Id. Until this Court issues a ruling, these XRP holders are unable to access their funds, including if they experience a life-altering event. Id. In the meantime, blockchain innovation has halted at the American border. Id.; ECF 684 at 2. In truth, the SEC is using this case as a quasi-declaratory judgment to test an implausible theory, developed after conducting its own failed Howey analysis. See Writ at 12 (“The [SDNY] supplies the exclusive method for testing the validity of the Commission’s complaint against Ripple.”), compared with, ECF 413 at 8 (enforcement lawyers conducted an XRP Howey memorandum, dated June 13, 2018, but “did not present a recommendation to the SEC.”). Hence, it becomes undeniable, that this case serves as a test case to expand the SEC’s Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 37 of 39
 30 jurisdictional reach into a burgeoning asset class, riddled in confusion and regulatory uncertainty - much of it caused by the SEC itself. It is undeniable because in 2018 (before becoming Chairman), Gary Gensler cautioned that the digital asset markets lacked regulatory clarity and that “even for Ripple, needs for there to be clarity in the market.” See Gensler Blockchain Interview, Deaton Decl. Ex. JJ. But today, as Chair, he claims that “rules related to crypto assets are well-settled” and “[t]he test to determine whether a crypto asset is a security is clear.” See Gensler Remarks, Deaton Decl. Ex. KK. The only thing clear, is that the SEC has asserted allegations it cannot prove. There are 4,343,575 XRP accounts, along with 7,723,297 Trust-Lines connected to the XRPL. XRPL Stats, Deaton Decl. Ex. LL. In other words, there are millions of XRP holders being held hostage as collateral damage while the SEC engages in a jurisdictional power grab. Those innocent holders have been abandoned by the SEC “adopting its litigation positions to further its desired goal, and not out of a faithful allegiance to the law.” ECF 531 at 6.  On behalf of the six individual XRP holders, in their individual capacities, as well as the millions of XRP holders, whose interests are embodied in the interests of amici curiae, we extend deep and sincere gratitude to the Court for allowing and considering amici curiae’s perspective during this litigation and at summary judgment. After two long years of tedious and distressing litigation, a decentralized community of users, investors, developers, and small businesses, anxiously await Your Honor’s decision.  VII. CONCLUSION Amici curiae respectfully request this Honorable Court deny the SEC’s motion for summary judgment because genuine issues of material facts exist. Respectfully, the Court should grant the Defendants’ motion for summary judgment because no reasonable jury could decide in favor of the SEC’s exceedingly overbroad theory.  Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 38 of 39
Case 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN   Document 708   Filed 11/15/22   Page 39 of 39
John Deaton
Crypto Law US
LD 990
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brakey, thank you for the invitation to offer this testimony to 
the Financial Services Committee in regards to LD 990, which would authorize 
certain financial institutions in Maine to accept virtual currency deposits.
My name is John Deaton and I’m an attorney who is currently representing tens of 
thousands of digital asset holders from Maine and the other 50 states as well as scores
of countries around the world, who have been harmed by a federal government that 
has refused to set clear rules or move legislation as you are considering doing today.
Allowing special purpose financial institutions to custody digital assets for customers 
is an important step that other states like Wyoming have taken. It is the first of many 
steps for providing clear regulatory guidance on digital assets within your state’s 
sovereign powers to regulate commerce. It will raise questions about custody of 
digital assets, consumer protections, how you will classify digital assets and how their
use in Maine will align with your state’s commercial code.
As a lawyer and as a digital asset holder myself, let me help make a few important 
things very clear. Digital assets are simply lines of computer code which provide 
some use or purpose to the user based on the platform that the code is native to. They 
are not scary or sinister. They have usefulness based on what they were designed to 
do. Many might have no useful purpose, while many others have great utility and can 
offer cost-saving and efficiencies to our economy that can be a great benefit to the 
people of Maine and the rest of this country. A token itself is not a security and 
should not be regulated as one. Over 70 years of federal case law, in my view, proves 
that, so please don’t fear the technology as it poses to threat to anyone. How some 
people might package and sell it is a different matter that can be covered by other 
laws, but that has nothing to do with the computer code that makes up the asset. So, 
depositing it in a special purpose financial institution is a perfectly reasonable act that 
should be allowed in the state of Maine.
I must also share a warning to you. I mentioned I represent tens of thousands of 
digital asset holders currently embattled with the federal agency that is supposed to be
defending their interests – the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. The actions
of that agency and others in the federal government in recent times is actively 
threatening not only digital asset holders like my clients, but they are threatening your
right and ability as a state to pass legislation like this.
I’d like your consent, Mr. Chairman, to share a legal memorandum by the respected 
Washington, D.C., law firm Cooper & Kirk which details the various ways in which 
federal banking regulators are illegally trying to financially suffocate legal U.S. 
businesses who have violated no laws or regulations in their use of digital assets. It is 
being called Operation Choke Point 2.0, and this law firm has relevant experience and
important evidence to share with this committee in this memo. It explains how federal
regulators are seeking to undermine Maine and the private sector in this state through 
these actions against anyone who uses this technology in their business.
Furthermore, Mr. Chairman, I request your consent to share a legal brief I filed with 
the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York in the case of SEC v. 
Ripple Labs, a landmark case which may set a sweeping precedent on how digital 
assets can and cannot be regulated by the SEC under the 1933 Securities Act and 
subsequent case law. I filed this amicus brief on behalf of over 75,000 holders of the 
XRP virtual currency who were grievously harmed by the SEC’s lawsuit against 
Ripple in December 2020. The details of the critical legal points for this committee’s 
information are all in this document so I won’t take up time explaining them. I will 
just say that like the federal banking regulators, the SEC is operating far outside what 
Congress authorized it to do nearly a century ago in suing legally operating 
companies like Ripple. In the process, it harmed my clients and thousands of others 
with this lawsuit and others like it. I have also spoken to Members of Congress to 
urge them to do what you are doing here today, to move on legislation and end the 
lack of regulatory clarity that lets power-hungry regulators like the SEC to overreach 
and abuse law-abiding companies and asset holders.
As much as I commend you for LD 990 and other such bills that will hopefully 
follow, anything that you do as a legislature will become meaningless if the federal 
government succeeds at its legal strategies like through federal lawsuits such as the 
Ripple case, or other acts of gross overreach designed to wipe out blockchain 
technology and its legal use in the United States.
I not only strongly urge you to adopt this legislation, but I also urge you to consider 
your own political and legal actions to defend your right and ability as the State of 
Maine to adopt this legislation and provide such legal ground for the use of digital 
assets. This could include amicus filings in federal cases that appear destined to 
follow soon against American companies, as well as public and political 
communications to federal authorities to stop their declared war on crypto in America.
I am eager to offer my assistance to you as political leaders as well as an institution to
explore your options for pushing back against this federal overreach and abuse. I 
appreciate your attention and consideration.
