banks serving those sectors. Virtual currency may have some utility for 
payment transfers, but recent events have exposed virtual currency price 
volatility and the potential use of crypto in theft and fraud, which have led to 
huge losses. Consumers owning virtual currency have also felt negative 
impacts. 
The turmoil has highlighted a variety of risks for banks involved with 
the crypto sector. Federal authorities are currently assessing whether and 
how crypto activities in a bank may be conducted in a manner that 
addresses safety and soundness, consumer protection, and compliance 
with anti-money laundering laws. Federal banking authorities have issued 
several warnings to banks urging extreme caution when working with 
crypto businesses or crypto assets. ln a joint statement, the Federal 
Reserve, OCC and FDIC explained that “Based on the agencies current 
understanding and experience to date, the agencies believe that issuing or 
holding as principal crypto-assets is highly likely to be inconsistent with 
safe and sound banking practices. ” Joint Statement on Crypto-Asset Risks 
to Banking Organizations, Jan 3, 2023. 
importantly, L.D. 990 is broadly written and would allow a Maine 
uninsured bank to hold virtual currency in the manner warned against in the 
joint statement. 
The Bureau would like to emphasize that the caution expressed by 
federal regulators means that even if Maine authorizes an uninsured bank 
to accept virtual currency deposits, such a bank would likely be unable to 
begin operations. This is because the Federal Reserve is a gatekeeper to 
the payment system for new banks. A bank must have a Master Account 
with the Federal Reserve to transfer money electronically for banking 
business, including consumer payments and redemptions. The Federal 
Reserve has recently made it clear in rulemaking that it will apply its most 
strict scrutiny to master account requests from state-chartered banks 
without a federal financial regulator. Heightened scrutiny from the Federal 
Reserve is particularly likely if the bank applying for a Master Account 
wants to engage in the crypto sector. In fact, the Federal Reserve has 
refused to provide Master Accounts to state-chartered crypto-related 
Special Purpose Depository institutions located in other states. At this time, 
the Bureau does not believe a Maine uninsured bank would obtaina 
Master Account at the Federal Reserve, severely impeding its ability to 
conduct business.
With all that has transpired in the past year, the Bureau, like most 
observers, believes that crypto and virtual currency is at an inflexion point. 
We simply do not know what the crypto sector will look like, or how it will be 
regulated to protect consumers in the future. The proposed bill places the 
authority to accept virtual currency within an existing supervisory 
framework in the Maine Banking Code. That framework is inadequate, as it 
simply does not contemplate supervision of crypto banks and how best to 
ensure safe and sound crypto-banking practices. Maine should not allow 
this activity until it has the benefit of knowledge and best practices under 
development by other regulators currently working to resolve issues and 
problems created by new entrants to the sector. 
By way of background, there are no Maine-chartered uninsured 
banks, and we have not received any applications to establish a virtual 
currency bank. Note also that only a small number of other states still allow 
uninsured bank charters. The reason is not only because of a lack of 
federal deposit insurance for depositors, but also because state regulators 
must liquidate such banks without the assistance of a federal insurer. 
Without the strong federal liquidation authority of the FDIC, a state would 
have to conduct the liquidation itself and possibly be forced to absorb 
liquidation expenses. For these reasons, states are cautious about 
uninsured charters, and the recent instances of fraud and failure in the 
crypto sector only adds to existing supervisory concerns. 
Finally, the Administration is always interested in innovation and 
business development in Maine, however, it does not believe the time is 
right for this type of banking activity. Volatility, fraud and consumer harm in 
the sector demands that Maine take a careful approach. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I would be 
happy to answer any questions from the Committee.
