Adam Rice
South Portland, Church Of Safe Injection
LD 1159
Dear Committee Members,
My name is Adam Rice, I am 33 years old, and am currently a resident of South 
Portland. I identify as a person in long term recovery from substance use disorder; and
am a person living with chronic, treatment-resistant mental illness. I am currently 
housed but have lived experience of being homeless and utilizing the social services 
available at that time. To this day I still have many friends living on the streets and 
struggling with addiction. I am writing this testimony today to urge that you all 
support the bill LD 1159: An Act to Establish a Pilot Project Regarding Harm 
Reduction Health Centers.
Over the course of the last 10 years I have experienced 68 people I was close with 
dying from either suicide, overdose, or murder. It is my belief that had these people 
been able to access a harm reduction center, many would still be alive today. Not only
do these centers help by providing sterile supplies and narcan at no cost; but they also 
educate people who use drugs how to use safely, and how to prevent and/or respond 
to an overdose. In my opinion, there should be supervised injection facilities in 
addition to more harm reduction centers; that way people dont need to use alone, and 
they can be rescued in case of emergency. Last year in Maine, 716 people died from 
overdoses. All of those deaths could have been prevented and its worth noting that 
there has never been an overdose death in a harm reduction center. It is my 
understanding that Rhode Island passed similar legislation a few years ago and has 
seen a positive impact since it was implemented.
Currently I work for a non-profit organization called The Church of Safe Injection. 
We operate a CDC certified SSP (syringe service program) in Lewiston. Part of my 
job is to also work 4 days a week in Portland at Amistad's SSP. Though both of these 
organizations are NOT supervised injection sites, they are still harm reduction health 
centers. In both locations clients can access syringe exchange services free of 
judjment or stigma while remaining anonymous due to confidentiality policies. 
Clients are also able to recieve education, get connected to services, receive peer 
support, and be plugged into a sense of community. In addition to those listed 
services, folks can also access help with wound care which minimizes the likelyhood 
of community members experiencing more serious health issues. 
Between both organizations we are doing outreach services in Cumberland County, 
Oxford County, and Androscoggin County. We are continuing to make positive 
connections with housed folks as well as people living outside or in the shelter. These 
outreach efforts go beyond mobile SSP programming. Often we will help these 
individuals with  food, hot beverages, wound care assistance, sleeping bags, clothing, 
and more. We use these days to encourage individuals living outside to come to our 
harm reduction drop in center where we can help refer them to services if they are 
interested. We also work with our clients that live outside to help with trash removal, 
and the collection of used syringes at various sites which we later dispose of via a 
hazardous waste company. At all locations served by both organizations we try to do 
the absolute most we can for the folks we encounter. We show them all love and treat 
them with dignity.
In the same way Recovery Community Centers help sober folks in recovery and 
provide needed services; Harm Reduction Centers help people who use drugs have a 
safe place to be, where they can receive the help they need. Both types of community 
centers     are vital to public health in Maine; and both save lives. As outlined above, 
harm reduction centers are so much more than just syringe service programming. We 
truly need more HRC's throughout the state. This will save lives, prevent death, create
more pathways to recovery, and facilitate more positive change for our community 
members. The lives of people who use drugs matter, and HRC's are crucial to reduce 
stigma and judgement so these community members feel safe and comfortable enough
to ask for help. With or without supervised injection services, HRC's do so much 
good for a population that has been historically shamed or ignored. It's time we 
rethink how we respond to substance use disorder and how we treat those afflicted by 
it. 
In closing, I would ask that this committe approve this piece of legislation. Too 
many people are dying, and that phenomenon is increasing rapidly each year due to 
the abundance of fentanyl and xylazine in the drug supply. It is nearly impossible for 
people who use drugs to stay safe without the existence of HRC's. None of these 
individuals can get sober or improve their lives if they are dead; and HRC's help 
prevent those deaths while also creating bridges to recovery. These are mothers, 
daughters, fathers, sons, and siblings. Every person who uses drugs that dies leaves 
behind a family stricken with grief. We as a state should be doing everything we can 
to stop these waves of death. We should be doing everything we can to save as many 
lives as we can without barriers, conditions, or stigma. HRC's are that solution, and 
they will lead to much more positive changes while improving public health greatly. I 
appreciate you all taking the time to read my thoughts, and thank you for considering 
moving forward with this bill. 
Best Wishes,
Adam Rice
Church of Safe Injection
Lead Peer Navigator For Southern Maine
