Testimony for our beloved Jesse 
Founder of Overdose Prevention Society, and the Church of Safe injection 
Written by his mother, Catherine Nash 
4/ 10/ 2023 
My name is Catherine Nash, l reside in Massachusetts, i am the mother of Jesse Harvey, and i am here to 
testify in favor of LD 1159. 
i am proud to call myself Jesse's mother. Jesse lived and died for all the people suffering from the disease 
of Substance Use Disorder. Such resolve and strong commitment on your part to do the right thing and 
support this initiative that Jesse brought to light many years ago will surely save lives and help get people 
into treatment. 
isn't that your goal in the office you hold? To improve the lives of Mainers? All Mainers. To view them as 
precious people and not just “constituents? ” To increase everyone ’s quality of life? Jesse always realized 
that all of the people he worked with and cared for were your constituents. That's why he always had 
voter registration cards, helped people understand the impact our state policy has on the day to day lives 
of people who use drugs. He was kind and patient as he explained to them what laws were standing in 
the way of real change in Maine. Outside, in the dark, on cold nights, he made sure people understood 
that it's only a handful of people who get to decide who lives or dies in our state. Every overdose death 
is a policy failure, right? While you all talk, we die. Jesse didn't just say those words at protests and die- 
ins, Jesse believed them. And now, three years after his death, what has changed. 
As we well know, Jesse's Church of Safe injection was at one time illegal and Jesse risked incarceration 
and now Jesse's Church is not only a legal, certiﬁed syringe service program, it receives funding from the 
state. So change does happen and can happen. 
Jesse was never wrong in the things he stood for, founded and worked for as his Church bears out. Jesse 
founded this years ago, there is still time to do the right thing. i implore you, on behalf of Jesse and his 
lifesaving mission, to do the right thing and vote for this science and evidence-based initiative of best 
practices. Remember this, each and every life you help to save is a precious person; Jesse was helping to 
give them a voice. 
Catherine: I will probably add at the end, for context since i am reading this publicly to the committee, 
that Jesse was alone when he died in 2020. Perhaps if there was a safe and welcoming place for him to 
go, we wouldn't have lost him. is that ok?
