1 
  
MAINE  CHIEFS  OF POLICE   
ASSOCIATION  
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
  Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com  
Statement of Opposition to L.D. 1159,  
An Act to Establish a Pilot Project Regarding Harm Reduction Health 
Centers 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the distinguished 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Charles Rumsey. I am 
the Chief of the Cumberland Police Department, and President of the Maine 
Chiefs of Police Association. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine 
Chiefs of Police Association in opposition to LD 1159.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This bill directs the Department of Health and Human Services to create a 
2-year pilot project establishing and operating a harm reduction health 
center to provide counseling and health service referrals and a place to use 
previously obtained controlled substances for clients  of  the  center.  The  
harm  reduction  health  center  must  be  approved  by  the municipality  in  
which  it  is  located,  and  the  bill  provides  immunity  to  the  State,  the 
municipality or employees and clients of the center from criminal or civil 
liability. The bill creates  an  advisory  board  to  provide  guidance  to  the  
department  and  requires  the department to report to the 132nd Legislature 
on the effectiveness of the project. 
 
The Maine Chiefs are in opposition to this bill because we are sworn to protect 
lives, and we have not seen enough data to show that harm reduction centers protect 
lives.  
 
Maine has a crisis with illicit drugs. We have set records in overdose deaths for 
three straight years and, in 2022, we lost 716 people. Each of these people had 
dynamic lives and left behind loved ones.  Their lives were cut short, and we believe 
that our community is worse off for it. We have and want to be supportive of every 
OFFICERS
President
Chief Charles Rumsey
Cumberland Police Dept.
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth Police Dept.
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn Police Dept.
Sergeant-at-Arms
Chief Scott Stewart 
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer
Chief John Kilbride
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary
Chief Michael Tracy
Oakland Police Dept.
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 
 single initiative that might save just one of those lives. Like we know - because the 
data confirm it - that more lives are saved when Narcan is accessible, so we have 
been supportive of those initiatives at the Legislature.   
 
We are in support of legislation that help people get off the drugs that can wreak 
havoc on their own lives, their family’s lives and the community. But we have not 
seen enough evidence that harm reduction centers assist people to stop using illicit 
drugs. We recognize that this legislation is to support a pilot project, but we think 
that even a pilot project is a step too far. This project would be testing a theory, 
without enough data to support it, on people’s lives, and potentially risking those 
lives. We cannot support that.  
For these reasons, we would ask you to oppose the amendment to LD 1159 and 
vote ought not to pass on this bill. On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police 
Association, we want to thank the committee members for your work on this 
Committee.  
 
