1 
 Written Testimony on 
L.D. 1159, “An Act to Establish a Pilot Project Reg arding Harm Reduction 
Centers” 
Presented by 
Deputy Chief Christopher M. Martin 
Brewer Police Department 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and disting uished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services: 
 
I am submitting testimony in opposition of the pass age of LD 1159,” An Act to 
Establish a Pilot Project Regarding Harm Reduction Centers”.   
Supervised injection sites do little to reduce the overall demand for illicit drugs. 
Since 2019, there has been a concerted effort to de criminalize the possession of 
illicit drugs. The Maine Center for Sensible Drug C ontrol Policy released a report 
outlining legislative priorities in 2019, and since  that time nearly all of the social 
justice reform measures have been introduced as leg islation.  Safe injection sites 
were one of those priorities. 
The concept of safe injection sites is a coordinate d step towards achieving the 
decriminalization of drug possession.  In order for  it to be functional there must 
be a zone around the site that would allow for “de facto decriminalization” 
allowing consumers to safely transport their drugs to and from the site.  The first 
time this was introduced in Maine as proposed legis lation would have created a 
½ mile radius allowing for use and possession and d eterring law enforcement 
from enforcing laws regarding the same (LD 949, “An  Act to Prevent Overdose 
Deaths”, 129 th  Maine Legislature, 2019). 
Vancouver’s Insite, North America’s oldest and firs t established safe injection 
site, is often used as the gold standard model.  I would strongly recommend that 
people should first tour Insite and the surrounding  area before considering using 
this model. 
2 
 A deeper look at the impact of Insite in relation t o effectiveness, ability to 
reduce the demand for illicit drugs, the effects on  businesses and residents in the 
area immediately surrounding Insite, and crime reve als the following: 
 Safe injection sites are good at what they do, whic h is really one thing, 
prevent people from dying at the location. 
 It didn’t reduce the overall demand for illicit dru gs. 
 No reduction in crime. 
 Overall degradation of area surrounding Insite. 
 Drugs were obtained on the black market, making thi s area a vibrant 
market for drug suppliers. 
 Crimes committed to facilitate addiction impacted s urrounding areas. 
 Most addicted persons that used the supervised inje ction site still used 
drugs primarily outside of the site on the streets,  using drugs when it was a 
matter of convenience and compulsion. 
 Created a de facto decriminalization zone for drug possession, which in 
turn created a low risk / high reward area for traf fickers. 
 Didn’t lead to healthy neighborhoods or people. 
 Community safety issues ignored over the desire to provide safe drug use, 
a resulting public apathy and feeling of helplessne ss contributing to 
unreported crimes and victimization. 
 Limited data involved whether HIV/AIDS cases droppe d due to safe 
injection sites. 
 Slim evidence to show a reduction in overall addict ion rates, marginal at 
best, detoxification success rate very low (less th an 2%). 
 Very little collection of data that could demonstra te lasting benefits. 
Here are additional source links that demonstrate t he impact or lack thereof: 
 https://tnc.news/2022/11/08/levy-tour-vancouver-eas tside/  
  
 https://www.city-journal.org/vancouver-harm-reducti on  
  
 https://vancouversun.com/news/local-news/crime-on-b -c-streets-
lawlessness-made-worse-by-government-policy-not-to- remand-repeat-
and-violent-offenders  
  
 https://www.straight.com/news/1029776/two-blocks-ea st-hastings-street-
saw-more-3000-overdose-calls-just-two-years  
  
3 
  https://mynorthwest.com/799135/visiting-insite-safe -injection/  
  
 https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-what -i-saw-in-a-day-
on-the-downtown-eastside-shocked-me/  
  
 https://vancouversun.com/uncategorized/the-green-ma n/welcome-to-
hell-a-walk-through-the-downtown-eastside  
  
 https://vancouver.citynews.ca/2016/03/14/vancouver- police-union-
supervised-injection-sites/  
  
 https://nationalpost.com/opinion/tristin-hopper-van couvers-drug-strategy-
has-been-disaster-be-very-wary-of-emulating-
it#:~:text=Be%20very%20wary%20of%20emulating%20it%2 0Back%20to%20v 
ideo,communities%20if%20used%20in%20isolation . 
  
 https://nationalpost.com/news/vancouvers-gulag-cana das-poorest-
neighbourhood-refuses-to-get-better-despite-1m-a-da y-in-social-spending  
  
 https://vancouversun.com/health/local-health/advoca tes-vancouver-
police-sweeps-put-drug-users-in-danger  
  
 https://bcmj.org/premise/supervised-injection-sites %E2%80%94-view-law-
enforcement  
  
 https://www.google.com/search?q=vancouver+eastside+ crime&source=l 
nms&tbm=vid&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjRm6ebvo7-
AhWPElkFHbS3BHQQ0pQJegQIAhAI&biw=1920&bih=937&dpr=1 #fpstate=i 
ve&vld=cid:c38bb2df,vid:dqw59WiCIcQ   (start around 24 min mark)  
  
 https://dailyhive.com/vancouver/vancouver-is-dying- documentary-video  
  
  
Attached to this testimony is a position pater by O ntario’s police leaders, 
“Supervised Injection Sites”, that contains referen ce materials relating to this. 
As we struggle with finding workable solutions to c ombating our drug epidemic 
we must recognize that we have to consider the illi cit drug economy and then 
4 
 employ models to influence behaviors regarding supp ly and demand, making 
investments in the realms of: enforcement, educatio n, access to treatment, and 
sustainable recovery.  It is through a balanced pra gmatic approach that we 
can have a functional drug control strategy.  Strat egies that indoctrinate 
permissiveness removes consequences and the impetus  to change, an all carrot 
and no stick approach, which is detrimental to all involved. 
We must recognize that illicit drug consumption is a money-making venture, one 
that organized crime is the profiteer.  The Mexican  Cartels control every major 
distribution hub in the United States with no other  criminal organization posed to 
challenge their dominance.  All of the fentanyl, me thamphetamine, and 
cocaine that we have here in our state came from th e distribution of the 
Mexican Cartels, which has an identified presence i n New England states.  From 
there it goes to other levels of organized crime, g angs, and is further distributed 
at the street level.   
We are seeing wholesale quantity seizures of fentan yl and methamphetamine 
by patrol officers in my area.  Pounds and kilogram s are readily available, this is 
a significant change from years past. 
Our demand is at an all time high, as illustrated b y record numbers of overdoses 
and overdose deaths.   
Supply sources, gangs, are now coming to my area to  distribute drugs to meet 
the demand.  A stark contrast from years past when our consumers travelled to 
Massachusetts to procure drugs for use and sale.  T hese gang members come 
from New York, Connecticut, and Massachusetts.  Gun  involvements and 
violence are becoming more common place.  The under lying reason is because 
its about money, making money.  Criminal organizati ons profit while our citizenry 
is at risk. 
In closing, I implore you to consider what the like ly results will be if we proceed 
towards safe injection sites and the decriminalizat ion of drug possession.  We 
can learn much from Vancouver, and predictable is p reventable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPERVISED INJECTION SITES  
A Position Paper by Ontario’s Police Leaders  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by the OACP Substance Abuse Committee  
Superintendent Ron Taverner , Chair  
Toronto Police Service  
 
 
 
2 
 Table of Contents  
 
 
Executive Sum mary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  3 
 
Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  4 
 
Supervised Injection Site: Eastside Vancouver  ................................ ................................ ..........  5 
 
Published Study: Medical and Public Order Benefits  ................................ ................................ .. 6 
 
Evaluation of the Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 8 
 
Supervised Injection Sites Perpetuate Criminal Activity  ................................ ............................. 13 
 
Organized Crime: The Beneficiary  ................................ ................................ ............................ 16 
 
Conclusion  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ 18 
 
Addendum  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ 19 
 
Works Cited  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................. 20 
 
  
 
 
  
3 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
The Ontario Association of Chiefs  of Police (OACP), which r epresents Ontario’s top law 
enforcement professionals, does not support the introduction of supervised injection sites in 
Ontario. We believe such facilities will encourage, not reduce, the consumption of illicit drugs 
among users.  
 
The resultant financial benefits accruing to organized crime groups from increased drug activity 
gives these syndicates an incentive to engage in vi olent activity in order to maintain their 
dominant position.  
 
Even more disturbing, numerous c ommunities across North America  have been devastated as 
the violence associated with illicit drugs forces people and businesses to move out. Thus, the 
consumptio n of illicit drugs at supervised injection sites will inevitably lead to a general 
degradation of the social and economic life of communities in which these facilities are situated.  
 
The Insite facility in Vancouver initially received an exemption under th e Criminal Code of 
Canada  in order to operate legally. However, in 2008, the Federal Government  decided not to 
renew that privilege, sparking a court challenge by the injection facility.  
 
On September 30, 2011 , the Supreme Court of Canada ordered the feder al government to grant 
an exemption under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act  to Vancouver’s supervised 
injection site. The Court argued that denying this exemption  – thereby preve nting the clinic from 
operating – undermined  drug users’ section 7 Chart er rights because such individuals  would no 
longer be able to access health services provided by the facility.  
 
The OACP, however, believes the evidence the court used to show the positive impacts from 
supervised injection sites is not convincing, in part  because other health -related experts have 
expressed reservations about these facilities.  
 
In 2008 , Health Canada’s Expert Advisory Committee stated that limitations on existing 
techniques tainted most evidence gleaned from the Vancouver experience. The Committee  
surmised  that t he best that could be ascertain ed from the available evidence  was that the 
injection facility had failed to meet its stated objectives.  Finally, the Expert Advisory Committee 
criticized the methodology showing improved public order i n the area around the clinic . In fact, it 
noted that other studies indicating  deterioration in public order at such injections sites was the 
norm.  
 
Supervised injection sites do not adequately address treatment for intravenous drug users. 
Essentially, ther e is only an inadequate measure of the number of drug users that have 
managed to end their addiction because of the Vancouver facility. Indeed, the clinic’s w ebsite 
only indicates a 1.6% success rate in treating addicts.   
 
More problematic, when intraveno us drug users consume illicit drugs, organized crime groups 
ultimately reap the benefits. This has been well documented in the World Drug Report  produced 
by the United Nations.  
 
Thus, the Ontario Association of Chiefs of Police does not support the introdu ction of supervised 
injection sites in Ontario . We believe such facilities would lead to greater d rug use, more 
organized crime , and a deterioration of community life in areas hosting such facilities . 
4 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Canadian police personnel  have first -hand knowledge and experience in dealing with individuals 
with drug addictions  and the problem associated with substance abuse . When police  respond to 
emergency calls involving illegal drugs, they may face a variety of medical conditions ranging 
from jittery behaviour t o extremely violent tendencies. In some cases, officers find individuals 
without any vital signs who require immediate medical attention . 
 
Worse still, users often purchase their illegal substances from local drug dea lers. I t is this 
interconnec ted web of nefarious activity, linking local dealers to province -wide distributors and 
ultimately to national and international crime organizations, which is most worrisome to law 
enforcement.   
In 1997, British Columbia declared a public health emergency i n Vancouver’s eastside . 
Widespread drug use in the  area had led to a spike in the number of overdose deaths and 
reported cases of HIV/AIDS. At the time, medical practitioners thought the best solution to these 
problems was to open a supervised injection si te in the city’s eastside .  
 
The facility was designed as a place where intravenous drug users could bring their own supply 
of cocaine or heroin and inject themselves in the presence of a nurse who would monitor and 
provide any necessary treatment followin g the injection.  The federal government initially granted 
the clinic an exemption under section 56 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act  (CDSA). A 
2008 effort  to renew this ex emption  was denied, eventually leading to a legal challenge in the 
Supreme C ourt of Canada.  
 
On September 30, 2011, the country’s highest court ruled that the federal government’s 
decision to deny the extension of the  existing exemption under CDSA  section 56  triggered the 
claimant’s section 7 Charter rights because it , “…prevented  injection drug users from accessing 
the health services offered by Insite, threatening their health and indeed their lives.” (R  v PHS 
Community Services 2011)  
 
The Vancouver clinic is run according to the existing harm reduc tion model. Supporter s view the  
purpose of the clinic as one that reduces the “ adverse health, social , and economic 
consequences of drug use without requiring abstinence from drug use.” (Vancouver Coastal 
Health Authority 2011) . Indeed, researchers and harm reduction advocates have long  argued 
the merits of injection facilities, pointing to their positive impact on lowering the number of HIV 
cases and reduced health care spending.  
 
The Ontario Association of Chiefs of Police (OACP), however, believes the merits of such sites 
are debatab le and should not be used as a rationale for the opening of similar facilities  in the 
Province of Ontario.  
5 
 SUPERVISED INJECTION SITE: EASTSIDE VANCOUVER  
 
A supervised injection site, called Insite, commenced operations in East Vancouver in 2003 in a 
bid to cut the number of drug -related deaths in the area of the city. Supporters said an injection 
facility would achieve a number of objectives , including:  
 
1) providing users with  greater access to health care  
2) reducing the number of ove rdose deaths  
3) cutting the t ransmission of blood -borne viral infections such as HIV  
4) curtailing the incidence of injection infecti ons such as skin abscesses, and  
5) improving public order.  
 
The core services provided by Insite involved supervised injections, first aid related to these 
injections  (e.g., skin abscess care ), referrals to primary health care and service providers and 
other types of counselling, and needle exchange and other drug paraphernalia, alon g with the 
provision of condoms . (Health Canada 2011 ) 
6 
 PUBLISHED STUDY: MEDICAL  AND PUBLIC ORDER BENEFITS  
 
Researchers in British Columbia published their main findings regarding the facility in the British 
medical journal, The Lancet , and argued the Vancouver clinic produced both medical and public 
order benefits.  The purpose of the  relevant study by Thomas Kerr and his colleagues was to 
determine whether the introduction of a supervised injection site in the  Downtown Eastside  
(DTES ) area of Vancouver  reduced the number of drug -related deaths.  
 
The study’ s methodology was based on a n examination of population -based overdose death 
rates between January 1, 2001 and September 20, 2003 – before Insite opened – and between 
September 21, 2003 and December 31, 2005.  
 
Using data from the Coroner’s O ffice, these researchers compared overdose  death rates within 
500 metres of the facility to the rest of the city. They found that overdose deaths decrea sed from 
253.8 to 165.1 per 100, 000 person -years, a reduction of 35%. By contrast, the overdose death 
rate for all of Vancouver decreased from 7.6  to 6.9 deaths, a reduction of slightly more than nine  
per cent. (Marshal et al 2011)  
 
In addition, these experts argued that Insite encouraged intravenous drug users to use the 
facility, and, as a result, should result in more addicts seeking counselling,  obtaining referrals to 
detoxification facilities , and  even placements in  treatment programs.  
 
Another  benefit from the injection facility, according to its supporters, would accrue to the 
community from the reduced transmission of blood -borne viral infec tions and other injection -
related infections. In one study, criminologists Andresen and Boyd from Simon Fraser University 
argued that, when they measured HIV infection and overdose deaths in east Vancouver, Insite 
prevented 35 new cases of HIV and approxim ately 3 deaths each year . (Andresen et al 2009)  
 
Finally, the previously cited Lancet  article indicated the appearance of the injection facility 
significantly improved public order within the surrounding community.  
 
In the later case, Kerr and his colleagu es evaluated the public order benefits from the 
Vancouver injection site by examining the period from six weeks before to 12 weeks after the 
opening of the Insite facility. They also selected 10 city blocks surrounding the facility and 
gathered data by wal king through these areas at different times on various days.  
 
The researchers identified the following in dicators of community disorder:  
 
 public injection use  
 syringes discarded in public view,  and 
 litter related to in jections such as syringe caps.  
 
Interestingly, they also used a fourth barometer – the prevalence of suspected drug dealers.  
 
Lastly, the social scientists acknowledged that police patrols in east Vancouver might impact 
local drug use; so they evaluated the law enforcement presence. However,  the study did not 
explain how the effectiveness of police patrols was measured.  
 
The researchers uncovered significant decreases in users injecting publicly, discarded syringes, 
and litter related to drug use. Moreover, they maintained that their results  bode well for 
community liveability and tourism since Insite produced improvements in public order . (Wood et 
al 2004)  
7 
  
The federal government’s Expert Advisory Committee (EAC), which produced a report for the 
Minister of Health in March 2008, also cited t his study regarding the medical and public orde r 
benefits of injection sites. The results were significant because the research influenced the 
Supreme Court of Canada decision on September 30, 2011 to order the federal government  to 
give Insite an ex emptio n under the CDSA  to continue operations.  
 
8 
 EVALUATION OF THE  METHODOLOGY  
 
Medical researchers might not be the best evaluators regarding drug dealers and illegal activity 
as compared to law enforcement officials. The Supreme Court  of Canada , however, did n ot 
make such a distinction in evaluating the methodology employed by these social scientists when 
deciding the Insite case.  
 
Left unanswered were a multitude of questions regarding how these social scientists evaluated 
crime and public order in Vancouver’ s eastside . How were researchers able to evaluate who 
was and was not a drug  dealer by simple observation? What factors did they take into account 
when making this assessment?  Did they look at clothing or individual’s  conduct on the street?  
 
These types o f questions were not addressed in the Lancet  study and were ignored by the 
Supreme Court. Even more problematic, the evidence cited by social experts to support the 
positive impacts of supervised injection sites is not convincing.  
 
Colin Mangham and his c olleagues published a 2011 article in The Journal of Global Drug 
Policy and Practice  critiquing Kerr’s study. Mangham disputed Kerr’s claim that overdose deaths 
decreased between 2001 and 2005. Instead, he argued, the original study should have 
accounted f or the greater availability of heroin in 2001,  which lead to a higher than “normal”  
number of overdose deaths in the baseline year.  
 
Mangham argued that t aking 2002 as the first year changes Kerr’s results . In fact, data from 
2002 onward  to 2005 actually i ndicated an upward trend in overdose deaths. (Pike et al 2011) 
Moreover, Mangham argued that supportive researchers should have been aware of the heroin 
criticism since some of these scientists participated in previous public discussions on that issue.  
  
Mangham also stated that  Kerr’s study failed to acknowledge tha t, since April 2003, Vancouver 
police increased deployments in the 12 -block area surrounding the Insite facility. This area is 
part of the city where the injection site is located and which saw a 35% drop in overdose deaths.  
 
The Vancouver Police Department, however, stated, “Yes, four officers per day, 22 hours per 
day, seven days a w eek, for one year from Sept ‘03  to Sept ‘ 04 in the blocks at all times with 
cell phone access directly to them by  SIS staff.”  
 
The officers were paid overtime – at double time – for the entire year. At the same time, 60 
other officers were deployed in a five -block area close to the faci lity and still are to this day.  
(Pike et al 2011) In their study, Dr. Kerr and his  colleagues stated, “…we know of no changes in 
policing policy that could have confounded our results.” (Marshal et al 2011)  
 
In published documents, the Vancouver Police Department confirmed that a complement of 
officers still patrols Vancouver ’s eastsid e.  
 
“What began as the Citywide Enforcement Team (CET) pilot project in April 2003 has turned 
into a permanent, though relatively small (approximately 56 Police Constables, four Sergeants 
and two Staff Sergeants with nine to twelve officers patrolling at any given time), group of 
dedicated officers who patrol the Downtown Eastside, mostly on foot.” (Vancouver Police 
Department , 2009)   
 
Researchers arguing in favour of the Insite supervised injection facility also did not account for 
the extra deployment o f police officers and their likely impact  on community safety. These 
factors, such as extra police officers, might have protected the community from any additional 
public disorder arising f rom the new injection facility.  
9 
 As such, one could conclude Vancouv er’s east side would have been negatively affected from 
the Insite clinic without the additional police officers.   
  
Also, Mangham suggested  that Kerr’s estimate of lives saved by the injection facility was too 
high, a finding reinforced by the European Mo nitoring Centre . (Pike et al 2011) Therefore, 
suspect methodology concerning the estimates of lives saved renders questionable claims that 
the injection facility has not hurt Vancouver ’s east side community.  
 
Simply put, any part of a community  that might host a n injection facility should demand a  
thorough and conclusive research as to how that community might be impacted – something 
existing studies have not accomplished.  
 
The Expert Advisory Committee ’s 2008 report cited three general limitations in making  a cost -
benefit analysi s for a new injection facility:  
 
1. Baseline data for the Vancouver e astside area was limited as it related to determining 
how frequent drug users injected drugs and shared needles , among other variables  
2. Longitudinal studies – the exami nation of the same indicator over years –- have not 
been published concerning injection facilities  
3. Researchers have not made a comparison between the Insite facility and other drug 
strategies, such as treatment courts and outreach pro grams, in terms of liv es saved.  
 
The failure to examine other options means researchers cannot assess Insite’s performance 
versus alternative strategies.  
 
The federal EAC then revi ewed existing research and applied  it against Insite’s stated 
objectives to determine whether  those stated goals had been achieved. The facility’s first 
objective was to increase access  to health and addiction care. To test whether the site was 
achieving its target, the Committee said any study needed to collect treatment histories, 
injection frequenc y, and needle sharing frequency of all who utilized the clinic.  
 
Although debating the medical merits of an injection facility is beyond the scope of this paper, 
an evaluation of the methodology used to collect health data is crucial because suspect 
method ology often produces unreliable results.  
 
Opening such facilities in Ontario without the benefit of reliable research exposes communities 
to potential degradation because illicit drugs are inherently harmful and are associated with high 
rates of local crim e. 
  
The EAC also criticized the supportive study’ s data based upon the self -reported inje ction 
practices of drug users. It  said a study of a comparative group would be useful in providing 
evidence as to whether the supervised injection sites have had a , “significant impact on needle 
sharing and other risk behaviours outside of the site where the vast majority of drug injections 
still take place.”  
 
In addition, the committee reviewed data showing over 8,000 drug users have injected drugs at 
Insite (2008 fi gures), and 18% of the addicts accounte d for 80% of the total visits. Of these , 
roughly 1,500 people  (less than one -in-ten) used Insite for all of their injections.  
 
More importantly, the total injections at Insite comprised less than five per cent of tota l injections 
in eastside Vancouver. Although the Committee noted the approximately 220,000 clean 
injections at Insite, the group stated that overall impact on the total number of injections in the 
eastside area was minimal.  
10 
 As well, the Vancouver Coastal H ealth Authority (VCHA), the governmental body responsible for 
Insite, calculated a reduction of total injections of 2.6% to 4.9%, a figure similar to that derived 
by the EAC. Thus, even if British Columbia boosted the number of injection sites, the overall  
impact would be minimal because addicts said they would use such facilities for less than 10% 
of all injections.  
 
The federal advisory committee also maintained that, although Insite encourages drug users to 
seek counselling and treatment, there was  no e vidence as to the facility’ s cost effectiveness 
since there has not been a study comparing an injection facility to other ways for addicts to get 
necessary help. Thus, the Committee could not reach a conclusion regarding whether Insite had 
increased user a ccess to health and addiction care.   
 
Furthermore, the EAC evaluated the facility’s impact on overdoses and concluded that it had 
saved about one life per year by intervening in such crisis situations.  
 
Since 2006, Insite’s staff has been involved in 336  overdose situations. The Com mittee stated 
that there is no “ direct evidence that SIS influence death rates and large scale and long -term, 
case controlled studies would be needed to show that SISs influence overdose death rates 
among those who use INSITE. Mathematical modelling is based on assumptions that may not 
be valid.”   
 
Indeed, these sites do save live s, statistically one annually. Those advocating for the 
introduction of supervised injection facilities should examine the evidence showing that illic it 
drugs are harmful and also review the correlation between addicts and property crime which, in 
turn, translates into greater victimization of the local community.  
 
Similarly, the federal committee noted that self -reported evidence collected from Insite  users 
and from a similar clinic in Australia indicated that needle sharing was lessened as users visited 
a supervised injection site. However, the EAC also stated, that , “(m)athematical mo delling, 
based on assumptions  about baseline rates of needle sharin g, risks of HIV transmission and 
other variables, generated very wide ranging estimates for the number of HIV cases that might 
have been prevented. The EAC was not convinced that these assumptions were entirely valid.”  
 
The federal committee  called into question whether Insite was meeting its HIV transmission 
goals. Without baseline data on needle sharing and any way of validating the claims of drug 
users on their risky behaviours, it is difficult to evaluate whether the facility cut the transmission 
of blood borne viral infections. Moreover, this begs the question whether this clinic is reducing 
harm to drug users or simply perpetuating the harm that drug users are doing to themselves.  
 
As well, Bayoumi and Zaric, researchers at St. Michael’s Hospital in Toronto, evaluated Insite’s 
cost effectiveness. They argued that the Vancouver facility has not been “rigorously ev aluated.” 
(Bayoumi  et al 2008)  Still, Mayoumi’s and Zaric’s results led them to say that Insite was 
improving health and saving money even wh en they utilized conservative estimates.  However, 
their co sting model has been challenged.  Jarlais  et al stated that their assumptions were faulty 
regarding averted HIV transmissions and these researchers argued that, in their modelling, 
Insite was actuall y responsible for “…about 250 -350 averted infections over 10 years, albeit 
substantially fewer than the 1191 estimated by Bayoumi and Zaric.” (Jarlais et al , 2008)  
 
Indeed, different researchers cannot even agree as to how many HIV infections have been 
averted w hen using a 10 -year time frame.   
 
 
 
11 
 The EAC reporting to Health Canada argued that longitudinal studies were required to , “show 
with any certainty that INSITE is cost -effective or to show that the economic benefits exceed the 
costs.” If researchers c annot concur as to how beneficial the facility has been in reducing HIV 
rates, then claims that such clinics would not hurt communities in which they were installed are 
equally questionable.   
 
Another one of Insite’s objectives – improved public safety – was also evaluated by the federal 
EAC. The committee looked at Kerr’s research begun six weeks prior to the facility’s opening 
and concluded 12 weeks after it began accepting patients, which figured that drug users were 
injecting less in public. They also mentioned Australia and some European injection facilities 
where drug users self -reported fewer public injections. The committee concluded that, although 
there was no proof that drug -related loitering and other criminal behaviour was rising, the 
research c onducted by Kerr’s group was limited because of a variety of reasons:  
 
1. The statistic s covered a limited time period  
2. Kerr’s study did not control for other variables that could reduce drug -related activity, 
such as more syringe d rop-off boxes or police patr ols 
3. Because most injections occurred outside of the Insite facility, the clinic really did not 
have a major impact on how many syrin ges were disposed of in public, and  
4. There was no mention whether the report examined any studies correlating the number 
of drug addicts and higher rates of property and other crime in areas adjacent to the 
facility.  
 
The EAC’s evaluation of drug crime in the locality was similarly critical of supporting research.  
Although the available police data did not reveal any substanti al changes in crime rate, data 
limitations were quite notable.   
 
The Vancouver Police Department’s crime figures, for example, did not account for public 
tolerance of criminal activity and victims who simply did not report violations. Furthermore, the 
committee questioned whether the level of unreported crime and public tolerance was higher in 
the area close to the facility compared to Vancouver as a whole.  
 
The EAC also queried available drug statistics, noting figures constantly change coincidental 
with increases or decreases in law enforcement activity.  The committee stated, “…for the most 
part these crimes…are almost never reported by anyone other than police. With this in mind, it 
is perhaps safest to assume that drug crime statistics tell us very lit tle about the nature and 
extent of drug crime anywhere.” Moreover, the committee pointed out that the small sample of 
residents, local businesses, and police officers interviewed might not be statistically 
representative of the community as a whole and thu s not reflect actual opinion within the area.  
 
For all of the above reasons, the evidence used by Insite’s supporters can be considered 
questionable. Thus, the position taken by harm reduction proponents begs the question as to 
who is protecting the local community from intravenous drug users and their high -risk 
behaviours by placing such a facility in their neighbourhood.  
 
Aside from data provided by Vancouver and Australia injecting facilities, the European 
Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA) is a European Union agency that 
collects data on drug addiction from European countries. Twenty -nine nations provided statistics 
pertaining to drug -induced deaths. Of the reported cases, 81% were male, the mean age was 
34 years -of-age, and more th an three -quarters of drug -related deaths were from opioids . 
(EMCDDA 2011)  
 
12 
 Although the statistics on drug -related deaths were listed, the EMCDDA did not provide data 
pertaining to supervised injection sites and crime in the communities surrounding these 
facilities. Data from the Netherlands, for example, lacked a detailed examination of the area 
adjacent to drug facilities and thus was difficult to interpret.  
 
The limited international data that does exist indicate s public order problems that have resulte d 
in the closure or relocation of some  injection facilities in Europe . (Poschadel et al 2002) This 
was studied by Poschadel et al and cited in the EAC report.   
 
Granted, the Canadian research conducted by Andresen and Boyd is consistent with the 
Australia n and Vancouver evaluations and concluded that the opening of the facility did not 
cause crime to increase or decrease. In fact, the EAC pointed to Andresen and Boyd’s 
examination of Vancouver police dispatch data for the seven -year period from 2000 to 200 6 that 
reached a similar conclusion. It has already been suggested, however, why such results might 
have occurred;  for example, because of an increased police presence within the community.   
 
By contrast, some European countries have seen crime increase i n areas within close proximity 
to supervised injection sites. The Canadian EAC cited Poschadel et al who reported increases 
in “drug dealing around the facility, with several of those also reporting aggressive incidents 
outside the premises, increases in p etty crime…” Thus, although published statistics related to 
Vancouver might not reveal an increase in crime, some international cases have yielded the 
opposite result.  
 
In addition, Vancouver police dispatch data have shown an increase in crime in some yea rs and 
a decrease in others. As a result, crime statistics do not yield much of a trend one way or the 
other and are probably of limited value in assessing the Vancouver experience.  Evidence 
pertaining to the general deterioration of the quality of life in  areas adjacent to the injection site, 
however, did show a clear trend. Most residents likely did not possess the financial ability to buy 
heroin or cocaine prior to the facility’s opening. Yet, they probably financed their addictions by 
committing various  crimes.  
 
We know the Insite  injection site has had a poor record in helping dru g users with their 
addictions. Users living in the area still do not possess the economic means to purchase their 
drugs. Instead, they continue to commit crimes at a similar r ate as existed prior to the facility’s 
opening. Thus, one can say that the clinic has at least maintained the status quo with respect to 
the rate of crimes committed by addicts because they simply do not possess the economic 
means to support their illegal habit.  
 
A high correlation already exists between drug users and high rates of property crime. Inspector 
Scott Thompson, who devised the operational plan when the  facility opened and presented the 
Vancouver Police Department’s position in 2008 to the fede ral Standing Committee on Health, 
stated that , “…linking the facility to crime and disorder or whether it caused crime to increase or 
even decrease is difficult because of the different variables that can affect it.” (Thompson 2011)  
13 
 SUPERVISED INJECTION SITES PERPETUATE CRIMINAL ACTIVITY  
 
Because supervised injection sites do not adequately address treatment for addicts, these users 
continue to commit crimes related to obtaining drugs. The statistics provided by the Vancouver 
Coastal Health Authority (VCH A) indicated that at least 50% of the  16,000  people living in 
Vancouver’s east side are on social assistance. In addition, a 1998 Vancouver report noted that 
75% of the residents on Vancouver’s eastside  have poverty level income.  
 
The lack of adequate inco me has resulted in many users turning to illegal activity to get the 
necessary funds to pay for their drugs.  
 
On average, cocaine users inject six times and heroin addicts four times daily. The approximate 
cost to the drug user is $100 per day. Assuming th e majority of intravenous users receive social 
assistance, they would only be able to sustain their drug habits for less than two weeks.   
 
As a result, the average addict would have no money left over for expenses such as rent or food 
and likely would  engage in petty crime for additional cash. Sex trade workers – an estimated 
38% of drug users – likely do not commit many property crimes , but are still engaged in criminal 
activity to finance their habit.   
 
Because of its lack of success in treating intrave nous drug users and ultimately helping them 
overcome their habit, the Vancouver supervised injection facility likely does not help addicts 
overcome their need to engage in illegal criminal that supports their habits . The Insite website 
contains data for 20 10 which indicates that, of the 12,236 individuals who used the facility, less 
than half, or 5,268, were referred to treatment services. There was no follow -up data on these 
individuals. But, of the 12,236 men and women who used the service in 2010, only 4 58 
participated in Insite’s detoxification program. Of those addicts, 97 detoxified at the facility 
(VCHA) . Thus, the detoxification success rate was 1.6%.   
 
In addition, Insite does not have data on that portion of the drug users who might have been 
successfully treated for their drug addictions.  
 
Similarly, international statistics on treatment referrals and their corresponding success rates is 
also lacking. Canada’s EAC cited Schu et al who said that, although referrals to other services 
are given in su pervised injection sites in Berlin , “…there is no data on the actual uptake of these 
services. ” (Schu et al 2005)  Spain and Switzerland also lacked referral figures.  
 
The Vancouver facility already has a low detoxification success rate. As well, there are  few 
statistics to support how many referrals have resulted in users getting off of drugs entirely.  Thus, 
one could conclude that the vast majority of Insite’s clients have continued to engage in various 
illegal activities in order to pay for their drug ha bits. Since most of the crime associated with 
their habits likely takes place in the areas surrounding the facility, the quality of life in 
Vancouver’s eastside neighbourhood has probably declined as a result of Insite.  
 
Generally, empirical research over the years has shown a relationship between drug 
consumption and criminal activity.   
 
Professors White and Gorman examined trends in drug use and crime by evaluating data taken 
from the United States’ Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM) program. This pro gram 
operates in more than 20 U.S. cities and utilizes urinalysis and self -reported data to evaluate 
recent drug use among those arrested. The professors discovered that, although the 
relationship between heroin use and property crime was largely inconsist ent, there was a 
positive correlation between cocaine and property crime.  
14 
 Moreover, they found a linkage that , “…both cocaine use and violent crime were increasing and 
decreasing in the same years.” There is an affirmative correlation between cocaine use and 
violent and property crime.  
 
The relationship between illicit drug use and crime is also acknowledged by the Vancouver 
Police Department. In 2009, the department published a document – “Project Lockstep” – in 
which they argued that, by the 1990s, the c ity had a problem with chronic offenders 
“…committing repeated offences primarily as a method of funding their drug addiction.”  
 
Furthermore, they stated that  whereas property crime has been reduced “…in all areas of 
Vancouver since the late 1990s, the re duction of break and enters (B&Es) in the DTES has not 
been as significant as that in the rest of the city. The high number of chronic offenders living in 
this area may explain, in part, the lack of reduction in break and enters in the DTES.”  Thus, 
illicit drug users likely commit property crimes to finance their illegal habit.  
  
This argument is even more convincing because government poverty data illustrates the 
economic realities faced by the majority of those living in the area of the Insite facility.  Indeed, 
public assistance simply does not provide enough money to support an illicit drug habit.   
 
Other studies have also shown a strong relationship bet ween drugs and property crime. F or 
example, research conducted by Nu rco et al 1984  indicated that  when drug addicts increased 
the frequency of their substance use, property crime increased. Similarly, when addicts cut their 
drug use, property crime fell. Furthermore, the same researchers demonstrated that criminal 
activity is “significantly greater follo wing addiction to drugs than before addiction.” (White and 
Gorman 2000)  
 
Because the Vancouver facility has done little t o reduce intravenous drug users’  dependency on 
illicit drugs, the clinic itself has maintained the status quo in regards to crimes comm itted by 
drug users. So, although the Vancouver police data shows no increase or decrease in illegal 
activity surrounding the facility, that result might be because drugs users are committing crimes 
at the same rate as prior to Insite’s start. Thus, the il legal consumption of drugs and the existing 
relationship with property crime rates likely indicates a continued deterioration in the quality of 
life in that community.  
  
An examination of heroin treatment and crime reduction by Lobmann an d Verthein  examine d 
the relationship between heroin -assisted treatment versus methadone treatment and the 
criminal activity of 1,015 individuals who participated in this German study.  
 
The objective of these scientists was to investigate whether these two treatments produce d a 
decline in criminal behaviour. They examined data a year prior to treatment and during the 
treatment year , using different data sources – drug users who provided information about their 
criminal activity and police statistics.  
 
Research previously cond ucted by Harrell on the validity of self -reporting regarding socially 
unacceptable behaviour, such as drinking and driving, shows that individuals underreport as 
much as 50% of the time. Moreover, Harrell’s research also shows that an individual’s ability to 
remember the quantity of drugs consumed or types of criminal offences committed more than 
12 months ago is limited . (Lobmann et al 2008)  
 
Since police data also tends to underestimate the actual number of crimes committed, these 
researchers strived to a chieve a “counterbalancing [of] the shortcomings of each data source.”  
(Lobmann et al 2008 ). 
 
15 
 Interestingly, experts argued that their results could be generalized to other countries and cited 
Switzerland, the Netherlands, and Spain where studies all found  a “considerable decline of 
crime related to heroin -assisted treatment.” Moreover, they argued that the Canadian 
experience should yield similar results. Vancouver police dispatch data, however, did  not 
support this supposition. As stated earlier, the poli ce dispatch numbers did not reveal an 
increase or decrease in crime to provide any meaningful interpretation of the facility’s impact.  
 
Data showing that crime did not fall could be explained by the facility’s poor record of treating 
drug addiction. Failu re to address this important aspect has maintained the status quo for 
continued criminal activity in the area . 
 
Supervised injection sites around the world have focused on the individual without adequately 
addressing the treatment component. In our experie nce, however, community safety issues 
should not be ignored when consid ering illicit substance abuse. Programs and facilities to help 
addicts should work in concert with the community and should not jeopardize neighbourhood 
safety.  
 
Vancouver’s Insite facility does not assist in improving the quality of communal life because it 
fails to address treatment or t he broader goal of prevention. In turn , the facility has negatively 
impacted the community because illicit drug users still commit crimes to finance t heir habit.  
16 
 ORGANIZED CRIME: THE BENEFICIARY  
 
Because supervised injection sites perpetuate the sale of illegal drugs, organized crime groups 
in Canada and other countries will benefit.  
 
In its 2007 World Drug Report , the United Nat ions Office on Drugs a nd Crime  examined  trends 
in world drug markets. Specifically, their report examined organized crime and transnational 
drug trafficking.  It concluded, “…nearly all transnational drug trafficking is conducted by 
organized groups.” Whereas heroin is shipped f rom Afghanistan to Russia by small crime 
organizations, cocaine that winds up in North America usually comes from Central America, 
shipped by larger crime groups.  
 
The UN body maintains that any long -term reduction in drug trafficking must be addressed at 
“…its source – the drug users.” ( World Drug Report 2007 ) Clearly, the Vancouver site has not 
been part of this strategy. The facility supplies clean needles and other drug equipment, but fails 
to address the demand for intravenous drugs, neglects any treat ment component, thus 
perpetuates illicit drug use and continued victimization of the community.  
 
At the retail end of the organized crime chain are the street gangs, which sell drugs to users.  
These low -level organizations often use violent crime and intimidation  tactics as a way of 
controlling their portion of the street trade in illegal substances. These offences include the 
“…facilitation of street level prostitution, theft, robbery, fraud, and weapons offences.” (Criminal 
Intelligence Service Canada 20 10)   
 
Moreover, these gangs often purchase and sell drugs from other criminal groups, establishing a 
link between these street vendors and more sop histicated crime organizations. British 
Columbia’s Integrated Gang Task Force (BCIGTF) investigates and pros ecutes gangs involved  
in violent criminal offences. The Force’s Superintendent has stated that  usually street gangs are 
“the soldiers for organized crime groups.” (Ross 2008)  
 
The drug trade operating in British Columbia also has links to the weapons trade , specifically so 
that domestic gangs can maintain the integrity o f their territories.  “In 2007, there were 247 gang -
related shootings in the Lower Mainland, many of them occurring in public spaces like streets, 
parks, restaurants and clubs.” (Ross 2008) B ecause the Vancouver supervised injection site 
has not achieved any meaningful results in treating drug addicts, the status quo has benefited 
street gangs and organized crime overall.  
 
Ontario is no different in the linkages between organized crime and dr ugs. Once these 
substances come in from overseas, in many cases, the Hells Angels motorcycle gang takes 
over. In 2004, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police argued that in , “…the majority of major 
shipments of cocaine we find – meaning loads of say, 20 kilos o r 60 kilos – when we peel back 
the layers we constantly find some level of involvement by the bikers. They have their hands in 
it all levels: shipment, distribution, money collection.” (Sher et al 2004)  
 
In fact, criminal investigations of Hells Angels in Ontario have shown that these bikers have 
established a drug network from west to east whereby a gang member , “…bought cocaine and 
marijuana in British Columbia’s Lower Mainland and shipped it to central Canada  east o n cars, 
buses , and airplanes.” (Sher et  al 2004)  
 
Vancouver’s eastside clinic has done nothing to counter the use of illi cit substances. Drug users 
continue to commit property crimes and other crimes to fi nance their harmful drug habit.  The 
same users then purchase their drugs at the street le vel and profits from the sale of these 
substances eventually f low up to crime organizations.  
17 
 The clinic’s failure to treat drug users so that they can live drug -free lives has helped maintain 
the economic positions of all stakeholders who benefit from the continue d consumption of illicit 
drugs.  If supervised injection sites open in Ontario, a similar pattern of community victimization 
would  arise.   
 
Insite’s current harm reduction model has not worked in Vancouver. Any introduction of similar  
facilities in to this province would be strongly opposed by Ontario’s police leaders and the 
policing community.  
18 
 CONCLUSION  
 
The Ontario Association of Chiefs of Police  does not support the establishment or operation of 
injection facilities in Ontario. Illegal drugs ar e harmful and usually purchased with proceeds of 
crime. Organized crime organizations benefit  from these facilities by having ready demand for 
illicit drugs while the community loses as crime in the area where these facilities are located is 
bound to rise.  
 
Although this paper does  not have as its purpose a  study of  the potential medical benefits to 
drug users, in our view, the methods used by scientific researchers to arrive at their conclusions 
is questionable.  For example, one goal of Vancouver’s Insite facility when it opened in 2003 was 
to address the spiralling numbers of HIV/AID cases, often attributed to needle sharing and 
intravenous drug use. Many experts, however, have found limitations on data involved in 
ascertaining whether HIV/AIDS cases have in fact dropped because of the clinic’s appearance.  
 
Regarding the impact of supervised injection sites on public disorder in Vancouver , the results 
are quite debat able because other variables, such as extra police officers deployed, were not 
accounted for  in the researchers’ studies. When Fischer and Allard conducted a feasibility study 
for an injection facility in Victoria, they found that evidence concerning their impact on public 
order was mixed, and this was “...further confounded by the fact that very  little systematically 
generated and non -generalizable information is available on this issue.” (Fischer et al 2007)   
By most measures, the Vancouver facility did not save many lives, in fact, only one per year . 
 
These minimal gains must be weighed against  the deterioration in quality of life in the 
community where the facility is situated. Vancouver’s Insite has done little to reduce crime in the 
city’s eastside . Crimes  such as prostitution, break and enters, robberies , and car thefts continue 
to occur sin ce these offences finance the habits of drug users.  
 
More alarmingly, if the facility perpetuates the cycle of addiction and, in fact, lures greater 
numbers into this area  of the community,  then local crime is bound to rise.   
The sale of illicit drugs to i ntravenous drug users who vi sit a supervised injection site  will 
facilitate the continued victimization of the community, and only serve to p rofit organized crime 
groups. From March 2004 to April 2005, the success rate of Insite in helping  addicts was only  
2.7%.  
19 
 ADDENDUM  
STATISTICS RELATING TO SUPREVISIED IN JECTION SITES (SIS)  
 
 8,000 drug user s have injected drugs at Insite;  18% accounted for 80% of the total visits  
(2008 figures)  
 Less than 10% of these addicts used Insite for all of their injections  
 Total  injections at Vancouver facility comprised less than 5% of total injections in 
Downtown East side of  Vancouver  
 Health Canada report concluded that Vancouver facility saved one ( 1) life per year by 
intervening in overdose situations  
 Wide ranging estimates o f number of averted HIV infections as a result of Vancouver 
facility (range from 250 -350 over 10 years versus 1191 estimated by different research 
team)  
 Vancouver Police dispatch data from 2000 -2006 cited in Health Canada report indicated 
that crime did no t increase or decrease following opening of Vancouver facility (one 
possible reason is increased police enforcement projects in area during those years; 
also approximately 50 extra officers directly assigned to close proximity to injection site)  
 A m inimum  of 50% of residents of Downtown Eastside area of Vancouver collect 
government social assistance payments ; 75% of those residents living at poverty level  
 Approximately 38% of drug users are involved in sex trade  
 On average, cocaine users inject six times pe r day and heroin users inject four times per 
day; the a verage cost to drug user is $100 per day  
 2010 Insite website data: 12 236 individuals attende d facility  
 Of 12, 236 using facility, 5 ,268 referred to other services (no follow up data of these 
individual s) 
 Vancouver c linic houses a detox facility called Onsite . Of 12, 236 who used facility in 
2010, just 458 participated in detox program at Onsite  
 Of 458 drug users who participated, just 197 completed detoxification program ; 2010 
detoxification success rate  at facility was approximately 1.6%  
 Referrals to long -term abstinence programs between 2004 and 2005 were 2.7% at 
Vancouver facility  
20 
 WORKS CITED  
 
Andresen, Martin A. & Boyd, Neil. “A Cost -benefit and Cost -effectiveness Analysis of 
Vancouver’s Supervised I njection F acility. ” International Journal of Drug Policy . (2009), 
doi:10.1016/j.drugpo.2009.03.004.  
 
Bayoumi, AM, Zaric, GS. “ The Cost -effectiveness of Vancouver’s supervised injection facility.”  
Canadian Medical Association Journal  2008  Nov 18;179(11):11 43-51. 
 
Canada (Attorney General) v. PHS Community Services Society, 2011 SCC 44  
September 30, 2011.   http://scc.lexum.org/en/2011/2011scc44/2011scc44.html . 
 
Criminal Intelligence Serv ice Canada (CISC). “Report on Organized Crime. 2010 ” 
http://www.cisc.gc.ca/annual_reports/annual_report_2010/document/report_oc_2010_e.pdf . 
 
Des Jarlais,  DC, Arasteh, K., Hagan, H. “Evaluating Vancouver ’s Supervised Injection Facility: 
Data and Dollars, Symbols and E thics.”  Canadian Medical Association Journal . November 18, 
2008, vol. 179 no. 11 doi: 10.1503/cmaj.081678.  
 
European Monitoring Centre for Dr ugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA).  “Drug -related deaths 
and mortality”  www.emcdda.iuropa.eu/stats11/drd .  Web. 24 November 2011.  
 
Fischer, B. and Allard, C., Feasibility Study on “Supervised Drug Cons umption Options” in the 
City of Victoria, delivered to Vancouver Island Health Authority and City of Victoria (2007).  
 
Health Canada . Vancouver’s INSITE  service and other Supervised Injections Sites: What has 
Been L earned From R esearch?  Final Report of th e Expert Advisory Committee.   Prepared for 
the Honourable Tony Clement. Minister of Health. Government of Canada. March 31, 2008.  
 
Lobmann, Rebecca.  & Verthein, Uwe.  “Explaining the Effectiveness of Heroin -assisted 
Treatment on Crime Reductions.”  Americ an Psychology -Law Society/Division 41 of the 
American Psychological Association (2008).  
 
Marshall, B., Milloy M.J., Wood, E., Montaner, J.S.G., Kerr, T.  “Reduction in overdose mortality 
after the opening of North America’s first medically supervised safer  injecting facility: a 
retrospective population -based study .”  The Lancet . Volume 377, April 23, 2011.  
 
Pike, G., Santamaria, J., Reece, S., DuPont R., Mangham, C., Christian, G.   “Analysis of the 
2011 Lancet Study on Deaths from Overdose in the V icinity o f Vancouver’s Insite Supervised 
Injection Facility”. The Journal of Global Drug Policy and Practice . 
http://www.drugfree.org.au/fileadmin/Media/Global/Lancet_ 2011_Insite_Analysis.pdf . 
 
Poschadel, S. Hoger, R., Schintzler, J., & Schreckenberger, J. (2002). “Evaluation der Arbeit 
Drogenkonsumraume in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland: Endbericht im Auftrag des 
Bundesministeriums fur Gesundheit.  In: Das Bundesminis terium fur Gesundheit und Soziale 
Sicherung .” (Schriftenreihe Bd 149). Baden -Baden: Nomos -Verlags -Gesellschaft).  
 
Ross, Caroline.  “Targeting Street Gangs from the Group U p.” The Gazette , Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police.  http://www.rcmp -grc.gc.ca/gazette/vol70n2/gang -gande -bc-cb-eng.htm . 
 
Sher, Tandt, and Appleby. “Ontario  Busts Reveal Angels’ Grip on National Drug T rade.”  Globe 
and Mail . July 17, 2004.  http://www.nicaso.com/pages/doc_page168.html . 
 
21 
 Schu, M. Tossman, P. Coll, K. & Shus ter, A. (2005). “Evaluation der D rogenkonsumraume in 
Berlin: Abschlussbericht. ” Berlin: Koln.  
 
Thomspon, Scott.  “Safe Injection S ite.” E -mail to Constable Munish Dhoum , Toronto Police 
Service . November 24, 2011.  
 
Tyndall, M. Kerr, T., Zhang, R. King, E. Montaner, J. Wood, E. (2006).  “Attendance, Drug Use 
Patterns, and Referrals Made from North America’s First Supervised Injection F acility .” Drug 
and Alcohol Dependence  83(3): 193 -198. 
 
United Nations.  “2007 World Drug Report”. Office on Drugs and Crime.  
 
Vancouver Coastal Health Authority. Insite – Supervised Injection Site. 
http://s upervisedinjection.vch.ca . November 29, 2011.  
 
Vancouver Police Department.  ”Project Lockstep. A United Effort to Save Lives in the 
Downtown Eastside .” February 4, 2009.  
 
White and Gorman.  “Dynamics of the Drug -Crime Relationship.” The Nature of Crime: 
Continuity and Change .  Volume 1.  Criminal Justice (2000).  
 
Wood, A., Kerr, T., Small, W., Li, K., Marsh, D., Montaner, J., Tyndall, M. “Changes in public 
order after the opening of a medically supervised safer injecting facility for illicit injection dru g 
users .”  Canadian Medical Association Journal.  September 28, 2004: pp. 731 -734. 
