Testimony of Doug Dunbar from Hermon, Maine 
 
In Support of LD 1159 
An Act to Establish a Pilot Project Regarding Harm Reduction Health Centers 
 
Public Hearing: April 10, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services, my name is Doug Dunbar. I live in Hermon, part of Senator Baldacci’s district, and I 
am writing to encourage your serious consideration of LD 1159. Too many people are dying 
from a preventable cause. This bill seeks to bring about urgently needed change. 
 
Representative Laurie Osher of Orono deserves considerable credit and appreciation for 
sponsoring this vitally important piece of legislation. Thanks also to the bill’s cosponsors. 
Everyone involved in developing LD 1159 are deeply troubled by the status quo. They recognize 
our current ways are resulting in unprecedented numbers of overdoses and deaths. 
 
If you don’t know someone who has died of an overdose, you are increasingly rare. Give it 
time. Sadly, it will happen. Soon, each of us will be touched by overdose and death. 
 
We can decide the status quo is acceptable or we can think and act in new ways. Sometimes 
those new ways are uncomfortable, even scary, until we closely examine them. Harm reduction 
health centers might be one of them for you. It was for me, until I took a closer look. 
 
During the past 25 years, over 1 million people have died of an overdose in the U.S. and Canada. 
Sons and daughters, brothers and sisters, mothers and fathers. In more than 35 years of 
operations around the world, there has never been an overdose death at a harm reduction health 
center. 
 
We need understand how these centers can play an essential role in not only saving lives, but 
connecting individuals with needed information, services and resources. That is the new way 
of thinking. Help people to stay alive and provide needed care. Our brothers and sisters cannot 
get better once they are dead. 
 
LD 1159 provides ample protections to the state and individuals. It invites us to take modest 
steps toward a proven way to save lives and help people. Being a leader sometimes requires the 
willingness to think differently and exercise a bit of courage. If this is one of those moments for 
you, be a leader and support LD 1159. 
 
Thanks for your time and consideration. You have ample sources demonstrating the beneficial 
impacts of harm reduction health centers, but I would be happy to provide additional information 
if you contact me ( dougdunbar@yahoo.com  or 207-299-5626).   
 
