Testimony in Support of LD 1159 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Genevieve Lysen, I have been 
in sustained recovery for 10 years, I am a certified recovery coach and I am the Organizing 
Director for the Maine People's Alliance. Our 32,000 members stretch from Kittery to Fort Kent. 
We are committed to creating a state of Maine where everyone has what they need, everyone 
contributes what they can, and no one is left behind. 
I am pleased to testify today in favor of LD 1159, An Act to Establish a Pilot Project 
Regarding Harm Reduction Health Centers. 
We can all agree that we are losing far too many Mainers to overdose, more than 700 people 
died last year. They were our sisters, brothers, cousins, co-workers, neighbors, parents, and 
children. 
The last time this committee heard a version ofthis bill my cousin Samuel testified before this 
committee. He can't be here today because Samuel died in August 2021 alone in his home, due 
to an accidental drug-poisoning. His body wasn't discovered until 5 days after his death. Sam 
and I grew up togethersin Lewiston. I'm an only child and Sam was like a brother to me whenI 
was a kid. He was -34.years old when he died. Like I do, Sam struggled with depression issues, 
substance use disorder, and though he worked so hard on his recovery, he couldn't find the 
help or belonging he needed to thrive. Sam’s experiences over the years with the courts and 
law enforcement madehim feel worthless, like a criminal, when he just needed help and 
love. When-Sam die-d he was 4 years into recovery and re-establishing a close, loving 
relationship with his son, Nlilo. If Sam had been able to-access a harm reduction health center, 
I expect he would be alive today. As you've heard from others today, there has never beena 
fatal overdose in a harm reduction health center, anywhere in the world, ever. And not only 
would he be alive, but Sam could have also accessed the supports he needed to remain in 
sustained recovery.r 
If our goal is to save lives, we know the creation of harm reduction centers would work. Doing 
so is not condoning drug use, it's facing the reality that people do use drugs and saying that 
saving lives is the most important thing. Until we are able to meet people where they are and 
save the lives that we can, we will continue to see countless preventable deaths. Thank you for 
your time today. 
Genevieve Lysen, Lewiston
\
Hello and good afternoon. My name is Samuel Jonas. I am a person of 
recovery from heroin addiction and it truly is an honor to be standing 
here today in favor of LD 949, An Act to Prevent Overdose Deaths. = 
I grew up between the Lewiston and Readfield areas of Maine, raised by 
an enormous and loving family. Even still, I had many insecurities asa 
teenager; of which, I never properly learned how to cope with. So, asa 
typical young adult experimenting with drinking and smoking, I founda 
form of pseudo confidence. Artificial happiness. Although fun at first, 
looking back I can clearly see that my addictive tendencies quite literally 
went from O to 100 overnight. When I was 19 years old I was introduced 
to morphine in theform of a pill. I was elated. Completely enamored. IfI 
could stop you for a moment, and ask you to recall a time in your life 
when you were the happiest, possibly a particular circumstance that 
completely filled your heart, that is what I felt at that moment. 
Multiplied by 10. Every problem I had ever known up to that point was 
simply gone. Immediately, that was my way to cope. 
It took no" time to spiral out of control. By 20 I was addicted to heroin. 
Someone said it was stronger and cheaper and stronger is what I wanted. 
That’s the horror of active addiction ~ when we hear that someone has 
overdosed, we seek out the source like a bloodhound. I started getting 
into a vicious cycle of losing my job, and then my partner, and then my 
home and belongings, and then going to jail. And then I would snap out of 
it long enough to realize it was all gone, decide to “make a change" , and 
try to piece it all back together. Over and over. I've participated in IOP3 
times, completed an in-house 45 day program, counseling, the whole nine 
yards, and still I would always fall back into wreckage. This is not to say 
that those things didn’t help - they did and they do - but I wasn't truly 
ready for change. I was afraid. While trapped in that revolving door,I 
overdosed twice. The first tirre was living in Portland with my son’s 
mother, before he was conceived, sleeping in our room. She found me, 
thank god, on the bathroom floor, purple with a needle still in my arm. 
The second time was in a parking lot at a local gas station here in 
Lewiston where I thought nothing of it to get high real quick while my 
friend ran in for a soda. He came out to find me barely breathing. 
Thankfully, the hospital was right around the corner. He drove me to the 
emergency room doors and when the EMTs came out and pulled me out ofi
i
i
i
E
i
2
1
i
i
I
I
I
I
i
I
I
I
i
2
i
the car, a needle fell off my lap. That's how fast I went out. On both 
occasions I didn’t even have the time to put the cap back on. It is nothing 
short of a miracle that I am standing here today. If it were not for being 
in the company of other individuals I surely would not be. And even still,I 
may not have been so lucky had I not been around those particular 
people. That's why Pm advocating for LD 949. A safe place, staffed by 
professionals, where active addicts can use and receive education of 
services available. We only change when we're ready.
