ST A T E  O F  MA I N E
  
GO V E R N O R ’S OF F I C E  O F  PO L I C Y  IN N O V A T I O N  A N D  T H E  FU T U R E  
1 81  ST A T E  HO U S E  STA T I O N  
AU G U S T A , MA I N E  
0 4333 -0 181  
GO R D O N  SM I T H
DI R E C T O R , OP I O I D  RE S P O N S E  
(20 7) 6 24-745 8 WWW .M A I N E .G O V /F U T U R E  
April 25, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Re:  Opposition to L.D. 1159, An Act to Establish a Pilot Project Regarding Harm Reduction 
Health Centers 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services; 
I appreciate the opportunity to submit this letter of behalf of Governor Mills in opposition to L.D. 
1159, An Act to Establish a Pilot Project Regarding Harm Reduction Health Centers. 
This bill would require the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) to establish a two-
year pilot program to fund a harm reduction health center, where a person (no age specified) may 
consume previously obtained controlled substances as well as receive counseling and referral 
services. The bill also requires municipal approval of the location of the harm reduction center 
and creates an eleven-member Advisory Board to advise DHHS on the location and operation of 
the pilot center. While Governor Mills supports the goal of reducing both fatal and non-fatal     
overdoses and is committed to practical and legal options in this respect, she opposes LD 1159 for 
the following reasons: 
1.Federal law prohibits the operation of such a “safe consumption site .1” While two such
facilities have operated in New York City for one and one -half years, there has been no
statement by the Department of Justice as to its in tention regarding such faciliti es. Even i f
1 21 U.S.C. § 856 (a) (2) makes it illegal to: “maintain any place, whether permanently or temporarily, for the purpose of manufacturing, 
distributing, or using any controlled substance; (2) manage or control any place, whether permanently or temporarily, either as an owner, 
lessee, agent, employee, occupant, or mortgagee, and knowingly and intentionally rent, lease, profit from, or make ava ilable for use, with 
or without compensation, the place for the purpose of unlawfully manufacturing, storing, distributing, or using a controlled substance.”   
Various DOJ officials have written memoranda (e.g., U.S. Attorney’s Office, District of Vermont, 2017) or op -eds (Lelling, 2019, Rosenstein, 
2018) making this argument, and the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania filed a preemptive injunction aski ng a federal 
judge to declare that Safehouse – the proposed supervised consumption site  in Philadelphia – was in violation of the Controlled Substances 
Act.  Although a federal judge ruled against the government, the case was subsequently overturned by the Court of Appeals (Un ited States 
v. Safehouse, 2021), and the U.S. Supreme Court declin ed to hear the appeal.  See recent RAND report, p. 227.
there were, this could change with a new administration without a change in the law . The 
Rhode Island legislature authorized the establishment of such a facility in 2021, but that 
facility  has not opened and it is not scheduled to open until 2024.  None of the other 48 
states has an authorized safe consumption site operatin g. 
2.While there are many (proponents note at least 200) facilities operating in some other
countries, there is no model that we are aware of that has operated in a primarily rural state.
3.While there was testimony at the public hearing stating there would be no cost to the
taxpayers, in fact, the operation of the facility would likely be the responsibility of the state
as the DHHS would be contracting out the operation and none of the servi ces would be
eligible for MaineCare reimbursement or covered by any commercial health insurance. And
the operational cost, based upon the facilities we have reviewed in New York City and in
Montreal, Canada would be substantial. The medical staffing a nd security costs alone would
be costly. A fiscal note has not yet been developed but, for reference,  the budget for the
operator of the two sites in NYC is currently $17.3 million.
4.The other services specified in the bill – specifically  health service referrals – are supports
we already provide in eighteen recovery community centers across the state.  Only two
counties, Somerset and Waldo, are presently without such a center and we are actively
working with individuals and organizations in each of those counties to look at sites for a
potential recovery community center.
5.There is insufficient evidence to date that safe use sites encourage individuals to find a
pathway to recovery.  Given the let hality of the current drug supply, we should be doing all
we can to encourage individuals to fin d a pathway to recovery, as continuing to use in this
environment  all to o frequently results in a  fatal overdose. Eighty percent of Maine’s fatal
overdoses last year involved fentanyl, which acts quickly and is 50 to 100 times more lethal
than morphine.  Only two milligrams of fentanyl is considered a potentially lethal dose.
Given  that an individual would be unlikely to – and may not be able to – use the facility in
every instance (the NYC facilities are open only 12 to 14 hours per day and only 5 days per
week), the establishment of such a s ite may actually increase the risk to users  by creating a
false sense of security in ongoing use .
In summary, the establishment of such a center, even if only on a pilot basis, would be premature, 
costly, and would be a violation of federal law. We will continue to review the performance and 
data associated with any centers that are operating in this country.  In 2019, I visited the facilities in 
Montreal offering safe use  and we will continue to review the data associated with these centers. 
But, in my opinion, there is not yet compelling data to justify any state action that may result in 
Mainers buying the most lethal substances ever trafficked in this country and puttin g them at risk. 
There are many other interventions that we can and do support, short of this type of facility, in order 
to protect and care for people who are using drugs.  These interventions include our syringe service 
programs, increasing both out -patient and in -patient treatment capacity and providing more 
recovery community centers, recovery residences and recovery coaches. And we will continue our 
robust distribution of the live -saving medication naloxone through the Maine Naloxone Distribution 
Initiative and expand our OPTIONS behavioral health liaisons program as announced by the 
Governor earlier this year.  
In conclusion, a safe consumption site may be a life -saving option, but it’s premature to know and, 
as designed, could put Mainers at cons iderable risk. I will make every effort to attend the work 
session schedul ed for  later this week.  
Sincerely,  
Gordon Smith, J.D.  
Director of Opioid Response  
Email: Gordon.Smith@maine.gov  
Cell: 207 -592-0859  

