  
 
OFFICERS  
     President  
     Molly E. Rossignol, DO, FASAM  
     President -Elect  
     Clifton F. Lord, MD, FASAM  
     Immediate Past -President  
     James W. Berry MD, FASAM  
     Treasurer  
     Judy A. Burk, MD, FASAM  
     Secretary  
     Mark J. Bucksbaum, MD  
 
  
April 10, 2023  
 
 
 
 
Re: NNESAM’s Support for LD 1159, An Act to Establish a Pilot Project Regarding Harm 
Reduction Health Centers  
 Dear Chair Baldacci  and Chair Mayer ,  
On behalf of the Northern New England Society of Addiction Medicine (NNESAM), the 
medical specialty society representing physicians and other clinicians in Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont who specialize in the prevention, treatment, and recovery from 
addiction, thank you for the opportunity to comment on this important issue. We write 
today to express our support for LD 1159.  This bipartisan legislation would direct the 
Department of Health and Human Services to create a 2 -year pilot program to establish 
and operat e harm reduction health centers, subject to municipal approval. Also known as 
overdose prevention sites (OPS) or supervised injection facilities (SIF), these facilities provide a place where adults may use pre -obtained substances under the superv ision of 
staff trained to prevent and treat overdose, prevent deaths and reduce harms from drug 
use (e.g., HIV, hepatitis B and C, and skin infections), as well as provide linkages to 
treatment and/or other services, and reduce public disorder.  
In 2022, over 700 Mainers lost their lives due to drug overdose.i To mitigate  these 
substantial harms to individuals and communities , lawmakers must pursue every policy tool 
at their disposal , including establishing pilot OPS . Leading public health and medic al 
organizations , such  as the American Medical Association (AMA) and the American Society 
of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) , have recognized the growing body of evidence that 
support s the establishment of  OPS  and their potential to reduce fatal overdose death. As 
such, both organizations have adopted policy positions calling for the development of pilot programs establishing OPS  in the United States. 
ii iii 
In 2021, Rhode Island became the first state in the na tion to authorize a two -year pilot 
program certifying OPS . iv Later that year, the nation’s first operating OPS  were opened in 
New York City’s Harlem and Washington Heights neighborhoods . In one year since 
opening , these sites have generated encouraging results. Staff members have intervened to 

 
 
  
prevent over 600 overdoses  and the  number of discarded syringes was reduced in 
surrounding areas .v vi  
The establishment of OPS  is an evidence -based policy proven to save lives a nd reduce 
the negative public health outcomes associated with drug use . Maine can be on the 
cutting edge in pursuing this important policy solution. As such, we urge members of this 
committee to favorably report LD 1159 and support its advancement forward. Please 
do not hesitate to con tact me at molly.e.rossignol@gmail.com  or (603) 703-6253 if you 
have any questions or concerns.  Thank you for your consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
   Molly E. Rossignol, DO, FASAM                                                                                                             
President, Northern New England Society of Addiction Medicine  
 
CC: The Honorable Henry Ingwersen                                                                                                                                                     
The Honorable Marianne Moore                                                                                                                                                
The Honorable Margaret Craven                                                                                                                                                             
The Honorable Ann Fredericks                                                                                                                             
The Honorable Anne Graham                                                                                                                     
The Honorable  Abigail Griffin                                                                                                                                       
The Honorable Kathy Javner                                                                                                                                                   
The Honorable Michael Leme lin                                                                                                                                 
The Honorable Colleen Madigan                                                                                                                                           
The Honorable Daniel Shagoury                                                                                                                              
The Honorable Sam Zager                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
i Sorg , M. H., Soucier, D. S., & Leidenfrost, A. (2022). Maine Monthly Overdose Report for December 2022. Margaret Chase Smith 
Policy Center. https://mained rugdata.org/wp -content/uploads/2023/01/2022 -12-ME_Monthly_OD_Report_final.pdf   
 
ii American Medical Association. (2017). Pilot Implementation of Supervised Injection Facilities H -95.925. AMA. 
https://policysearch.ama -assn.org/policyfinder/detail/supervised%20injection?uri=%2FAMADoc%2FHOD.xml -H-95.925.xml   
 
iii American Society of Addiction Medicine. (2021). Overdose Prevention Sites. asam.org. https://www.asam.org/advocacy/public -
policy -statements/details/public -policy -statements/2021/08/09/overdose -prevention- sites   
 
iv AP News. (2021). Governor signs law creating drug injection site program. AP News. https://apnews.com/article/ma -state -wire-
government -and-politics -health- 89cc2338c855a35c58bfc31c14d38031   
 
v Krauth, D. (2022). 7 on your side: 1 year later, NYC's Overdose Prevention Centers have save hundreds of lives. ABC7 New York . 
https://abc7ny.com/7 -on-your -side-investigates -nyc-overdose- prevention- center- drug -addiction/12511336/   
 
vi CBS Mornings. (2022). Inside overdos e prevention centers designed to reduce harm from illicit drug use. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9YUKwJlXPq4 .  
