~ 
Heeevery 
ﬁadiareeerey 
% Hre§eei 
IN FAVOR of LD1159: 
An Act to Establish a 2-Year Pilot Program Regarding Harm Reduction Health Centers 
Greetings: Representative Osher and the Honorable Health and Human Services Committee. 
I am Jeanne Marquis, a parent of a person in recovery, Selectman for China, Maine; and an 
organizer for Maine Recovery Advocacy Project. I am testifying in favor of establishing Harm 
Reduction Health Centers in Maine. 
When you have a family member with substance-use disorder, you can’t wish their addiction 
away. Your loved one needs to choose the path to recovery on their own. Until they make this 
choice, We need to keep them alive. Harm Reduction Health Centers will keep our sons and 
daughters alive. 
Harm Reduction is not a new concept to Maine. Since I998, this state has allowed Syringe 
Service Programs because we know that clean needles reduce the risk of bloodbome infections 
such as HIV and hepatitis. 
Harm Reduction Health Centers are Maine’s next step in evidence-based initiatives addressing 
substance use. These centers will be run by experienced harm reduction specialists and nursing 
staff who will support clients who have consumed substances on-site by monitoring and 
providing emergency medical care if necessary. All of the centers will also provide support by 
recovery specialists so when people make the choice to choose recovery, they will have the help 
they need. - 
As an elected ofﬁcial, I am pleased to see there is a clause the bill that municipalities have the 
opportunity to decide if a center is right for their community. It would be a choice of the 
residents. 
To the critics who think Harm Reduction Health Centers will enable more drug use, I say 
absolutely not. What these centers 3&1 do is enable people to not have to use alone, enable 
people access to related health services, enable people to have access to recovery services, and, 
most importantly, enable people to live. 
So I urge you to vote in favor of LDI I59. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Jeanne Marquis 
China, Maine
