To: Health and Human Services Committee 
From: Jess Falero, Church Of Safe injection 
Date: April 10 2023 
Re: in favor of LD 1159: An Act to Establish a Pilot Project Regarding Harm Reduction Health 
Centers 
Good afternoon Chair Baldacci, Chair Meyer, and other honorable representatives of the Health 
and Human Services Committee. My name is Jess Faiero, l live in Portland. l am a Harm 
Reduction Outreach Specialist for the Church of Safe injection and l am testifying in favor of 
LD:1159. 
When we talk about drugs and people who use drugs, it's usually in terms that aren't helpful or 
accurate. As a culture and society, we have this tendency to take things we don't understand or 
are afraid of and turn those feelings into a judgment of morality, or of character. Here’s what we 
don’t talk about: why do people use drugs? And why is it we have allowed 1800 Mainers in the 
last two years to lose their lives to an OD? We know the answers. They have been shown to us 
by the many Harm Reduction Health Centers around the world 
We can all agree on this: the trauma of being responsible for your friend's life isn't something 
anyone should have to bear alone. We are a community that has been beaten down by stigma, 
shame, and institutional oppression; and we are a community whose voice has been silenced 
and deemed unworthy. 
At my job we have two main ways of interacting with people who use drugs: outreach and our 
drop in center. Outreach consists of going to encampments where unhoused people are staying, 
and offering services that a health center would provide. We provide needle exchanges, wound 
care, referrals to services, and information on how to reverse overdoses. in the drop-in center, 
we have the same services plus more opportunities to connect with people who use drugs and 
their loved ones and connect them to the care they need. 
Those 1800 Mainers we’ve lost in the last two years? 15 of them were my friends. These are 
people who worked hard. in life, in recovery, in survival. People that have been filling the cracks 
in the system that have always existed for those in the margins of our society but are often 
ignored due to this perceived lack of morality and sometimes an inherent hatred for people who 
use drugs. 
in Portland theyjust opened a new shelter about 7 miles away from the downtown area. They 
have a shuttle to help facilitate getting people from downtown and to the shelter. The caveat is 
there are no needles allowed on the shuttle or in the shelter. Because of this people, who use 
drugs will not be able to access those services. That increases the danger of harm from 
overdose, withdrawal, and traveling and living outdoors in all weather. That in turn increases the 
chance of disease transmission rates due to uninhabitable living conditions. 
People who use drugs survive and save each other every day. Failing to pass this bill and 
create this service will mean the continual rise of overdose deaths and a continued worsening of 
this epidemic that affects every community no matter how rural or urban.
For years this state has ostracized people who use drugs and lacked the political will to address 
poverty and health issues that are major drivers of drug use. For this, and for those 1800 lives 
we’ve lost in the last 730 days, all of us are responsible. 
The members of this committee have an incredible opportunity to make history and be a part of 
changing the lives of the millions of people who live in this state. We can radically transform 
both overdose rates and the lives of people who use drugs. Remember: Not one person has 
ever died from an overdose in any of these facilities around the world. 
Please vote ought to pass on LD:1159.
