Kelly Merrill 
101 W. Front St., #2 
Skowhegan, ME 04976 
April 10, 2023 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony, LD 1159 Ought to Pass 
Dear Chairs Sen. Joseph Baldacci and Rep. Michele Meyer and Members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services; 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on LD 1159, “An Act to Establish a Pilot Project 
Regarding Harm Reduction Health Centers” . 
My name is Kelly Merrill, and l’m an activist, journalist, and 
organizer who has been a harm reductionist since 2017. I live in Skowhegan. 
Harm Reduction Healthcare Sites have shown themselves to be one of the greatest public health tools we 
have to combat the Overdose Death Crisis. We have seen drug overdoses due to illicit fentanyl kill friends 
and family members and devastate communities. Nearly every person I knew by name at Florence House 
women's shelter in 2019 are dead. 
Harm Reduction Healthcare Sites are a crucial component of centralizing access to sen/ices that people 
need now, and will need as their drug use changes over time. Whetherthey need wound treatment from 
toxins in the drug supply or have decided that they are ripe for transition into a recovery program, people 
who use drugs are held in a space of compassion and non-judgement; which for someone in that 
vulnerable state, is imperative to them moving fon/vard and finding the help and care they need and 
deserve. 
You will have undoubtedly heard all of the statistics, about how no one has ever died at a harm reduction 
healthcare site, how hundreds of overdoses are reversed at such sites every year, and how these sites 
reduce cost, reduce the burden on first responders, reduce rates of HIV and Hep C, and provide transition 
into detox and recovery for those who want it. 
This is how we respond to the Overdose Death Crisis compassionately, resolutely, and effectively. People 
dying of accidental drug overdose are being cut down in the prime of their lives, leaving behind partners, 
children and aging parents; and the pain of their loss continues to devastate families and communities 
with grief and shame. It doesn’t need to be like this. Harm Reduction Healthcare Sites are wildly 
successful. I urge you to support LD 1159 and the adoption of this proven pilot program. 
Sin rely, 
Kelly F. Merrill
