Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
l 
The uniﬁed voice for Maine's comm unity behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Q Testimony in Support of LD 1159 
ll' 
"' 
Officers "' 
Dave Mccluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1“ Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"“ Vice- 
President 
' 
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health 
‘ 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP Inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Aroostook Mental Health Center 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"‘ Board Members "'
l 
' 
Adcare Educational Institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health & Counseling 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
| Center l 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
TriCounty Mental Health Services 
Wellspring, lnc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services An Act to Establish a Pilot Project Regarding Harm Reduction 
Health Centers" 
Sponsored by Representative Osher 
April 10, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members 
of the Health and Human Services Committees. My name is Malory Shaughnessy 
and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine's community based mental health and substance use treatment providers, 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance 
advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 1159, "An Act 
to Establish a Pilot Project Regarding Harm Reduction Health Centers." According 
to SAMHSA, "Harm reduction is critical to keeping people who use drugs alive and 
as healthy as possible, and is a key pillar in the multi—faceted Health and Human 
Services ‘ Overdose Prevention Strategy." l would like to thank Representative 
Osher for bringing this bill forward. 
Last year, 716 people died from preventable overdoses, and hundreds more died 
from complications related to non-sterile equipment for substance consumption 
and Maine's inconsistent, contaminated drug supply. There has never been a fatal 
overdose in any of the over 120 existing Harm Reduction Health Centers, 
anywhere in the world, ever. The bottom line is that Harm Reduction Health 
Centers save lives. 
Harm Reduction Health Centers have been implemented in countries all over the 
world since the 1980s and have had a proven positive impact on the community. 
Research shows that centers connect people to treatment and recovery support 
services and bridge gaps in healthcare for people who use drugs. 
Each year in our state the number of accidental overdose deaths rises. And you all 
- and your colleagues before you -- spend a lot of time in this committee room 
trying to create solutions for the problem. Yet, the numbers still rise. And each 
one of those deaths is someone’s child, our community member— a Mainer. The 
proposal in front of you today has a 100% effectiveness rate for saving lives. 
Again, there has never been a fatal overdose in any of the over 120 existing Harm 
Reduction Health Centers, anywhere in the world, ever. I respectfully ask each of 
you, if you want to save lives. If your answer is yes, then please say yes to this 
important common-sense proposal. Thank you.l 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAllianceMaine.org
