PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
. 
www.aclumaine org 
AMERICAN CIVII. LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine" 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 1159 — Ought to Pass _ 
An Act to Establish a Pilot Program Regarding Harm Reduction Health 
Centers' 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, greetings. My name is 
Meagan Sway, and I am the policy director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties 
guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, We urge 
you to support LD 1159, which would save lives._ 
More than four years ago, I stood before this committee in support of LD 949, 
An Act To Prevent Overdose Deaths, a bill that would have -authorized harm 
reduction health centers, also known as overdose prevention centers. In 2019, when 
I testified about the “long, brutal opioid epidemic, ” Maine had just lost 307 of its 
people to preventable drug overdoses. It felt unimaginable to lose that many. Last 
year alone, We lost 716 people, more than double the number of preventable deaths. 
The lethal drug overdose epidemic, like all health epidemics, requires a 
comprehensive evidence-based strategy. One part of such a strategy is to meet people 
where they are, including reaching people who have not sought treatment by 
connecting them with facilities like harm reduction health centers. 
Overdose prevention programs like the pilot project established in this bill, 
have been operating across Australia, Canada, and Europe for decades. These centers 
have successfully prevented overdose deaths and disease transmission, and have 
connected people to treatment. There have also been two similar centers established 
in New York City. Over 2,000 people went in their first year of operation and staff 
intervened in more than 600 overdoses, stopping them before they became deadly.1 
Rhode Island passed a similar bill to LD 1159 and will open harm reduction health 
‘ Dan Krauth, 7 On Your Side: 1 year later, NYC’ s overdose prevention centers have saved 
hundreds of lives, ABC 7 NY, Nov. 22, 2022, available at https://abc7ny.com/7-on —your-side- 
investigates-nyc-overdosc-prevcntion-center-drugaddiction/ 125 1 1336/.
centers this year. The evidence shows that overdose prevention sites work, and this 
is an opportunity for Maine to lead the nation to healthier future? 
Maine has a proud history of doing what is best for Mainers, even when there 
is tension between state and federal law. While the consumption of scheduled drugs 
remains illegal under the federal Controlled Substances Act (CSA),3 and LD 1159 
cannot change that, the Maine legislature should nevertheless support this bill. 
Despite the fact that cannabis consumption is illegal under federal law, the state of 
Maine has allowed cannabis consumption for medicinal purposes since 1999.4 Voters 
approved consumptionsand possession for recreational purposes in 2016. The state 
legalized cannabis initially because the legislature took a patient-centered approach, 
and found that the benefits of cannabis to patients suffering from pain and illness 
outweighed the state’s interest in criminalizing the drug. Maine has continued with 
legalization despite the federal opposition and the direct conflict between Maine’s 
laws and outdated, unscientific federal drug laws.5 
In addition to Maine’s history of doing what’s best for its people, even if it 
contradicts federal law, it is also Well-established that the state and federal 
governments can adopt different laws addressing the same activities and separately 
enforce each within the boundaries of the state under the ‘dual sovereignty ’ doctrine.6 
Under the principle of dual sovereignty, state-sanctioned harm reduction health 
centers will not shield individuals acting in compliance with state law from arrest, 
indictment, or conviction under the federal CSA. Rather, like Maine’s medical and 
recreational cannabis laws, LD 1159 would establish immunity under state law, but 
offer no legal protection from possible punishment by the federal government under 
the CSA. 
LD 1159 asks us: how does Maine as a state want to use its own resources to 
tackle overdose deaths and save lives? The United States Supreme Court has 
determined that the 10th Amendment restrains Congress both from requiring a state 
to enact or keep on its books any law requiring or prohibiting certain acts,7 and also 
from commandeering state actors to enforce federal laws.8 Since the federal 
government cannot, as a constitutional matter, count on state resources to enforce its 
2 See, e.g., Potier C., Laprévote V., Dubois-Arber F., et al., Supervised injection services: What 
has been demonstrated? A systemic literature review, Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 2014; 
145:48-68 (review of 75 articles regarding supervised consumption sites found that these sites 
were associated with better health outcomes for intravenous drug users and fewer overdose 
deaths). 
3 21 U.S.C. §801 et. seq. _.
_ 
4 22 M.R.S. §2383-B 
5 See, e.g., 21 U.S.C. §§841(a)(1), 844(a) (criminalizing drug possession). 
6 See Moore v. Illinois, 55 U.S. 13, 20 (1852). 
7 New York v. U.S., 505 U.S. 144, 166 (1992) 
8 Printz v. U.S., 521 U.S. 898, 935 (1997)
laws, a state’s decision to create harm reduction health centers is within the purview 
of the state legislature.' 
As Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis famously wrote, “[i]t is one of the 
happy incidents of the federal system that a single courageous state may, if its 
citizens choose, serve as a laboratory; and try novel socialand economic experiments 
without risk to the rest of the country. ”9 The laboratory of democracy, at its best, isa 
system in which communities and states can develop community-based solutions to 
the unique problems they face. And, in our federalist system of government, public 
health is a core state power, which is to be granted great deference by the federal 
government.1° Because harm reduction health centers, and preventing overdose 
deaths, is a matter of public health concern, it is especially fitting that the state would 
participate in the laboratory of democracy in this area specifically. 
The ACLU of Maine has pushed, and will continue to push, for evidence-based 
health responses to support Mainers with substance use disorder in an effort to save 
lives, protect civil liberties, and end the failed War on drugs. We urge the legislature 
to prioritize the health and well-being of Maine’s people over fear of conﬂict with the 
federal government. We urge you to support LD 1159, which is one piece of the 
comprehensive response needed to tackle our overdose death epidemic. Please vote 
“ought to pass” on this important legislation. 
9 New State I66 C0. v. Liebman, 285 U.S. 262, 311 (1932). 
1° See Jacobson v. Massachusetts, 197 U.S. ll, 24-25 (1905).
