Nicole Gagnon
Westbrook
LD 1159
LD 1159
Thank you all for being here today, and for your willingness to consider 
implementing Harm Reduction Health Centers here in Maine. My name is Nicole 
Gagnon, I’m a resident of Westbrook, and I’m here to testify in favor of LD 1159. 
Substance Use Disorder is a disease of isolation, and this is borne by the numbers of 
people who fatally overdose by themselves. A coroner’s report from British Columbia
in 2018 observed that 69% of people who died of a drug overdose there between 2016
and 2017, were using drugs alone. It seems safe to assume that the numbers would be 
similar here. 
Two and a half years ago, I overdosed on fentanyl in my apartment one evening. I 
chose to use alone that night because I was ashamed of my use, was hiding it from my
friends and family, and did not feel physically safe using with others. My mother 
found me two days later, blue and laying on the floor. My oxygen rate was at 70 
percent, I was on the cusp of death, and I spent over a week in a coma. I’m lucky to 
be alive today. 
I truly believe that if there had been a Harm Reduction Health Center available nearby
that day, I would have used it. I didn’t want to be using alone, but I couldn’t find a 
safer way, and couldn’t control my addiction. It was a very scary place to be. 
Today I’m 50 days sober, and grateful to be able to testify for this bill. I’ve been 
incredibly lucky to benefit from excellent addiction treatment, therapy, and access to 
Narcan, but there are still many who haven’t been so fortunate. A Harm Reduction 
Health Center is not only a supervised area for people to use substances safely, it’s a 
community space that offers a multitude of other opportunities such as peer support, 
health screening, and access to treatment. It’s a place where people can access care 
without stigma, and it can truly be a portal to recovery. In the midst of an epidemic 
with no end in sight, we need to grab every option and opportunity that values and 
sustains life. Please join me in supporting LD 1159. Thank you. 
