Sarah Manfredo-Daley 
Augusta 
LD 1159
Good afternoon representatives, I know it's been a long day for all of you, but I am 
going to ask that you look up from what you're doing, and give me your attention and 
the time I've prepared for. I'm Sarah Manfredo-Daley, and I'm a person in recovery 
from addiction. A person who, by the grace of God, survived the worst phase of my 
existence. In recovery, we learn to ask for what we need from others, face our fears 
instead of running from them, and to deal with our problems head on and with grace 
and dignity.  I'm here to testify in support of LD 1159 because in my opinion, it's 
really simple. If we are not facing our fears and dealing with our problems head on at 
the state level, extending that same grace and dignity, how can we expect anyone else 
to do it? Maine historically is very reactive with legislation, waiting for a crisis to 
happen before we act, rather than acting proactively at the first sign of a problem. It's 
a little late for us to be proactive with the addiction crisis, but how long are we willing
to wait to react? Right now is the time for our reaction. Overdose prevention sites 
save lives. No one has ever died of a an overdose at any of the 130 harm reduction or 
overdose prevention sites all over the world. Not one. Every overdose where the drug 
user survives is a success story. It gives that individual another day to live and love, 
another day is a new opportunity to wake up and make a different choice. A better 
choice. A smarter choice. Another opportunity to see how loved they are. Another 
opportunity to make a change and start showing up as their best selves. If we save one
life, the bill has done it's job. Saving lives or continuing to allow the stigmatization of 
addicted people to send the message that our lives do not matter? Everyone's life 
matters to someone. The addicts I speak of and whom are losing their battles with 
addiction every day, are someone's children, someone's parents, someone's brother or 
sister, someone's best friend, or maybe someone's only confidant or support person. 
To someone, that person matters more than any of us could imagine. What if it was 
your child? Would their life matter then? Every overdose is a policy failure. What else
do we really need to know? In recovery, we learn that the opposite of addiction is 
connection, let that connection start here and now. Let's send the message that addicts 
are worth saving, that their lives matter, that they are loved and cared about by 
passing LD1159. For me, the choice is simple, we either save lives or we sit back and 
be okay with people dying. I don't know about you, but I'm never okay with people 
dying, under any circumstances. 
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony today, and thank you for giving me
your time and attention. I appreciate you all. 
