I 
% Recover"?' 
'§ ﬁ‘ a&v@aerey' 
% tgrejeet 
Testimony in Favor of 
LD 1159 An Act to Establish a 2 Year Pilot Regarding Harm Reduction Health Centers 
April 10th, 2023 
Greetings Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and other honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee of Health and Human Services, My name is Steven Knockwood. I am the Deputy Organizing 
Director for the Maine Recovery Advocacy Project (ME-RAP). I am also a person in long term recovery 
and an individual who has worked boots on the ground for the past three years with people who were 
suffering with active SUD.I stand before you today to give testimony in Favor of LD 1159 “An Act to 
Establish a 2 Year Pilot Regarding Harm Reduction Health Centers" 
I want to start by acknowledging the many perspectives that you will hear today in this matter. Some will 
be in support of this measure others will be against. All are valid, all hold truth for the individual speaking 
today. The global truth in this issue is everyday people who use drugs are dying and nothing We have tried 
has successfully decreased the number of preventable fatal overdoses in the state of Maine. These people 
are our mothers, fathers, sisters, brothers, husbands and wifes. 
I hold a belief that meaningful change must always begin internally. Unless an individual changes 
something within themselves ﬁrst meaningful change cannot happen. You may ask what that means. It 
means that a person must ﬁrst believe within themselves that they are worthy of that change. That the 
change is possible and that they have the right to determine what that looks like for them. LD 1159 
supports this internal process. The data shows that people who use these facilities in other parts of the 
nation and world where they currently exist do in fact recover. Their lifes undergo a process of healing 
that leads to long term successful recovery. Also, not a single fatal overdose has ever happened at a Harm 
Reduction Health Center in the world. With that one single fact and the data that proves people that enter 
into this care setting more often than not complete a process that ends in long term sustained recovery 
should be sufficient for us to come together as a society as a whole and give individuals the opportunity to 
access this much needed pathway. 
I believe that LD 1159 stands to ﬁnally impact this issue in a substantial way. First one needs to 
understand that Harm Reduction Health Centers are not a place to enable individuals to continue in 
addiction. They are places of comrection. A place ﬁ'ee of the stigma and shaming that individuals who use 
drugs face in all other settings. A setting in which one can start a process of healing that seeks to lessen 
the harm caused by substance use, empower individuals to believe they are capable of meaningful change 
and give them an environment free from the stigma and shame that oﬁen drives individuals further into 
the isolation that results in fatal overdose. 
Some other important facts to consider is that data shows that current SSP’s receive more used needles 
than they give out. This would in my opinion be increased by the fact that they would not have to leave 
the premises with harm reduction supplies, they would be disposed of 100% in a safe way not discarded 
in unsafe ways. Harm Reduction is not just a gateway to recovery, it is widely considered to be a pathway 
of recovery. That the deﬁnition of recovery is any change enacted by an individual that improves a 
person's quality of life is recovery.
w Qecoveziy ii 
be ﬁtdveassay 7 
§ iiiregetct 
Testimony in Favor of 
LD 1159 An Act to Establish a 2 Year Pilot Regarding Harm Reduction Health Centers 
Today our system of recovery says to an individual suffering from SUD, they must be willing to meet the 
requirement of abstinence to receive the support and services essential to recovery. I believe that LD 1159 
opens an avenue of recovery that doesn’t currently exist within our state. Expanding recovery to all that 
will beneﬁt from it. 
The overwhelming good that LD 1159 stands to do deserves us all to approach it with an open mind. We 
need to show our community members that currently use drugs and are dying, that they deserve to get 
better. That they have the right to determine what it looks like to them and that we as a society are willing 
to support them on their journey to recovery. That they deserve to have healthcare free of the everpresent 
stigma and shame in our greater healthcare system. Most of the time stemming from lack of knowledge 
by healthcare professionals. 
Please stand with the many who believe that LD 1159 will create such a change and vote in favor of this 
bill in work session 
Nitap(thank you) 
Steven Knockwood 
stevcn@recovei3§0icescom 
(207) 735-4427
