 
 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.org 
 Hello Chair Baldacci, Chair Meyer, and honorable members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services,
My name is Taylor Cray, and I am the Outreach Team Leader for Preble Street’s Advocacy 
Team. I am writing to you today to ask that you support LD1159: An Act to Establish a 
Pilot Project Regarding Harm Reduction Health Centers. 
At Preble Street, substance use and its associated dangers are a daily element of our 
work. Within our community, we experience the tragedy of overdose deaths on a regular 
basis as friends, family members, and peers are lost to substances. Harm reduction is an 
integral part of the work we do and is built into our internal procedures and is also part of 
our facility designs. Even outside of the direct community of social services providers and 
clients, it becomes increasingly difficult to find anyone in Maine who has not been 
impacted in some way by this ever-growing crisis. For those living and working on the 
front lines of the opioid crisis, the trauma and fear of loss perpetuates our relationships, 
work, and lives in ways that cannot be ignored. 
Harm Reduction Health Centers provide individuals a safe and monitored environment in 
which to use drugs. In recent years, the available drug supply has become increasingly 
unsafe, as substances are cut with Fentanyl and other drugs that are more potent and 
difficult to predict. For many individuals, unpredictable changes to their drug supply can 
lead to fatal overdoses, particularly when there is no one present to intervene and 
administer naloxone, or when the drug is Narcan-resistant. Harm Reduction Centers 
ensure that individuals who use drugs can do so without risking their lives, despite 
potential unknown elements in their drug supply. 
Much of our drug policy response in this country is rooted in fear and ignorance. For 
many years, our policy approaches have sought to address substance use through 
punishment, incarceration, and misinformation. In most cases, these approaches only 
continue to perpetuate the harmful cycles that damage not only individuals, but families, 
communities, and our society. The lack of compassion in our approach to drug policy has 
cost us too many lives, and we cannot continue to allow fear to dictate our response to 
this crisis. As many advocates will tell you all, no one has ever died in a Harm Reduction 
Health Center. This alone should be proof enough that these facilities are worth piloting 
in our state. The passage of LD1159 has the potential to save countless lives across the 
State of Maine. I urge you to vote in favor of this monumental bill. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Taylor Cray
Advocacy Outreach Team Leader
Preble Street
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to 
homelessness and hunger

 
  
