 
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 10 , 2023  
 
Testimony in support of  LD 1159 - An Act to Establish a Pilot Project Regarding 
Harm Reduction Health Centers  
 
Senator Baldacci , Senator Moore and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee,  
My name is Winifred Tate, I am a resident of Waterville, a professor and the 
director of the Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College.  
 
Harm Reduction Health Centers are critical services for Maine communities. 
They prevent overdose death, provide harm reduction supplies, and connect people 
ready to move toward recovery with access to support.  
 
There services are incredibly important, as overdose deaths continue to rise at an 
alarming rate. This bill will allow municipalities that are willing to do so, to set up these 
services in support of Maine communities.  
 
The Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention currently oversees 18 
Syringe Service Programs. Harm Reduction Health Centers are the next step for 
expanding these programs.  
 
There is a substantial and growing body of public health research in support of 
these programs, which have been established in 11 countries in Europe a nd North 
America: Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, 
Norway, Spain, Switzerland and the United States. In 2021, Rhode Island became the 
first state to authorize a site ; and that same year, two sites opened in New York  City. 
These programs have prevented thousands of overdose deaths, reduced disease and 
infections among people who use drugs, and connected people to services.  We know 
from these experiences, and from the body of research collected to evaluate them, that 
these programs work.  
 
We have a consensus that problematic substance use and substance use disorder 
are public health problems, that require public health solutions.  Maine cannot continue 
with the tremendous loss of our beloved community members, family an d friends to 
overdose death. Harm Reduction Health Centers are a critical tool for addressing the 
contaminated and dangerous drug supply in the state, for reaching people where they 
are, and most importantly, for saving lives.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I urge you to pass LD 1 159. Thank you for your time.  
 
 
Winifred Tate  
Associate  Professor of Anthropology  and Director of the Maine Drug Policy Lab  
Colby College  
wltate@colby.edu  
207-859-4701  
 
 
 
Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College  
The Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College brings together policymakers, scholars 
and students, providing evidence -based analysis for addressing critical drug polic y 
issues in our state and beyond, and conducts research on problematic drug use and 
access to treatment in Maine.  
 
