Testimony of Maria Fuentes  
Maine Better Transportation Association  
Joint Standing Committee on T ransportation  
 
LD 1210 – “An Act to Establish a Maine Highway Capital Fund to Provide Consistent Funding for the 
Construction and Repair of Maine's Roads and Bridges"  
 
April 6, 2023  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative  Williams,  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Transportation . My name is Maria Fuentes, Executive Director of the Maine Better Transportation 
Association  (MBTA) , and on behalf of the MBTA,  I speak today in support of LD 1210 .  
Our organization represents over 700 members who plan, design, build, maintain,  or use our 
transportation system including transportation contractors, engineers and suppliers, bus and rail 
companies, airports and port interests, and others committed to investing in our transportation 
infrastructure to boost the state’s economy and quality of life.  
Members of this committee are aware  of the needs of our transportation system . Maine has an 
underperforming Highway Fund,  and this has been the case for decade s. Since fuel tax revenues have 
essentially remained flat, the Highway Fund has not enjoyed the prosperity experienced by the  General 
Fund . This is no  surprise since its main funding source is  the per-gallon excise tax , which  is declining as 
fuel efficiency continues to increase , and hybrid and electric vehicles increase in popularity . Like many  
states , we have been waiting for  years for the federal government to step up and fully support the states – 
as they did when the country built the interstate  - but that partnership is not  as robust as it once was . 
Federal fuel taxes have not been increased since 1993 , so Washington has been continually sending the 
signal to states that they are left to their own devices relative to maintaining their transportation 
infrastructure .  
Certainly,  a bright note in Washington has been the passage of the Bipartisan Infrastruc ture Law  (BIL) . 
While the formula funding for the states only increased marginally  given inflation , there are new grant 
programs available to pursue . Maine has done exceptionally well in securing these grants, largely due to 
Senator Susan Collins ’ seat on the Senate Appropriations  Subcommittee, and her passion for making 
transportation a top priority . You have heard MaineDOT talk about how Maine is likely to continue to be 
very successful with the grant programs, which they consider a possible ga me-changer.  
But MaineDOT has a challenge in terms of state matching funds . We wonder whether Maine could be 
eligible for even more grant funding, if the Department knew they could produce  more matching funds . In 
other words, the state match could be  an obstacle in being able to support federal grant funds.  
MaineDOT’s  state highway fund budget is on life support, and this is not  a new problem . The D epartment 
has done cost -cutting, belt tightening, and even reclassified their entire highway system  so that scores of 
miles of roads can expect nothing more than “Light Capital Paving  (LCP) ,” – which we used to call 
“Skinny Mix” - once every seven years . But as the state gets more desperate for funds, we abandon more 
parts of our transportation system . For several years now, MaineDOT reaffirmed their focus away from 
rehabilitation and highway reconstruction, and toward more preservation . Current funding levels have 
driven our Department of Transportation to minimize their highway  reconstruction program. Instead, it 
has had no choice but to make skinny mix and other pavement treatments the core of their highway 
capital program.  
The goal used to be to complete 600 miles of LCP and it has since been increased to 700 miles . LCP is 
used for “basket case” roads that need some type of treatment,  so the road will not  completely fail . It has 
become the core of M aineDOT’s program because  they do  not have the resources to do some of the safety 
projects like reha bilitation, or reconstruction , on existing roads .  
Testimony of Maria Fuentes  
Maine Better Transportation Association  
Page Two  
 
LD 1210 - An Act to Establish a Maine Highway Capital Fund to Provide Consistent Funding for the 
Construction and Repair of Maine's Roads and Bridges  
 
The funding problem is not a new one , and we are fortunate for the increasing General Fund contributions 
that prop up the HF. Since the King Administration, every governor and Legislature have supported 
paying back DOT general obliga tion bonds with General Fund revenues . That is a considerable 
contribution . The state is fortunate that the Governor and past Legislatures have recognized that the 
highway budget is cratering, and Governor Mills has proposed , and the Legislature has pass ed, significant 
funding from the General Fund for the Highway Fund  – not just bonding, but direct appropriations, and 
more . This Committee has certainly helped by looking at the percentage that the State Police spends on 
transportation -related issues, an d changing the percentage of what is paid to them by the HF so that it is in 
line with the time they are spending on traffic issues.   
To their credit, MaineDOT has historically ranked highly in studies that show they have low 
administrative costs compared to many other states, and that they use their scant resources efficiently . 
They have cut their overhead and operations significantly . In fact, over the course of a few budget cycles, 
MaineDOT  reduced its workforce  by approximately 20% . That is unheard of for a n agency.  
But there is only so much cutting and prioritization that a state agency can do . This committee created, 
and the Legislature passed, the TransCap program which took a per centage of existing fuel taxes and sent 
them to the Maine Municipal Bond banks to issue revenue bonds for projects that, by statute, needed to be 
capital projects, or those with at least a ten -year life . Skinny mix would not fit within that definition . So, 
what has happened in ensuing biennia is that the Administration puts in language, it is accepted by the 
Legislature, and those funds are allowed to be used for projects with less than a ten -year life , specifically 
skinny mix.  That way, those funds can  be used for a program that is supposed to be paid for by state cash 
instead of borrowing.  
We understand that this bill does not offer a solution or funding mechanism for the proposed capital fund, 
but we agree that it is needed, and should be pursued with conversations about how to fund capital 
projects in Maine . One start may be to look at th e recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission To 
Study  and Recommend Funding Solutions for the State’s Transportation Systems , completed during the 
119th Legislatur e. 
Again, even though we hear that transportation has oodles of money due to the federal law, Maine 
desperately needs money for capital cash in their budget, like they used to have and which they need to 
fund federal dollars . We appreciate the sponsor recognizing this and  putting in a bill to continue the 
conversation.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify  on behalf of MBTA.   
