Testimony in Sugport of LD 439 
An Act to Allow Death by Suicide to be Considered a Death While in the Line of 
Duty 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Rick Petrie, and l ama 
Paramedic who has worked in the Maine EMS system for 42 years. I am now the Chief 
Operations Officer for North East Mobile Health, a for-profit Ambulance Service based 
in Scarborough Maine and the Program Director for the Jackman Paramedic project. 
On Monday, April 24, 1995, Paramedic Robert O’Donnell killed himself at his parents’ 
ranch. Robert O’Donnell was the Paramedic that crawled through a shaft to extricate 
baby Jessica from a well in Texas eight years earlier after working for 58 hours to free 
her. He got divorced three years earlier. After the suicide, his brother Ricky was quoted 
as saying “Ever since that Jessica deal, his life fell apart. There's a deal that happens 
when people are in these real stressful situations, it's so hard for them to deal with this 
afterward. ” Jessica survived the incident; Robert never recovered. 
Several years ago l was here with a friend, and Auburn Police Officer, and we were 
both testifying about PTSD and its‘ effect on public safety personnel. We were there 
because we both lived through a particularly heinous event in Auburn on October 27, 
1984. During that testimony, he recounted the nights sitting on the edge of his bed with 
his sen/ice revolver in his mouth because he could not get the sounds, and the sights, 
and the smell out of his mind. 
We need to be better at taking care of our public safety providers; helping them get the 
mental health support that they need to deal with this exceedingly difficult, stressful job. 
But, when we fail, we need to recognize that their death is as much in the line of duty as 
getting killed in an accident, or shot, or stabbed while on duty. 
Thank you for your consideration, and l am happy to answer any questions you may 
have. 
Rick Petrie, EMT-P 
rpetrie@nemhs.com 
207-754-9109
