Marne Sheriffs ’ Association 
‘§‘ _ “One Team, One Mission" 
ii‘ 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President .»ri /4_ 
Sheriff Scott Nichols, 1“ Vice-President, Sheriff William King, 2”‘! Vice-President — Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary— 
Sheriff Todd Braclcett, Treasurer ~ Sheriff Troy Morton, Immediate Past President— 
Sheriff Joel Merry, Past President-at-Large - Mary-Anne LaMarre, Executive Director 
March 20, 2023 
L.D. 439 — An Act to Allow Death by Suicide to Be Considered a 
Death While in the Line of Duty 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Cormnittee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Robert Young. I am the Sheriff of 
Piscataquis County and here on behalf of the Maine Sheriffs Association. 
Maine sheriffs discussed this bill and those present voted to support L.D. 439 - An Act to Allow 
Death by Suicide to Be Considered a Death While in the Line of Duty. 
The subject matter of this bill is very difficult to discuss, and Maine Sheriffs wish to thank 
Representative Salisbury for bringing this important yet sensitive topic forward. While 
evaluating the scenario presented in this bill, the predominant response noted was that while 
none of the sheriffs can imagine navigating such a profound loss Within our agencies, we must 
take a position in the horriﬁc event that our worst fears are realized. 
As we grappled with how to present our support and stories were shared, the enormity of what 
law enforcement is tasked with confronting on a daily basis cannot be understated. Each and 
every day, law enforcement officers are continually exposed to the negative human element. We 
are faced with highly charged emotional situations with the expectation that we’ll deescalate and 
provide safety for those in the midst of trauma. 
Jails are oﬁen referred to as the emergency rooms of the penal system. Our corrections ofﬁcers 
have to manage individuals who often arrive in our jails under the inﬂuence of substances or 
suffering from mental health disorders. Being verbally harassed and smeared with imnate feces, 
while working extra shifts due to short-staf ﬁng, are not uncommon events in the average day ofa 
corrections ofﬁcer working within a county jail. 
Research conducted by the National Alliance on Mental Illness (N AMI) reveals alarming 
statistics in overall mental health of law enforcement ofﬁcers, with primary fmdings showing 
higher rates of depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). While efforts are 
underway to help law enforcement ofﬁcers navigate the impact of their working conditions, 
passage of this bill sends the message that the State of Maine recognizes the toll this work takes 
on its dedicated law enforcement ofﬁcers. 
Maine sheriffs appreciate the opportunity to share our position of support for LD 439, and we 
urge each of you to vote Ought To Pass. I welcome any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
Sheriff Robert Young 
O/B/O Maine Sheriffs ’ Association
