£5 STATE OE MAINE 
I, L; ,+ _ DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
Y’1* 
.;,_=?"i ?2 
ml IVIAINE EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES _ 
152 STATE HOUSE STATIONg ' 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
J 1‘-NET T4 M"-I5 MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
J. SAM HURLEY 
DIRECTOR 
Testimony of J. Sam Hurley, IV[PH, EMPS, NRP 
Director, Maine Bureau of Emergency Medical Services (Maine EMS) 
Department of Public Safety 
In Support of LD 439 
“An Act to Allow Death by Suicide to Be Considered a Death While in the Line of Duly” 
Presented by Representative Salisbury of Westbrook 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND PUBLIC 
SAFETY 
Public Hearing: March 20, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety: 
My name is Sam Hurley, and I am the Director of Maine Emergency Medical Services, Maine 
EMS, Within the Department of Public Safety. I am testifying on behalf of Maine Department of 
Public Safety and Maine EMS in support of LD 439, "An Act to Allow Death by Suicide to Be 
Considered a Death While in the Line of Duty.” 
As many of you serving on this Committee are aware based on your experience within the public 
safety ﬁeld, the traumatic stressors of this line of work can weigh heavy on everyone involved. 
While we will discuss multiple stressors on the EMS system today, one of the most important' 
things that we will discuss today is the ever-present concem over the mental health of the 
professionals practicing Within the ﬁeld. 
I have been a paramedic for many years now and I have interacted with my fair share of 
traumatic experiences. While I have not functioned in all the roles within the public safety 
Excellence O Support O Collaboration O Integrity 
PHONE: (207) 626-3860 TTY: (207) 287-3659 FAX: (207) Z87-6251 
V/ith ofﬁces located at the Central Maine Commerce Center, 45 Commerce Drive, Suite 1, Augusta, ME 04330
domain, I can safely speak as an EMS professional that the nature of our job involves the never- 
ending barrage of abnormal events followed by normal responses. I can still remember the ﬁrst 
time I ever did chest compressions on an infant or the ﬁrst time I saw a person decapitated.E 
These are all very abnormal events that for most would be life-altering and scarring, just because 
EMS clinicians and other public safety professionals are exposed to them every day doesn’t 
mean that they don’t have similar “normal responses. ” These exposures have a tendency to 
collect and compound, especially for those who haven’t identiﬁed their mind’s best way of 
decompressing. This is especially weighty when public safety professionals begin to question, if 
only I had arrived a few minutes earlier or ifl had only administered that deﬁbrillation a little bit 
faster. Everyone manages these stressors differently and the point in which these stressors 
overwhelm someone’s ability to cope is different for everyone. 
Unfortunately, public safety has a deep-rooted culture that fails to encourage public safety 
professionals to reach out to their peers, to engage, and to ask for help. Over the past few 
decades, we have made some strides in helping to expand peer support networks within the 
public safety systems, increase ﬁtness-for-duty screening capabilities, and empowered public 
safety professionals to reach out to mental health professionals. HOWEVER, there are still those 
who fall through the cracks. Those individuals who are chased in their dreams by memories from 
throughout their profession of these abnormal events coupled with a variety of normal stressors 
that we all face in life — family, ﬁnancial, etc. Despite the resources that are available, there are 
some of these individuals that die by suicide. 
The ultimate goal of the public safety community is to make sure that no public safety 
professional dies by suicide. However, we understand that achieving that goal will likely not be 
met overnight. This bill, amended to read: 
When determining whether an individual has died while in the line of duty, the chief the 
State Fire Marshal, the director or the commissioner, as applicable, shall evaluate 
whether an individual who died by suicide died as a result of the line of duty. 
will give the Colonel of Maine State Police, the State Fire Marshal, myselﬁ or the 
Commissioner of the Department of Corrections, as appropriate based on the individual ’s 
profession, the authority to consider death by suicide as a line of duty death. In doing so we are 
sending a resounding message to the families of first responders that we, the State of Maine, are 
Page 2 of3
here to support them. While we were unable to stop their loved one before they died from 
suicide, we are committed to honoring their service to the State and People of Maine by 
administering the line of duty death beneﬁt. 
Last year, similar bipartisan legislation was signed into law in the State of New Hampshire that 
made deaths by suicide to be considered line of duty deaths. We too at Maine EMS and the 
Department of Public Safety believe it is imperative that we support our public safety 
professionals and continue to encourage the use of mental health resources. However, the 
constant barrage and collection of the abnormal, traumatic experiences may surpass the threshold 
for some and their ability to cope, for those individuals we have a responsibility to ensure that 
their families are supported - especially alter they have given everything, including their lives, to 
the profession. 
I am more than happy to answer any questions that you may have at this time, but please feel free 
to reach out to me anytime if there is any additional information that I can offer you and/or the 
Committee. 
Thank you. 
Page 3 of3
