4» 
; I HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
15 
;} 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Suzanne Salisbury TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
I34 Park Road 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Residence: (207) 899-6863 
Suzanne.Salisburv@legislaturemainegov 
March 20, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Suzanne Salisbury presenting 
LD 439, “An Act to Allow Death by Suicide to Be Considered a Death While in the Line of 
Duty” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Good afternoon Senator Beebe-Center, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is Sue Salisbury, and I represent 
House District 128, which includes part of Westbrook. I am here today to speak in strong support 
of LD 439, “An Act to Allow Death by Suicide to Be Considered a Death While in the Line 
of Duty” 
For years, the emergency services profession was a male-dominated ﬁeld. Part of that culture 
resulted in a mindset of “suck it up and move on” after a difficult call. Providers didn’t talk about 
how a call made them feel and they certainly didn’t express if their mental health was in crisis. 
These were the jobs of heroes and heroes don’t need counseling or medication. Right‘? 
According to the U.S. Fire Administration, “Public Safety personnel are 5 times more likely to 
suffer symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression than their civilian 
counterparts, leading to a higher rate of suicide. More ﬁrst responders die of suicide than in the 
line of duty each year."’ 
In June of 2022, the U.S. House passedz the HERO act, aimed at providing much need mental 1 
health support for the nation's ﬁrst responders and healthcare providers. Part of the bill is 
speciﬁcally aimed at collecting data about ﬁrst responder suicide rates as well as providing 
resources for intervention and treatment for providers. 
These are all good steps as we move forward as a society and talk openly about mental health 
and the fact that some jobs carry a higher risk of suicide. Acknowledging that these risks are real 
and directly associated with this line of work is essential to ultimately reducing rates of suicide 
for those who put their lives on the line for our safety every day. 
1 Suicide prevention resources for emergencv responders tfemagov) 
2 https:// ﬁtzpatrick.house.gov/2022/6/house-passes-rep-s —bipartisan-legislation-to —deliver-mental-hea|th- 
resources-to-nation-s —ﬁrst-responders-and-health-care-workers 
District I28: Part of WestbrookI
1
Here in Maine, We can support our emergency service workers and their loved ones by changing 
the statute to reﬂect this reality and offering some compensation for the family members who are 
left behind. More is certainly needed, and I am committed to continuing to work towards better 
prevention and management solutions. 
Thank you for your time, and consideration of this bill.
