FEKME FINANIIE AUTHORITY 0F MAINE 
Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
Neither For Nor Against L.D. 648 
An Act to Address Staffing Shortages in Critical Public Safety Jobs 
through Economic Incentives 
February 28, 2022 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement, and Business 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am here to 
testify Neither for Nor Against L.D. 648, An Act to Address Staﬂing Shortages in Critical 
Public Safety Jobs through Economic Incentives. 
This bill is essentially a repeat of one proposed during the Second Session of the 
130"‘ Maine Legislature that subsequently was amended to a study and later failed to be 
enacted. It would establish through a $5 million one-time appropriation to FAME a Fund 
to Provide Public Service Student Loan Forgiveness to provide student loan forgiveness 
for local and county law enforcement officers, firefighters, emergency medical services 
persons, dispatchers, and public health Workers. It also would appropriate $5 million in 
funds for FAME to provide no-interest home mortgages to these same workers while they 
are serving in those positions. 
We want to commend Senator Baldacci for his efforts championing these public 
servants, who do difficult and heroic work every day protecting our communities. During 
the pandemic, they have been especially heroic considering the increased health risks, 
workforce shortages, and attendant stresses they all have endured in carrying out their 
duties. Enacting a new student loan forgiveness program to both retain and attract such 
professionals could be a meaningful tool in providing some relief to these professionals 
and addressing Maine’s pressing workforce challenges. 
If funded and provided with more details and guidance, FAME could administer 
this program as We do similar other loan, loan repayment, and loan forgiveness programs. 
Currently drafted, the proposed eligible applicant pool is quite broad. Additional
1
guidance that would be helpful would include more precise definitions regarding the 
public safety professionals to be included, especially surrounding “law enforcement 
officers ” and “public health workers. ” Also, we wonder whether a term of service should 
be required (for example five years of service in return for five years of loan repayments) 
for participants. 
Additionally, FAME does not engage in financing housing transactions (the 
Maine State Housing Authority does this), so our recommendation is to change that part 
in Section 2 of the bill referencing our involvement with no-interest home mortgages. If it 
is not changed, I fear it would greatly increase our costs of operation as we would need to 
develop expertise in this new area and perhaps hire new staff. 
Also, we are not sure that our administrative costs for operating the program 
would be sufficiently met by the bill’s current language, which provides for interest on 
the fund to fund such costs. Normally our programs have statutory language allowing 
“reasonable costs” from the fund to be used. This Would be our preference. 
We also would like to point out for your consideration that some similar although 
not identical programs currently exist at both the federal and state levels. First, the federal 
government provides a Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program for these same 
professions. This is for federal loans only, however, and is available after a borrower 
makes 120 payments (ten years): i1ttps:: ’fsti1deritaid. gow’nianage-loans/forgiveness- 
cancellationiptiblic-se1"v ’ice. Second, FAME currently operates a Tuition Waiver Program 
for Public Servants. Tuition waivers are available for children and spouses of firefighters, 
law enforcement officers, and emergency medical services personnel who have been 
killed in the line of duty, or who died because of injuries received during the performance 
of their duties. Third, although it is unclear what is meant by “public health workers” in 
the bill, as you know FAME already administers a variety of scholarship, loan, and loan 
repayment programs for health care workers. In addition to the existing Doctors for 
Maine’s Future Scholarship, the Maine Health Professions Loan Program, and the Maine 
Dental Education Loan and Loan Repayment Programs. During the 130"‘ Legislature, two 
additional health care loan repayment programs were created and funded with federal 
ARPA monies for us to administer: the Nursing Education Loan Repayment Program and 
the Maine Health Care Professionals Loan Repayment Pilot Program. 
Finally, there’s also a newly revamped tax credit, the Student Loan Repayment 
Program, to help provide some student loan debt relief to these public servants and 
others. Formerly known as the Educational Opportunity Tax Credit (EOTC) or 
“Opportunity Maine,” this refundable tax credit provides up to $2,500 per year or up to 
$25,000 lifetime for eligible Maine residents who work and pay taxes in the state after 
they graduate from higher education. 
I will be happy to answer any questions you have.
2
