20160165.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Support of L.D. 648,  
An Act To Address Staffing Shortages In Critical Public Safety Jobs 
Through Economic Incentives 
Submitted by Chief Charles Rumsey  
March 14, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business.  My name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the Chief 
of the Cumberland Police Department. I am submitting testimony on behalf of 
the Maine Chiefs of Police Association in support of LD 648.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
As stated in the bill’s summary, LD 648 establishes the Fund to Provide 
Public Service Student Loan Forgiveness within the Finance Authority of 
Maine (FAME) to provide funds for student loan forgiveness for local and 
county law enforcement officers, firefighters, emergency medical services 
persons, dispatchers and public health workers, and appropriates $5 million to 
that fund. The bill also appropriates $5 million to FAME to provide no-interest 
home mortgages to local and county law enforcement officers, firefighters, 
emergency medical services persons, dispatchers and public health workers 
while they are serving in those positions. 
We have hit a crisis point in Maine when it comes to finding men and women 
to serve in public safety positions. It is a constant struggle to recruit individuals 
to fill these jobs, and it’s equally as hard to retain quality people in our law 
enforcement ranks. We are faced with the need to offer more incentives to 
potential recruits to encourage them to join the ranks.  
This is why we support LD 648 – it provides two types of incentives that are 
attractive to our recruits. The first is to help forgive any loans that may have 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
20160165.1 been borne by our officers to finance a higher education degree. Worrying about 
how to pay off student loans that are needed to further their careers is the last 
thing officers need to think about when they are putting their lives on the line 
every day. 
Furthermore, law enforcement officers often work long hours and they 
should be able to buy a home for their family, but with interests rates 
prohibitively high and home prices extremely expensive, homeownership has 
become unattainable. Providing interest free home loans can be the difference 
between being able to purchase a home or continuing to stay in the rental 
market.  
We need to do what we can to assist our public safety officers with whatever 
help they may need, whether it be with school expenses or mortgages. The 
program outlined in this legislative proposal sends a signal to our public safety 
officials that we appreciate the sacrifices that they and their families give us on 
a daily basis. 
For these reasons, we hope that you will vote in favor of LD 648. And, on 
behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank you for your 
work on this Committee.  
