 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 13 1st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Econ omic Advancement and Business  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
March 24 , 202 3 
 
Supporting:  
LD 648, “An Act to Address Staffing Shortages in Critical Public Safety Jobs Through Economic 
Incentives ” 
 
Sponsored by Senator Baldacci  
Senator  Curry , Representative  Roberts , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Inno vation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business , I am  Hannah Hudson , Policy 
and Communications  Manager at Maine Primary Care Association (MPCA).  
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers 
(CHCs) , also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the 
largest  independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high qual ity and equitable 
primary and preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people 
(1 in 6  Mainers ) at more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties. They are at the 
forefront of delivering care to rural and und erserved Maine communities .  
Community Health Centers provide all patients with these comprehensive primary care 
services, as well as a host of other services that include transportation, translation, and case 
management . They are further required  to provide this care without regard to a patient’s 
insurance status or ability to pay - which is a mandate unlike any other primary care provider.  
At the heart of each CHC is the staff that work every day to deliver innovative, high -quality care. 
Staff  at both the clinical and non -clinical levels understand the communities they serve and are 
dedicated to ensuring health care access. However, there are longstanding challenges related 
to primary care recruitment and retention  in Maine . Some commonly identified issues specific 
to attract ing and retain ing employees  at Maine CHCs are increased retirements due to an aging 
workforce; increased competitive si gn-on incentives and compensation ; and lack of applicants 
(especially those prepared to work within a CHC setting) .  
CHCs have also had the experience of successfully recruiting a candidate, only to have that 
candidate decline the final offer due to a lack  of affordable housing options. We believe that 
the provisions  of this bill related to home  mortgages are an innovative way to provide  the 
incentives necessary to grow the primary care workforce in Maine.  
Additionally, MPCA is  supportive of the  loan forgiveness provisions in this bill . These programs  
can be  a valuable incentive  for CHCs to utilize when recruiting providers as a strategy to address 
the exorbitant amount of debt they have acquired throughout their educational programming.   
 
 
 
 mepca.org  We enco urage the committee to maintain a definition of “public health workers” in the final bill 
that includes Community Health Center workers to ensure that these critical organizations and 
their employees can be supported by this program.  
On behalf of Maine’s C ommunity Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments  and 
we respectfully ask that you to support this bill . Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at 
hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
 
Hannah A. Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
