Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business
Room 202, Cross State Office Building
March 24, 2023
My name is Jennifer Gunderman.  I am Director of the Maine Area Health Education Center 
(AHEC), resident of Belfast, and current public health student. The purpose of this letter is to 
voice support for LD 648 (SP 265) "An Act to Address Staffing Shortages in Critical Public 
Safety Jobs Through Economic Incentives".
The proposed loan forgiveness program will provide incentive and support to enhance the public 
health workforce in Maine.  Currently, the Maine public health infrastructure is strained by 
shortages in workforce.  In addition, current public health workforce experience financial 
barriers to pursue additional public health training and education. As clearly evident during the 
COVID-19 response, the public health workforce is essential to securing and promoting the 
health of Mainers. An effective and timely response to public health issues is jeopardized when 
the workforce is strained and undertrained.
The proposed program is realistic and could address barriers.  The proposed loan forgiveness 
program aligns with the long-standing loan forgiveness programs for direct health workers 
including medical, dental, and nursing.  Providing loan forgiveness can incentivize public health 
practitioners to come to Maine as well as support current Maine public health practitioners to 
obtain additional training and education. 
As Director of Maine AHEC, this proposed program would be a tool to alleviatin.g workforce 
shortage. As a current public health student pursuing a Doctorate in Public Health, I would 
personally benefit from the program.  With increased student loans, I will be exploring work 
opportunities outside of Maine that offer financial support.
I offer one recommendation to add a definition for public health workers. One definition to 
consider is from Tilson and Gebbie (2004): “A public health worker is one a significant portion 
of whose work content advances or contributes to accomplishing one or more of the ten essential 
public health services”1. 
Sincerely, 
Jen Gunderman, 
Maine AHEC Network Director, University of New England, 
jgundermanking@une.edu, (207) 505-1452 
  Tilson & Gebbie. (2004). The public health workforce. Annual Review of Public Health; 25:341–56.
