Testimony of Kalie Hess, MPH
In support of LD 648: An Act to Address Staffing Shortages in Critical Public Safety Jobs Through 
Economic Incentives
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business (IDEA) on March 24, 2023
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the IDEA committee, my name is Kalie Hess. I 
live in Southwest Harbor and am a public health professional who has been working in this field for 
more than a decade. I’m here today to testify in support of LD 648, specifically around the inclusion of 
public health professionals in this bill, and wish to offer my thanks to Senator Baldacci for bringing this 
bill forward.
I grew up in Maine and went to UMaine where I graduated with high honors and a degree in 
Anthropology with minors in French and Spanish. As part of my education, I ended up taking a class on 
medical anthropology. One of the books I read inspired me to work in public health, eager to help on a 
large scale to help people live healthy and happy lives. To learn more about the public health field, 
including how to conduct evaluations, investigate outbreaks, and prevent chronic diseases, I pursued a 
Master of Public Health (MPH) degree. 
I chose a program that was less expensive than others, knowing that when I graduated, I wasn’t going to 
be earning a high enough salary to pay for the loans necessary to cover my tuition at some of the other 
schools I had gotten into. When I graduated in 2013 with my MPH, I was making about $18/hour. 
Unfortunately, public health positions are often undervalued despite the benefit they bring to our 
communities. The pandemic has shown the value of public health, but as a field that is largely grant-
funded, the positions rarely pay the value that staff bring to the people of Maine, and, in my experience, 
these positions often lack some of the financial and fringe benefits that are more common in larger 
organizations or for-profit businesses.
I have worked to prevent substance use in youth, help farmworkers in Maine get the health care they 
need to stay healthy to support our local farms, increase access to health care in rural and underserved 
communities, and prevent outbreaks of infectious diseases in schools and childcare settings. I currently 
work to support a large network to change Maine’s oral health system to ensure that all children can 
grow up free from preventable dental disease.
As part of my career, I have sat on state committees and worked on supporting legislation for loan 
forgiveness for other health careers. Working with pediatricians, dentists, nurses, hygienists, and others 
over my career has shown me the value of these professions and revealed that public health is truly a 
unique field that fills an important niche that other direct-service health professions do not address. The 
work we do is understated yet results in lasting change that drastically improves the lives of people in 
Maine. 
Public health professionals’ work is still being rocked by the ripple effects of the pandemic. In addition to 
being a challenge in and of itself, the pandemic diverted attention and funding from other challenging 
public health issues, such as housing, substance use, transportation, and oral health care. Our workforce 
is stretched thinner than ever as some professionals experienced burnout at a time that we are facing 
compounding public health challenges exacerbated by the pandemic. In other words, we are doing more 
with less.
Moreover, most of the public health workforce is women and underrepresented populations, so existing 
pay disparities are worsened in this low-wage field. This bill would help reduce the issues around pay 
equity the public health workforce faces and highlight the state’s commitment to truly building a healthy 
Maine. I also believe this bill would help attract and retain public health workers to Maine, a boon to our 
workforce that we need.
As you consider this bill, I’d encourage you to adopt the definition that the Maine Public Health 
Association is offering to determine who is working in public health for inclusion in this program. 
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony.
