Kristina Mead
Augusta
LD 648
Dear Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business,
 
My name is Kristina and I live in Augusta. I am writing as a public health professional (as well 
as a current graduate student) in support of LD 648 “An Act to Address Staffing Shortages in 
Critical Public Safety Jobs Through Economic Incentives."
Maine’s public health workforce often works behind the scenes, protecting and promoting the 
health of people and places across Maine. Public health workers include epidemiologists, 
health educators, drinking water specialists, and toxicologists (among many other 
professions). They work in a range of areas, including vaccination, youth substance use, 
maternal and child health, and emergency preparedness, and serve all people in Maine, 
including those with low-income, rural populations, LGBTQ+, racial and ethnic minorities, and 
older adults.
 
The student loan debt incurred from studying public health can be crippling, as public health 
jobs are often lower paying than professions in other fields, including health care. Existing 
loan forgiveness programs in Maine are for health care providers (e.g., dental care, nursing, 
medical care), but none serve the non-direct service delivery public health workforce.
Personally, as an adult student returning to school, I found it difficult to afford my 
loan repayments while being the sole provider for myself as well as my partner, who 
is suffering from mental illness that is preventing him from working (and currently 
not collecting social security). Even when I was only financially responsible for 
myself, my loan repayments were more than I paid in monthly mortgage or, currently,
rent. 
The public health workforce has been at the forefront during the COVID-19 
pandemic, helping with emergency response and managing other chronic public 
health challenges in Maine communities. This bill is needed to support these 
professionals; it will strengthen Maine’s public health workforce and attract more 
people to study and stay in Maine. I respectfully request you vote LD 648 "ought to 
pass." Thank you. 

