Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
In Support For
LD 648 - An Act to Address Staffing Shortages in Critical Public Safety Jobs Through Economic 
Incentives
February 28, 2023
Sen. Curry, Rep. Roberts and distinguished members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting 
testimony in support of LD 648, An Act to Address Staffing Shortages in Critical Public Safety Jobs 
Through Economic Incentives, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association (MMA).
MMA represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature and receives its 
policy positions at the direction of our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee made up of elected and 
appointed municipal officials elected by their peers to serve from each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. As 
such, the positions of the Association are reflective of the balance necessary to achieve state policy goals 
for the impacts of legislation on communities of varying resources and size. 
Municipalities are struggling to find first responders in every community. Individuals who once 
were able to volunteer in many towns in their spare time, now must cobble several jobs together to make 
ends meet. As is most of Maine, municipalities are facing a silver tsunami of long-time leaders eligible 
for retirement. Just as it is harder to attract individuals to public service, we are losing those who have 
dedicated their lives to the role. Municipal officials are eager for any and all tools that may be able to help 
attract and retain public servants and see LD 648 as a possible piece of a multi-factor approach. 
However, in many communities, hospitals are providing housing for their public health staff, 
either by being the rental agent on property to rotate out exclusively for traveling nurses and visiting 
providers or keeping a section of local hotel properties for their staff. This is something that 
municipalities would struggle to replicate for their public safety staff in any meaningful way even if local 
resources were available to do so. 
As the appropriation for the lofty goals of these two programs is very small given the statewide 
need, and entry level housing unattainable in the current, investment driven real estate market, for any 
municipal employee, let alone a public safety employee, officials ask that you consider prioritizing the 
program rules and triage the rulemaking in favor of public safety employees particularly in communities 
and agencies experiencing significant shortages and limited resources. 
 
