122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  In Support of : 
LD 648: An Act To Address Staffing Shortages in Critical Public Safety Jobs through Economic 
Incentives  
 
Joint Standing Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
Room 202, Cross State Office Building  
Tuesday , February  28, 2023 
 Good afternoon, Senator Curry , Representative Roberts , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business . My name is Rebecca Boulos. I 
am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public Health Association. MPHA supports  LD 
648: “ An Act To Address Staffing Shortages in Critical Public Safety Jobs through Economic Incentives.”  
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we  advocate, act, and advise on critical 
public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that 
responsibility seriously.  This bill appropriates funds to the Public Service Student Loan Forgiveness Program administered by the Finance Authority of Maine  (FAME) , which wi ll be used to provide student loan forgiveness for public safety 
and public health workers.  Maine’s public health workforce is committed to protecting and promoting the health of people and places in Maine, often working behind the scenes. Public health workers include epidemiologists, researchers, and health educators and program planners who work in a range of areas, including vaccination, youth substance use, maternal and child health, and drinking water safety. People  who are drawn to the field of public health are 
compassionate and want to make our communities better , healthier  places. Public health professionals have 
been working hard during the pandemic, both in direct response to COVID -19, and to address other chronic 
health challenges in our communities.  
 The student loan debt incurred can be crippling, as public health jobs are often lower paying than professions  in 
other fields, including health care. It is worth noting that e xisting loan forgiveness programs in Maine are for 
health care providers (e.g., dental care, nursing, medical care), so many public health professionals are ineligible  to apply. 
 We noted there is not a definition of “public health workers” in the bill. One  definition  to consider is from 
Tilson and  Gebbie (2004): “ A public health worker is one a significant portion of whose work content advances 
or contributes to accomplishing one or more of the ten essential public health services ”
1 (hyper link added).  
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  We ask the bill’s sponsor to please consider establishing eligibility criteria that include either  education (e.g., 
Bachelor of Science in Public Health , Master of Public Health, Doctor of Public Health ) or Maine -based work 
experience in public health (e.g., 3 years in a public health field); and that applicants’  current field of 
employment is in public health. In the loan repayment requirements, applicant s could be asked to provide a 
short narrative about how their work advances or contributes to accomplishing one or more of  the ten essential 
public health servic es. We recommend that if someone is eligible for more than one loan forgiveness program 
(e.g., dental care and public health) , then they can only receive financial support  from one of those programs.  
 
This bill has potential to strengthen Maine’s public health workforce and attract more people to study and stay in Maine. As noted, public health jobs can be low paying and stressful, and many public health jobs in Maine have vacancies. Providing this much needed financial support may help attract people to the field, bolster ing the 
workforce and improving the health of Maine’s communities.  
 We are so grateful to Senator Baldacci and the bill’s cosponsors for bringing this legislation forward. MPHA is in strong support and available to answer any questions. We are also available for the work session. Thank you 
for your consideration.  
 
 
1 Tilson & Gebbie. (2004). The public health workforce. Annual Review  of Public Health ; 25:341 –56. 
