Testimony in Support of LD 648
An Act to Address Staffing Shortages in Critical Public Safety Jobs Through 
Economic Incentives
Good morning, Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business. My name is Rick Petrie, and I 
am a Paramedic who has worked in the Maine EMS system for 42 years. I am now the Chief 
Operations Officer for North East Mobile Health, a for-profit Ambulance Service based in 
Scarborough Maine and the Program Director for the Jackman Paramedic project. 
I was also fortunate to serve as a member of the EMS Blue Ribbon Committee whose work laid 
the foundation for this, and other, legislation supporting Emergency Medical Services in Maine.  
As the Blue-Ribbon Committee heard very clearly, EMS is in trouble. We are inadequately 
funded, tightly regulated, and under resourced. We have a significant staffing shortage because 
of poor wages and benefits, long hours and incredibly difficult working conditions. Yet, every 
day, EMS providers have found a way to respond, sacrificing time with their families, 
appropriate rest, and their own mental health. In the past, much of the State relied on 
volunteers, but those days are coming to an end.
Unfortunately, our ability to respond is now starting to crumble in many areas of the state. We 
can cite many instances where the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th level mutual aid ambulances are required to 
respond to emergency calls, resulting in significant delays. There are even cases where family 
members have placed patients in their vehicles because there was no ambulance available to 
respond in a timely fashion. Public Safety Dispatchers regularly speak of desperation while 
trying to find an ambulance to respond. Patients are being held in emergency departments for 
hours, and even days, waiting to find an available ambulance to transport their patients.
Nationally, the average median wage for EMT’s is $17.05 per hour, and the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics lists EMS as one of the lowest-paying jobs in health care. The same wage and benefit 
issues are rampant throughout the Public Safety profession. We are all having difficulty 
recruiting and retaining new members into our respective fields, creating a crisis in the 
professions that Maine Citizens rely on when they are sick, injured, or in danger.
As a state, we need to continually look for ways to provide incentives for public safety personnel 
to enter into, and remain in, the field. No-interest home mortgages and student loan forgiveness 
would represent a welcome incentive for public safety personnel with economic incentives that 
would far exceed the proposed expenditure. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
Rick Petrie, EMT-P
rpetrie@nemhs.com
207-754-9109
