 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 648, An Act to Address Staffing Shortages in Critical Public Safety Jobs Through Economic 
Incentives  
 
March 24, 2023 
 
Chair Curry, Chair Roberts, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of 
the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative 
policy committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in support of LD 648. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  LD 648 establishes the Fund to Provide Public Service Student Loan Forgiveness to be 
administered by the Finance Authority of Maine. This bill would appropriate $5 million to the Fund for student 
loan forgiveness for local and county law enforcement officers, firefighters, emergency medical services 
persons, dispatchers, and public health workers, and would also appropriate an additional $5 million to provide 
no-interest home mortgages to such local and county workers while they are serving in those positions. 
 
Supporting our local and county law enforcement officers, firefighters, emergency medical services persons, 
dispatchers, and public health workers is important to our Association. In addition, incentivizing workers to join 
these professions is crucial to our communities due to the shortage of such workers. We believe that this bill 
provides needed assistance and support to public servants who serve our counties and communities on a daily 
basis, and also attempts to address the shortage of such workers in counties across the State. As a result, we 
write to support LD 648. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
 
 
 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
