 
25015148_2   
 
 
 
 
LD 648, An Act to Address Staffing Shortages in Critical Public Safety Jobs Through Economic 
Incentives  
 
February 27, 2023 
 
Chai r Curry, Chai r Roberts, and members of the Joi nt Standing Committee on Innovation , Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Stephen Gorden and  in addition to serving as a member of  
the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative 
policy committee of the Mai ne County Commissioners Association . We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in support of LD  648. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citize ns in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta , represents all 16 of Maine’s counties , and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county .  
 
Discussion.  LD 648 establi shes the Fund to Prov ide Public Service Student Loan Forgiveness to be 
administered by the Finance Authority of Maine . This bill would appropriate $5 million to the Fund for student 
loan forgiveness for local and county law enforcement officers, firefigh ters, emergency medical  servic es 
persons,  dispatchers , and public health workers , and would also appropria te an additional $5 million to provide 
no-interest home mortgages to  such local and county workers while they are serving in those positions.  
 
Supporting our local and county law enforcement officers, firefighters, emergency medical services persons, 
dispatchers, and public health workers is important to our Association. In addition, incentivizing workers to join 
these professions is crucial to our communities due to the shortage of such workers. We believe that this bill 
provides needed assist ance and support to public servants who serve our counties and communities on a daily 
basis, and also attempts to address the shortage of such workers in counties across the State. As a result, we 
write to support LD 648. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to pr ovide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional informat ion, please do not hesitate to let us know.  
 
Respectfu lly submitted,  
 
Stephen Gorden  
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legisl ative Counsel  
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabri el Drive, Suite 2  Augusta, ME 0433 0, 207-623-4697  
www.mainecounties.org  
 
