Amanda Carson
Brunswick School District
LD 618
My name is Amanda Carson, and I am a School Counselor at an elementary school in 
Brunswick. I oppose LD 618: An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social and 
Emotional Learning and Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion from School Curricula. 
When reading the stipulations of this bill, it is clear that the writer(s) are not educated 
on the matters and teachings of CRT, SEL, or DEI. CRT is a university or graduate 
level course not taught in grades below the post-secondary education level; therefore, 
there is no merit to debate these teachings as they do not occur in public schools 
Pre-K-12. Social Emotional Learning (SEL) is a subject I teach, as a School 
Counselor, in grades 3-5, and includes none of the prohibited topics outlined in this 
bill. I teach the students about empathy, respect, self-esteem and self-awareness, 
conflict resolution, understanding perspectives, and a host of other topics meant to 
teach them ways of being inclusive, open-minded, and respectful members of their 
communities. We talk extensively about the fact that no one will think exactly the 
same about every matter, but everyone deserves to be respected. To find a problem 
with the teaching the importance of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion is absurd - I 
would be interested to know what the writer(s) and supporters of this bill fear so 
deeply about these topics, as I imagine they believe they should be given equitable 
treatment and opportunities. in the world. But that's the core issue - fear. Fear of 
what? Loss of dominance? Loss of identity? To let one's fear dictate the lives of 
others shows weakness, lack of information, and cowardice. The prohibitions outlined
in this bill are a reflection of how its writer(s) and supporters are taking in this 
information, not a reflection of how this information is presented. I should say now, 
that I am a cisgender, White, heterosexual female, and I do not feel threatened, guilty,
or bad about myself because I am continuing to grow and learn about the basic respect
and inclusion of people similar to and different from me. As human beings, we must 
remain open to both contradiction and affirmation of our values and beliefs, and doing
so does not not diminish our importance or standing in this world. Whatever the 
writer(s) and supporters of this bill fear, which I gather from the bill is something 
quite opposite of the reality of these teachings, should be examined with scrutiny and 
alarm. This is not movement forward. I would invite any of you to sit in a class I 
teach and listen to the kindness and curiosity exhibited by students. The writer(s) and 
supporters of this bill would do well to research the topics they so vehemently oppose 
before writing nonsensical falsehoods simply to coddle their own fears. Thank you. 
