To: Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
 
From: Ann Leamon, Waldoboro, Maine 
 
Re: In Opposition to LD 618 – An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social Emotional 
Learning and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula 
 
Date: May 3, 2023 
 
I am writing to urge you to vote against LD 618 – An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, 
Social Emotional Learning and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula. This act 
threatens wide-ranging intellectual discourse and inquiry in our schools, while also threatening 
real economic harm to our state. 
 
To start, “Critical Race Theory” is a being used in an attempt to silence discussions of systemic 
racism and gender bias. As a white person, I would like to believe that my country has always 
been a beacon of inclusion and virtue, the “City on a Hill” as described by John Winthrop in 
1630 and later John F. Kennedy.  But that is simply not true and wishing cannot make it so. 
Native Americans, Black people, Asians, Hispanics, and women all bear the marks of systemic 
bias, ranging from economic oppression to disenfranchisement from voting roles to lack of 
health care. Without understanding the past, we cannot make amends in the future. It is critically 
important that our schools teach this information to allow us as Americans to do what has made 
us great as a country: to learn from our mistakes.  
 
Barring diversity, equality, and inclusion from school curricula is damaging in another way. 
Youth need models who look like them to identify with people who succeed, as parents or 
workers or entrepreneur or creatives. Knowing that there is a place for you where you live is 
critical. But in addition, diversity has measurable benefits. A study by McKinsey & Co. showed 
that companies with more gender diversity were 25% more profitable than those with the least, 
and those with more ethnic diversity were 36% more profitable than those with the least.1 But 
diversity must be taught. People gravitate toward hiring those who look and act like them—an 
economic pattern called homophily—and that habit only changes through external policies.  
 
In summary, teaching America’s sorry racial record is important to help redress age-old 
inequities, while diversity training helps position our society for success. We can do right and 
make money. Please vote against LD 618.  
 
 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
  
 
1 Sundiatu Dixon-Fyle et al., “Diversity Wins: How Inclusion Matters,” McKinsey & Company, May 19, 
2020, https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/diversity-and-inclusion/diversity-wins-how-inclusion-
matters. 
