As someone who has been an educator for 20 years, I am very familiar with three things: 
 -The needs of the students I serve 
 -The agility needed to meet those needs 
 -the tendency for buzzwords and acronyms to dominate discussions instead of the 
students and their needs. 
This bill is devoted to those acronyms, and the definitions of them that it gives bear very 
little resemblance to the content that falls within them, or the essential role that content 
categorized within these acronyms plays in fulfilling the primary mission of public schools: 
helping young people to learn and grow. 
 In the classroom, Social Emotional Learning curricula refer to precisely that: content that 
assists students in developing their social skills – including anti-bullying, conflict resolution, and 
something as simple as how to start a conversation on the first day of school or take turns. It 
also assists them in learning about their emotions – such as ways to respond when they feel 
angry that do not involve hitting. The idea that a school might be expected to stop engaging 
with these topics with children – especially when we have seen how the pandemic has delayed 
students’ skills in such areas as sitting still, managing frustration, sharing, and other basics, and 
even more especially in the midst of a youth mental health crisis, is baffling. If SEL is banned, 
what, precisely, are teachers to do instead with students too shy to talk to others, or who hit 
when angry? And in what way would such a ban serve those students, or those around them 
who will be affected by their dysregulation?  
 Similarly, DEI curriculum serves the simple purpose of equipping teachers and students 
to deal with one very obvious fact: people are different. This is a difficult fact to miss, but it also 
takes skill to work with effectively. For instance, as an English teacher, I found it hugely helpful 
to learn which languages do not contain definite articles, as this allowed me not only to work 
more effectively with speakers of those languages on their writing and grammar, but also gave 
me richer information about language to use when teaching about grammar to native English 
speakers. My students and I have also benefitted greatly from learning about cultures around 
the world, and writing messages to one another in Braille. Learning about the many ways of 
being human unequivocally enriches students’ lives, validates the cultures and identities that 
they themselves have, and equips them for everything from the workplace to interfacing with 
their future in-laws. There are no benefits to taking away this area of skill-support.  
Lastly, Critical Race Theory refers to a very particular higher level academic concept 
which we do not teach it at the K-12 level. We do, however, teach children, and those children 
have their own races and skin colors, their own questions, and their own thoughts, which they 
need to be able to talk about – or at least reference – in order to learn. We also teach history, 
and the history of the US and other countries includes the history of how race has been 
handled in the past because this is not the first time it has been a high profile topic in the 
United States.  
We have seen in other states how laws like this have tied teachers’ hands, not only on 
content (how exactly does one teach accurately about Reconstruction without discussing the 
racial dimension?) but, far more frighteningly, in responding to students themselves. School 
needs to be a safe place for students to ask questions and have their own thoughts, and when 
teachers are forbidden to respond to what students bring, we send a message that students are 
not safe, that their thoughts aren’t welcome, and we deprive them of the guidance and support 
that they need in finding their own answers to those questions or developing those thoughts. 
Moreover, we have also seen how the impossibility of what we are asking of teachers when 
these laws are passed – to both teach and not teach at the same time – puts so much pressure 
on them that many choose to leave the field for better paid, less restrictive, and more 
respected work, causing teacher shortages, which hurt all of us.  
All of the buzzwords in this article can easily be coopted to apply to any topic that 
someone wishes to challenge for reasons of their own which may not serve the students our 
schools are intended to educate. These buzzwords also all either contain or can overlap with 
areas of learning so essential (such as taking turns) that the costs of their removal would be 
enormous to the point of unraveling classrooms all together. Anything one hopes to protect 
students from with a ban like this would pale in comparison to what they would lose if it went 
into effect.  
   
Anna  Logowitz
Sedgwick 
LD 618
As someone who has been an educator for 20 years, I am very familiar with three 
things:
-The needs of the students I serve
-The agility needed to meet those needs
-the tendency for buzzwords and acronyms to dominate discussions instead of the 
students and their needs.
This bill is devoted to those acronyms, and the definitions of them that it gives bear 
very little resemblance to the content that falls within them, or the essential role that 
content categorized within these acronyms plays in fulfilling the primary mission of 
public schools: helping young people to learn and grow.
In the classroom, Social Emotional Learning curricula refer to precisely that: 
content that assists students in developing their social skills – including anti-bullying, 
conflict resolution, and something as simple as how to start a conversation on the first
day of school or take turns. It also assists them in learning about their emotions – such
as ways to respond when they feel angry that do not involve hitting. The idea that a 
school might be expected to stop engaging with these topics with children – especially
when we have seen how the pandemic has delayed students’ skills in such areas as 
sitting still, managing frustration, sharing, and other basics, and even more especially 
in the midst of a youth mental health crisis, is baffling. If SEL is banned, what, 
precisely, are teachers to do instead with students too shy to talk to others, or who hit 
when angry? And in what way would such a ban serve those students, or those around
them who will be affected by their dysregulation? 
Similarly, DEI curriculum serves the simple purpose of equipping teachers and 
students to deal with one very obvious fact: people are different. This is a difficult 
fact to miss, but it also takes skill to work with effectively. For instance, as an English
teacher, I found it hugely helpful to learn which languages do not contain definite 
articles, as this allowed me not only to work more effectively with speakers of those 
languages on their writing and grammar, but also gave me richer information about 
language to use when teaching about grammar to native English speakers. My 
students and I have also benefitted greatly from learning about cultures around the 
world, and writing messages to one another in Braille. Learning about the many ways 
of being human unequivocally enriches students’ lives, validates the cultures and 
identities that they themselves have, and equips them for everything from the 
workplace to interfacing with their future in-laws. There are no benefits to taking 
away this area of skill-support. 
Lastly, Critical Race Theory refers to a very particular higher level academic concept 
which we do not teach it at the K-12 level. We do, however, teach children, and those 
children have their own races and skin colors, their own questions, and their own 
thoughts, which they need to be able to talk about – or at least reference – in order to 
learn. We also teach history, and the history of the US and other countries includes 
the history of how race has been handled in the past because this is not the first time it
has been a high profile topic in the United States. 
We have seen in other states how laws like this have tied teachers’ hands, not only on 
content (how exactly does one teach accurately about Reconstruction without 
discussing the racial dimension?) but, far more frighteningly, in responding to 
students themselves. School needs to be a safe place for students to ask questions and 
have their own thoughts, and when teachers are forbidden to respond to what students 
bring, we send a message that students are not safe, that their thoughts aren’t 
welcome, and we deprive them of the guidance and support that they need in finding 
their own answers to those questions or developing those thoughts. Moreover, we 
have also seen how the impossibility of what we are asking of teachers when these 
laws are passed – to both teach and not teach at the same time – puts so much 
pressure on them that many choose to leave the field for better paid, less restrictive, 
and more respected work, causing teacher shortages, which hurt all of us. 
All of the buzzwords in this article can easily be coopted to apply to any topic that 
someone wishes to challenge for reasons of their own which may not serve the 
students our schools are intended to educate. These buzzwords also all either contain 
or can overlap with areas of learning so essential (such as taking turns) that the costs 
of their removal would be enormous to the point of unraveling classrooms all 
together. Anything one hopes to protect students from with a ban like this would pale 
in comparison to what they would lose if it went into effect. 
 

