Anthony Shostak
Greene
LD 618
I am writing in support of LD 123 - An Act to Eliminate the Educational Purposes 
Exception to the Prohibition on the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors.
I am a parent of two teens. My career for these past thirty-plus years has been in 
education, and I sit on the board of directors of my local school district. Please note 
that my opinions expressed in this letter, though informed partly by my experience as 
a school director, should in no way should be construed as representing the board as a 
whole.
Why there is obviously obscene matter in school libraries beggars comprehension. 
Anyone who supported the law to allow the exemption this bill would remove should 
understand how their good intentions have been perverted. I had to review a book 
challenged in our district. This book contains the sexually explicit image of one 
person’s phallus firmly planted in someone else’s mouth. That sentence bears 
repeating: It is as graphic and explicit as the hardest of hardcore pornography.   
Allowing school librarians to place this in the hands of children is an egregious lapse 
of judgement. 
That lapse of judgement has knock-on effects; for one, it makes the job of a school 
director incredibly difficult. When righteously indignant parents challenge these 
obscene materials, the district’s lawyers caution that removing the book opens the 
school to First Amendment lawsuits. Do we remove the book for the good of the 
children in our district, or do we protect the district from litigation? So, you see, you 
legislators have created a problem. Obviating the situation by preventing these books’
presence in school libraries is the obvious solution. Eliminating the Educational 
Purposes Exception to the Prohibition on the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to 
Minors will do just that.
In addition to allowing school directors to concentrate their attentions on policies and 
fiscal matters instead of wading through community-dividing obscenity challenges, 
eliminating the exemption will help school librarians more wisely invest tax dollars in
materials more germane to the subjects taught in public schools and more suitable for 
the immature minds of the students. There are ample examples of books and movies 
that present the same subjects as those in the obscene ones, but without the obscenity, 
without the graphic explicitness of the particulars of someone’s ejaculation, the ease 
with which someone’s several fingers slipped into someone else’s (choose an orifice),
or the sensations of rhythmic penetration. One does not have to resort to obscenity to 
portray the diversity of human experience. 
If the aforementioned book with the fellatio image were a movie, it would have been 
rated NC17. No adult, not even a school librarian, would be allowed to bring a minor 
into a theater to watch it. No exceptions. Why then, do we allow this awful 
stuff—things that once seen cannot be unseen—into a school library? I’ll tell you 
why: because Maine’s legislature thought it would be a great idea. That was a horrible
decision. 
Now is your chance to undo that mistake, to right a wrong, for the good of our 
children and the future of Maine and our nation.
Please give your vote in support of LD 123 - An Act to Eliminate the Educational 
Purposes Exception to the Prohibition on the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to 
Minors.
 
I am writing to urge you to support LD 618 - An Act to Eliminate Critical Race 
Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from 
School Curricula.
Critical Race Theory (CRT) and Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) are 
intellectually flabby, dishonest, and divisive. They promote a culture of grievance and
victimhood that is poisonous to a diverse society built on mutual respect.
CRT and especially DEI undermine humankind’s instinctual admiration of ability and
achievement by lowering standards in the name of reparations and/or  equitable 
outcomes.  They promote group identity as more important than individualism, 
reducing persons to mere members of one group or another—groups most often based
on immutable characteristics like race. Because of CRT and DEI, school personnel 
are instructed in professional development workshops to put up pictures of people 
from a group to serve as role models for that particular group. They are selected 
because of their identity, not because of the importance of their achievements. This is 
anathema to America. If we allow such DEI initiatives as this, where does it end? Do 
we have enough classroom wall space for pictures of people from every conceivable 
identity group? After we have photos of people from the various Peoples of Color, all 
unhelpfully misspelled with X’s and accompanied by so-called and often 
impronouneable pronouns like “xer”, will we the need representatives of the 
double-amputee Polish community? That isn’t sarcasm, because if one is to be truly 
diverse and equitable, every single possible identity group will need to have their 
spotlight. It is ridiculous.
You may not have noticed, but Maine’s public schools are not exactly renowned for 
their excellence. We graduate students who reading and math skills are below level, 
and whose understanding of science, history, and civics is embarrassing. High school 
teachers in my district have publicly complained that students arrive from the middle 
school without the knowledge to succeed in high school. Why is that? Partly because 
we have moved away from teaching academics, making them take a back seat to 
“educating the whole child” and to making them “feel safe.” How about instead, we 
make them feel smart and capable by focusing on things that actually matter in the 
real world of adult life? Things like math, science, literacy, an understanding of how 
our government works, and history that doesn’t make them hate themselves or others 
because of the color of their skin. 
One of the things I hear parents say to their school boards most often is that they want
the schools to concentrate on the basics. Keeping CRT and DEI out of the schools 
will allow them to do just that.
I urge you use your vote to support LD 618 - An Act to Eliminate Critical Race 
Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from 
School Curricula.
