 
 
May 1 , 2023  
 
Testimony re: LD 618 : “An Act to Eliminate Critical Race The ory, Social and Emotional Learning and Diversity, Equity, 
and Inclusion from School Curr icula ” – OUGHT NOT TO PASS  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and 
Cultur al Aff airs: 
 Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment in opposition to   LD 618. My name is Chris McLaughlin, and I am a 
licensed clinical social worker with over 2 2 years of experience providing behavioral health services to children and 
families across a variety of treatment settings here in Maine. I am also humbed to be  the Executive Director of the Maine 
Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers (NASW -ME). A large part of my job at NASW -ME is to represent 
the interests of Maine’s social workers as they endeavor to meet the b ehavioral health needs of Maine people across all 
settings and ages from Fort Kent to York and all places in between . On behalf of our over 1000 members here in Maine, 
including many school social workers, I’m honored to share thoughts on this important proposed legislation.   
 
As social workers, NASW -ME supports any efforts to enhance a young person’ s understanding of them selves a s well as 
the wor ld around them. Social Emotional Learn ing and D iversity, E quity, and I nclusion are amo ng some of  the best-
practice  strategies that educat ors can use to achieve th is goal. These essential components of education are crucial to the 
success and well -being of all students, and it is imperative that they are given the attention they deserve.  
 
Social emotional learning, or SEL, is the process of developing the skills necessary to understand and manage emotions, establish positive relationships, and make responsible decisions. By teaching SEL, we are equipping students with the tools 
they need to navigate the complex social and emotional challenges they will face throughout their lives. SEL helps students 
build resilience, develop empathy, and enhance their problem -solving abilities, making them better prepared to succeed in 
all aspects of their l ives. Research show s that when schools focus on and promote SEL, students have more positive 
attitudes toward others, have a stronger sense of self, and perform better academically. Schools also  see reduced behavioral 
issues, lower levels of distress, and higher graduation rates . 
 
Diversity , equity , and inclusion, or DEI, is another critical component of a well -rounded education. Like some of the 
elem ents of SEL, b y teaching about the value of diversity and promoting an inclusive environment  in schools , we are 
preparing students  to be successful in the diverse world they will encounter outside of the classroom. DEI education helps 
students develop an appreciation for different cultures, backgrounds, and perspectives, and promotes the development of a 
more just and equitable society. Equally as important, lessons on DEI pro mote the skills of empa thy and per spective 
taking, two critical skills aligning well with youth outcomes with  problem solving and conflict management .   
 
Incorporating SEL and DEI into the  school curriculum is not just a matter of academic success, but also a matter of social 
responsibility. By providing students with a well -rounded education that includes these critical components, we are 
building a foundation for a more equitable and just  society. I urge you to support the inclusion of SEL and DEI in the 
school curriculum, so that we can ensure that all students have the skills and knowledge they need to succeed in today's 
world.  
 Regarding Critical Race Theory , or CRT, it ’s important to note that NASW -ME has spo ken with several  of our school 
social work members and support ers and  are unaware of instances of  CRT  being taught in any Maine K -12 school. 
However, we believe that  it is important to include factual and accurate historical information in our schools ’ history and 
social stud ies curriculum s and to again stress the impor tance of teachin g res pect for diversity. To be clear, though, it is not 
our und erstanding , as LD 618 would have one believe, that students are being taught that one race or se x is inher ently 
better than another , that one should feel a sense of discomfort or gu ilt because of their race or sex, or that specific trai ts are 
racist of sexist. NASW -ME has great faith in the expertise of our state’s educators in their ability to teach facts and address 
teaching s of concepts such as i mplici t bias with re spect for all learners in their classroom s. 
 
I want to  thank you all for your work on this issue.  Please do not hesitate to reach out to NASW ME for any support we 
can offer , including any social work  representation and participation in any future w ork s essions , should it be necessary , 
for LD 618 . 
 
Thank you again,  
  
Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW 
Executive Director  
Maine Chapter – NASW  
 
Resources:  
Catalano, R.F., Berglund, M.L., Ryan, J.A., Lonczak, H.S., & Hawkins, J.D. (2004). "Positive youth development in the 
United States: Research findings on evaluations of positive youth development programs."  The Annals of the American 
Academy of Political a nd Social Science, 591(1), pp.98- 124 
 
Durlak, J.A., Weissberg, R.P., Dymnicki, A.B., Taylor, R.D., & Schellinger, K.B. (2011). "The impact of enhancing 
students' social and emotional learning: A meta -analysis of school -based universal interventions."  Child Development, 82, 
pp.405- 432 
 
Merrell, K.W. & Gueldner, B.A. (2010). Social and emotional learning in the classroom: Promoting mental health and 
academic success. New York: Guilford Press.  
 

