Cindy Dean
Liberty
LD 618
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Cindy Dean. I 
am a Professor of Education at the University of Maine at Augusta. My remarks are 
my own and do not represent the University of Maine System. I write in opposition to 
LD 618, An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social and Emotional Learning 
and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula.
In my role as an education professor, I teach a required course entitled Diversity, 
Poverty, and Cultural Competence. As classrooms have become more diverse, 
educators need to be cognizant of the different practices, beliefs and needs of each 
student. In this course, pre-service teachers begin to develop their critical cultural 
competence by learning about their cultural selves, exploring the visible and invisible 
differences among diverse populations of students, examining personal and 
institutional cultural beliefs and assumptions, and develop culturally responsive 
teaching practices. The NEA describes cultural competence as” having an awareness 
of one’s own cultural identity and views about difference, and the ability to learn and 
build on the varying cultural and community norms of students and their families. It is
the ability to understand the within-group differences that make each student unique, 
while celebrating the between-group variations that make our country a tapestry. This 
understanding informs and expands teaching practices in the culturally competent 
educator’s classroom” (NEA). 
This class teaches aspiring educators how to build culturally responsive, relevant, and 
sustaining practices that recognizes the individuality of a students, the learning styles 
of various cultural groups, and the need for differentiation in content and learning 
modality. The class helps students investigate the many structural barriers that may 
inhibit a student’s academic progress. We discuss cultural awareness, culturally 
responsive caring, how culture influences communication in the classroom, the need 
for a culturally relevant curriculum and culturally congruent teaching.
There are several reasons why LD 618 is problematic. First and foremost, it would 
restrict academic freedom and the ability of teachers to provide students with a 
comprehensive and culturally responsive education that my class supports. It denies 
the fact that our classrooms are filled with diverse groups of students whose cultural 
heritage, social practices, and familial norms influence their learning in multiple 
ways. Just as supporting and teaching those students in culturally appropriate ways is 
part of a teacher’s job, so is assisting those students with learning about how people 
outside their cultural circle live and contribute to the world. A curriculum that opens 
windows into other ways of being and knowing promotes acceptance.
The purpose of education is to equip students with critical thinking skills, and by 
prohibiting these teaching frameworks students will be denied the opportunity to 
develop understanding, empathy, and respect for the current and historical diversity of
our world. It will hinder students' ability to understand and confront issues of racism 
and discrimination in society.
Furthermore, the bill's language is overly broad and vague, making it difficult for 
teachers and school administrators to interpret and enforce. The bill's definitions of 
critical race theory, social and emotional learning, and diversity, equity, and inclusion
are also inaccurate and misrepresentative of the actual content and purpose of these 
teaching frameworks.
Finally, by prohibiting these teaching frameworks, the bill perpetuates the false 
narrative that racism and discrimination are issues of the past and do not exist in 
present-day society. This bill ignores the reality of systemic racism and the need for 
students to learn how to address it to create a more just and equitable society.
In conclusion, LD 618 is an ill-conceived and misguided attempt to restrict academic 
freedom and limit students' ability to learn critical thinking skills and address issues 
of discrimination and racism. I urge the Maine legislature to vote against this bill and 
instead support comprehensive and inclusive education for all students.

