Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee.  
 
My name is Claire Millikin Raymond, I am an educator with nearly two decades 
experience teaching at the college level, and I am testifying against LD 618. LD 618 
would markedly diminish educational excellence in Maine. The history of the United 
States, and Maine history, includes extensive periods of racially based oppression 
and disenfranchisement. It is this complex history that critical race theory 
addresses. As educator and lawyer Richard Delgado notes “In 1790 Congress had 
limited naturalization (acquisition of United States citizenship) to free white persons 
only. With minor modifications, this racial qualification for citizenship stood on the 
books until 1952,” indicating the long and deep history of racial oppression and 
disenfranchisement in the United States. Critical race theory allows students to 
learn the reality of their national history.  
 
To prevent students from learning this history would be to prevent Maine students 
from being well-educated citizens of our democracy. Many students in Maine 
schools are from families that are not of primarily European descent. Banning 
critical race theory from Maine schools will have a deleterious effect on these 
students’ experience of belonging, of having full voice in the classroom.  
 
If the goal of Maine’s educational system is to produce well-educated citizens of our 
democracy and also not to exclude any group of students from equal opportunity to 
learn, then Maine needs to be aware that classrooms’ social climate impacts 
student learning outcomes. Critical race theory not only teaches all students about 
the full and real history of the United States but also creates a classroom climate 
that welcomes and values all voices.  
 
Critical race theory is not about excluding the voices and histories of those of 
primarily European descent. Critical race theory is about including, in addition to 
these already foregrounded European-American voices and histories, the voices and 
histories of the many Americans, and many Mainers, whose families are not 
primarily of European descent. Because excellence in education for all students is a 
core value and prime goal of Maine as a state, I recommend that LD 618 not be 
passed. Its passage will be a major step backward and work against educational 
excellence in Maine.  
 
Sincerely, 
Claire Millikin Raymond 
Owls Head, Maine 
 
 
 
Claire  Raymond
Owls Head
LD 618
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. 
My name is Claire Millikin Raymond, I am an educator with nearly two decades 
experience teaching at the college level, and I am testifying against LD 618. LD 618 
would markedly diminish educational excellence in Maine. The history of the United 
States, and Maine history, includes extensive periods of racially based oppression and
disenfranchisement. It is this complex history that critical race theory addresses. As 
educator and lawyer Richard Delgado notes “In 1790 Congress had limited 
naturalization (acquisition of United States citizenship) to free white persons only. 
With minor modifications, this racial qualification for citizenship stood on the books 
until 1952,” indicating the long and deep history of racial oppression and 
disenfranchisement in the United States. Critical race theory allows students to learn 
the reality of their national history. 
To prevent students from learning this history would be to prevent Maine students 
from being well-educated citizens of our democracy. Many students in Maine schools 
are from families that are not of primarily European descent. Banning critical race 
theory from Maine schools will have a deleterious effect on these students’ 
experience of belonging, of having full voice in the classroom. 
If the goal of Maine’s educational system is to produce well-educated citizens of our 
democracy and also not to exclude any group of students from equal opportunity to 
learn, then Maine needs to be aware that classrooms’ social climate impacts student 
learning outcomes. Critical race theory not only teaches all students about the full and
real history of the United States but also creates a classroom climate that welcomes 
and values all voices. 
Critical race theory is not about excluding the voices and histories of those of 
primarily European descent. Critical race theory is about including, in addition to 
these already foregrounded European-American voices and histories, the voices and 
histories of the many Americans, and many Mainers, whose families are not primarily
of European descent. Because excellence in education for all students is a core value 
and prime goal of Maine as a state, I recommend that LD 618 not be passed. Its 
passage will be a major step backward and work against educational excellence in 
Maine. 
Sincerely,
Claire Millikin Raymond
Owls Head, Maine
