May 4, Z023: Legislate testimony regarding LD 123, LD 618 and LD 1008 
Dana Carver-Bialer, MPP/MA, PhD Candidate 
Position: Oppose 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Dana Carver-Bialer and I serve the 
students and community members of the Bangor School Department in my role as Diversity, Equity, 
Inclusion and Belonging Coordinator. This is a role to which I've brought a 16 year career in teaching 
instruction, higher education research, and public policy analysis. For the sake of time, l have 
provided a brief synopsis of my credenﬁals, education, and professional afﬁliations at the conclusion 
of my written testimony submission. 
I provide the following statement representing the Bangor School Department, notably 
Superintendent James Tager and the Bangor School Department School Committee in strong 
opposition of LD 123, LD 618 and LD 1008. 
Throughout today's-public hearing, you will undoubtedly be provided expertise and data that 
challenge the measurable harm of codifying LD 123, 618, and 1008. Having spent the last 16 years of 
my career engaging in education research, civil rights investigations and policymaking —including 11 
years of teaching —this is for good reason. As educators, we turn to research to make informed 
decisions: research across countless disciplines —education, medicine, public health, childA 
development, and sociology, to name a few—highlight the overwhelming beneﬁts for both majority 
and underrepresented populations of curricula, teaching methodology and policies that 
acknowledge diverse lived experiences and sources of knowledge. Instead, I wish to provide a 
deeper glimpse into the human faces, here and now, that will be impacted by the limited access to 
diverse texts and inclusive curriculum that these bills promote. 
As the third largest district in Maine, the Bangor School Department serves approximately 3,500 
students across 10 schools. Our students and families reﬂect dynamics emblematic of American 
public education in 2023: families have diverse income levels, political ideologies, faith traditions, 
nationalities, ethnicities, racial identiﬁes, and familyistructures. Our students identify as LGBTQ+, 
navigate the challenges of visible and invisible disabilities, and hold an endless expanse of opinions, 
interests, identities, and visions of their futures. And, like all districts, our staff work tirelessly to 
mitigate a post-pandemic ”return to normal" and ensure our students are safe from violence, all 
while cultivating academic excellence. Navigating these complex dynamics has led us to a "back to 
the basics" approach to public education. The basics of kindness, consistent attendance, pathsto
graduation, and partnering with parents and guardians for their students ’ educational needs. In the 
spirit of getting "back to the basics,” I wish to highlight other basics that inform our practice: 
Education, in its purest form, functions to promote self-reﬂection as well as an increase in 
understanding the world beyond one's perspective and experiences. To reference a phraseI 
frequently use when training educators, critically engaging with students is a function of 
creating mirrors AND windows. Mirrors to self-reﬂect; windows to understand experiences 
beyond one's own. Why do we do this? For the idealized goal of promoting empathy and 
deeper connection to the experiences of others, and, because that's what is demanded of 
us: Whether you measure academic excellence through standardized testing, aggregated 
building-level assessments, or promoting a lifetime of inspired learning, we havea 
commitment to provide students with the tools to challenge assumptions, examine their 
world, and be informed consumers and creators of knowledge. 
We recognize that educators hold the profound responsibility to cultivate a passion for and 
accumulation of knowledge into a skillset that positions Maine's youth to become 
tomorrow's global leaders. With this, we trust them to make countless curriculum and 
instruction decisions, every day, and empower them through administrative support, 
adherence to standards, and alignment with countless benchmarks established locally 
through federal policies. The bills being considered at today's hearing suggest a ”one size ﬁts 
all" approach to education, removing choice and undermining administrators, school boards, 
students, and families to specialize education to community needs. 
We understand the most important form of diversity to be diversity of thought. We equip 
our students with complex histories and global experiences to promote critical thinking. 
How can we possibly expect students to make informed decisions, innovate, or navigate 
problem solving otherwise? 
We know our students are not solely students, they are people. Students show up to school 
every day with complex and diverse lives. They turn to their caretakers, peers, news cycles, 
media, and sometimes even us, their teachers, to make sense of their world. They are not 
simply indoctrinated with curriculum at school as a sole source of knowledge. 
Reducing access to language and stories of diverse identities does not reduce prevalence of 
diverse identities, it shuts the windows and shatters the mirrors that students rely upon to 
see themselves and make sense of the world. Researchl tells us that l.GBTQ+ identiﬁed 
youth-particularly transgender youth—experience exponentially higher rates of poor 
1 
Kosciw, J.G., Clark, C.M., Truong, N.L., & Zongrone, A.D., The 2019 National School Climate Survey: The 
Experiences of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Tronsgender and Queer Youth in Our Nation's-Schools (New York, NY: GLSEN, 
2020).
outcomes, including poor mental health, suicidality, unstable community and family support, 
substance use disorder, homelessness, vulnerability to violence, and feeling lack of. 
connection to their school communities. Every day, l work with students of 
underrepresented populations and can say with zero hesitation that programming, texts, 
mentors, and instruction that recognize their unique contributions to our community makea 
world of difference. On a deeply personal note, I know inclusive curriculum and educators 
who champion a culture of inclusion and belonging would have made an invaluable 
difference for my own childhood, too.r 
The text of these bills suggest educators prioritize at politicized agenda over education. To this,I 
implore you to better understand what terms like social-emot'i0na/ /earning, diversity, equity, and 
inclusion, and critical race theory mean. What you will ﬁnd are frameworks immersed in decades of 
research to better understand the complex human experience. Like people of diverse identities, 
these terms are not inherently political. These terms have been politicized to promote fear, 
intolerance, and discrimination. When nationally recognized research points to growing mental 
health challenges faced by American youthz , how can removing care, cultural competency, 
belonging, and safety possibly be endorsed by our elected officials? When state and federal 
anti-discrimination laws demand schools infuse education, prevention and remedial measures into 
Title IX and Affirmative Action protocols, how can these goals effectively be met under L.D. 618?- 
Measures to subvert knowledge and eradicate diverse experiences erase the sense of belonging and 
critical skills all students deserve and educators are entrusted to navigate. In an evolving world, 
education must evolve too. 
For these reasons, we strongly urge the Committee to unanimously vote "ought not to pass” for LD 
123, LD 618 and LD 1008. Thank you for your time and consideration. 1 
Respectfully submitted, , 
James Tager, Superintendent, Bangor School Department 
l\/larwa Hassanien, Chairperson, Bangor School Department School Committee 
Timothy Surrette, Vice Chairperson, Bangor School Department School Committee 
Dana Carver-Bialer, Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and Belonging Coordinator, Bangor School 
Department ‘I 
2 
"Youth Risk Behavior Survey: Data Summary and Trends Report,” Centers for Disease Control. Accessed April 20, 
2023, https://www.cdc.gov/heaIthyyouth/data/yrbs/pdf/YRBS_Data-Summary-Trends_Report2023_508.pdf
Dana Carver-Bialer submits this testimony as cumulatively informed by professional roles, formal 
education, and lived experience as an educational leader who embodies historically and 
contemporarily underrepresented identities, She holds a B.A. in Women's Studies and Political 
Science from Simmons College, a dual Masters of Public Policy and Masters of Women and Gender 
Studies from Brandeis University, and is a PhD Candidate in Communication at The University of 
Maine. After over a decade teaching, researching, and advising in higher education, she transitioned 
to K-12 education and is currently serving the Bangor School Department as their Diversity, Equity, 
inclusion, and Belonging Coordinator —the ﬁrst standalone K-12 "DE!" position in /\/laine. in this role 
she supports the district ’s DE/B curricular and training eﬁorts and through advanced Association of 
Title IX Administrators (ATIXA) certifications conducts Title IX and Aﬁirmative Action investigations.
