Elizabeth  Andersen
Maine Association of School Libraries
LD 618
My name is Elizabeth Andersen. I have been an educator for close to 30 years. I have 
taught at all three levels: elementary, middle, and high school, both as a classroom 
teacher and a school librarian. I write to you today as an educator, a parent of a child 
from a marginalized group, and the President-Elect of the Maine Association of 
School Libraries. 
The main premise of LD 618 is flawed. First, critical race theory is not taught in 
Maine schools, so anti-bias education is what I will use in its place for my written 
testimony. The teaching of anti-bias education, social and emotional learning, 
diversity, equity, and inclusion in every school in which I have worked, is about 
providing students windows and mirrors in which to view the world and develop 
empathy for others. Dr. Rudine Sims Bishop coined the idea that books act as 
“mirrors, windows, and sliding glass which allow students to see themselves and 
affirm the value of their identities and also to develop empathy for others’ 
experiences. Limiting students’ access to books and curriculum because of the content
listed in LD 618’s content limits Maine students' ability to see themselves reflected in 
their schoolwork and books; it also hinders other students from gaining an 
understanding of other people’s identities and experiences. 
In accordance with federal civil rights laws, as an institution, a school is prohibited 
from discriminating on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex (including gender 
identity and sexual orientation), disability, or age. By not providing curriculum and 
school resources that represent all the race, color, national origin, sex, and emotional 
needs of all students, schools are creating inequity and discriminating against students
who often have the highest need in our schools. 
Schools are places where we encourage students to learn and grow. LD 618 will 
fundamentally harm Maine students. I urge you to vote against LD 618. 
1  In Praise of a Scholarly Force: Rudine Sims Bishop 
https://library.ncte.org/journals/LA/issues/v85-2/6175

