Emily Connelly
Portland
LD 618
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, I am a parent and I work in 
the public library. I am writing today against LD 618, An Act to Eliminate Critical 
Race Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion 
from School Curricula. 
My children go to Lyseth Elementary school, and I have loved getting glimpses into 
what they are learning about in school — especially my daughter who is in third 
grade, and has been able to engage with their growing Wabanaki Studies curriculum. 
They are raising salmon eggs in their classroom, learning about changes to waterways
in Maine and how those have impacted the Wabanaki communities, and had a visit 
from family members of Wabanaki children in their school for a drum circle. All of 
these are being taught within age appropriate historical contexts — and are showing 
the students Wabanaki people are of course still here. I am thrilled that my kids are 
getting to learn about the history and the present of Wabanaki people in school — 
something we definitely didn’t learn about when I was growing up, and wish I had! 
And this is just one example of the kind of curriculum this bill would be working to 
suppress. 
LD 618 also targets the schools’ Second Step program that teaches kids about 
managing their feelings — how to deal with stress and anxiety, or how to treat others 
with respect. It would target the teachers who are introducing historical concepts and 
relating them to our society today. It would make educators worried about teaching 
accurate history of slavery, suffrage, civil rights, the Holocaust, and more. It unfairly 
targets communities whose histories are already marginalized. I know I am grateful 
for the work teachers do to teach important history to our kids, and help them 
understand its impact today.
A bill like LD 618 would only serve to further damage our public schools — and our 
state is already struggling to maintain teachers. It would be expensive to put in place 
as well. This bill implies that we don’t trust teachers to do their job, and educate our 
kids. I know that there is so much thought put into the curriculum, and so much work,
and I am so grateful to the educators working to teach all of our students. We all want 
schools where students can work in healthy, safe, and supportive environments, and 
the educators do so much to make that happen.  
Please rule against LD 618. Thank you for the opportunity to share my opinion with 
you today. 
