May 3, 2023 
 
Maine State Legislature 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
 
Re: Legislative hearings scheduled for May 4, 2023 
 
To Whom it May Concern: 
 
I am the parent of a Hall-Dale Middle School student and resident of Hallowell. I submit this letter as 
written testimony in opposition to three bills you will be considering on Thursday, May 4, 2023. My 
household is absolutely and adamantly opposed to LD 123, LD 1008, and LD 618. I am writing today to 
voice our strong opposition and hope that these bills do not pass.  
 
As to LD 123 (An Act to Eliminate the Educational Purposes Exception to the Prohibition on the 
Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors), making it illegal to talk about or include books in curricula 
that discuss trans identity or sexuality, this is absurd and offensive, flying directly in the face of the 
notions of kindness, inclusivity and basic decency. Making it illegal to discuss trans identity or sexuality 
will, of course, only open up paths to ignorance and further harassment of LGBTQ students. At Hall-Dale, 
the students have formed a Civil Rights team; one of the activities they did this year was to create 
welcoming signage throughout the school for LGBTQ students. We are extremely proud of their work in 
this regard. How about if legislators conduct themselves in an equally kind and welcoming manner? Let 
this bill die an appropriate death. 
 
LD 1008 (An Act to Establish a Rating System for Books in School Libraries) would make it easier to ban 
books on the basis of identities deemed “controversial and inappropriate.” Who will decide whose 
identities are “controversial and inappropriate?” Banning books in school libraries is doing the opposite 
of what school libraries should be doing – expanding students’ minds and giving them access to 
information. Parents can still decide which books they want to keep from their kids, but let’s not give 
the government the right to decide which books our kids should be reading. I shudder at the thought of 
whoever dreamed up this bill having the right to decide what my daughter can read or discuss at school. 
 
LD 618 (An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social Emotional Learning, and Diversity, Equity, and 
Inclusion from School Curricula) would, for one thing, make it illegal to talk about racism currently and 
throughout history, as well as the structural racism that persists today. Seriously?! Why are we 
considering legislation that would make it illegal to talk about racism, in 2023? Additionally, this bill 
would eliminate programs designed to help kids navigate life and emotions. At Hall-Dale, a Social and 
Emotional Learning professional was hired with COVID funding to help kids still dealing with the effects 
of the pandemic, and we know that this position continues to help many kids deal with the aftermath of 
the isolation, fear and disruption caused by COVID. Eliminating these positions will create yet another 
source of disappointment and disruption to kids who really need the help. Again, if the minds behind 
these bills could conduct themselves as well as our middle school students, we wouldn’t have to waste 
our time writing letters like this. 
 
In short, each of these bills is designed to close minds and make information inaccessible. They are 
clearly intended to maintain a desperate hold on a system that harasses, bullies, and “others” kids from 
identities that have traditionally been marginalized. They are also clearly designed to uphold systemic 
racism that we should instead be continuing to dismantle. This only happens when conversations can 
take place. I urge you not to let these bills go one step further. Thank you. 
 
Erin Lloyd 
Hallowell, Maine 
Erin.599@gmail.com  
