TESTIMONY OF GIA DREW 
LD 618 — Ought Not to Pass 
An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and 
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
May 4, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, greetings. My name is Gia Drew, 
and I am Executive Director of EqualityMaine, a statewide organization which has been 
advocating on behalf of Maine’s LGBTQ+ community since 1984. I am testifying today 
in opposition to LD 618. This dangerous bill would prohibit schools from providing 
instruction and information about important parts of US History, including our 
understanding of race, as well as social and emotional learning, and diversity, equity and 
inclusion in school curricula. Limiting students ’ exposure and experience with these 
topics limits their ability to see themselves in the broader world and unnecessarily denies 
them the opportunity and freedom to explore themselves and the world around them. 
Before joining Equality/Maine, I was a K-12 art teacher for twenty years. One the reasons 
I became an educator was because I had several teachers in my life that helped me ﬁnd 
my way as a young learner. They provided a curriculum that not only reﬂected who I was 
as a person, but also exposed me to the wonderful diversity the world has to offer. They 
helped me to see myself as a person who has value, and helped me understand my 
relationship to my emotions and feelings, so I could better navigate this complex world. 
As a teacher, I tried my best to emulate these teachers, so my students had the opportunity 
to thrive and succeed. 
Fortunately, Maine schools are encouraged, if not required by the learning standards, to 
do what my teachers did for me and I tried to do for my own students. That is also what 
this bill is trying to prohibit, thus making schools an unwelcoming and cold space for 
many kids. Recently, the US Surgeon General released a report on the state of mental
health for young people.‘ In the section, How We Take Action, the top two suggestions 
for educators are: 
1. Create positive, safe, and affirming school environments. 
2. Expand social and emotional learning programs and other evidence-based 
approaches that promote healthy development. 
Providing students with the skills they need to navigate complex social situations, 
manage emotions, and establish positive relationships with their peers and teachers is 
essential for the success of young people. These are also traits that will beneﬁt them as 
they become adults in our society. 
For LGBTQ+ youth, these skills are particularly crucial. Many of these students face 
unique challenges related to their sexual orientation or gender identity, such as 
discrimination, bullying, and harassment. Social Emotional Learning can help them build 
resilience and coping strategies to overcome these obstacles and thrive in school and 
ultimately as adults. 
It’s the job of dedicated teachers and administrators in Maine’s public schools to help 
students understand the World around them and prepare them for success as adults. This 
bill stiﬂes teachers ’ ability to do that important Work and does a disservice to Maine 
students, denying them the chance to build critical thinking skills, to engage with 
comprehensive information and education — including the full picture of American 
history, both good and bad — and to appreciate human differences. Children deserve an 
honest and accurate education that enables them to learn from our past and help createa 
better future. 
We urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 618. Thank you for your time and attention 
to do what’s best for kids. I’m happy to answer any questions. 
Gia Drew (she/her) 
Executive Director, EqualityMaine 
l 
https:/iwvvvv.hhs.gov/surgeongeneral/priorities/youth-mentaI-health/index.html
