Jeri Stevens PhD, LCPC, CCS 1580 Pond Rd Sidney, Me 04330  207-872-7558   Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and respected members of the Education and Cultural Affairs committee,  Thank you for the opportunity to share my thoughts regarding LD 618 An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula and am urging you to vote ONTP.  I am Jeri Stevens, PhD, LCPC, CCS. I started my career as a school counselor over 43 years ago and have been a clinical mental health counselor and clinical supervisor for 40 years.  I am an assistant professor and clinical coordinator for the graduate counseling program at Husson University and provide clinical supervision to school counselors and school based mental health counselors.   The author of this bill is asking that these values and beliefs not be taught in school:  A. One race or sex is inherently better than another race or sex; B. By virtue of the individual's race or sex, an individual is inherently racist, sexist or oppressive, whether consciously or unconsciously; C. An individual should be discriminated against or receive adverse treatment solely or partly because of the individual's race or sex; D. Members of one race or sex cannot and should not attempt to treat others without respect to race or sex; E. An individual's moral character is necessarily determined by the individual's race or sex; F. An individual should feel discomfort, guilt, anguish or any other form of psychological distress solely because of the individual's race or sex; and G. Meritocracy or traits, such as having a work ethic, are racist or sexist or were created by members of a particular race to oppress members of another race.  The above beliefs are the core of Critical Race Theory and I wholeheartedly agree that these values do not have a home in public school and should not be part of any curricula. However,  Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DEI) are entirely different and should be removed from this bill.   Social Emotional Learning (SEL) is the means where students learn tools, knowledge and skills to manage emotions, empathy for others, establish and maintain positive relationships and make responsible decisions. The benefits of SEL are well researched and repeatedly show evidence directly related to student academic success, fewer behavior problems, less emotional distress and positive social behavior.  With the rising rates of anxiety, depression, suicidality, homelessness, substance use, and physical, emotional and sexual abuse, social emotional learning is crucial in the schools. When looking at social and cultural issues, teaching students about diversity (we are all individuals and different), Equity (no one individual is better than another) and Inclusion (including all people 
Jeri Stevens PhD, LCPC, CCS 1580 Pond Rd Sidney, Me 04330  207-872-7558   not just those who are the same) helps build students ability to be relational, non-judging, open to learning and achieving.   Parents have the option to review curriculum as well as opt out of individualized student supports. It would be a devastating for the majority of students, teachers, staff and parents if SEL was to be eliminated in the schools. It takes a village to raise healthy, well-adjusted kids building self-esteem and self-confidence to be achievers.   It is my recommendation that you not pass this bill as it stands with a recommendation that Social Emotional Learning and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion not be considered alongside of Critical Race Theory.  I am happy to participate in the work session or to be available for any future discussions. Thank you for taking the time to read this testimony.  Kindly,  Jeri W Stevens, PhD, LCPC, CCS  Jeri Stevens PhD, LCPC, CCS Clinical Supervisor Husson University Assistant Professor / Clinical Coordinator   
