Jessica Feeley
York
LD 618
Good afternoon and thank you for accepting my testimony.  
On its face, LD 619 appears innocuous.  It is not.  
First, the issue of "Critical Race Theory" must be addressed.  Critical Race Theory is 
a construct taught in Law Schools, relating to thew concept that racism may or may 
not be embedded in the United States' court system.  Please note that it is topic 
discussed in law school curricula.  This is AFTER a student has completed their 
primary education, aka Kindergarten - grade 8, secondary education. aka High school 
or grades 9-12, and post-secondary education, aka college or university, bringing a 
student into, at least, their 20's.
However, racism is a part of US history.  While the Three-fifth's Compromise was 
effectively gutted by passage of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution by 
outlawing slavery, it was the 14th Amendment that officially repealed the Three-fifths
Compromise in the Constitution.  While those Amendments did change to Law of the 
Land, it did not completely change beliefs or practices.
I am in my 60;s.  I freely admit that I was taught racist attitudes by my parents. 
 It was a reflection of the times. My parents moved our family to Maine in February, 
1971.  Aside from all the snow, I also noticed that there were no Black or Brown 
people, anywhere. What I DID notice that people of French and Acadian descent were
the subject of similar jokes and comments that I had heard about people of color in 
New York and New Jersey. People of French descent, by virtue of their origin and 
faith, had been targeted by the Ku Klux Klan in Maine.  I assure you, that topic was 
NOT covered in Maine History at my local public school. I only learned of this during
the past three years. 
 Groups of people have been discriminated against in our country since the first 
Europeans landed.  The Puritans didn't allow anyone who did not practice their faith 
to settle with them.  This is the reason that what we now call Rhode Island came into 
existence: Catholics were not welcome.
Free public education was established in our country in order to educate children and 
especially the children of immigrants. The initial hope was to avoid the rigid class 
structure of Europe. Segregation by race made that goal impossible.
We have seen the rise of White Supremacy in our country, and it has regained ground 
here in Maine. There have been meetings and demonstrations documented in the 
news. The only way to combat insidious racism is to teach about it and show how it is
detrimental to our civil society.
Now, about equity education. Because of .1973 changes to US law, I was able to open
a personal checking account WITHOUT my father's permission and signature when I 
went to college. In 1980, I opened my first credit card account.  I never changed  my 
name when I married  and my husband was still in college, so I was the primary on 
the account.  The cards arrived and his last name had been changed to mine. "When 
did laws change that a woman didn't have to change her name?" he was asked. We 
had educated ourselves on this before our wedding. His answer? "It's never been 
required in Maine, it's just always been tradition." 
I can give you plenty of personal examples of sexual harassment in my life.  These 
included while in school and those events caused me to feel that I was of lesser value. 
When I tried to explain these issues to the men who were in control, I was publicly 
ridiculed, Events such as these are a detriment to mental health. Let us just follow the 
recent news just since the start of 2023 to see the effects of not having healthy coping 
skills.
In conclusion, as I have read LD 618 and the platforms and demands of the 
sponsoring organizations, I ask LD 618 be voted "Ought Not To Pass."
 
