Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Ha rove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 4% 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Opposition 
LD 618: An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and Diversity, 
Equity and Inclusion from school Curricula 
Jesse Hargrove - Vice President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
May 4, 2023 
Good Afternoon Senate Chair Rafferty, Representative Chair Brennan and members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, 
My name is Jesse Hargrove. I live in Thorndike and teach Social Studies at Hermon High 
School. I serve on the RSU 3 School Board, the Thorndike Budget Committee, and as Vice 
President of the Maine Education Association. I am here today on behalf of the MEA in 
opposition to LD 618 An Act to Eliminate Critical Race T heory, Social and Emotional 
Learning and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula. 
On Tuesday, May 2nd at 2:17, just before One Act play rehearsals, a student of mine 
entered my classroom. She was absent from class having spent the day, right here, talking to 
state legislators about transgender issues. She had a vacant look and commented that her 
Representative made it clear by actions and words that she made him uncomfortable in their 
conversation, and there were other priorities than listening to her issues and concems. At that 
moment, I was heartbroken with helplessness for my student. Her expectations of the day were 
to be treated as a citizen, as the future, as an American advocating for her rights, freedoms, and 
liberties. Instead, she left feeling invalid, unworthy, and unrepresented. 
The Preamble to the U.S. The Constitution begins, We the People. . .but never deﬁnes 
who the people are. We know that citizens of this great experiment in democracy have 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME D4401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207—888—2070 fax I www.maineea.org
Maine Education Association <* 
i. 
; its 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
experienced “blessings of liberty” differently, and that it is our duty to work towards a “a more 
perfect union” . It is therefore necessary that we learn from the women in the Triangle Shirt 
Factory, laborers in Camegie’s steel mills, the marchers in Selma, the students in East St. Louis, 
and the rioters at Stonewall. LD 618 Implies that our schools are teaching that one group is 
better than another, confusing this for Critical Race Theory (CRT), Social Emotional Learning 
(SEL), and Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion. VVhat our schools are doing is teaching students to 
analyze primary sources, such as The Constitution, The Bill of Rights, George Washington ’s 
Farewell Address, but also Frederick Douglass ’s 1852 Independence Day Address why he says 
the 4th of July “Is yours, not mine” . Including books, texts, and documents by diverse authors 
presenting unique perspectives on controversial topics is not teaching critical race theory. We 
simply do not do the things implied in this legislation. We debate the cause of the Civil War 
looking at economic factors, social factors, political factors. We teach pluralism and multiple 
perspectives, such as the Petitioner and Respondents in precedent and cturent Supreme Court 
Cases. (Shameless plug) You are all invited to see my students conduct a Moot Court of the 
current 303 Creative v. Elenis case that seeks clariﬁcation between state anti discrimination laws 
and lst Amendment right to free speech. Students will argue BOTH Sides of the case while 
other students, having reviewed precedent cases, will render a decision. Social Emotional 
learning is simply working with students to develop the strategies to handle difﬁcult situations, 
such as civil debate where differing perspectives are explored, in order to manage their stress, 
and meaningfully engage. 
Imagine that student I referenced before, leaving a classroom, feeling dejected, 
discouraged, and unrepresented. You would determine that I failed her. My responsibility is to 
include all of my students, and to prepare all of my students for a diverse America. I, and my 
colleagues across the state, do that with pride and without prejudice. The subjective language of 
LD 618 such as “guilt” , “discomfort ” , and “anguish” would discourage educators from 
incorporating learning activities that foster critical thinking, recognizing biases, and evidence 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 H3149 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207—888—207D fax I www.maineea.org
E s Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
based reasoning. It threatens an already depleted educator workforce and values rote learning 
over the creative problem solving for 21st Century America. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Jesse Hargrove 
Thorndike, ME 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME OM01 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207»622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.0rg
