 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
May 4, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs , my name is Joe Anderson.  I am a 
resident of Portland, a hospital -based pediatrician, and I s erve  on the board of the 
Maine Chapter of the American Acad emy of Pediatrics.  I am writing today to 
express our opposition  to LD 618, A n Act to Eliminate Critical Race T heory,  Social 
Emotional Learning and Diversi ty, Equity  and Inclusion from School Curricula .  We 
feel this bill  seek s to politicize our public education syst em and would further a n 
environment of intolerance toward  those in historically disa dvantaged and 
minority communities.   We ask that you vote Ought  Not to Pass on  LD 618 . 
 
LD 618 s eeks to ban “Critical Race Theory ” – an academic and legal framework 
that describes how systemic racism is inter twined throughout  American  society.   
It is a theory  developed by legal  scho lars and taught in law schools  and graduate -
level studies , not elementary  or secondary schools .  However, this term has been 
co-opted by opponents attempting to silence discussions or instruction 
surrounding systemic racism, and even to ban the accurate and truthful telling of 
American histor y.  The incongruency  of the definiti on of “Critical Race Theory”  in 
this bill ’s title  and text  with its historical use in  academic study  lead us to believe 
that this legislation  would introduce confusion  and hesitation to educators when 
it comes to teaching and discussing issues related to racism, especially as it relates 
to our nation ’s history and c urrent events.  
 
The bill ’s use of the terms “Social and Emotional Learning ” and “Diversity, Equity, 
and Inclusion ” is also concerning.  As defined by the Robert W ood Johnson 
foundation, “Social and emotional learning is a framework that focuses on the 
core social and emotional skills necessary for students of all ages  to be healthy 
and successful .  Bridging curriculum and teaching with school policies and 
collaboration with parents  and communities, SE L has five key components: self -
awareness, self -management, social awareness, relationship skills, and 
responsible decision -making. ”1  As pediatricians, we re cognize the importance of 
integrating th ese topics th roughout a child ’s education – both at home  and at 
school  – and would not support any suggestion that the state would seek to ban 
these concepts, especially in the midst of a mental health crisis .   
 
Diversity, Equity , and Inclusi on describes initiatives to promote the fair treatment 
of all people , and is understa ndably focused on populations who have be en 
histor ically under -represented or subjected to discri mination .  DEI is not an 
instructional methodology, but  rather  is most often used  to guide employment 
practices or corporate culture .  In the school setting, it could l ook like learning 
about  other cu ltures as a w ay to better understand and respect our differences, 
and to honor our shared humanity.  
 
 
 
Educators across our  great state a lready have a monumental task at hand in 
ensuring our children have the skills and knowledge necessary to thrive in a 
constantly changing and diverse world.  Please don’t stifle their efforts, and  allow 
them to use their training and expertise to  teach and guide our youth to  become 
smart, talented,  compassionate , and well-adjusted  adults  with  every tool in their 
chest .  Please vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 618.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Co-Chair, Advocacy Committee  
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics  
 
 
 
The American Academy of P ediatrics believes that “celebrating the diversity of 
children and families and promoting nurt uring, inclusive environments  means 
actively opposing intolerance, bigotry, bias, and discrimination.  The AAP is 
committed to using policy, advocacy and education to encourage inclusiv ity and 
cultural effectiveness for all .”2 
 
 
 
1 Robert Wood Jo hnson Foundation: Social and Emoti onal Learning.  
(https://www.rwjf.org/en/insights/collections/social -and-emotional -learning.html?o=0&us=1 ). 
 
2 American Academy of Pediatrics Equity and Inclusion Efforts  
(https://www.aap.org/en/about -the-aap/american -academy -of-pediatrics -equity -and-inclusion -efforts/ ). 
  

