Justin Whynot
Windham 
LD 618
Senator  Rafferty,  Representative Brennon, and esteemed members of education and 
cultural affairs committee,
     My name is Justin Whynot, I reside in Windham and I am  in support of LD 618. 
     I would like to bring your attention to a very special group of people. Everyone 
likely knows one of these very special people, either directly or indirectly. This group 
exists on what we refer to as “the spectrum”. Everyone who loves someone that is 
autistic, you know how wonderful, special, and easily impressionable they can be.
     Some of the curriculum being used in the State of Maine, and content that is easily 
accessible in the libraries of Maine’s public schools seems to be targeting an already 
vulnerable group of children. These books that are portraying age inappropriate 
sexual content and self harm, materials that promote ideologically malicious 
socio-emotional curriculum, these things are inappropriate for the average population 
of students this age. For this special minority? It’s manipulative and damaging to the 
innocent developing minds of the children of the State of Maine and can result in 
destructive behavior.
     Cherished members of the autistic community are already burdened by social 
anxieties, but many will develop coping mechanisms that help them lead a more 
fulfilling life with less burden of stress. As we all know, imagination is a blessing 
given to us at youth that regretfully tends to fade away with age. Many of us have 
fond memories of Mr. Rogers trolley cruising through make-believe land, but at the 
end of the show the trolley always came back to reality. I highly encourage 
imagination. It can lead to great things, but as adults, as parents, as a governing body, 
it is our duty to ensure that it always makes it back to reality.
     The equity opportunity of the Maine school system seems to be targeting the 
spectrum community with its curriculum and library content that promotes self harm, 
suicide, rape, incest, racism, segregation, victimization, bullying and many other 
horrible things.  Things that can be traumatizing and triggering for adults, are being 
provided freely to children, including our most vulnerable children. No adult should 
be subjecting vulnerable innocent children to this atrocious content.
     I’d like to point out to you what that special group looks like, numerically 
speaking. Recent CDC data states, for children 8yrs old in 2020, 1 in 36 children are 
estimated to have ASD, and to break that down for you, that is approximately 4% of 
boys and 1% girls . You can see, the potential for harmful effects of the mental heath 
of the spectrum community is growing at a rapid pace. Autistic boys have a more than
three times higher rate of suicide than the general population and autistic girls are four
times the rate. Recent data for the general population shows that one in three teenage 
girls attended or contemplated suicide. 
     Actions and policies during the pandemic contributed to the drastic increase in 
suicide attempts nationwide. Suicide was already the second leading cause of death 
among 10 to 34 year olds. Why are we “fueling the fire” of the mental health crisis 
that our children are burdened with? Licensed mental health professionals along side 
parents should be guiding children through mental health challenges, not librarians 
and  curriculum.
     Many books in Maine public school libraries contain Content deemed detrimental 
to the mental health of children, and sexual content that’s provided freely, to 
developmentally unprepared children. That’s considered sexual abuse by the CDC.  
When children are introduced too, or are confronted with, sexualized content, it 
rewires their frontal lobe. The frontal lobe is not fully developed until the age of 25 or
26. Social and sexual behavior, judgment, and decision making are all done in the 
frontal lobe. For children, especially those with ASD, the effects could be 
devastating! Having this harmful content in Maine public schools can adversely 
impact students mental health and wellbeing. I implore to remove this harmful content
by voting  “ought to pass” on  LD 618.
