May 4, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee: 
 
My name is Katrina Hoop and I live in Portland. 
 
I stand in strong opposition to LD 618 for several reasons: 
 
First, both the title of this bill and the language contained within it are confusing. By arbitrarily lumping 
together three broad and complex concepts, we cannot possibly understand the complexity, nuanced 
history, and purpose of each area. Beyond the title, the 7 “definitional clarifications” listed appear to be 
a jumbled pile of distortions, are wildly unclear, or reductionist in nature.    
 
Second, Critical Race Theory, social emotional learning and the topics of diversity, equity and inclusion 
are entirely different concepts or/and approaches. Each would require a lengthy discussion to educate 
you on these. For this reason, I will address one theme on discomfort. Learning about material that 
might make us uncomfortable is hard. I understand this personally because I have taught this material 
for 17 years as a Sociology teacher in higher education. We grapple with complex topics such as 
individualism, social structure, history and identities such as race, racism, gender, and sexuality in 
deliberate detail.  I cannot teach any of this without an honest and accurate understanding of American 
history.  We cannot understand our current society without understanding our past. Many of my 
students acknowledge that while discussing material is hard, they appreciate the deep exploration of 
material and recognize how important it is to fully know our history and how our lives are impacted by 
this history.  
 
Finally, let me speak broadly about this bill. The authors of this bill are clearly afraid to reconsider their 
world view and appear, rather, to prefer remaining willfully ignorant of realities, such as racism, 
privilege, transphobia and implicit bias, that surround their bubble of conscious existence. They also 
wish to force their ignorance upon EVERY young person in this country by demanding that the 
government censure school curricula and forbid open and honest exploration of these realities. 
Furthermore, their heightened fear seems to have impeded their ability to intelligently communicate 
their ideas, thus clearly illustrating a severe lack in understanding of the concepts.  
 
We should help ALL our children become intelligent, analytical, reflective and compassionate members 
of society, even if their parents choose not to be. 
 
Please vote Ought NOT to Pass.  
 
Sincerely, 
Katrina Hoop 
Portland Maine 
 
