Kerry Anderson
Monmouth
LD 618
My name is Kerry Anderson, a resident of Monmouth in Kennebec County, and I’m 
writing to testify against LD 618: An Act to Eliminate Educational Critical Race 
Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from 
School Curricula. As a current public high school teacher and former international 
education professional, I believe strongly in more education related to the roles race 
has played throughout our history and the ways racial differences impact us today. 
We absolutely cannot back away from educational and intellectual pursuits; it is our 
duty to work to understand different human experiences more deeply and truly, and 
race plays a role in our human experiences. Educating ourselves about this is an act of
hope; it is an attempt to create a better, safer, more just world. We need to understand 
racism in order to dismantle it. 
I speak two languages and much of my professional career has been rooted in 
interculturality. It is vital that we bear diversity, equity and inclusion in mind if we 
want schools to be places where every student is accepted and treated well, and if we 
want to prepare students for the world outside of school. So many students are curious
– many want to learn more about diversity, equity, inclusion, and cultural differences 
and similarities. Why would lawmakers want to prevent this?
What exactly do lawmakers mean when stating they’d like to eliminate social and 
emotional learning from school curriculum? Schools are inherently social and 
emotional, and it is our job to help students navigate the complex social structures 
they face and emotions they feel every day. Naming and understanding one’s own 
emotions is not easy; it takes work, practice and support. Schools need to be places 
where this is practiced and supported. I was just visiting a school in another country, 
and the teachers at this school told me they feel the area their school needs to invest 
the most in is social and emotional learning. My colleagues overseas, as well as my 
colleagues right here in Maine, see bullying, harassment, and mental health struggles 
in our halls. We want to prevent bullying and harassment; we want to lessen the 
severity and extent of mental health struggles and distress that our students have. We 
need more investment in social and emotional learning in order to do this. 
I urge legislators to strongly oppose and fight to stop LD 618: An Act to Eliminate 
Educational Critical Race Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and Diversity, 
Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula.

