Kristen Day
Windham
LD 618
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Education and Cultural Affairs 
committee members:
My name is Kristen Day, and I am a mother of three children, and a taxpayer in 
Windham. I support LD 618 and ask you to vote yes to eliminate CRT, SEL & 
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from school cirricula. SEL was a HUGE mistake in 
Maine. Public Education is tanking already. It might look fine from your seats up here
in Augusta, but I can't wait for my daughter to be out of there. 
Since SEL has been the basis for education, and equity became the focus, students are
demoralized and unmotivated. The relations between students at school has become 
nagative, devided and bullying is worse than ever. By pointing out differences, 
students notice all the differences and point them out incessantly. Bullying is like 
nothing you could even imagine. And it's not just lgbtq, it's every student, same as it 
ever was. Just so much worse. When kids are are taught to label each other, they learn
to profile, and to isolate, even segregate themselves. It becomes a big black hole of a 
competition for what group gets prioritized, rather than all being EQUAL as we are as
Americans. We always help those in need, but people are not in need because of a 
demographic. That's called racism. It's a massive step backward in civil rights, 
teaching students to oppress themselves in the name of progress. This is not how you 
want to raise the next generation to inherit our country. 
An even bigger problem is that SEL blurs the lines of professionalism in school. 
Teachers are so unprofessional. They talk about their personal lives, marital problems,
sex lives, medications- My daughter's teacher in 9th grade told his class of 14 year 
olds that he was uncircumcized. It was in the context of his Jewish background so it's 
ok with SEL right? No, and he didn't have the sense to censor that. He would not curb
talking about it 5 times, and we had to file a sexual harassment complaint. 
Please bring back academic, merit based learning. Kids all need support, not just 
select demographics. And kids need to all see each other as humans and learn to 
BUILD, not just look around pointing the finger and tearing down. Vote YES on LD 
618 and get back to basics!
