An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social and Emotional Learning 
and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula 
 
 Good afternoon.  My name is Lisa Clark. I’m a resident of Poland, a former 
teacher, and current stay at home parent. I oppose LD 618 and would like to speak to 
each of the parts of the bill.  As a teacher, I can tell you that most schools do not 
currently have formal CRT curriculum.  If they do, they are most likely at the high school 
or college level.  None of the schools I worked in had formal CRT curriculums nor were 
teachers provided training in CRT however CRT came up naturally through 
conversations with our students.  An example that sticks in my mind is when I was 
reading a novel set in the Civil Rights era with my students.  We were discussing the 
events of the novel and one of my students asked: “But Mrs. Clark, things are better 
now, right?” This was right on the heels of the killing of George Floyd and naturally 
students were able to recognize that, although our country has made progress, the 
effects of racism and slavery are still embedded in our society and can have very real 
consequences on their lives.  Students today have access to an incredible wealth of 
information and perspectives. Students are going to question what they are learning in 
history and social studies classes and apply it to what they see in our society. Part of the 
common core standards for ELA is to be able to understand varying perspectives and 
explain why the perspectives may be different.  We are teaching kids to think critically 
and to think from many angles so, even if there is a lack of formal curriculum, CRT will 
come up in discussion. For those who oppose CRT, I would like you to ask yourself why.  
Have you ever experienced a CRT curriculum? Have you seen it in action in the 
classroom?  What harm do you foresee coming to students by learning about CRT?  In 
my mind, the effort to ban CRT in Maine schools is an effort to stall equality and critical 
thinking.  
 The part of this bill that really stands out to me is the desire to ban social 
emotional learning, SEL is literally embedded in everything that is done in the 
classroom.  Kids today have access to social media and the internet and are constantly 
bombarded with negative ideas and imagery. In recent years students have had to face a 
tumultuous political climate, looming climate change, mass shootings, and a global 
pandemic. Many students’ families have been hit hard by inflation, homelessness, and 
substance abuse. That’s a lot of stress on a child and that stress carries over into the 
classroom.  The hardest part about teaching is classroom management. If you have even 
one child in crisis, the whole classroom will be affected.  I am not currently in the 
classroom but the biggest thing that I am hearing from my former colleagues and 
parents is that behaviors are out of control since the pandemic.  Collectively we have all 
faced a trauma and teachers cannot effectively teach until they have managed the 
behaviors of the classroom which involves teaching students how to process and handle 
their emotions and to handle conflict with others.  That is the core of SEL- regulating 
emotions and learning to handle conflict.  In my classroom SEL looked like students 
learning how to name what they were feeling and why, learning how to breathe to calm 
their bodies, learning how to have a polite discourse with their classmates when they 
disagreed in discussion, and it even included a lunchtime yoga and meditation class that 
my students very much loved and needed. I recently read that more than 40% of 
teachers leave the profession within their first five years of teaching. That’s almost half 
of all new teachers. I’ve also read that 16% of teachers overall leave the profession each 
year and that teaching programs at some universities have shut down because 
enrollment is so low.  There is a reason for this.  Teachers love their kids.  But when they 
feel like they are not respected, when they feel like they do not have support, when they 
don’t have resources- all of that leads to the feeling that it’s not worth it.  And I can tell 
you that, even though I am not currently teaching, it’s nonsense like this bill that makes 
teachers want to quit.  Teachers need the appropriate tools in order to be successful and 
SEL is one of those tools.  
 Lastly, I would like to speak to the idea of banning diversity, equity, and inclusion 
in the curriculum.  Maine is not an incredibly diverse state racially, but that is changing 
over time.  Despite the lack of racial diversity I can assure you that there is diversity in 
the classroom.  It may be a student who identifies as LGBTQ, a student with a mental or 
physical disability, or a student with autism.  As I mentioned before, the cornerstone of 
a productive classroom is a classroom where students’ emotional needs are met and 
everyone feels safe and secure.  Part of that is addressing the differences and diversity 
within the classroom, teaching students to embrace differences, and learning to interact 
productively with those who may be different from you. Another part is making sure 
that education is equitable for all, no matter the student’s race, gender, sexual 
orientation, class, or ability. If teachers cannot teach diversity, equity, and inclusion 
than that will feed into conflicts, students who do not feel safe and secure, and 
potentially volatile situations.  Those of you who may think that it’s not necessary in 
Maine because we are not a diverse state, I ask you to think of the future of our students. 
Many of our students will go to universities whether within Maine or out of state where 
they will be exposed to a diverse range of individuals.  How successful do you think that 
they will be if they haven’t learned to dialogue and work with people who are different 
from them? 
 As a teacher, I see this bill as a step to control and suppress freedom of speech 
and ideas.  I think that this bill will set Maine back as a state. I also believe that the 
people who support this bill need to spend a substantial amount of time in actual 
classrooms talking to actual teachers. I believe you need to ask yourself what is your 
purpose for introducing this bill? What are you afraid is happening in our schools? Is 
this what your constituents have told you they want, or is this your own agenda? I’d like 
to remind you that you are here to represent the people of Maine and, if the majority of 
constituents have not asked for this, this is a bill that shouldn’t even be on the table. 
Thank you.  
