Louise Secordel
Scarborough
LD 618
As a Scarborough resident and a proud recipient of American grade school education, 
I strongly oppose the proposed bill LD 618 to eliminate critical race theory (CRT), 
social emotional learning (SEL) and diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) from 
school curricula.  
To start, banning facts or evidence-based practices that improve student performance 
and well-being is unacceptable. 
CRT is a specific academic concept, developed more than 40 years ago with decades 
of research, to show how racism is embedded in our legal systems, institutions, and 
policies. It is actually rarely taught in grade/high school, and if it is, the goal is to 
understand history and society to create a better future together---it is not to shame 
white kids or teach them to hate themselves. It was not a part of my grade/high school
education. I first heard about it in college and wish I had had the language and facts 
earlier when learning about history and developing critical-thinking skills. 
SEL and DEI are both much broader concepts, with evidence-based practices that 
extend beyond the topics of race and sex that the proposed bill focuses on. SEL 
frameworks teach important skills that help students with decision-making, emotional 
regulation, and relationship building. Research shows that the benefits are consistent 
and broad, from increased social skills, attitudes, and academic achievement to fewer 
problems with conduct and distress. SEL frameworks are often embedded in how 
educators teach, interact with students, and conduct activities, and usually have no 
explicit connection to identity politics. My parents moved from France to the USA 
when I was a child, partly because of the American education system and its ethos of 
positive reinforcement, empowerment, and exploration. Those are all important 
components of SEL. Banning something that is so expansive, beneficial, and 
intertwined with how educators teach is not the future. 
Similarly, DEI is an even broader and more ambiguous topic. At its core, the DEI 
field is about increasing representation across many identities (e.g., race, sex, gender, 
nationality, language, religion, age, physical ability, etc), addressing unfair policies so
that there is an even playing field for all, and empowering people to work together. To
the extent that this is even explicitly taught in schools, the goal is not to shame, but to 
learn about oneself, deepen empathy and critical thinking skills, and collaborate with 
others so that everyone feels belonged. At its broadest level, there are DEI 
components in all the humanities subjects (and beyond)—banning it wouldn’t even 
make sense, ethically or logistically.  
Banning these expansive and important topics is harmful and not the way to support 
our future Maine generations---I strongly oppose this proposed bill. 

