Mary Finn
WISCASSET
LD 618
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee:
My name is Mary Finn, I live in Wiscasset, and I am the mother of 2 young adult 
sons. One of my sons is a second lieutenant in the US army.  His story is unique as he 
is the son of a Peace and Justice educator, and believes strongly in upholding the 
constitution and our rights and freedoms. He is  a warrior in service to those rights 
and freedoms. He is the leader of a group of multiracial, multiethnic men and women 
in a Bradley unit.  And he is partially successful as he has learned to respect all those 
in his unit regardless of religion, race, ethnicity, class, sex and gender identity. This is
what is required in today’s army as it reflects those who today are serving, and is a 
reflection of our larger world. We raised our sons as best we could to learn to be 
comfortable in a multiracial, multicultural society. That was what we believed our 
public school would help to provide and yes, our public schools did do just that.
Our children deserve an honest telling of the history of the United States, all of it, to 
prepare them to solve the complex problems of today’s rapidly changing world. If 
children are not told the truth of our history, but just a selective piece, we are on the 
road to repeating the mistakes of the past.  And as a result, recreating the harm and 
injustices of the past. 
I believe that social emotional learning is crucial in the lives and education of our 
youth. How else do they learn to get along with others, solve conflict in a healthy 
way, treat others with love and respect? School communities are a hub for learning 
these skills. Emotional regulation, empathy and good interpersonal skills are all 
important for one to be successful in life, to become successful adults,  and live and 
be productive participants in a multicultural, multiracial world. 
I urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 618. It would have a negative effect on 
the well being and student learning here in Maine. 

