Matt Drewette-Card
Topsham
LD 618
Testimony Submission IN OPPOSITION to LD 618 - An Act to Eliminate Critical 
Race Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion 
from School Curricula
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs,
My name is Matt Drewette-Card. I am a resident of Topsham, a lifelong educator, and
a parent of two learners currently enrolled in the K-12 public education here in Maine.
I am submitting testimony on behalf of myself and myself onlym, and my testimony 
does not reflect the positions of any other organization to which I may be affiliated.
I am urging the committee to vote "Ought Not To Pass" on LD 618.
Aside from the rampant fragility and gross misunderstandings that this bill presents 
regarding Social and Emotional Learning and Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in 
schools, this bill is fundamentally flawed. The bill states: 
"A school administrative unit may not provide instruction ... that...: 
-F: An individual should feel discomfort, guilt, anguish or any other form of 
psychological distress solely because of the individual's race or sex; 
-G: Meritocracy or traits, such as having a work ethic, are racist or sexist or were 
created by members of a particular race to oppress members of another race."
Part F: How can you, the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee and Legislature 
in general, legislate "feelings?" What historical, cultural, and educational topics might
elicit these feelings, and how are we (as educators and even parents) going to know 
what topics might evoke intense feelings of discomfort, guilt, or anguish in another 
individual? Who is the individual? A student? A parent? A School Board member? A 
community member? How does this language belong in statute? The language is 
vague and unclear. The phrase, "those who ignore history are doomed to repeat it" is 
important because that phrase is not just about the cognitive recognition of historical 
facts, but the social and emotional understanding of the impact those facts had on 
society at large. History is about facts AND impact, and impact comes from value and
importance. This language would force schools to remove discussions about values 
and impacts of historical events and facts, and as a result, the lessons of history would
go unlearned. 
Part G: Due to the structure of the sentence, the phrase "such as work ethic" can be 
removed. It then would say that schools could not teach or include in their curricula 
that there existed "traits" that "are racist or sexist or were created by members of a 
particular race to oppress members of another race." In a past legislative session, the 
legislature passed requirements adding that the "History of Genocide" must be 
included in the Maine Learning Results. Genocide is almost universally and 
historically predicated upon ideals or "traits" that "are racist or sexist or were created 
by members of a particular race to oppress members of another race." So how would 
schools meet these statutory requirements? This language is vague, broad, and poorly 
written, and would cause much confusion and disruption across all of Maine.
Further, any claims that we live in a pure meritocracy need only look at the historical 
and current wage gap between men and women 
(https://blog.dol.gov/2023/03/14/5-fast-facts-the-gender-wage-gap#:~:text=Overall%
2C%20women%20are%20not%20paid,for%20Black%20and%20Hispanic%20wome
n.). If we lived in a pure meritocracy, this gap would not exist, nor would it get even 
more exacerbated when factoring in race, ethnicity, and socio-economic status as 
well. 
From top to bottom, this bill is flawed, ignorant, and bad for Maine schools and 
Maine learners. I have only highlighted 2 clear and distinct flaws in the bill language, 
and there are many others. I urge the committee to vote "Ought Not To Pass" on LD 
618.
Thank you for your time and service to Maine.
