LEGAL ADVOCATES 
8‘ DE FENDERS - 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
Ought Not to Pass — LD 618 
An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and Diversity, 
Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula 
Submitted to the 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
May 4, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, 
and I am the Policy Director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of the ACLU of Maine and GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders 
(GLAD), I am here today to testify in opposition to LD 618, because it forbids teaching of 
important concepts to young people in our schools. 
If enacted, this bill would forbid schools from “provid[ing] instruction ” in seven topics 
that are inaccurately described as “critical race theory, social and emotional learning, and 
diversity, equity and inclusion. ” Putting aside the inaccurate descriptions of these topics, the 
ACLU opposes this bill because it attempts to limit what can be discussed in classrooms, 
violating students ’ First Amendment rights to learn. 
After a year and a half of children losing out on in-person learning because of COVID- 
19, and the disruptions students have faced coming back in person, many students face increased 
difficulties in school. As so many students struggle to catch up, We should be doing everything 
We can to help children learn, not restricting what they can learn. In fact, the latest National 
Assessment of Educational Progress data shows a significant drop in performance in history and 
civics in 2022 for nearly all 8"‘ graders, as compared to the last report in 2018. NAEP reports this 
as the first ever score decline in civics since the report began.1 
1 
National Center for Education Statistics. (2023 May 3). Eighth-graders ’ U.S. history and civics scores decline in 
new Nation' 
s Report Cards; ﬁrst-ever score decline in civics [Press Release], 
https://www.nati0nsreportcard.gov/civics/supporting_ ﬁles/2022_civics_ushistory_press_release.docx.
This bill attacks students ’ access to a safe learning environment where young Mainers 
can freely explore, intellectualize, criticize and analyze different concepts and ideas. Prohibiting 
instruction in discussions of race, sex, or gender could leave young people ill-equipped for 
experiences outside of the classroom. It also restricts teachers ’ development and ability to teach 
their students, as they will be afraid or unable to handle student questions surrounding race or 
gender or sexual orientation that come up in the course of teaching. It will impede the ability of 
teachers to help students in their learning journeys. 
School is supposed to be a place for academic and social-emotional development, which 
this bill actively seeks to forbid. By restricting these topics, children will not learn how to have 
difficult conversations. School is the environment Where young people learn how to talk and 
understand other people’s points of view, to work together, change their minds, and learn how to 
back up their positions. This bill could prevent students from developing those skills. 
By enforcing erasure of concepts in schools, We enforce censorship and we erode the 
ability to discuss and to dissent, which are essential parts of democracy. We urge you to vote 
ought not to pass. 
Meagan Sway Mary L. Bonauto 
ACLU of Maine GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders 
P.O. Box 7860 257 Deering Ave., #203 
Portland, Maine 04112 Portland, ME 04103
