Senator Raiferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Melissa Cheeseman and I am a high school English 
teacher, representing the Maine Education Association. I oppose LD 618. 
First, please know that I am speaking for myself, from nearly thirty years of teaching experience. Trust 
that I spend much time, thought and energy into making sure that what I teach is engaging, relevant and 
encourages students to self-reflect, as well as nurture critical thinking, reading and writing skills. I have 
had the good fortune to work with colleagues who strive to share best practices, and open young minds.I 
have taught countless works of ﬁction and nonﬁction, chosen not just by me, but by my students. In the 
classroom, I strive to include a variety of perspectives; students conduct research, most often on topics 
they choose, evaluating and synthesizing information and ideas, inferring their own conclusions. For 
example, given the times we live in, the age of the internet, social media, and now, A.l., students are 
inundated with countless types of information and viewpoints, including mis- disinformation. Helping 
them navigate this ever-changing world becomes more and more challenging. I want them to be ready for 
the workforce and college, equipped to read the ﬁne print on an apartment lease, or offer insights in 
connection to core material being taught in a college course. I want them to think for themselves. 
This bill, however, includes language that is, frankly, perplexing. 
The Brookings Institution, a nonproﬁt public policy organization based in Washington, DC., states that 
“Laws forbidding any teacher or lesson from mentioning race/racism, and even gender/sexism, would put 
a chilling effect on what educators are willing to discuss in the classroom and provide cover for those who 
are not comfortable hearing or telling the truth about the history and state of race relations in the United 
States. Ironically, ‘making laws outlawing critical race theory conﬁrms the poi11t that racism is embedded 
in the law,” as sociologist Victor Ray noted.’” 
What is most disturbing to me is that, the way that this act is worded, it seeks to muzzle not just educators 
but students ’ freedom to think and express their own ideas, opinions and observations.' 
For these reasons, I strongly urge the Committee to vote unanimously “ought not to pass.”
