Mitch Degere 
58 maplewood lane 
Durham, ME 04222 
Testimony in opposition of LD 618 
Dear representative Adams and honorable members of the committee on Education and 
Cultural affairs. I am resident of Durham ME and I am here today to testify in opposition against 
LD 618. 
In 1997 I was working at a psychiatric treatment as a mental health worker, sitting in a weekly 
clinical meeting with a full staff of 40 psychiatrists, social workers, and administrators. Sharing 
my experience with a patient that was venting a delusional rant in which he stated he was 
being followed by the FBI and a list of other things devoid of reality. The CEO looks at me with 
the intensity of putting out a fire and says, ”why are you being his toilet"? next to me was the 
community coordinator who immediately interrupts and says, "or his bank". 
Experiencing a flush of embarrassment, hurt and a very unsettling aura through out the 
meeting permeated my entire existence. This was an initiation or birth that brought downa 
blind spot and began the development of understanding "moral injury". 
The mission and values at this Psychiatric treatment center; was an open setting campus where 
treatment resistant patients can come and go freely to lead their treatment taking back a healthier 
existence. The CEO was actively putting out a fire, so the spark I created would not spread, by tolerating 
or accepting untruths of this radical or delusional kind requires a blatant abandonment of reason. WhatI 
was doing was “contrary ” to the mission and values of the treatment center. 
Today, we all bring our different roles, missions, values, and experiences but I would like to urge all of us 
to recognize that these roles are related and that I have to be willing to recognize agreements and 
consistency with those who oppose my views. It is paramount that we as a community, do not detach 
from the fidelity of those values and mission of our roles. When we do this, it creates "moral injury". 
Born in 1960, growing up white I did not have to talk about race, being male I didn't have to worry about 
my place in society, this is called privilege. My counter parts being black or of color had to talk about 
race to get through life or even to sun/ive it. My girl counter part was pressured to stay in a more ridged 
feminine role. Combine this with the silent stoic Irish catholic culture in a home saturated in alcoholism. 
Education is the antidote to our cultural silence and that education should always include what our 
children are experiencing in their lives. This includes the study of our society's "moral injuries ” of 
slavery, Jim crow laws, the present-day systemic racism in our country including a prison population in 
which people of color have overrepresented. Not one president has had the courage to apologize for 
those evils and no reparations given although the greatest economy in the world was built on the backs 
of chattel slavery.
ln Timothy Snyder's book, Tyranny, 20 lessons of the twentieth century, he puts it "you submit to 
tyranny when you renounce in what you want to hear and what is actually the case." 
"To abandoned facts is to abandon freedom" as such, an open hostility to verified reality takes up the 
form of invention of lies as if they were the facts. 
l.E. Trump "the vote is always rigged” "black people are taking the vote away from white people, 
although history shows the opposite to be the case." 
Rush Limbaugh was the #1 radio talk show host making $400,000,000 a year at his peak. A racist, sexist, 
homophobic, hater with no curiosity whatsoever to manage our country's challenges. 
Tucker Carlson, the number 1 cable news commentator who was just fired from fox news, a white 
nationalist, race baiting, conspirator has the largest audience in the country. 
Donald trump was supported by 74,000,0000 Americans. He averaged 27 lies a day by the end of his 
administration and is still the leading contender for the republican party's nomination for president in 
2024. A racist, misogynist, xenophobic hateful divisive leader. 
”Accepting untruths of this radical kind requires a blatant abandonment of reason" 
We need DEI like the desert needs rain, from pre-school all the way through college and should be 
taught with the appropriate developmental abilities of a student's age and maturity. 
When we betray our values of democracy, legislation, public education, parenthood and community we 
suffer, and our humanity sinks like a stone in water. This Bill is not symbolic of oppression it is 
oppression, and it fertilizes the growth of our collective moral injuries, injuries that will never be 
resolved or managed. From generation to generation, we keep saying ”why do I have to do this, l didn't 
create slavery or Jim Crow, l'm a good person, not a racist. You don't have to do anything, but what will 
that silence bring or what effect will it have if our children are allowed to talk about it.
