Dear Legislators,  
 
In bold, following each alphabetized point of the proposed legislation LD 618, I offer a correction to the 
claim(s) made in that section. As a widely published professor with an international reputation for 
leadership in related fields of academic study I am very familiar with the actual content of Critical Race 
Theory (CRT), social emotional learning (SEL) and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DEI).  
 
Spoiler Alert: not a single statement about CRT, SEL or DEI in LD 618 is correct.  What is astonishing to me 
is that each of the statements about CRT/SEL/DEI in LD 618 is THE OPPOSITE OF WHAT THESE SCHOOLS 
OF THOUGHT ADVOCATE. One wonders , “how could thinki ng legislators  with full access to the robust 
literature on these schools of thought  get this so wrong ?”  
 
“1.  Prohibition.   A school administrative unit may not provide instruction in critical race theory , social 
and emotional learning  and diversity, equ ity and inclusion  in school curricula. For the purposes of this 
section, "critical race theory, social and emotional learning and diversity, equity and inclusion" means 
instruction that:”  
 
A.  One race or sex is inherently better than another race or sex;  
CRT/SEL/DEI is premised on the opposite (as per founding father Thomas Jefferson and the 
Declaration of Independence), “all people are created equal.”  
 
B.  By virtue of the individual's race or sex, an individual is inherently racist, sexist or oppressive,  
whether consciously or unconsciously;  
CRT/SEL/DEI is premised on the opposite; that race and/or sex have no inherent connection to an 
individuals’ racist/not racist, sexist/not sexist views.   
 
C.  An individual should be discriminated against or receive a dverse treatment solely or partly because 
of the individual's race or sex;  
CRT/SEL/DEI totally, fully and completely rejects this idea and goes further: No individual anywhere, 
of any race or sex, should ever be discriminated against for any reason.  
 
D.  Members of one race or sex cannot and should not attempt to treat others without respect to race 
or sex;  
CRT/SEL/DEI take the opposite position; all people should attempt to treat all others with RESPECT 
regardless of their race or sex.  
 
E.  An individual's moral character is necessarily determined by the individual's race or sex;  
CRT/SEL/DEI takes the opposite position; individual moral character has no necessary connection to 
the individuals  race or sex.  
 
F.  An individual should feel discomfort, guilt, anguish or any other form of psychological distress solely 
because of the individual's race or sex;   
CRT/SEL/DEI DOES NOT  assert that individual discomfort, guilt or psychological d istress stems either 
wholly or in part from the  individual’s  race or sex.  
 
G.  Meritocracy or traits, such as having a work ethic, are racist or sexist or were created by members of 
a particular race to oppress members of another race.  
CRT/SEL/DEI take as a premise that a full, robust meritocracy cannot be achieved in social settings 
where individuals are systematically denied equal opportunities because of their race/sex. Further, 
CRT/SEL/DEI are carefully to NOT attribute racist/sexist  INTENT to the individuals who created metrics 
of meritocracy (notwithstanding the very real historical fact that the vast majority of those individuals 
were white men).  
 
CONCLUSION  
 
The authors of LD 618 demonstrate their difficulty with reading comprehension. If this was a multiple 
choice exam, or any other assessment, we would be shocked to find interpretations of the underlying 
material to be 100% incorrect . The extent to which LD 618 misrepresents CRT/SEL/DEI suggests an 
intent to deceive —otherwise one would find at least one correct statement in the list of views that are 
attributed to CRT/SEL/DEI.  
 
Finally, it is difficult for this citizen/professor to reach any conclusion other than that the sponsors of this 
bill are in fact racist, sexist demagogues working hard to stir up the kinds of virulent hatred that so often 
leads to racist/sexist violence. I am truly ashamed that such bigots walk among us.  
 
Thank you for your attention i n this matter.  
 
Susan F. Feiner  
Professor Emerita, University of Southern Maine  
 
 
Susan Feiner
YARMOUTH
LD 618
Dear Legislators,
In bold, following each alphabetized point of the proposed legislation LD 618, I offer 
a correction to the claim(s) made in that section. As a widely published professor with
an international reputation for leadership in related fields of academic study I am very
familiar with the actual content of Critical Race Theory (CRT), social emotional 
learning (SEL) and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DEI).
 
Spoiler Alert: not a single statement about CRT, SEL or DEI in LD 618 is correct. 
What is astonishing to me is that each of the statements about CRT/SEL/DEI in LD 
618 is THE DIAMETRIC OPPOSITE OF WHAT THESE SCHOOLS OF 
THOUGHT ADVOCATE. One wonders, “how could thinking legislators with full 
access to the robust literature on these schools of thought get this so wrong?”
 
From the bill's language
“1.  Prohibition.  A school administrative unit may not provide instruction in critical 
race theory, social and emotional learning and diversity, equity and inclusion in 
school curricula. For the purposes of this section, "critical race theory, social and 
emotional learning and diversity, equity and inclusion" means instruction that:”
 
A.  One race or sex is inherently better than another race or sex;
CRT/SEL/DEI is premised on the opposite (as per founding father Thomas Jefferson 
and the Declaration of Independence), “all people are created equal.”
 
B.  By virtue of the individual's race or sex, an individual is inherently racist, sexist or
oppressive, whether consciously or unconsciously;
CRT/SEL/DEI is premised on the opposite; that race and/or sex have no inherent 
connection to an individuals’ racist/not racist, sexist/not sexist views. 
 
C.  An individual should be discriminated against or receive adverse treatment solely 
or partly because of the individual's race or sex;
CRT/SEL/DEI totally, fully and completely rejects this idea and goes further: No 
individual anywhere, of any race or sex, should ever be discriminated against for any 
reason.
 
D.  Members of one race or sex cannot and should not attempt to treat others without 
respect to race or sex;
CRT/SEL/DEI take the opposite position; all people should attempt to treat all others 
with RESPECT regardless of their race or sex.
 
E.  An individual's moral character is necessarily determined by the individual's race 
or sex;
CRT/SEL/DEI takes the opposite position; individual moral character has no 
necessary connection to the individuals race or sex.
 
F.  An individual should feel discomfort, guilt, anguish or any other form of 
psychological distress solely because of the individual's race or sex; 
CRT/SEL/DEI DOES NOT assert that individual discomfort, guilt or psychological 
distress stems either wholly or in part from the individual’s race or sex.
 
G.  Meritocracy or traits, such as having a work ethic, are racist or sexist or were 
created by members of a particular race to oppress members of another race.
CRT/SEL/DEI take as a premise that a full, robust meritocracy cannot be achieved in 
social settings where individuals are systematically denied equal opportunities 
because of their race/sex. Further, CRT/SEL/DEI are careful to NOT attribute 
racist/sexist INTENT to the individuals who created metrics of meritocracy 
(notwithstanding the very real historical fact that the vast majority of those 
individuals were white men).
 
CONCLUSION
 
The authors of LD 618 demonstrate their difficulty with reading comprehension. If 
this was a multiple choice exam, or any other assessment, we would be shocked to 
find interpretations of the underlying material to be 100% incorrect. The extent to 
which LD 618 misrepresents CRT/SEL/DEI suggests an intent to deceive—otherwise 
one would find at least one correct statement in the list of views that are attributed to 
CRT/SEL/DEI.
 
Finally, it is difficult for this citizen/professor to reach any conclusion other than that 
the sponsors of this bill are in fact racist, sexist demagogues working hard to stir up 
the kinds of virulent hatred that so often leads to racist/sexist violence. I am truly 
ashamed that such bigots walk among us.
 Thank you for your attention in this matter.
 Susan F. Feiner
Professor Emerita, University of Southern Maine
