Thomas Van Buren
Deer Isle
LD 618
To the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs.  I am offering written testimony
on LD618, a bill to prohibit teaching on race, diversity and social emotional learning. 
I am a cultural anthropologist, musicologist and cultural specialist with a lifetime of 
experience in presenting cultural programs and content.  
This bill propose to control what is taught or not taught in Maine Schools, seeking to 
censor the mention of race in teaching of history, and goes even further to prohibit the
subject of diversity and even social emotional learning. This bill is an affront to the 
First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States, as well as the principles of 
the field of historical studies, which concern evidence based documentation and 
discussion of verifiable facts in the historical record. The definitions included in the 
bill of critical race theory and diversity, inclusion and equity cited in are inaccurate 
and irrelevant to the study, practice and teaching of history. 
What the bill claims to refer to is a field of study at the professional law school level 
concerning the lengthy history of race based discriminatory law that is integral to 
legal history in the United States from the colonial era legal basis for slavery and 
indentured labor through the drafting of the US Constitution, the legal framework of 
the antebellum slave states through to the post reconstruction race based laws 
throughout the former confederacy, and which informed discriminatory banking, 
housing, education and immigration law for most of the century following the Civil 
War. The legacy of this legal framework are integral to American history. However, 
Critical Race Theory is not taught in schools, and as such does not need to be the 
subject of legislation.  Nevertheless, the writing of the social studies curriculum is the 
domain of professional educators trained in their respective field, and not that of 
politicians. This bill would set a very dangerous precedent of imposing a political 
ideology in the classroom.  I strongly urge the committee not to pass LD 618.
