Tom Berry
Kennebunk
LD 618
To: Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Honorable Members of the 
Committee
From: Tom Berry
RE: Testimony in Opposition to LD 618: 
“An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and 
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula”
I am a 30-year resident of Kennebunk and I’m writing to urge the Committee to vote: 
“Ought Not to Pass” on LD 618.
I am both alarmed and incredulous that, at this stage in our nation’s history, we are 
being subjected to efforts by a fearful minority who would appoint themselves as the 
“Thought Police” for the entire population. (And I do mean “entire population” since 
this kind of effort is happening nation-wide.)  
LD 618 is but one of several such bills currently being presented to this committee.
The language used in LD 618 is often vague, at times confusing, and frequently 
suggestive that there is a potential threat posed by Maine teachers who harbor 
malicious intentions that has no basis in reality.  Speaking as a retired educator with 
over 25 years experience (K-12) in Maine public schools, I have to say I actually find 
it quite insulting.
In particular, regarding the bastardized interpretation of the term “Critical Race 
Theory” used here, I suggest that our truly great country has nothing to fear from 
acknowledging where, historically, we have fallen short of our ideals.  In fact, such 
acknowledgement would be a sign of the strength we collectively have as we continue
to strive to fulfill our highest potential as a moral leader among nations.  
Regarding the other descriptors in this bill, the language is so subjective that, were it 
to become law, it would open the door to countless frivolous complaints that would 
create a bureaucratic nightmare for school boards across the state.  
To those who would seek to impose this restriction on our public school teachers and 
thereby reduce the flow of information to students they serve, I would say: 
These students are not as fragile as you think they are.  
Let teachers teach, Let students learn
So, I urge you once again to vote “Ought Not To Pass” on this bill.
Respectfully submitted,
Tom Berry

