Anna Staehli Wiser, DPT 
4 Leavitt Street 
Skowhegan, Maine 04976 
(207) 399-8646 
annastaehli@gmail.com 
Testimony in Support of LD 1453, An Act to Amend the Physical 
Therapist Practice Act Laws 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable Members of the HCIFS Committee, 
I am a physical therapist currently employed at Redington-Fairview General Hospital in 
Skowhegan. Soon l will be opening a private practice. l'm asking you to support LD 1453, An 
Act to Amend the Physical Therapist Practice Laws. 
l have a doctorate degree in physical therapy and residency and fellowship training in manual 
therapy, which includes spinal manipulation. Spinal manipulation has been explicitly included in 
the Maine Physical Therapist Practice Act since 1991. However, it is the only intervention that 
requires both a referral and consultation with a physician, chiropractor or osteopath to perform. 
By requiring a "consultation," we either have to wait for the physician to return our signed 
treatment plan — which can take several weeks — or we have to call the physician to ask if we 
can include spinal manipulation in our treatment plan before the patient's next PT visit. 
Scheduling a phone call with the physician can be extremely difﬂcult since both of us are busy 
treating patients face to face all day long. This is an unnecessary requirement for our referring 
physicians and sometimes results in delays in us being able to implement our full treatment plan 
if it includes spinal manipulation. 
In all my 22 years in practice l have never had a physician disagree with me when l have 
recommended spinal manipulation in my treatment plan. Therefore, requiring me to have that 
“consultation ” is an undue burden - both on me and the busy physician. Waiting for a physician's 
order results in a delay in treatment, and possibly added expense for the patient, and it prohibits 
physical therapists from using the treatment interventions that are already within our full scope 
of practice until we get it. Interestingly, l routinely utilize joint manipulation in the extremities 
(forjoint impairments at the elbow, hip, and ankle mostly) without the need for physician 
consultation.
ln my practice, I initiate treatment on the ﬁrst day, and if spinal manipulation is indicated, l 
would like to be able to provide that service on day one, not ask the patient to wait. Whena 
patient is suffering from chronic headaches, neck pain, or lower back pain that inhibits their 
ability to go to work, they want the best, most effective treatment right away. If indicated, a 
manipulation can dramatically reduce pain and improve function in one session. 
When seeking medical care for an injury, there can be many delays. l hear daily stories from 
patients about how they had to wait for several weeks to see their doctor. Once the doctor 
referred them to physical therapy they then had to then wait several more weeks to geta 
physical therapy appointment. Once they ﬁnally got in to see me, if spinal manipulation is 
recommended, they still could not receive this part of the treatment until the doctor signed off 
on it. This is a major source of frustration for the patient who is looking for some relief of their 
debilitating spine pain, which is a very common problem - in fact, the leading cause of disability 
worldwide is low back pain‘. 
ln its current form, while initially intended to add an extra layer of protection for the patient, the 
Practice Act is actually creating a roadblock to the patient being able to access timely medical 
care. lf the physical therapist has to withhold part of the treatment until a doctor's signature is 
obtained, this delays effectiveness and progression of the care plan. Furthermore, many health 
insurances allow only a few physical therapy sessions within a specified time frame. This 
creates a scenario where providing all of the necessary treatment starting on day one is of 
utmost importance. Since there have been no issues or complaints against physical therapists 
performing spinal manipulations in more than 3 decades, it seems that this restriction on spinal 
manipulation is no longer needed. 
Soon l will be leaving my job at Redington-Fairview General Hospital to enter into private 
practice. Patients will be coming to see me with the expectation that l can provide all of the 
services l advertise on the ﬁrst visit. For me to have to tell a patient with severe back pain thatI 
cannot provide spinal manipulation for possibly several weeks will hurt my business. I worry 
that a patient may decide to go elsewhere to receive the treatment they need.
The Maine physical therapy practice act as it is written currently, is cumbersome and 
antiquated. It hurts the physical therapy profession as well as the patients it serves. Please 
consider modernizing this law and doing away with the requirement of a physician's order to 
perform spinal manipulation. 
Sincerely, 
Anna Staehli Wiser, DPT 
Reference: 
1. Wu A, March L, Zheng X, Huang J, Wang X, Zhao J, Blyth F|\/I, Smith E, Buchbinder R, Hoy 
D. Global low back pain prevalence and years lived with disability from 1990 to 2017: 
estimates from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Ann Transl l\/led. 2020 
l\/lar;8(6):299. doi:10.21037/atm.2020.02.i75. Pl\/llDI 32355743; Pl\/ICIDI PMC7186678.
