Members of the HCIFS Committee, 
 
I am Dr. Dan Dallatore, a doctor of physical therapy and licensed physical therapist residing in 
Scarborough. I have been practicing physical therapy for almost 10 years, am a board-certified specialist 
in orthopedic physical therapy, owner of a private practice, adjunct faculty for the physical therapy 
program at the University of New England, and currently the president of the Maine Chapter of the 
American Physical Therapy Association. I am writing in the strongest support for LD 1453 and urge you 
to vote “Ought to pass on LD 1453”. The current Physical Therapist Practice Act is dated, including 
restrictions that delay delivering optimal care to Mainers. We are not attempting to increase our scope 
of practice, but are trying to modernize our practice act due to changes in PT practice, decrease the 
burden to patients, and provide more timely and appropriate care. 
It has been over 25 years since our practice act was last updated. As a result, we would not be able to 
enter the ever-growing PT Compact. This prevents Maine therapists from taking advantage of modern 
opportunities such as practicing via telehealth across state lines. For example, a therapist having the 
ability to serve a patient wintering in another state. Entering the PT Compact would also attract other 
PTs to Maine to address our state’s shortage of therapists. For this purpose, we must amend our 
Physical Therapy Practice Act to add requirements for continuing education and fingerprinting. 
We are also attempting to eliminate two outdated restrictions which were originally intended to protect 
the public, but are only serving to interfere with patient access to physical therapy services. The 
proposed changes do not alter the physical therapist’s scope of practice, rather eliminate barriers 
allowing the therapist to optimally deliver the services already allowed under the current scope. These 
changes include removing the requirement for referral if a patient does not improve in 30 days and after 
120 days whether there is improvement or not, as well as removal of the requirement to have a referral 
and consultation to perform spinal manipulation. 
These 30 and 120 day referral requirements are not necessary. As healthcare professionals with clinical 
doctorates, physical therapists are well aware of when a patient needs referral to a more appropriate 
healthcare provider whether there is improvement or not. This makes a general referral requirement 
based on need much more appropriate instead of arbitrary time-based requirements. These arbitrary 
requirements only increase the burden of rising healthcare costs for Maine citizens. They also add to the 
increased strain on the healthcare system, requiring unnecessary visits to another provider only to get 
referred back to physical therapy in many cases. The requirement of “improvement” is also unnecessary, 
as many patients are treated for medically necessary maintenance services to continue at their current 
level of function and remain independent at home. There are also many therapists providing wellness 
services that should not be bound by a 120 day requirement which was not contemplated when the 
restriction was put in place over 25 years ago.  
The requirement of referral and consultation in order to perform manipulation of the spine only delays 
the ability of a physical therapist to perform a skill which is already within the PT scope of practice. This 
prevents the delivery of optimal care to patients during critical times early in a plan of care. Research 
has shown that a significant number of individuals experience a worsening in disability due to low back 
pain at 1-week follow-up if they did NOT receive spinal manipulation1. This only strengthens the case 
that the intervention is important early in a plan of care, and waiting for referral/consultation could be 
denying patients the most effective and appropriate care, even potentially making them worse in that 
timeframe. Since the time this restriction was put in place, there have been no complaints to the 
licensure board or malpractice cases against PTs for providing spinal manipulation, therefore, the 
restriction is only harming patients, not protecting them.  
Thank you for your consideration of these issues. Based on the above arguments, I urge you to LD 1453 
“Ought to Pass”.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Dan Dallatore PT, DPT, Board Certified Specialist in Orthopedic Physical Therapy 
President Maine APTA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reference: 
 
1. Childs JD, Flynn TW, Fritz JM. A perspective for considering the risks and benefits of spinal 
manipulation in patients with low back pain. Man Ther. 2006 Nov;11(4):316-20. doi: 
10.1016/j.math.2005.09.002. Epub 2006 Jul 12. PMID: 16839800. 
