Le? 
Position on Thrust Joint Manipulation Provided by Physical Therapists 
WAPTA American Physical Therapy Association 
The Sdenu of Healing. The An of Caring. 
An American Physical Therapy Association White Paper 
Executive Summary 
Although Thrust joint manipulation (TJM) has been provided by physical therapists since the inception of 
the profession and physical therapists have published the majority of the research to demonstrate TJM 
effectiveness, the chiropractic profession has mounted legislative and regulatory strategies to prohibit 
physical therapist use of these procedures. Although chiropractors use arguments of patient safety and 
education as arguments against physical therapists use of TJ M, it is quite evident the primary purpose of 
these legislation and regularity assaults is driven by economic motives. 
TJ M and Physical Therapist Practice: Historical and Current Overview 
The history of manipulation in recorded history can be traced back to the days of Hippocrates, the father 
of medicine (460-355 B.C.), and documentation of manipulation being a part of physical therapist practice 
dates back to the beginning of the profession., With early inﬂuence of internationally recognized leaders 
in manual physical therapy plus new research ﬁndings, physical therapists have assumed leadership role 
as the practice of TJM and associated education continues to evolve. 
TJM and Physical Therapist Training 
Physical therapist TJM training starts in professional education (entry—level) programs. Entry-level 
program curricula design and implementation are primarily directed by A Normative Model of Physical 
T herapisl Professional Education (Normative Modeb and the Evaluative Criteria For Accreditation of 
Educational Programs for the Preparation of Physical Therapists (Evaluative Criteria) used by the 
Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education (CAPTE). Both the Normative model and 
the CAPTE evaluative criteria are very speciﬁc that both thrust and non-thrust manipulation techniques 
for the spine and extremities must be taught in physical therapist entry-level curriculum. 
TJM and Patient Safety 
Chiropractors claim that manipulation provided by PTs place the public at risk for serious injury. The 
majority of the injuries and deaths from cervical spine manipulation have occurred at the hands ofa 
chiropractor, while PTs were involved in fewer than 2% of the injury cases, and no deaths have been 
attributed to PTs. PTs have an excellent medical~legal track record of patient safety and the use of TJM. 
HPSO, the primary liability insurance carrier for physical therapists in the United States, has conﬁrmed 
that there are no higher claims losses for PTs who utilize TJM than for those who use other types of 
treatments. 
Research Supporting the Use of Manipulation 
Physical therapists are leading the effort to establish the evidenced-based framework for safe and 
appropriate use of TJM in treating movement disorders. The fact that physical therapist researchers and 
clinicians are leading the way in demonstrating the effectiveness of TJM further illustrates that PTs are 
safe and effective providers of TJM for treatment of spinal disorders. 
Summary 
Based on the coordinated, strategic chiropractic legislative activities during the past 20 years, it is clear 
the chiropractic profession has established a national agenda to prevent PTs from using TJM. Their 
claims that PTs are not adequately trained and that patients are at risk receiving TJM from PTs have no 
factual basis. / £51;
What is Physical Therapy? 
Physical therapy is a dynamic profession with an established theoretical and scientiﬁc base and 
widespread clinical applications in the restoration, maintenance and promotion of optimal 
physical function. This includes: 
o Examining individuals with impairment, functional limitation, and disability or other 
health-related conditions in order to determine a diagnosis, prognosis, and intervention. 
o Alleviating impairment and functional limitation by designing, implementing, and 
modifying therapeutic interventions. 
o Preventing injury, impairment, functional limitation, and disability, including the 
promotion and maintenance of ﬁtness, health, and quality of life in people of all ages. 
Engaging in consultation, education, and research. 
What does a physical therapist do? 
ll provide services that help restore function, improve mobility, relieve pain, and prevent or 
limit permanent physical disabilities of patients with injuries or disease. PTs work closely with 
patients to restore, maintain, and promote their overall ﬁtness and health. Patients may include 
accident victims and individuals with disabling conditions such as low back pain, fractures, head 
injuries, arthritis, heart disease, and cerebral palsy. 
PTs examine patients ’ medical histories, then test and measure their strength, range of motion, 
balance and coordination, posture, muscle performance, respiration, and motor function. They 
also determine the patient's ability to be independent and reintegrated into the community or 
workplace after injury or illness. Finally, they develop treatment plans describing a treatment 
strategy, its purpose, and the anticipated outcome. 
Physical Therapist Education and Licensure 
To practice as a physical therapist in the U.S., you must earn a doctor of physical therapy degree 
from a Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education-accredited physical 
therapist education program and pass a state licensure exam. 
The length of professional DPT programs is typically three years. Primary content areas in the 
curriculum may include, but are not limited to, biology/anatomy, cellular histology, physiology, 
exercise physiology, biomechanics, kinesiology, neuroscience, pharmacology, pathology, 
behavioral sciences, communication, ethics/values, management sciences, finance, sociology, 
clinical reasoning, evidence-based practice, cardiovascular and pulmonary, endocrine and 
metabolic, and musculoskeletal. 
Approximately 80% of the DPT curriculum is classroom (didactic) and lab study and the 
remaining 20% is dedicated to clinical education. PT students spend on average 27.5 weeks in 
their ﬁnal clinical experience.h 
A0 /#1?
