 
 
Testimony of Jessica Peck-Lindsey 
President, Maine Acupuncture Society 
Neither For Nor Against LD 1453 
An Act to Amend the Physical Therapist Practice Laws 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health Care, Insurance, and Financial Services. My name is 
Jessica Peck-Lindsey. I am the President of the Maine Acupuncture Society and on 
behalf of our organization and the members we represent, I am here to offer testimony 
neither for nor against LD 1453, An Act to Amend the Physical Therapist Practice Laws. 
  
As licensed acupuncturists, we are deeply committed to upholding the highest 
standards of care for our patients. We believe that all licensed practitioners, regardless 
of their specific training, should be held to these same standards. While this specific bill 
does not impact our area of practice, we do have concerns about what appears to be 
scope of practice creep. We share the concerns of others who have testified today and 
whose members could be impacted by the proposed changes in this bill. 
  
We believe adequate training that is on par with the professionals being emulated and 
continuing education that is specific to the adjunctive therapies being learned and 
performed is necessary for all professions. We are concerned about the scope creep 
that we have seen in our own profession. Practices like cupping therapy and electrical 
stimulation have been introduced into other professions when they are not properly 
trained to perform them. The most clear and alarming example of this is the widespread 
adoption of dry needling by those who are not professionally trained in the practice of 
acupuncture. Dry needling performed inappropriately can lead to dangerous unintended 
health consequences for patients. Today those who are professionally trained in spinal 
manipulation warn of similar adverse and unintended health consequences when 
performed by others. We understand and sympathize with their concerns. 
  
Additionally, we fully support background checks for all practitioners, as well as regular 
licensing reviews, to ensure that practitioners continue to meet the highest standards of 
care. This will help to protect patients, employees, and the general public. 
  
 
We thank you for the opportunity to testify today. We hope the information provided is 
useful as you make your deliberations. I am happy to answer any questions you may 
have and provide any I don’t for work session. 
  
Thank you. 
 
