Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable Members of the HCIFS 
Committee: 
  
My name is Katherine Rudolph and I’m a resident of Yarmouth.  I am a licensed physical therapist 
(PT) and an Associate Professor in the Doctor of Physical Therapy program at the University of 
New England. I am testifying in support of LD 1453 and will focus my testimony on removing the 
requirement for referral to a licensed doctor of medicine (among others) after 30 days with no 
improvement, or after 120 days regardless of their level of improvement.  
 
This provision was instituted in the 1990’s and it no longer aligns with the current scope of PT 
practice as outlined by the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA).  
• PTs routinely refer to other health care providers based on medical necessity, rather than 
the number of days that have passed.  
o You can be assured that physical therapists are capable of making such referrals 
based on the current requirements of educational programs.  
▪ The Commission on the Accreditation of Physical Therapy Education 
(CAPTE) requires programs to prepare students to recognize and make 
appropriate referrals when medically necessary. Students must 
successfully perform this skill in order to earn a PT degree. 
o Therefore, requiring referral to another provider based on number of days is no 
longer necessary and having this requirement simply adds unnecessary costs to 
patients and can delay their access to care.  
• The modern scope of Physical Therapist practice now includes wellness and prevention 
services, which was never considered when the 120-day referral requirement was put in 
place. PTs now provide services that range from preventing a condition to symptom 
management and preventing further deterioration.  
o Patients in wellness or maintenance programs don’t always “improve” and their 
care may last well beyond 120-days.  
o The referral requirement can also result in patients receiving less than optimal 
care.  
▪ They may avoid the hassle of repeated referrals by seeking maintenance 
care from other types of exercise specialists, such as personal trainers, 
yoga or Pilates instructors. These providers may have no education in 
chronic disease management yet they have no restrictions on how long a 
patient may participate in their services.  This puts physical therapists at a 
distinct disadvantage.  
• Finally, Occupational Therapists – who have a very similar scope of practice – have no 
physician referral requirements whatsoever in Maine and this issue was not raised when 
the OT’s amended their Practice Act in 2021. 
 
I thank you for your time and can answer any questions you may have. 
