Stephen C. F. McDavitt PT, DPT, MS  
6 Bentridge  Dr. 
Falmouth Mai ne 04105  
 
April 21, 2023  
Dear Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee,  
I am Dr. Stephen McDavitt PT, DPT, a physical therapist originally from Rangeley and have resided in Falmouth 
Maine since 1989. I am writing in the strongest support for LD 1493 , An Act to Amend the Physical Therapist 
Practice Law , and urge you to vote “Ou ght to pass on LD 1453 ”. In this letter I will provide evidence that will 
enable you to understand my passion and genuine request for your support. The current law is antiquated, directly 
interferes with a physical therapists’ capacity to deliver their com petent scope of personal, and professional practice, 
and from that in turn, effects the productivity and value opportunities for the state of Maine and US healthcare 
system by constraining a full and appropriate use of its professional physical therapist w orkforce in its delivery of 
healthcare services to Maine citizens. LD 1453 will abate those barriers.  
I have practiced physical therapy in Maine for 47 years. Currently I continue to practice independently in Maine, 
and I am also a professor at the Univers ity of the Cumberlands,  a hybrid doctoral physical therapy program in 
Williamsburg Virginia. Beyond ongoing physical therapist practice, within my career, simultaneously I have been 
intimately involved in over 35 years of leadership within our national org anization, a sample of which includes 
serving the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA) for six years on its Board of Directors and six years as 
president of its Academy of Orthopedic Physical Therapy. https://www.linkedin.com/in/smcdavittdpt/   
In 1991 I was one of the major developers and advocates for SP194 -LD 493, “An Act to Improve Access to Physical 
Therapy Services” . During that time, it was evident to Maine physical therapists that requiring a referral for Maine 
citizens to receive physical therapy services was an unnecessary barrier creating treatment delays and treatment 
denials which in turn were adding to ongoing and downstream costs and burdens in patient outcomes. LD 493 
surfaced by the Maine Physical Therapy Chapter APTA to remove the needless referral requirement for physical 
therapist services to enable them to provide innovations in delivery of services and improved access adding val ue as 
opposed to costs from physical therapist services to Maine citizens. Thirty -two years ago, during the presentation 
and negotiation of LD 493 it was evident to Maine Physical Therapists that some citizens and especially the Maine 
Chiropractic Associat ion were unaware, naïve, and unsettled in their reconciliation of physical therapist accredited 
education and sanctioned professional practice competencies pertaining to clinical reasoning on limitations in scope 
of practice as it pertains to referring to other professionals, intervention safety and efficacy. Within that realization 
Maine physical therapists decided that even though unnecessary, they would work out compromises in the resolution 
of LD 493 that would provide and demonstrate “an assurance road  history opportunity” for later use in practice act 
resolution, and concluded with accepting limitations and exceptions as political, not necessary compromises. Those 
limitations and exceptions that were political compromises, however, were unnecessary the n and are not only 
antiquated now, but antithetical to the original intent and spirit of LD 493 and acceptance of compromises in moving 
forward with a road history approach to resolve this unverified concern from 1990.  
In my investigation over the thirty -two years history that physical therapists in the state of Maine have provided 
direct access under the current law, I could not find any reports from the state of Maine licensing board for 
complaints relevant to physical therapist practice under having no r eferral requirement or when practicing spinal 
manipulation. As we stated in 1990 and I will emphasize now, spinal manipulation is an intervention practiced by 
many professions. Physical therapists have practiced manual therapy including spinal manipulation , in the US since 
1921, and accredited PT education programs are required to meet practice competency standards for spinal 
manipulation that provide safe and efficacious treatment.  
A profession’s scope of practice is directly dependent upon the education and skill of the provider, the established 
history of the practice scope within the profession, supporting evidence, and the regulatory environment. The 
foundation of the physical therapist’s scope of practice is inherently linked to the process required t o manage the 
patient/client. For the PT, the profession has outlined the following elements of patient/client management: 
examination, evaluation, diagnosis, prognosis, intervention, and outcome assessment. Through execution of this 
process, the PT determi nes whether physical therapy services are needed and develops the plan of care in 
collaboration with the patient/client/caregiver. This has always been part and parcel to physical therapist practice 
and supports that physical therapists practice like physi cians and other  first entry inter -collaborative healthcare 
providers , provid e a diagnosis within their scope of practice and collaboratively or directly refer to others when a 
patient may experience or demonstrate a physical condition the PT determines is beyond their scope of practice. 
Such is a practice standard in  all the accredited educational program s of physical therapist practice and a 
professional ethical obligation within the APTA code of ethics which all physical therapists are required to abide b y. 
In closing, I recognize State licensing laws define the permissible scope of practice for the healthcare professions. 
The stated purpose is to assure  consumers that healthcare workers conduct their practices in areas for which they are 
professionally tr ained . Recommendations in LD 1453 merely update, support,  and authorize current physical 
therapist practice standards for competency and the value -added opportunity for Maine citizens to receive physical 
therapist services while the same time assuring thei r safety and outcomes relevant to the scope and standards of 
physical therapist practice. Additionally, I would like to point out that as opposed to intuitive concerns from those 
individuals less informed that required compromises in 1990 for LD 493, we ha ve now not only provided 
documentation on practice competency and safety that meets the standards of LD 1453 but also provided a 32 -year 
history of data that refutes the concerns voiced in 1990.  
Thank you for your consideration of my passion and evidence f or my position. Based on that, I urge you to vote “LD 
1453 ought to pass”. If you have any questions or concerns and wish to discuss any of this information with me 
personally, please feel free to do so. scfm@mcda vittompt.com  207-450-4250  
Sincerely,  
Stephen McDavitt PT, DPT, MS  
Fellow, American Academy of Orthopaedic Manual Physical Therapists  
Catherine Worthingham Fellow, American Physical Therapy Association  
 
6 Bentridge Dr.  
Falmouth, Maine 0405  
 
Physical Therapist:  Orthopaedic Rehabilitation, Manual Therapy,  
Ergonomics/Work Analysis, Clinical Mentoring and Practice Advocacy.  
https://www.linkedin.com/in/smcdavittdpt/  
  
“Ailment depletes human potential.  
Physical therapy speaks to inspiring and  
enriching the quality of human potential  
by optimizing an individual’s outlook,  
movement and performance.”  
 
 
 
 
