The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA 
members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, 
amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information 
Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner,
Maine Invites You (since 1933).
Alison Sucy, Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs, 
on Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association
In Opposition to
LD 1009, An Act Regarding the Reduction and Recycling of Food Waste
March 22, 2023
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources:
My name is Alison Sucy and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government 
Affairs for the Maine Tourism Association. The Maine Tourism Association, a non-profit, is the 
state’s largest tourism organization supporting members in every type of tourism business such 
as lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, guides, tour operators, amusements, and 
historical and cultural attractions. We’ve been promoting Maine and our 1500 members for over 
100 years. I present this testimony in opposition to LD 1009.
While we appreciate the importance of this issue, we don’t believe that the proposals set forth in 
this bill are the best ways to achieve the goals of dealing with food waste. We are concerned 
about the timeline set forth, the labor intensive requirements, the associated costs to our small 
businesses in both contracts and labor, and the feasibility of finding composting practitioners in 
certain areas of the state.
We believe that the Department of Environmental Protection should continue the coordination 
with the George J. Mitchell Center for Sustainability Solutions at the University of Maine and 
also work with this committee to further the work they have already done to develop reasonable 
solutions to this problem. The preferences of large food banks should also be taken into 
consideration to ensure that they can effectively handle the quantity and type of donations 
required by this bill. Further progress on food donation tax credits and food donation liability 
exemptions also can move Maine closer to the objectives of this bill.
I respectfully ask that you vote Ought Not To Pass. Thank you for your time and consideration of 
our testimony.
