L STATE OF MAINE 
‘*5 DEPARTMENT 01= ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION °,-~*"‘°"m,,( 
$ :1 
E ‘é- 
, J, »-1.‘A 
AI’ .,' 
,;./I 
I. E‘‘ 
I 
mt “' ' 
Ia” 0, ,,,\\\‘-' 
MELANIE LOYZIM JANET T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY OF 
CARLA HOPKINS, DIRECTOR 
DIVISION OF MATERIALS MANAGEMENT 
MAINE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
SPEAKING IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 1009 
AN ACT REGARDING THE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING OF FOOD WASTE 
SPONSORED BY REPRESENTATIVE ZEIGLER 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON 
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
DATE OF HEARING: 
MARCH 22, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Committee, I am Carla 
Hopkins, Director of the Division of Materials Management within the Bureau of 
Remediation and Waste Management at the Department of Environmental Protection, 
speaking in opposition to L.D. 1009. 
A‘l:(;LIS,I. 4'\ I§.\N(}()R PURI I \Y\I) IIRHSQLII" . I$lIL 
I" .\"I‘.\'I‘Ii IIUIISI‘ . ST.\TI().\4 Il|(1H()(}.\\ R0 \I) SI III ( 312 (,<\\(:() R().\D I235 CIi.\l'I'R1\I. DRI\'Ii, SI\IY\\ .\Y P \RI\ 
.\I-(}l-3'1 \ .\I.—\INI-I II-I533'(H|I" B,\NG()R '\I \I\I I)-I-I111 P()R'I'I.,\.\lI), i\l.-\I.\iH UIIUE PRIaSQUIu ISLH, .\I.'\I‘\lIi li-I76‘) 
(Z117) Z87-W58 FAX: (ZII7) Z87-78Z( (107) 1)-Ii 4w ll I \\ (_H ) HI -I 8-I (QIIT)822-(LSIIIIl:1\X1(2II7)U22~(I3II3 (207) 7(>4—(I477 IH\X: (207) 7(vII—3l43 
\\\.'I\,\IIn_'I inc.g<|\/dup
LD 1009, An Act Regarding the Reduction and Recycling of Food Waste 
Testimony of: Carla Hopkins/DEP 
Public Hearing: March 22, 2023 
Page 2 of5 
This bill proposes certain goals and mandates related to the management of food 
scraps and food waste in Maine. Although the Department fully supports the goals of 
food waste diversion, the Department has several substantial concerns regarding the 
feasibility, implementation, and cost of the approach proposed in this bill. The bill as 
well as the proposed amendment provided to the Department on March 16, 2023, by 
the committee clerk would, among other things: 
Ban the disposal of food waste at a landfill or incinerator beginning July 1, 2025 
for entities generating a specific volume of food waste and would require the 
generator to instead separate food waste from its regular solid waste stream and 
follow a proposed hierarchy of diversion as follows: reduce the amount 
generated, donate edible food for consumption by people, use as animal feed, 
composting or anaerobic digestion with use of the resultant material as a soil 
amendment, and finally anaerobic digestion without the use of the material asa 
soil amendment. 
Require depackaging facilities to report certain information to the Department. 
Put requirements on waste transporters to ensure that food waste is not landfilled 
or incinerated and to report generators to the Department that are not separating 
their food waste. 
Require certain food waste generators to report information about food waste 
handling to the Department. 
Require intermediary facilities such as transfer stations to separate food scraps 
from all other waste and manage the food waste in accordance with the 
proposals set forth in this bill. 
Require landfills and incinerators to ensure they do not accept food waste. 
Require the Department to develop rules to implement the program and develop 
and provide an education and outreach program to assist in implementing the 
proposed legislation. 
Require the Department to administer and develop a new program to implement 
these provisions of the bill as well as procedures for enforcement.
LD 1009, An Act Regarding the Reduction and Recycling of Food Waste 
Testimony of: Carla Hopkins/DEP 
Public Hearing: March 22, 2023 
Page 3 of5 
The proposed legislation would pose a significant burden on the Department to 
implement for many reasons, including but not limited to: 
Maine currently lacks the composting and anaerobic digestion infrastructure that 
would be required to handle the amount of food scraps and food waste that 
would likely result from this proposal. Moreover, the bulk of Maine's composting 
and anaerobic digestion facilities that do exist are primarily located in the more 
densely populated areas of the state and along the I-95 corridor. Because 
infrastructure does not exist to support all of the food waste that likely would be 
generated in all corners of the state, this proposed legislation could result in 
unintended consequences such as improper storage of food wastes over longer 
periods of time which in turn could pose public health concerns relating to odors 
and attraction of vectors. Likewise, even if the existing infrastructure were to be 
adequate by July 1, 2025, to handle all of the additional food waste proposed by 
this legislation, trucking these wastes from more rural areas of the state to 
existing facilities would be cost prohibitive. 
Administration of the new program proposed in this bill would require an 
extensive amount of Department staff time and result in great expense to the 
State. In order to implement the bill, the Department would have to conduct a 
statewide assessment of composting and anaerobic digestion capacity, the 
universe of generators of food wastes, as well as transporters of food wastes; 
update licenses for transfer stations, landfills and incinerators currently engaged 
in collecting food wastes; develop mechanisms for collecting and tracking 
information that would be required to be reported to the Department; engage ina 
considerable rulemaking process; and have procedures in place for enforcing the 
program by July 1, 2025. The Department does not currently have the staff to 
accomplish this. Because of the scope and scale of this proposal which would 
require standing up a new program, it is anticipated that additional resources 
would be necessary for implementation. Additionally, the monetary impacts to
LD 1009, An Act Regarding the Reduction and Recycling of Food Waste 
Testimony of: Carla Hopkins/DEP 
Public Hearing: March 22, 2023 
Page 4 of5 
entities affected by the proposed program including restaurants, grocery stores, 
municipalities, school districts, hospitals, and universities to name a few would be 
substantial as the vast majority currently lack the infrastructure to implement the 
program. Costs likely will include items like staffing, transportation and logistics, 
and new contracts with approved alternate handling facilities. 
The Department continues to diligently work toward the goals proposed in this bill in the 
following ways: 
The Department continues to work with the University of Maine’s George J. 
Mitchell Center for Sustainability Solutions to develop a model based on the 
consolidated collection of food scraps and other organic materials. 
The Department continues to award grant funding and provide technical support 
under the Waste Diversion Grants Program (38 M.R.S. § 2201-B). To date, this 
program has awarded more than $977,000 to fund 50 programs including many 
that divert food waste and enhance food scrap collection and composting efforts. 
Initially, grants were being awarded once per year. However, due to increasing 
demand, we have expanded the program and now award grants twice per year. 
The next round of grant awards is anticipated to be announced soon this Spring. 
The Department continues to support strategies in accordance with the Food 
Recovery and Solid Waste Management Hierarchies. Department staff work with 
Maine municipalities and institutions to develop collection, transportation, and 
composting infrastructure by doing things such as developing a guide to 
recovering and composting organics in Maine; working with partners such as the 
Androscoggin Valley Council of Governments, Lincoln County Commissioners, 
and the Northern Maine Development Corporation to name a few to hold regional 
workshops to help stimulate the collection and diversion of food scraps and food 
waste from disposal facilities; promoting “consolidated collection" facilities 
through a registration process rather than requiring full transfer station licensing 
to promote the collection of food scraps in convenient, centralized locations 
within communities making it more economical to transport those materials to
LD 1009, An Act Regarding the Reduction and Recycling of Food Waste 
Testimony of: Carla Hopkins/DEP 
Public Hearing: March 22, 2023 
Page 5 of5 
composting or anaerobic digestion facilities; and, developing a guide for schools 
to use to set up an onsite composting operation in 10 steps. 
Thank you forthe opportunity to provide testimony. l am available to answer questions 
of the Committee, both now and at work session.
