1 
 
Testimony IN SUPPORT  
LD 1009  As Amended  
An Act Regarding the Reduction and Recycl ing of Food Waste  
Joint Committee on Envi ronment and Natural R esources  
Public Hearing  
March 22, 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Chair; Repre sentative  Gramlich , Chair; and Honorable Committee  Members:  
 Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony IN SUPPORT of LD 1009 As Amended . 
DWME ( Don’t Waste ME) is a citizens ’ group working for waste policy that gives communities 
local  control, incorporates Zero Waste goals, and protects the health and environment of  
communities most impacted by waste facilities . LD 1009 provides a n important framework to 
help Maine approach waste management  from the front  end to better achi eve the goals of the 
State solid waste hierarchy . The recent  January 2023 Maine Solid Waste Generation and Disposal 
Capacity  Report for Calendar years 2020 and 2021  records that the State is behind on its goal s 
for reduction , diversion  and recycling of waste going to incineration and landfill. LD 1009 would 
focus on a por tion of the waste stream  representing opportunities to significantly reduce the 
amount of waste requiring  disposal . Waste is a verb and somethin g we choose to do. We can 
make better choices.  LD 1009 rep resents better choices  that preserve  and repurpose valuable 
resources and conserve finite  disposal capacity.  
 Importantly, this l egislation gradually , with a time span starting  in 2025 and concluding in 
2035,  diverts and then bans valuable food res ources from disposal at inciner ators and landfills. It 
begins by addressing the wasted food resources produced  by large generators and progresses to 
captur ing those resources from everyone. This phase d-in approach provides opportunity  for the 
important and necessary development of the infrastructure for co llection, hauling, and 
processing.  It allows time for education on the value of reducing the amount of food resources 
wasted and creating the structure to distribute edible  food to food rescue organiz ations and 
individuals. Food resources not suitable for human consumption will be diverted for use  by 
2 
 
farmers for livestock feed or directed to organic recycling facilities for composting or anerobic 
digestion.   
 An important aspect o f this bill that stre ngthens the critical front -end approach to 
managing the waste stream is the strong source separation components at t he point of where 
the wasted resources are gener ated. Food resource generators are required to separate food 
from all inorganic  waste such as packaging before sending the food resources to a composting or 
anerobic digesting service. DEP  (Department of Envi ronmental Services ) will be instrumental  to 
providing educational resources  to strengthen  prog rams. These steps help assure that compost 
and digestate are clean and uncontaminated with packaging materials and suitable for use to 
remediate  Maine’s agricultural lands. This methodology  reduces risks to human health and the 
environment .  To address and balance concerns about contamination and the impact of 
significantly packaged food resources and the challenges attendant to on -site source separation , 
this l egislation has allowances for large volumes of such  organics to be separated and depackaged 
by mechanical means  before recycling.  
LD 1009 is an important essential begi nning to the work that must be done to provide 
protection and sustainability for public  health, our valuable resources , the environment , and 
Maine’s future.  We have only to look at Vermont,  which has had a law to separate  out food 
resources from MSW (municipal solid waste) since 2020 to know that implementation of LD 1009 
is practical and achievable. Thank you for considering our comments. Our organization , DWME , 
asks  that t he Committee vote OUGHT TO PASS  on LD 1009.  
DWME  
Jackie Elliott, Mem ber 
148 West Road  
Waterboro , ME 04087  
(207) 247 -0103  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com   
 
 
 
