 
64 Blueberry Road Portland, Maine 04102  
Testimony of Kevin Roche, CEO & General Manager,  
 ecomaine  
before the Committee on the Environment & Natural Resources  
in Opposition to  LD 1009 ,  
An Act Regarding the Reduction and Recycling of Food Waste  
March 22, 202 3 
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and distinguished members of the 
Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources , thank you for the 
opportunity to testify on this legislation. My name is Kevin Roche , and I represent 
ecomaine as  its CEO and General Manager . We are a quasi -municipal 
organization in Portland with more than 70 member communities in Maine. We 
own and ope rate Maine’s largest recycling plant, a food waste recovery program, 
a waste -to-energy facility,  and a landfill.   
 
It is with a focus on ecomaine’s food and organic waste recovery strategies that I 
am pleased to submit testimony today.  Since ecomaine began a concerted effort 
to consolidate food scraps separately from solid waste or recyclables in 2017, we 
have diverted more than 25,000 tons of this material from Maine’s landfills.  
 
As this committee knows well, organic material is the leading cause of methane 
in landfills, which, as a greenhouse gas, is a significant cause of change in our 
climate.  Allow me to be clear: w e are supportive of efforts to keep this material 
from an end -of-life in landfills.   
 
However, there are  existing programs that are effective  now, employing best 
practices to accomplish just that, that are currently  in place and successful in 
Maine.  Notably, as I mentioned above, ecomaine’s efforts to keep 25,000 tons of 
food waste from being landfilled, as well as others alr eady in practice.   
 
These strategies and best practices are currently in place to provide convenient 
methods of disposal for organic waste – a material that is complicated for 
residents and producers to deal with under the best of circumstances.  It is 
ecomaine’s position that LD 1009 would unnecessarily provide more barriers to 
these best practices, not fewer.   

 
Again, w e are supportive of efforts to divert more of this material from Maine’s 
landfills, but not at the risk of interfering with processes an d strategies that are 
already working for Maine.  Thank you for your consideration.  
