Seth Kroeck
Brunswick
LD 1009
Good morning honorable chairs Brenner, Gramlich and esteemed members of the 
committee. Thank you for hearing my testimony this morning regarding LD1009. My 
name is Seth Kroeck and I have run Crystal Spring Farm in Brunswick for the past 20 
years. We produce MOFGA certified organic wild blueberries, carrots, Brussels 
sprouts, small grains and hay. Additionally we have a USDA Harmonized GAP food 
safety certification.
I applaud the efforts of the committee to address food waste and by extension, food 
insecurity in Maine. That said I do not believe this bill as written would be helpful in 
meeting these goals. 
As a food producer we harvest, wash, grade, store, package and ship fresh produce 
bound for retail and processing markets in Maine and beyond. As I’m sure the 
members of the committee are aware, food production in Maine, especially wholesale 
production runs on very small margins. We examine every aspect of our operation 
closely for efficiency and wherever possible we find a return for the calories 
produced. In our experience this is also true of the burgeoning local food processing 
sector in Maine.
As a food producer we sell several grades of produce. The best are bound for the 
shelves of retailers like Whole Foods and Rosemont Market or the kitchens of many 
of Maine’s best restaurants. Utility grades make their way to processors and school 
kitchens (that have staff to work with them) and seconds are sent to food pantries and 
hunger relief kitchens. Culls that are not salable due to quality or size are composted 
or field spread and fertilize our hay crop, nothing is sent to a landfill. 
For almost a decade we have been wild blueberry farmers. We do not sell fresh 
berries in the summer when we are busy with many other crops. Instead we ship all 
our field raked fruit (44,000LBS in 2022) to a packing processor in Hancock. Our 
packer takes this bulk fruit and cleans out the leaves, twigs, dirt and anything else that
is not a blueberry. The berries are then separated by size, creating different grades, 
before flash freezing them. We buy these berries back for the cost of this service and 
it allows us to then package and market our fruit year round. 
If this bill passes it will mandate an onerous bureaucratic requirement on business like
mine and that of my blueberry packer, requiring us to report and record processes and 
efficiencies that we are already engaged in, not because they state regulated, but 
because they are good business. 
The research and education programs of the Mitchell Center for Sustainability 
Solutions have shown us that there are new uses and markets for Maine foods of all 
grades. Developing new preparation options and modes of distribution for food 
should be our priority rather than mandating added costs and regulation on the 
producers and processors trying to build the local economy.
Thank you.

