31 Freedom Parkway Hermon, ME 04401 p. 207-848-7551 f. 207-848-5581 
TESTIMONY NF]NA LD 1009 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
Testimony of Shelby Wright, Eastern Region Manager of Engagement 
Casella 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Shelby Wright, and l am the Eastern Region 
Manager of Engagement for Casella. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak Neither For/ Nor Against LD 1009 “An Act Regarding 
the Reduction and Recycling of Food Waste” as amended. 
Casella recognizes, as one of our company's fundamental values, the need to divert waste 
material to the highest and best possible use - supporting the solid waste hierarchy and 
preserving valuable landﬁll space for the people of Maine. 
Overall, the amended language of LD 1009 recognizes the dynamic nature of the solid waste 
arena and the need to reduce barriers to achieve reduction at the ﬁrst point of generation, in 
particular the "low hanging fruit" of food waste and food scraps. 
Broadened terminology such as “Food Rescue" and “Food Rescue Organization" and will 
ensure the calculated reduction of food waste from the overall waste stream is open to other 
means of diversion other than just composting alone. Other Northeast states have passed 
similar legislation and are seeing remarkable percentages of "Food Rescue". 
It will be important to collect market data on the amount of food waste tonnages produced in 
the State. The private sector must work hard to develop the expansive and statewide 
infrastructure needed to meet the goals of LD 1009 as the volume of material falling under 
this mandate has yet to be determined by a third-party audit of the waste stream. 
Financial support for the development and implementation of much needed food waste 
diversion infrastructure is needed. Funding and planning for a robust and accessible system 
throughout each region of the State is in order to ensure that meaningful reduction and 
recycling of food waste and scraps can be achieved in the short and long term. T 
Casella is interested in learning more about the goals of the State concerning the reduction 
and recycling of food waste and areas in which waste management and recycling companies 
can participate. 
Thank you. l welcome the opportunity to answer any questions. 
Shelby Wright 
Eastern Region Manager of Engagement, Casella 
RECYCLING - SOLUTIONS - ORGANICS - COLLECTION - ENERGY - LANDFILLS casella com
