 
  
 
Testimony in Support of  
LD 1009, An Act Regarding the Reduction and Recycling of Food Waste  
 
Vanessa Berry , NRCM Sustainable Maine Outreach Coordinator  
March 22 , 2023 
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Vanessa Berry . I am the Sustainable Maine  
Outreach Coordinator  for the Natural Resources Council of Maine. I appreciate this opportunity to 
testify in support of  LD 1009 . 
 
Food waste is a growing concern in Maine , making up nearly 40 percent of our municipal waste 
stream  that must be managed through our existing waste infrastructure . This heavy, wet, nutrient -
rich material creates a unique challenge in landfills by generating a potent greenhouse gas in the 
form of methane, and food waste can also  impact the efficiency of incineration when dumped  into 
one of Maine’s waste -to-energy facilities. According to Projec t Drawdown, reduced food waste 
and composting has the potential to prevent approximately 88 to 102 gigatons of CO2 equivalent 
emissions globally, ranking among the top 5 strategies to mitigate  climate change  (Drawdown ). 
Beyond the harm it can cause in the waste stream , discarded food  is a waste of the time, land, 
water, and energy  used to make food suitable for consumption  in a state where one in four child ren 
is at risk for hunger ( Maine DOE ). Helping food waste generators donate their edible food and 
divert inedible food from disposal  can have huge benefits for Maine’s people and our 
environment.  
 
At the local level, food waste diversion programs are a pop ular and successful strategy to reduce 
the amount of material being sent to landfills and waste -to-energy facilities.  In Vermont, similar 
laws have been implemented to require food donation and diversion  and have resulted in dramatic 
increases in food dona tions to food banks in the state.  Here in Maine, d ozens of m unicipalities 
have created kiosks for residential food waste collection or have implemented composting at their 
transfer facilities, and composting programs are expanding to school cafete rias and workplaces 
throughout the state.  As the cost s to dispose of waste in  landfill s and waste -to-energy facilities  in 
Maine, municipalities, businesses, and individuals could see significantly lower disposal fees by 
removing food waste from the trash , in addition to possible incentives for donating food . Despite 
the municipal innovations already in place to reduce wasted food, more  action is needed 
throughout the state to make food diversion accessible and convenient for all. This bill has  the 
potential to create more long -term awareness of the volume of wasted food at all levels , and I have 
learned by auditing waste and digging through other people’ s garbage that once you have seen the 
volume of the problem, it is virtually impossible to un -see it.  
 
As amended, LD 1009 provides a plan with concrete goals for implementation within a reasonable 
timeline. This bill also offers some flexibili ty when a nd if diversion is not accessible or presents a 
heavy financial burden in order to comply with the law. We acknowledge that not all Maine 
communities have the same access to convenient options for composting or anaerobic digestion of 
food waste and agree t hat implementation of food waste diversion requirements should not come 
at the cost of providing other essential services to the community. With the implementation of 
Maine’s Extended -Producer Responsibility for Packaging law by 2027, municipalities 
partic ipating in recycling will begin to see reimbursement  payments  that could be used to support 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 more collection and management of food waste, creating a positive feedback loop for increased 
residential recycling and food waste diversion.  
 
LD 1009 present s a unique opportunity for Maine to keep food out of Maine’s landfills and waste -
to-energy facilities and redirect those resources to Maine people and Maine soil. This bill  
address es food waste and food insecurity by establishing a clear pathway for businesses t o donate 
surplus edible food to those in need and find productive uses for the remaining food that is unfit 
for human consumption. Food is simply too precious a resource to waste. Thank you for the 
opportunity to  show  our support , and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
 
