FINANCE AUTHORITY 0? MAINE 
Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
Neither For Nor Against L.D. 1462 
An Act to Provide Financial Incentives for Attorneys to 
Provide Indigent Legal Services 
April 10, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am 
testifying today Neither For Nor Against L.D. 1462, An Act to Provide Financial 
Incentives for Attorneys to Provide Indigent Legal Services. 
As you have heard, this bill would establish a program to provide both no-interest, 
forgivable student loans and a tax deduction to encourage University of Maine School of 
Law graduates to provide indigent legal services full-time after graduation. The 
forgivable loan program would provide no-interest loans to eligible students to cover the 
costs of law school and of licensing to become an attorney. To be eligible, the student 
must commit to providing indigent legal services for ﬁve years following graduation 
from law school. The program would provide loan forgiveness for eachyear during the 
loan period the participant fulﬁlls their commitment to provide indigent legal services in 
Maine. If the participant fails to fulﬁll their commitment, the loan must be repaid. The 
second part of the bill would provide to a program participant, for the ﬁve years 
following graduation, a personal income tax exemption deduction equal to the full 
amount of income earned by that person from providing indigent legal services in 
accordance with the program. 
FAME spends most of our time in the IDEA Committee these days, but I believe 
many of you know that we are a quasi-independent state agency (2023 marks our fortieth 
anniversary) that provides ﬁnancial solutions to help Maine people achieve their business 
and higher education goals. We create business and educational opportunities through our 
willingness to invest at greater risk based on public beneﬁt.
l
Since 1990, FAME has been tasked by the Legislature with administration of 
Maine’s higher education ﬁnance programs. These include the Maine State Grant and 
several other loan, loan forgiveness, and loan repayment programs, mostly related to 
educators and health care professionals. We currently do not administer any program 
related to attorneys but could do so if provided sufficient funding and guidance by the 
Legislature. That funding hopefully would include our ability to recoup some of our costs 
of administering the program, as well. In addition to setting up the program, 
promulgating rules, marketing it, and providing and monitoring loans and their 
forgiveness over the years (this involves communication with both the participating 
attorneys and their student loan servicers), we would need to coordinate with Maine 
Revenue Services in certifying annually those participants allowed a personal exemption 
deduction in return for their service. 
Some aspects of the bill 1 wanted to bring to your attention for 
consideration/clari ﬁcation should you move forward with it: 
I No funding is provided in the bill for the loan forgiveness program and 
obviously this would be essential. Presumably there will be a ﬁscal note 
from Maine Revenue Services, as well, related to the proposed tax 
exemption deduction. 
I How much funding will be required for the loan forgiveness program 
depends in part on how many participants per year we are expected to 
select, the costs of tuition in a given year for attendance at the University 
of Maine School of Law, as well as the average cost of licensing. 
I Tuition at the University of Maine School of Law for academic year 22-23 
can range from $23,190 per year for Maine and Canadian residents to 
$36,000 per year for non-residents. Law school can last three years or 
more depending on the particular student’s needs and schedule. 
I My back-of-the-envelope calculations estimate that a three-year loan plus 
licensing costs per person would range from $75,000-110,000 per 
participant. Thus, a $1 million ongoing appropriation per year could cover 
approximately ten new students per year. 
I The bill as written does not set a limit on the number of participants to be 
selected annually (see Subsection 2 re: loan eligibility). Our 
recommendation would be to keep it ﬂexible and based on available 
funding (e.g. “up to” language). 
I The bill appears to contemplate an eight-year relationship at least between 
FAME and a selected recipient (loans and the accompanying service 
commitment would presumably last for a three-year law school period, 
plus the ﬁve-year service period after which a participant obtains their 
license). 
I These are to be no-interest loans, so that will limit the amount of money 
revolving back into the fund over the years, as will the expected high-rate 
of loan forgiveness. 
I Depending on the participant (especially their bar exam scorel), it may 
take them more than 120 days after graduation to become licensed to
2
practice law in Maine, so that timeframe might need to be adjusted (see 
Subsection 1(E)(2)) 
I As far as costs of becoming licensed to practice in Maine, it typically 
involves a bar examination fee ($600 or more if admitted in any other 
jurisdiction for more than one year), a license fee ($160 or $265 if more 
than three years of practice, admitted via motion) and perhaps other 
requirements. Maybe estimate $1,000 maximum as a ﬁgure? 
Finally, I would like to point out for your consideration that the federal 
government provides a Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program for qualifying attorneys 
who work for a government organization at any level or certain tax-exempt not-for-pro ﬁt 
organizations. This is for federal loans only, however, and is available after a borrower 
makes 120 payments (ten years): https://studentaid.gov/manageloans/forgiveness- 
cancellation/public~service 
As many of you know, there also exists a newly revamped state tax credit, the 
Student Loan Repayment Tax Credit, to help provide some student loan debt relief to 
qualifying Maine tax filers. Formerly known as the Educational Opportunity Tax Credit 
(EOTC) or “Opportunity Maine,” this refundable tax credit provides up to $2,500 per 
year or up to $25,000 lifetime for eligible Maine residents who work and pay taxes in the 
state after they graduate from higher education. 
Thank you for your consideration of my comments. I Will make every effort to 
attend the work session.
3
