Larry Dansinger
Bangor
LD 1462
April 5, 2023
To members of the Committee on Judiciary of the Maine legislature:
I am writing to comment, neither for nor against, on LD 1462, “An Act to Provide 
Financial Incentives for Attorneys to Provide Indigent Legal Services.” 
There is no doubt that Maine’s current system of providing legal services to those 
charged with a crime, but who cannot afford an attorney, is not working. (The term 
“indigent” has disparaging connotations and so I will not use that term. I hope it is 
one that the legislature can change to something more neutral.) Not enough lawyers 
are willing to take such cases, and many times defendants receive inadequate, 
ineffective or almost nonexistent representation as a result. Justice is no longer 
balanced; it is tilted in favor of the prosecution. 
The Maine Advisory Committee to the US Commission on Civil Rights has been 
studying this issue. While it does not yet have a full report, its interim report, 
“Indigent Legal Services for Criminal Defendants in Maine,” notes the inadequacy of 
the current system. It’s primary conclusion so far is to “Provide funding at the 
minimum level recommended by the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services 
to ensure enough provision for effective legal services.” That report is available at: 
https://www.usccr.gov/files/2023-04/interim-memo-me-sac-3.28.23.pdf
I believe the Commission’s ultimate conclusion, and one that many others in Maine 
have determined as well, will be that a public defender system is better than Maine’s 
current system. One of the biggest problems with the current system is that the 
lawyers that are taking cases of those who cannot afford one are not generally 
committed to providing an adequate, let alone robust, defense to those who need it. 
Again, the scales of justice are unbalanced in favor of the prosecution. While a higher 
pay to lawyers might help in some cases, having a lawyer who is unmotivated or 
reluctant to represent an accused individual provides poor representation to a 
defendant. The extreme lack of lawyers taking these cases now makes this problem 
obvious.
The financial incentives offered by LD 1462 could identify some lawyers who would 
do their best in defending those charged with a crime. It could also enable some 
lawyers without a lot of financial resources to more easily practice law after 
graduation. In that sense, the bill can benefit lower-income graduates from law 
schools who have a sincere interest in defending lower-income defendants. 
But I think what is really needed is a better system—one that all other states but 
Maine use, a public defender system to provide that representation. It is not perfect; 
the scales of justice are still often tilted in favor of the state. But, public defenders at 
least know and accept their role in providing a good defense to those unable to afford 
a lawyer. I expect that many/most have a sincere desire to provide equal justice to 
those charged with a crime. There is less indication that lawyers who accept cases 
now through Maine’s unique system have that desire. 
LD 1462 has provisions that could benefit a public defender system as well. But, if it 
is only applicable to Maine’s current system of finding lawyers to work on behalf of 
defendants who cannot afford one, it should be put on hold until a better system, 
based on public defenders, is created.
Larry Dansinger
21 Mount Desert Drive
Bangor, ME 04401
(207) 262-3706
larryd@myfairpoint.net

