'r 
- ~ it 
M tthC 
w G. Pouliot ‘ - 
THE MAINE SENATE ' 
3 State House Station E1C 
Senator, District 15' I 
13lst Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
TESTIMONY OF SENATOR MATTHEW POULIOT 
Sponsor of LD 1462 
An Act to Provide Financial Incentives for Attorneys to Provide Indigent Legal Services 
Public Hearing: April 7, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary. I am Senator Matt Pouliot and I represent3Senate District l5, which includes the towns 
of Augusta, Belgrade, China, Mount Vernon, Sidney and Vassalboro. I am here to present my 
bill LD 1462 “An Act -to Provide Financial Incentives-for Attorneys to Provide Indigent Legal 
Services, ” _, 
As our challenge in Maine to provide high quality representation for Maine citizens who are 
entitled to counsel at state expense persists, we must take bolder action. The Maine Commission 
on Indigent Legal Services was established by the Legislature in 2009, with a mission to protect 
the rights of Maine’s indigent citizens in courts throughout the state by providing oversight, 
support and training to assigned private counsel and to contract counsel. The commission is 
failing because of its inability to attract lawyers to participate in the commission and represent 
indigent citizens. 
The bill before you today proposes a creative approach for how we can attract lawyers to 
participate in this system and stay here in Maine. I believe the only way We are going to turn the 
corner and get lawyers to stay here in Maine and participate in the Maine Commission on 
Indigent Legal Services is with some bold initiatives, because what we are currently doing is not 
working. If passed, it would establish a program to provide no-interest loans and a tax exemption 
to help attract and keep students in Maine and encourage those who do choose to become Maine 
Law graduates to provide indigent legal services after graduation. 
The loan program provides a no-interest loan to eligible students to cover the costs of law school 
and of licensing to become an attorney. To be eligible, the student must commit to providing 
indigent legal services for 5 years following graduation from law school. The program provides 
loan forgiveness, on an amortized basis over the loan period, for each year during the loan period 
the program participant fulﬁlls the participant's commitment to provide indigent legal services in 
this State. If the program participant fails to fulﬁll the participant's commitment, the loan must 
be repaid, on the same amortized basis. The bill also provides to a program participant, for the5 
years following graduation, a personal income tax exemption deduction equal to the full amount 
State House: (207) 287-I505 * Fax." (207) 287-1527 * Toll Free: I-800-423-6900 * TTY: 711 
Matt.P0zlli0t@legislature.mainegov * Web Sire: Ieg1'sIature.maine. gov/senate
of income earned by that person from providing indigent legal services in accordance with the 
program. 
I’m not saying this bill is perfect and will solve all of our problems with access to services, but it 
is the Way We need to be thinking to right this ship that is sinking. Thank you for your 
consideration of this bill and I am happy to answer any questions.
