P0 Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.aclumaine.org 
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION . 
Maine 
i 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 1462 - Neither For Nor Against 
An Act to Provide Financial Incentives for Attorneys to Provide Indigent ' 
Legal Services 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, andI 
am policy director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine,a _ statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I present this 
, testimony neither for nor against LD 1462, legislation that would provide loan 
forgiveness and tax breaks to some lawyers who provide indigent legal services. 
As this committee is aware, our indigent legal services system is at the 
breaking point. Our Chief Justice has stated, “we are having a bit of a crisis of 
appointed counsel . . . . We don’t have enough lawyers who are willing to take these 
cases or are available to take these cases. And we, at the same time, are 
experiencing a crisis in the court system with a backlog. . . that is just 
overwhelming. ”1 
This crisis cannot be attributed solely to an attorney shortage. Even when 
Maine had more than triple the indigent services attorneys it has now (600 in 2019 
compared to under 200 today), the Sixth Amendment Center still found that 
1 Kevin Miller, Maine’s top judge makes plea for more attorneys to address ‘crisis’ , Maine Public (Nov. 
10, 2022), https://www.mainepublic.org/c' ourts-and-crime/202211-10/maines-top-judge-makes-plea- 
for-more-attorneys-to-address-crisis.
Maine’s low standards for those attorneys was “worrisome, ” that clients often 
suffered “critical gap [s] in representation, ” and as many as a fourth of those 
attorneys were not performing basic yet vital tasks like meeting with their clients? 
Nonetheless, we agree that Maine’s current attorney shortage exacerbates 
the problems of our system. We also agree that loan forgiveness, as provided for in 
this bill, could attract more people to providing constitutionally necessary legal 
services. However, the bill’s income-tax exemption, While creative and bold, is not 
our preferred economic incentive — We should all pay our taxes. Ultimately, We 
question Whether this bill represents the most effective and efficient way to combine 
those two principles. We urge the Legislature to create a robust public defender 
system, because the public defenders working for that system would already likely 
be eligible for federal loan forgiveness, at a far lower cost to Maine taxpayers, and 
such a system would remedy other inadequacies in the system such as a lack of 
adequate standards, training or oversight. 
2 Sixth Amendment Center, The Right to Counsel in Maine: Evaluation of Services Provided by the 
Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services, iv-vii (2019), 
https:1‘/sixthamendment.org/6AC/6AC_me_report_2O19.pdf.
