1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Hearing Date: April 10, 2023 
  
LD 1462 – “An Act to Provide Financial Incentives for Attorneys to Provide 
Indigent Legal Services” 
 
 
 Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
providing testimony at the request of the Administration Against LD 1462, “An Act 
to Provide Financial Incentives for Attorneys to Provide Indigent Legal Services.” 
This testimony is limited to the bill as it affects Maine Revenue Services.  
The bill proposes to establish a Maine personal income tax exemption for a person 
participating in the Indigent Legal Services Loan Program (Program) who commits 
to providing indigent legal services on a full-time basis for a period of 5 years after 
becoming licensed to practice law in Maine.  The exemption is equal to the amount 
of income earned by the program participant from providing indigent legal services 
during the tax year.  The Finance Authority of Maine must annually certify to 
Maine Revenue Services the program participants who are eligible for the tax 
credit. 
Currently, the Maine access to justice income tax credit under 36 M.R.S. § 
5219-ZZ provides a nonrefundable income tax credit of $6,000 per tax year for up 
to 5 years for attorneys certified by the Maine Supreme Judicial Court to provide 
legal services in underserved areas of the State.  Enacted in 2021, the law limits 
Court certifications to 5 attorneys annually from 2022 through 2027.  Instead of 
2 
 creating a new benefit, one option for consideration is increasing the number of 
attorneys eligible for the access to justice credit. 
Also, for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2022, the student 
loan repayment tax credit under 36 M.R.S. § 5217-E provides a refundable income 
tax credit equal to student loan payments made directly to lenders during the 
taxable year, up to $2,500 ($3,500 in certain cases). 
There are several bills before the Legislature to provide student loan relief or 
tax benefits to individuals with certain degrees or engaged in certain activities 
related to a particular profession.  The existing Maine student loan repayment tax 
credit, federal student loan relief programs, and other state tax credits already 
provide significant relief in many instances.  Adding new programs or credits 
increases the complexity of these overlapping benefits. 
In addition, exempting income from State taxation is not a direct and timely 
approach to compensate attorneys for their service.  
The Administration also notes the following technical concerns: 
• The exemption provisions in the bill should be moved to 36 M.R.S. section 
5122, subsection 2 to be consistent with other income addition and 
subtraction modifications. 
• For clarification, the bill should stipulate the number of years a program 
participant may be certified for, and receive, the personal tax exemption 
deduction.  Despite the bill summary, the bill only requires an eligible 
person in the Program to “commit” to performing indigent legal services 5 
years after receiving a license to practice law in the State; it appears that the 
deduction is not limited to any specific 5-year or other period. 
3 
 • The bill does not limit the exemption to the extent that the income is 
included in federal adjusted gross income. 
• In addition to the benefits provided by the Program, taxpayers may qualify 
for the access to justice credit and/or student loan repayment credit.  It may 
be desirable to coordinate Program benefits with these credits. 
• Section 2 of the bill should clarify that the amount of income that qualifies 
for the deduction is the “amount of income earned during the taxable year.”  
See the bill, page 2, line 19. 
• The exemption appears to be intended to apply to individuals as wage 
earners.  As written, the terms “person” and “full amount of income earned” 
may raise questions about partners or sole-proprietors and what income 
(gross or net) is eligible for exemption.    
The estimated fiscal impact continues to be under consideration.  
The estimated administrative costs are $11,000 in fiscal year 2024-25 for 
one-time computer programing costs to add an additional line to the individual 
income tax return to accommodate the tax exemption. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
