 
 
 
 
 
April 10, 2023  
 
Sen. Anne Carney, Chair 
Rep. Matt Moonen, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re:  LD 1462, An Act to Provide Financial Incentives for Attorneys to Provide 
Indigent Legal Services  
 
Dear Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee: 
 
On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Maine State Bar Association, we write in conceptual support 
of LD 1462, An Act to Provide Financial Incentives for Attorneys to Provide Indigent Legal Services. We 
believe this bill sets forth some important incentives to encourage junior-level attorneys to provide legal 
services for indigent Mainers, and we would be happy to be part of further conversations regarding the 
proposed incentives.   
 
About us. The Maine State Bar Association is a statewide trade association chartered in 1891 by the 
Maine Legislature. The Association currently represents approximately 3,000 attorneys in the State in 
both public service and private practice. The Association maintains 28 separate sections covering nearly 
every field of law practiced in Maine, from Administrative Law to Workers’ Compensation Law. Access 
to justice for all individuals across Maine is a key element of our mission, hence our strong and 
longstanding interest in indigent legal services. 
 
Discussion. Access to justice is an important issue for our Association and our members. In this regard, 
our Association has played an active role with regard to improving access to indigent legal defense and 
civil legal aid. We also have established a committee focused on ensuring that legal services are available 
in Maine’s rural communities. 
 
This past legislative session, important progress was made to encourage more lawyers to participate on 
the roster of the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services (MCILS). In response, more lawyers have 
in fact joined. But there is more work to be done, including a tremendous need to recruit additional and 
new attorneys to provide indigent legal services, especially in the State’s rural counties. 
 
LD 1462 would establish a program to provide no-interest loans and a tax exemption to encourage Maine 
law students to provide indigent legal services after graduation from law school. The program would 
provide loan forgiveness and a personal income tax exemption deduction equal to the full amount of 
income earned by that person from providing indigent legal services in accordance with the program. 
Undoubtedly, this bill would encourage junior attorneys to practice in rural Maine, and in turn, would 
help address the critical issue of the lack of attorneys in rural counties. 
 
In addition, as always, MSBA is happy to be part of broader conversations regarding additional options in 
addressing these issues and recruiting attorneys to rural practice. Likewise, we note that further work may 
be needed regarding the specific incentives listed in LD 1462. That said, to the extent that this bill 
encourages attorneys to practice in rural areas and helps address the ongoing issue of there being a lack of 
attorneys in rural Maine, we write in support of the concept.  
MSBA Comments re LD 1462 
April 10, 2023 
Page 2  
 
Conclusion. Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments on LD 1462. If you have 
questions or need additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Sincerely,  
Zachary F. McNally 
Zachary F. McNally 
Chair, MSBA Ad-Hoc Rural Practice Committee 
 
cc: Stacy O. Stitham, President, Board of Governors 
 Angela Armstrong, Executive Director 
 Rachel Okun, Chair, MSBA Legislative Committee 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP 
 Clara McConnell, Maine Street Solutions 
 
