April 25, 2023 
Testimony of Genevieve McDonald 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Testifying in FAVOR of L.D. 1155 
An Act To Address Legislative Salaries 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government, I am Genevieve McDonald of Stonington. I served 
as a member of the House in the 129th and 130th Legislature, and I am testifying in favor of 
L.D. 1155, An Act to Address Legislative Salaries. 
In Maine we pride ourselves on having a citizen legislature, comprised of everyday people who 
want to be of service to their communities and to our state. Public service is a noble calling and 
requires a tremendous amount of dedication, both in terms of time and mental capacity. While 
Maine has a part-time legislature, the work does not end when you leave the State House, or 
when session is over. During my time in office, I spent countless hours preparing testimony and 
building support for legislation, attending community events, responding to constituent concerns, 
and meeting with residents so I could better understand the issues that were important to them.I 
also served on the Govemtnent Oversight Committee which meets continuously throughout the 
year. 
I am grateful to have had this opportunity to serve. However, I could not afford to remain in 
office. Throughout my time as a member of the House, I had an outside job, while carefully 
balancing my responsibilities as a lawmaker and a working parent. In 2021, my last full year of 
public service, I spent $14,250 on childcare and eamed $14,699 serving in the Legislature. This
ﬁgure does not speak to the additional expenses of maintaining a household. At 40 years old, 
these are the years I need to be contributing to the ﬁnancial security of my family and planning 
for the future. 
Maine will not have a truly citizen legislature until more people can afford to serve. Lawmakers 
should be paid a salary that will do more to bridge the gap between altruism and ﬁnancial 
stability. Lawmakers should be able to focus on their legislative work and the important issues 
that are deliberated in this building, and not the need to be earning income elsewhere. Increasing 
legislative salaries would result in better outcomes for members in terms of time and mental 
capacity, and in turn, better outcomes for their constituents. 
I want the Maine Legislature to continue the legacy of having a citizen legislature. I want people 
from all Walks of life to be able to serve in office. I want to be represented by people who 
understand the issues I am facing as a Working-class Mainer. I do not want legislative service to 
be accessible only to those who can afford it, and I do not want to continue to lose dedicated 
members because they cannot afford to remain in office. Please support L.D. ll55 and the future 
of Maine’s citizen legislature. 
Thank you for your service, and for your time and consideration.
