L LEAGUE or-women VOTERS‘ 
t, ii./‘i;1..ii"\i 
TO: The Honorable Tim Nangle 
The Honorable Holly Stover, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
DATE: April 25, 2023 
RE: LD 1155, An Act to Address Legislative Salaries 
Good afternoon Senator Nangle and Representative Stover, 
My name is Lane Sturtevant. l’m a resident of Warren. I am here today representing the League of 
Women Voters of Maine. I am testifying in support of LD 1155, An Act to Address Legislative Salaries. 
The League of Women Voters of Maine is a nonpartisan political organization that has been working for 
over 100 years to encourage informed and active participation in government, to increase understanding 
of major public policy issues, and to inﬂuence public policy through education and advocacy. We never 
support or oppose any political party or candidate. 
Part of working to encourage active participation in government is working to ensure that there is equal 
access not only to the ballot box but also to elected ofﬁce. Anyone who is eligible to vote should be able 
to vote and anyone who is eligible to serve in public ofﬁce should be able to run for ofﬁce and serve if 
elected. That is why we have supported policies, like the Clean Elections program, that reduce the 
ﬁnancial barrier to running for office. 
LD 1155 addresses the ﬁnancial barrier to serving in office that comes after someone is elected. As you 
very well know, serving in the State Legislature is an incredible commitment. The schedule of the 
legislative session and the time spent fulﬁlling the duties of the office make it difficult to maintain 
full-time employment unless a legislator has the privilege of being self-employed or of working an 
extremely ﬂexible career. For working Mainers, then, the decision to run for state legislature involves the 
calculus of whether they can aﬁord to serve in office. The current compensation for state legislators 
would not cover the cost of living expenses for most Mainers while the legislature was in sessionl , 
meaning that they would have to somehow make up those expenses in the remaining half ofthe year or 
rely on retirement funds, a partner's income, or family wealth. 
As a consequence of the inadequate compensation for state legislators, many l\/lainers are barred from 
pursuing this form of public service. Inequalities in wealth and income levels mean that poor and 
working class Mainers, young Mainers, women, and Mainers of color are less likely to be able to afford to 
serve than older white men. l can tell you that i, personally, would not be able to serve in the State 
Legislature due to this ﬁnancial barrier. 
1 
lt is worth noting that even with lodging reimbursements to stay in Augusta — which have limitations anyway —a 
legislator would not be able to halt rent or mortgage payments without potentially losing their year—round housing. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@lwvme.org 207.622.0256 www.1wvme.org
LWVME to VLA April 25, 2023 
LD 1155 
The League of Women Voters of Maine is fully committed to diversity, equity, and inclusion in principle 
and in practice (Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Policy). We are also committed to working for "open, 
accountable, representative, and responsive government at every level” (LWV impact on Issues, page 
17). These positions lead us to support equitable compensation for those serving in the State Legislature. 
We have not fully analyzed the cost of disruption to year-round employment or cost of living data in 
Maine in order to evaluate what speciﬁc compensation amount would do away with the ﬁnancial barrier 
to service. With that caveat, we are not ready to comment on whether the speciﬁc amount proposed in 
LD 1155 represents equitable compensation, though we support increasing the compensation by any 
amount as a long overdue matter of moving toward equitable access to serving in the State Legislature. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@1wvme.0rg 207.622.0256 Www.1wvme.0rg
