Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, and members of the State and Local Government Committee, my 
name is Scott Cuddy and I live in Winterport. I’m here today to ask you to vote Ought To Pass 
on LD 1155, An Act to Address Legislative Salaries. 
 
I served in the 129th and 130th legislature, and would have run again to try to be serving with 
you today if I could have afforded it. However, I have two boys, 12 and 15, and with the costs of 
owning a home, raising two kids, the prospect of needing to begin caring more and more for an 
aging parent, and all of life's normal day-to-day expenses I simply couldn’t make it on the 
legislative salary. 
 
I became a construction worker in 2003, and joined the International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers in 2005. During my time in the legislature I was a union electrician and made good 
money while I wasn’t in the legislature. However, I didn’t make enough to overcome what I lost 
during the session. 
 
You all understand our schedule. The legislature begins to meet in December, not long after the 
election. We then continue (in the long session) until mid June and possibly later. I found that I 
had to leave my job completely in Mid-December, and couldn’t take another call for work until 
nearly the end of June. That’s 7 months for which I was paid under $14,000. My hourly rate at 
that time averaged about $32.00. In the seven months of the long session that I couldn’t work as 
a construction worker I missed out on $37,000 of income. The $13,500 that I was paid by the 
state clearly doesn’t replace that. I lost less during the short session, but it was still painful. 
 
I’m not wealthy. I don’t have a savings account or trust fund I could draw on to make up the 
difference. If it weren’t for the free childcare I got from family I would have gone broke serving in 
the legislature. As it is I lived in a cycle of banking everything I could while I was working so that 
I could have something to help me get through the sessions. 
 
I loved serving the people of the State of Maine in the legislature. I loved the camaraderie, the 
committee meetings, the full days of session in the House Chamber. I miss it now. I wish I were 
on the other side of the horseshoe today but I simply can’t afford to do it. And I am extremely 
grateful to all of you who are there now and are able to make the sacrifices needed to serve. 
 
My big concern, though, is that in the 130th legislature I think I was the only construction worker 
in the House. I didn’t go through every legislator's bio, so I might have missed one or two, but I 
was the only one I knew of. I believe that’s an important voice. I believe the women and men 
who build our roads, hospitals, schools, power lines, homes, and more need their voice heard in 
Augusta. But right now it’s too hard. 
 
I have no problem with making a sacrifice to serve. Even at the rates of pay described in the bill 
I’d still be taking a loss compared to what I could make on my tools, but the choices I’d make on 
a daily basis wouldn’t be as hard when it comes to my budget. 
 
In closing, please help make it possible for regular working Mainers to be able to serve in those 
chairs. Help an ironworker, a plumber, an electrician, or a carpenter bring their voice into the 
process without sacrificing financial stability. Thank you for your time, the work that you do, and 
for listening. Please support LD 1155. 
