 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members 
include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural 
and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and 
annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alison  Sucy,  Chief Operating Officer and Director  of Government  Affairs,   
on Behalf  of the Maine  Tourism  Association  
 
In Opposition  to 
 
LD 949, An Act to Protect Workers from Employer Surveillance 
 
 
April 4, 2023 
 
Senator  Tipping, Representative  Roeder, and Members  of the Joint  Standing  Committee  on Labor  and Housing:  
 
My name  is Alison  Sucy  and I am the Chief  Operating  Officer  and Director  of Government  Affairs  for the 
Maine  Tourism  Association.  The Maine  Tourism  Association  is a non-profit  association  and the state’s  largest  
tourism  organization  with nearly  1500  members.  For over 100 years,  MTA  has been  promoting  Maine  and 
supporting  members  in every  type of tourism  business  such  as lodging,  restaurants,  campgrounds,  outdoor  
recreation,  retail,  guides,  tour operators,  amusements,  and historical  and cultural  attractions.  I present  this 
testimony  in opposition  to LD 949. 
 
There  are a number  of ways  in which  surveillance  is very important  to a business  but is not “strictly  necessary  
to ensure  employee  health  and safety  or the security  of employer  data,”  as the bill would  require.  Monitoring  
for customer  safety  is excluded  in this bill. Camera  monitoring  of employees  who are, for example,  
maintaining  and repairing  equipment  for sports,  recreational  activities,  and amusements  may be seen as one 
part of an important  customer  safety  process  for these  operators,  yet would  be prohibited  under  this bill. 
 
A business  may monitor  to protect  itself  from  theft  or fraud  by its employees  and this is also prohibited  under  
the proposal.  Cameras  may be used  to watch  for theft  of products  and supplies  in stockrooms  or warehouses  
of retail  businesses,  hotels,  and restaurants  and bars (e.g. alcohol  storage  areas),  as well as to monitor  for theft  
in financial  transactions,  particularly  with cash.   
 
Tracking  productivity  of employees  working  from  home/remotely  may be key to employers  allowing  such  
arrangements.  By prohibiting  this, many  employers  will remove  remote  work  as an option  for employees  if 
they can’t  track  productivity  in a timely  and effective  manner.   
 
Businesses  with drivers  frequently  have  GPS  or other  monitoring  devices  on their  vehicles  to ensure  that 
drivers  are driving  where  they are supposed  to and are being  safe.  Finally,  we have  concerns  about  limits  on 
cybersecurity  which,  although  allowed  to a degree  under  this proposed  language,  may exclude  the processes  
some  businesses  already  have,  forcing  businesses  to change  to make  costly  changes  to potentially  less 
effective  security  measures.  
 
This bill seems  far too restrictive  for many  types  of tourism  businesses  and limits  their  ability  to monitor  for 
customer  safety,  employee  productivity,  and theft.  I respectfully  ask that you vote Ought  Not To Pass.  Thank  
you for your  time and consideration  of our testimony.  

