‘ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Amy Roeder TTY: MAINE RELAY 7ll 
45 Blackstone Street 
Bangor, ME 04401 
Residence: 207-370-5517 
Amy.Roeder@legislature.maine.gov 
April 4, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Amy Roeder Presenting 
LD 949, An Act to Protect Workers from Employer Surveillance 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, and fellow members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing. My name is Amy Roeder, and I represent House District 23 which includes a portion of Bangor. 
Today, I present to you LD 949, An Act to Protect Workers from Employer Surveillance. 
In this era of digitalization, we have tools at our disposal to help boost our productivity and have found 
ways to access extensive infonnation on any topic we wish to research with the click of a button. Since 
the beginning of the pandemic, employers have been searching for ways to stay in business and keep their 
employees on their payroll. According to a 2020 gqpgj from Maine Department of Labor, nearly 27% of 
businesses in Maine reported that they increased telework during the pandemic. 
Along with this increase in remote telework, there have been increased attempts from employers who are 
hoping to keep tabs on their workers. While employee accountability is important, and necessary, the level 
in which employers are monitoring their employees is unnecessary. 
Some surveillance programs record keystrokes, track computer activity by taking screenshots, record 
phone calls or meetings and access employees ‘ webcams. Other programs take surveillance even further 
by remotely accessing workers’ systems altogether. 
According to a Qty conducted in 2021, surveilling employees often has negative consequences 
including making employees more likely to break rules. Employees in the U.S. who were under 
surveillance took more unapproved breaks, intentionally worked more slowly and stole more ofﬁce 
equipment than their un-monitored peers. According to an a_r_t_i_gl_g written by I.S. Nelson, a legal scholar 
specializing in business ethics:
“ ...oversurveillance typically drives out an organization ’s best employees, and it creates discriminatory 
patterns that fall hardest on women, minorities and those of different sexual orientations. The people who 
bring the most care, diversity, and varied thought perspective to a team are being driven out ﬁrst and 
fastest. Diversity on a team is proven to be proﬁtable; you can put a dollar amount on that. And at the 
District 23: Part of Bangor
same time, you can put a dollar amount on the cost to a company of people leaving—at a minimum 
between 90—200% of a person’s salary.” 
Under federal law, stuveillance of employees is legal. While employers must disclose to employees that 
they will be surveilled, they do not have to disclose how they are being monitored. 
This bill prohibits employer surveillance unless the surveillance is strictly necessary for employee health 
and safety or the security of the employer, with certain limitations. It requires employers to provide, upon 
a veriﬁable request by an employee, data collected on the employee and certain information regarding that 
data. It speciﬁes that an employer must provide notice to its employees prior to beginning employer 
surveillance. It provides that an employee has a private right of action. 
AAA reached out to me to let me know about their safety program for fleet drivers. They use a monitoring 
system in their AAA-owned tow trucks that records video/audio and also provides location for our 
dispatch. The video helps us identify liability for damage complaints of towed vehicles, investigate crash 
causation if they are involved in a crash and it also provides safety reminders to the drivers. The vehicle 
location allows for them to route the nearest available truck to their members and also allows their 
members to view the truck enroute. I offer this information to you so that, when discussing this bill, you 
can consider the exclusion of technology employed for the purpose of dispatch, insurance or in the 
normal course of business are exempt from the statute. 
Thank you for your consideration. I’m happy to answer any questions you may have. 
District 23: Part of Bangor
