 
Unum is a registered trademark and marketing brand of Unum Group and its insuring subsidiaries.  
2211 Congress Street  
Portland, ME 04122  
207 575 2211  
unum.com  
 April 17, 2023  
 
Re: Concerns with LD 949 "An Act to Protect Workers from Employer Surveillance"  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Committee Members -  
 
Unum is the nation’s leading disability insurance company, proudly operating in Maine since our 
foundation here 175 years ago. Unum employs approximately 2,300 Mainers, most of whom 
work from our campus in Portland, but many enjoy the flexibility of our hybrid approach that 
allows for remote work across the State of Maine . Unum serves nearly 45 million individuals 
through our various financial protection products and services, and as you can imagine, the 
integrity and safety of our customer data is our top concern.  
 
At Unum, we are tasked with handling extremely sensitive customer data every day.  This 
includes financial information, medical and health records, and personally identifiable information 
of our customers. Monitoring  the work of our employees ensure s they are following the right 
processes and protocols when they are evaluating customer claims . We are also required to 
ensure claims are being process ed on a timely basis. This Act could handcuff our ability to 
maintain the  highest quality output as it relates to compliance and risk decisions , obligations 
under both  the U.S. Department of Labor as well as Departments of Insurance in all fifty states.  
  
Our employees are responsible for making benefit payments to claimants, processing claims 
based on medical records, and interacting directly with our customers. Our clie nts expect us to 
follow the highest ethical practices and make sound risk -based decisions regarding their claims. 
In 2022, we paid nearly $8 billion in benefits and served over 180,000 companies seeking to 
provide their employees with robust benefits packa ges at work.  
 
It is our duty to maintain  accuracy and integrity at every step in this process. Should an issue 
arise, Unum is responsible for investigating actions by using tools that we fear may be prohibited 
under interpretations of LD 949, even if such  situations do not align with this legislation’s intent.  
 
Where our employees are concerned, this Act would negatively impact our ability to effectively 
coach and train our employees, thus reducing  employee development potential and continuous 
improvement opportunities. People Managers need the ability to ensure workers are using our 
tools effectively, treating clients respectfully and to use pertinent  information to follow up on any 
customer feedback that may need to be addressed.  
 
We kindly ask that you consider the negative impact on financial services institutions, as well as 
the unique regulatory environment that we operate within. We urge you to safeguard our ability 
to keep our employees safe, to protect our business, and to be st serve our customers.  
 
 
 
 
 
Umberto Speranza  
AVP, Government Affairs  
Unum Group  
 
 

