TES-!'|MQNY CF unﬁt ‘eta; Brian Parke mAN‘§§!1 
L.D. 949, “An Act to Protect Workers from Jlﬂbéllfﬁfﬁ’ 
Employer Sun/eillance ” ‘,,,_‘.¢,,,,, 
(201112:-41:8 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee on 
Labor and Housing. My name is Brian Parke and I am the President and CEO of the Maine 
Motor Transport Association and a resident of Brunswick. The Association is comprised of 
more than 1,700 member companies, whose employees make up a large portion of the 
34,000 people who make their living in the trucking industry in Maine. 
l am here today to testify in opposition to LD 949. on the basis of the unintended highway 
safety implications. When our industry talks about professionalism and the role our truck 
drivers play in the safety of our roads, we like to talk about the investments many of our 
members have made in technology like driver alert systems for fatigue, fon/vard collision 
warning and mitigation systems, electronic stability control, adaptive cruise control and lane 
departure warnings. 
But our industry has also invested heavily in the human element of safety as well and this is 
through voluntary installation of video technology, both outward and inward facing cameras. 
While also used as a liability protection tool, this technology is also used throughout the 
trucking industry as a way to identify unsafe behaviors such as tailgating, speeding, not 
wearing a seat belt and driver distraction. Employers get alerts so that they can proactively 
coach their drivers and improve safety habits, which improves highway safety for all Mainers, 
not just truck drivers. These cameras also provide real-time incident detection such as hard 
braking, evasive maneuvering and alerts when hours of service limits are close. 
Visual limitations are also an area of concern for our truck drivers and cameras can provide 
the driver with a clear view of.the back of the truck and can help assess blind spots on the 
move. So you can see, these camera systems are in place because safety is the number 
one priority for truckers who are sharing the roads with our families.
But the way we read LD 949, it’s not clear if these camera systems would be permitted in 
Maine if it were passed. Section 3 of the bill lists the authorized surveillance limitations as 
being “strictly necessary to ensure employee health and safety or the security of employee 
data” and then goes on to list further restrictions. Using the term “strictly ” in section 3 seems 
to me would disqualify our use of camera system technology that is being used to improve 
highway safety. 
We respectfully ask that you oppose LD 949. 
Thank you for your consideration and for allowing me to testify. l would be happy to answer 
any questions the committee has now or at the Work Session.
