R L 45 Melville Street, Suitel 
ASSOCIATION or Augusta, ME 04330 
‘Q MA| N E Phone: 207.623.1149 
Voice of Maine Retail www.retailmaine.org -- »;-»>,-,e»='.w ’ _ _.
% 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Mike Tipping, Chair 
Representative Amy Roeder, Chair 
Members of the Labor and Housing Committee 
RE: Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD 949, An Act to Protect Workers from Employer 
Surveillance 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee: 
My name is Curtis Picard and I am the President and CEO of the Retail Association of Maine.l 
am a resident of Topsham. We have more than 350 members statewide and represent retailers 
of all sizes. Maine's retailers employ more than 85,000 Mainers. We are here today to testify in 
opposition to LD 949. 
We are presuming that the intent of LD 949 is to examine and regulate the use of things like 
productivity software for remote workers, and while we have concerns about the bill proposal 
in that regard, we wanted to highlight some additional unintended consequences from the 
proposed legislation. 
As drafted, LD 949 states "'employer surveillance" means the use of trackers, cameras, task 
software or other monitoring systems that track the productivity and keystrokes of employees. 
The bill further states that employers, in our case retailers, could not use cameras unless 
authorized under Section 3 of the bill. Section 3's exemptions include that cameras would only 
be allowed "to ensure the health and safety or the security of employer data." Further, Section 
8 of the bill would require an employer to notify the employee that they are being monitored. 
Most retailers install security cameras throughout a store, warehouse and parking lot to help 
monitor things like organized retail crime, employee theft and other loss prevention services. 
We believe that LD 949 would inhibit or prohibit a retailer from using cameras in a typical 
fashion. It is commonplace to have cameras monitor a cashier station and store layout primarily 
for theft, but the cameras can also indicate when employees are not performing required job 
duties.
I am not an expert on the various job monitoring technology, and there are other experts that 
can testify to their details. Regardless, we have concerns about LD 949, and would urge the 
committee to oppose the bill. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our thoughts. 
Sincerely, 
Curtis Picard, CAE, President and CEO
