 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY , ESQ.  
 
Ought to Pass - LD 949 
 
An Act to Protect Workers from Employer Surveillance  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
LABOR AND HOUSING  
 
April  4, 202 3 
 
Senator Tipping , Representative  Roeder , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing , greetings .  My name is Meagan Sway , and I am the Policy 
Director  at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving 
civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our 
members, we urge you to support LD 949. 
New technologies have given employers unprecedented abi lities to monitor and watch their 
workers. While some employers might have a legitimate interest in monitoring work to ensure 
efficiency and productivity, electronic surveillance often goes well beyond proper management 
concerns and becomes a tool for spyi ng on employees in furtherance of no legitimate business 
interest. In some cases, employers have even demanded that workers turn over the passwords to 
their personal social media accounts.  Another company installed software on their employees’ 
computers th at takes a screenshot of the desktop every ten minutes  to monitor their employees’ 
activities.  
This bill proposes a fair and reasonable solution to this worsening problem. If enacted, LD 
949 would prohibit employer surveillance unless the surveillance is s trictly necessary for employee 
health and safety or the security of the employer, with certain limitations. It would require 
employers to provide, upon a verifiable request by an employee, data collected on the employee 
and certain information regarding th at data. It would also require employer s to provide notice to 
their employees prior to beginning employer surveillance. Crucially, i t provides that an  
enforcement mechanism: a private right of action.  
  
 
Much of our waking life is spent at work. That is why it is especially important for the 
legislature to do all it can to ensure that our workplaces do not become dystopian and unduly 
invasive. This bill is a necessary step in that direction.  
We urge you t o vote ought to pass .  
 
 
