 
 
Office of General Counsel  
103 Maine Ave., Bangor, Maine 04401  
207-992-9200  
 
 
April 4, 2023  
 
Dear Member s of the Committee on Labor and Housing and Representative s Roeder, Boyer, Faulkingham, Gere, 
Malon, Osher, Supica, and Williams:  
 
Thank you for your work to date on LD 949, “An Act to Protect Workers from Employer Surveillance. ” While LD 
949 rightly encourages dialogue concerning  whether, how, and when employees have a reasonabl e expectation of 
privacy in the workplace, LD 949  raises serious questions and concerns for employers, and for  health care  provider  
employers  in particular . 
 
By way of background, PCHC is the largest and most comprehensive of the 20 FQHC organizations in M aine and 
the second  largest of the 100 in northern New  England, with approximately 900  employees located in Penobscot, 
Waldo and Somerset counties. PCHC’s employees include approximately 200 providers: physicians, nurse 
practitioners, physicians’ assistant s, registered nurses, pharmacists, LCSWs, LCPCs, psychiatrists, social workers, 
dentists, chiropractors, and physical therapists, among others. In normal, non -pandemic years, PCHC sees 
approximately 65,000 patients and engages in roughly 325,000 visits ann ually. Seventy percent of PCHC’s patient 
population are lower income people and seniors. PCHC works through the medical home model , coordinating 
individual patient care among the entire care team, addressing the root causes , social determinants of health,  and 
community conditions that lead to poor health, and enhancing the patient -care team relationships to improve health 
outcomes. PCHC has been providing this type of care since 1997. PCHC providers focus on individual patient needs, 
proactively treating ch ronic illnesses encouraging healthier behaviors for better health management.  
 
Health  care providers  implement health information  and related  systems to ensure data  tracking, measurement, 
auditing, and reporting. Having a real -time understanding of how health information and related  systems are 
interacting and how employees are interacting with those systems  is necessary to ensure  timely and outstanding 
patient care  at both population health and individual health levels , that standards of care are met, that harm -events 
are avoided, that positive patient outcomes  and relationships are  maximized , and that we meet expectations laid out 
by grantors, funders, payers (public and commercial), and accreditors . This means, for ex ample, that  PCHC , and all 
health care providers , among other things : 
 
 Monitor  whether patient referrals are being processed per  timelines set forth in policy ( e.g., stat and urgent 
referrals (same day and 1 business day, respectively ), and stat lab results  and critical lab values are being 
communicated immediately to patients . 
 Track and audit whether patient needs communicated via phone call are r outed and triaged appropriately.  
 Run reports from its various electronic medical records on whether employees are appropriately and 
correctly performing  core job duties  (e.g., track and measure quality metrics  such as cancer screening, 
immunization, A1C) as defined in the job description.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Audit  and prevent  data from  being sent outside of PCHC’s secured encrypted systems.  
 Audit  to ensure that patient protected health information  (PHI)  is accessed, used and disclosed only for 
permissible purposes.  
 
All of this  work  relies upon a health care provider’s  ability to access, track, measure, audit and report on employee 
work and productivity within technical  data systems.  The work described above translates into ensuring a stable 
foundation upon which outst anding patient c are can happen.  In its current form, LD 949  will interfere with this 
work , for example : 
 
 It does not include a definition of “productivity” or “keystroke.” (See Paragraph 1).  
 While the current version  of LD 949  does allow an employer to use surveillance if  “it is strictly necessary to 
ensure employee health and safety or the security of employer data . . .”, it does not define “strictly 
necessary”, “health” or “safety.” (emphasis added). (See Paragraph 3).  
 It does not define “authorized agent.” (See paragra ph 3(D)).  
 It appears to opine on what data an employer owns versus what data an  employee owns, which lacks clarity 
and could cause confusion vis -a-vis the well -settled law of right, title and interest in property  in the state of 
Maine.  (see Paragraph 5).  
 It provides for a private right of action for employees to pursue  litigation against an employer for violation 
of LD 949, which will translate into additional, costly litigation, and add to the already long dockets our 
court system in Maine manages. (See p aragraph 9).  
 
In short, and specifically for healthcare providers , LD 949  in its current form will require extensive and costly  
systems and policy redesign. It will require that health care providers allocate  diminishing resources to non -core 
functions, sy stem rework, an d vendor contract and functionality modifications. The remedy in this space (employer 
surveillance), alternatively, could be tied to laws requires every employer to lay out its data access, tracking, 
measurement , auditing, and reporting prac tices in organizational policy and giving employees notice of expectations 
at hire and ongoing during the course of employment.  
 
Thank you for your time and work. PCHC appreciate s your interest in this issue. An employee’s right to privacy at 
work and an employer’s right to monitor all of its systems and data can be balanced in an appropriate and thoughtful 
way. LD 949 in its current form does not get us there, however.  
 
I would be happy to discuss this further. Please do not hesitate to reach out with any  questions or for more 
information.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Megan A. Sanders, Esq.  
Chief Legal Officer, Compliance Officer & Chief Human Resources Officer  
 

