. STATE OF MAINE
S . DEPARTMENT OF LABOR \:_ 2,2 
"“‘z”éu.l 54 STATE HOUSE STATION - . $.~- = . 
.3» \\a. AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0054 
Janet T. Mills Limra A‘ Fonman 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Mike Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards 
Maine Department of Labor 
Neither For nor Against LD 949 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, April 4, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. I'm Mike Roland, Director of the_Bureau of Labor Standards at the 
Maine Department of Labor. l’m here today to testify in neither for nor against LD 949 An Act to 
Protect Workers from Employer Surveillance. 
This bill would prohibit certain types of surveillance of employees by an employer that is not necessary 
under the terms identified in the bill. We understand the valid concerns addressed in the bill, but 
believe it is far too broad and inclusive in its concept of surveillance to be either reasonable or 
workable. Indeed, it seems possible that some fairly common and widely accepted tools of 
management, such as standard methods of determining an employee's productivity, could be seriously 
compromised. 
Also, the definition of surveillance itself and other subsections of the proposed statute contain terms 
(trackers, task software, least invasive, authorized agents, automated decision system) that are 
unfamiliar to the Department andwwould need to be defined somehow. 
That. said, we believe that certain subsections appear to have merit and might be considered 
separately. Specifically, 
0 subsection 5 regarding employee personal devicesw, 
0 the notiﬁcation requirements in subsections 7 and 8, 
0 and possibly subsection 4 regarding monitoring of employee's personal property, 
would add reasonable protections not clearly included in existing statutes. 
Provisions for enforcement of this section are not specified in the bill. Were enforcement authority 
given to the Department, we believe that for the above reasons and others, the difficulties involved 
would be quite considerable and would certainly require additional staff. 
PHONE: (207) 67.3-7900 TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287»5292 
The Maine Department of Labor pl‘0Vld€S equal opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have now 
or at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to sen/ing Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth.
