STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Gambling Control Unit 
87 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0087 
JANET T. MILLS MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK MILTON CHAMPION 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
Legislative Testimony 
Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
Milton F. Champion III — Executive Director 
Gambling Control Unit 
Department of Public Safety 
April 4, 2023, 1:00 pm, Room 202, Cross Building 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and Distinguished Members of the Committee 
on Labor and Housing, I am Milton Champion, Executive Director of the Gambling 
Control Unit within the Department of Public Safety. I am here today on behalf of the 
Department of Public Safety to testify “Neither For Nor Against” LD 949 which is an Act 
to Protect Workers from Employer Surveillance. 
Currently by statute Title 8, Chapter 31, §lO04-A requires surveillance or optimum 
security for casino operations through rules established by the Gambling Control Board. 
Section §lO06 makes all surveillance records and information conﬁdential and that rules 
be adopted to prevent fraud or deception by patrons and/or employees. Surveillance has 
been a key part of monitoring casinos since the l97O’s replacing cat walks in the ceiling 
above the casino ﬂoor. The catwalks allowed surveillance personnel to look directly down 
through one way glass, on the activities at the tables and/or slot machines. Because of the 
large amounts of chips, markers and cash being moved around the facility and in count 
rooms and vaults, surveillance is a key measure to keep honest people honest. 
While not necessarily required by statute, other areas of gambling oversight include 
surveillance, like “in person” wagering facilities that offer advance deposit wagering or 
simulcast wagering on horse racing and now with the addition of sports Wagering, 
lounges, or walk-in facilities, are required by rule with the same amount of surveillance. 
I thank you for the opportunity to appear before the committee today, and I would be 
happy to answer any questions you may have at this time. 
Respectfully 
Offices located at: 45 Commerce Drive, Suite 3, Augusta, Maine 04333-0087 
(207) 626-3900 (Voice) (207) 287-4356 (Fax)
