l\/loine Credit Union Leogue
A 2 Ledgeview Drive - 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Mailing Address: P.O. Box 1236 - 
Portland, ME 04104 
207-773-5671 - 
1-800-442-6715 
www.mainecul.org 
In Opposition to LD 949 
An Act to Protect Workers from Employer Surveillance 
Committee on Labor and Housing 
April 4, 2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members ofthe 
Committee on Labor and Housing, 
My name is Robert Caverly, and i am the Vice President of Advocacy & Outreach at the Maine 
Credit Union League. The Maine Credit Union League is the trade association for Maine's 50 
credit unions and over 725,000 members statewide. We respectfully submit the following 
testimony in opposition to LD 949. 
Credit unions across the state rely on security cameras, entry logs, and other control 
mechanisms to ensure that our facilities, staff, and the deposits of 725,000 Mainers are always 
safe and secure. We agree that Mainers deserve to feel safe in their workplace; just as they 
deserve to feel that their deposits are safe within their financial institutions. But by failing to 
distinguish security cameras, which are necessary for the security of our staff and facilities, 
from keystroke tracking software, LD 949 would harm the security of credit unions. 
Cameras and control measures are not used to penalize or punish employees but instead 
protect the institution from fraud or abuse. The limited exceptions in LD 949 do not consider 
these factors, and do not include any exceptions for financial institutions like credit unions, 
which have legitimate security concerns and federal regulations that require monitoring. 
Additionally, by requiring employers to provide employee data upon request, LD 949 could 
result in the exposure of member accounts by divulging protected private information. Security 
cameras in credit unions are always active, capturing activities in many sensitive areas. 
Requiring a credit union to divulge potentially sensitive material to any employee upon request 
exposes the institution and members. 
In addition to being a security concern, LD 949 represents a risk to credit unions because of the 
potential liability established by the private right of action. Section 9 exposes credit unions, who 
are member-owned financial cooperatives, to the risk of civil penalties and attorney's fees. As 
financial co-operatives, each of the 725,000 credit union members in this state has a vested 
interest in the well-being of their credit union, and LD 949 threatens that well~being 
Maine credit unions are proud to employ some of the best people across the state. Credit 
unions pride themselves on creating positive workplace environments, and frequently receive
‘§’ Moine Credit Union League 
yearly recognitions as Best Places to Work in Maine. We understand that the intent of l_D 949 
may be to protect employees, but without a recognition of the surveillance necessary for the 
safety and security of credit unions, we must oppose it at this time. 
The League would support an amendment to exempt financial institutions from this legislation 
We are committed to providing a safe and secure environment for our members to transact 
their business, and to providing a secure and empowering workplace for our employees. 
The League thanks the committee for hearing our viewpoints and we would urge the 
committee to vote ought not to pass on LD 949.
