 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 949 
 
AN ACT TO PROTECT WORKERS FROM EMPLOYER SURVEILLANCE  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing  Committee.  I am Steven 
Bailey , executive director  of Maine  School Management A ssociation, testifying on behalf of the legislative 
committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents Association , in 
opposition to  L.D. 949. 
 
During the school day and after school hours , knowing who is on-premises  is cruc ial for campus safety. The 
ability to detect unauthorized visitors is a major pro of security cameras.  Security cameras make it easier for 
security staff and school administrators to keep track of students and teachers and better understand who 
should or s hould not be on school property . Security cameras in schools and on school grounds also deter 
crimes like thefts, break -in, vandalism, tre spassing and even bullying.  
 
Our associations oppose this bill as security cameras are used widely inside and outside of our school  
buildings . The language in this bill is a bit broad and lacks definitions . The bill states that the use of cameras 
must be “least invasive ”, what does that mean for schools and their campuses? The bill limits the use of 
cameras  to the smalles t of employees.  School cameras are installed to capture  any individual who enters the 
campus or the school  building, therefore limiting the use to the smallest of employees would be impossible. 
The bill calls to have the data collected accessed only by aut horized agents. The data gathered by school 
cameras is accessed many time s by school safety directors or school administrators . When appropriate, this 
data may be turned over to law enforcement. This bill does not determine who authorized  agents are. 
 
To reduce or re -define the use of cameras in our schools result s in the reduction of the safety protocols that 
schools use to keep our students safe.  
