Testimony of Debra Dunlap 
Neither For, Nor Against LD 1325, 
“An Act to Make Permanent the Submission of Certain Reports to the Legislature Concerning Child 
Welfare” 
To The Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Friday, April 21, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services, 
My name is Debra Dunlap, and I am Co-Chair of the Maine Child Welfare Advisory Panel (MCWAP). I am 
submitting testimony today on behalf of the Panel neither for nor against LD 1325, which would make 
permanent the established regular reports from the Panel to this Committee. The Panel has asked me to provide 
information to help inform the Committee as you make your decision. 
As one of the state’s three citizen review panels for child welfare, MCWAP has always been required by federal 
statute to prepare an annual report and to make it available to the public. These reports contain a summary of 
the activities of the Panel, and recommendations to improve the child protective services system. However, 
during earlier reviews of the child welfare system, members of the 129"‘ Legislature reported being unaware of 
citizen review panels and the amrual report. In 2019, the passage of LD 192 established the first statute 
requiring MCWAP’s annual report to be submitted to this Committee. After the Ofﬁce of Program Evaluation 
and Govermnent Accountability (OPEGA) issued a report on child welfare oversight in 2022, the Legislature 
adopted a resolution that built on this statute, requiring more ﬁequent quarterly reports from MCWAP and 
additional child welfare advisory oversight entities to this Corrnnittee. 
The quarterly reports from MCWAP are presented by citizen members of the Panel, and include a summary of 
observations regarding efforts by OCFS to improve the child welfare system, a summary of the collaboration 
between the three citizen review panels, and recommendations on how to further protect the State's children 
through Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) policy and rulemaking and through legislation. 
Since the quarterly reporting process was established last year, two recorrnnendations from MCWAP’s 2021 
Annual Report were acted upon by the 130th Maine Legislature. Contingency Funds to be used for families 
during the child protective assessment process were included in the Supplemental Budget. A Connnission was 
also established to Develop a Pilot Program to Provide Legal Representation to Families in the Child Protection 
System. This session, three of MCWAP’s 2022 Armual Report recommendations have been incorporated into 
legislative and budget proposals to address pay rates for parent attorneys and Guardians ad Litem, and to 
expand peer support for parents involved with the child protective system. 
The Panel is fully willing to continue to provide quarterly reports to this Committee. If this act does not pass, 
the current reporting schedule is set to expire on June 30, 2024. 
Thank you for considering this testimony. 
Respectfully, 
Debra Dunlap 
Co-Chair 
Maine Child Welfare Advisory Panel 
Gorham, ME
