3 - 
5 5 Senator Marianne Moore /3/at 
3 State House Station 
Senate a% Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
(207) 287-1505 
Z6 I“ 
if 5 Marianne.Mo0re@legislature.maine. gov 
Se/zale .@1' 4bzz'el 6 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished 
members of the Health and Human Services Joint Standing Committee. My name 
is Marianne Moore. I proudly represent Senate District 6, which includes all of 
Washington County along with 16 Communities in Eastern Hancock County as 
well. 
l am here to introduce LD 1325, ”An Act to Make Permanent the Submission of 
Certain Reports to the Legislature Concerning Child We/fare" . 
Those of you who were on the HHS Committee during the 130"‘ Legislature might 
remember the extensive work we did to address concerns with the Child Welfare 
System, working through several bills, taking seriously the sad situation of the 
death of six children in June 2021. 
For those new to the topic, we combined bills and unanimously voted in LD1853 
(which was initially a Concept Draft to be used as a vehicle to move legislation 
forward) as a ”Resolve, To Increase Oversight of the Child Welfare System" 
enacting reporting requirements as follows: 
1) The Child Welfare Advisory Panel and the Child Death and Serious Injury 
Review Panel are required to submit quarterly reports to the HHS Committee and 
efforts to collaborate between the Citizen Review Panels required by the federal 
Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act and 
2) The Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Child and Family 
Services, is required to submit quarterly reports to HHS Committee regarding 
progress in implementing the recommendations of the Casey Family Programs 
and Collaborative Safety report completed for the department in October 2021, 
responses to recommendations from the Child Welfare Advisory Panel 
established pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 22, section 4010-D and 
progress in efforts described in the department's annual report on child welfare. 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 * TTY (207) 287-I583 * Message Service 1-800-423-6900 * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
For the quarterly reports, the bill required at minimum the following from each: 
Section 1 — Citizen Panels Quarterly Reports: 
1. A summary of generalized and anonymized observations in the prior 3- 
month period regarding efforts by the Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office of Child and Family Services to improve the Child Welfare 
System; 
2. A summary of the collaboration between the advisory panel and the review 
panel as well as the Justice for Children Task Force established in 2006 that 
reports to the Supreme Judicial Court; and 
3. Any recommendations on how to further protect the State's children 
through Department of Health and Human Services policy and rulemaking 
and through legislation. 
Section 2 — 
Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Child and Family 
Services Quarterly Reports: 
1. Efforts to further coordinate and advance child welfare services in primary, 
secondary and tertiary prevention, as those prevention services are 
described by the Office of Child and Family Services; 
2. Efforts to expand the use and value of family team meetings; 
3. Efforts to expand the use of participation of people with lived experience in 
the development of policy regarding and operation of the child welfare 
system; 
4. A review of the department's policies and practices regarding domestic 
violence and the ability of the nonoffending parent to assume custody of 
the children; 
5. Efforts to work with the Guardian Ad Litem Review Board under the Board 
of Overseers of the Bar, the judicial branch and other interested parties to 
improve the training and support of guardians ad litem; and 
6. Any recommendations on how to further protect the State's children, 
through department policy and rulemaking and legislation. 
The initial bill/law required the quarterly reports to begin in June 2022 until June 
30, 2024.
ln December 2022 the Maine Child Welfare Action Network (MCWAN) (which isa 
group of organizations and individuals working together to align, strengthen and 
sustain efforts to ensure the safety and well-being of all Maine Children, youth 
and families) developed a Framework of Strategic Child Welfare System Priorities 
for 2023. One of the priorities listed was for the Legislature to make permanent 
the regular reports from all child welfare advisory oversight bodies to the Health 
and Human Services Committee set to expire in 2024 to continue ongoing, 
coordinated oversight of child welfare system improvement efforts. Thus, the 
purpose of this bill. 
Because the previous statute had the sunset ofJune 30,2024, this bill actually 
makes the reporting requirements permanent. 
l ask for your support and will do my best to answer any questions at this time. 
Thank you!
APPROVED CHAPTER 
BY GOVERNOR RESOLVES APRIL 7,2022 
STATE OF MAINE 
IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 
TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-TWO 
S.P. 605 - L.D. 1853 
Resolve, To Increase Oversight of the Child Welfare System 
Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and 
Whereas, the duty to protect children ﬁom abuse and neglect is a fundamental priority 
of the Legislature; and 
Whereas, the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over 
health and human services matters must receive reports from citizen review panels and the 
Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Child and Family Services as soon 
as possible in order to consider legislation affecting the duty to protect children from abuse 
and neglect; and 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
therefore, be it 
Sec. 1. Citizen panels quarterly reports. Resolved: That the child welfare 
advisory panel, referred to in this section as "the advisory panel," established pursuant to 
the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 22, section 4010-D and the child death and serious injury 
review panel, referred to in this section as "the review panel," established in Title 22, 
section 4004, subsection 1, paragraph E, shall submit reports to the joint standing 
committee of the Legislature havingjurisdiction over health and human services matters at 
least every 3 months beginning in June 2022 and until June 30, 2024. The advisory panel 
and the review panel may choose to submit combined reports or separate reports. Any 
presentations of the reports to the committee must be presented by the citizen members of 
the panels to the extent possible. Each quarterly report must contain, at minimum, the 
following: 
l. A summary of generalized and anonymized observations in the prior 3-month period 
regarding efforts by the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Child and 
Family Services to improve the child welfare system; 
Page 1 - l30LR2278(03)
2. A summary of the collaboration between the advisory panel and the review panel 
as well as the Justice for Children Task Force established in 2006 that reports to the 
Supreme Judicial Court; and 
3. Any recommendations on how to further protect the State's children through 
Department of Health and Human Services policy and ruleniaking and through legislation. 
Sec. 2. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Child and 
Family Services to provide quarterly reports. Resolved: That the Department of 
Health and Human Services, Office of Child and Family Services shall submit reports to 
thejoint standing committee of the Legislature havingjurisdiction over health and human 
services matters at least every 3 months beginning in June 2022 and until June 30, 2024. 
The reports must address the progress in implementing the recommendations of the Casey 
Family Programs and Collaborative Safety report completed for the department in October 
2021, responses to recommendations from the child welfare advisory panel established 
pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 22, section 4010-D and progress in efforts 
described in the department's annual report on child welfare. The reports must address, at 
minimum, the following: 
1. Efforts to further coordinate and advance child welfare services in primary, 
secondary and tertiary prevention, as those prevention services are described by the Office 
of Child and Family Services; 
2. Efforts to expand the use and value of family team meetings; 
3. Efforts to expand the use of participation of people with lived experience in the 
development of policy regarding and operation of the child welfare system; 
4. A review ofthe department's policies and practices regarding domestic violence and 
the ability of the nonoffending parent to assume custody of the children; 
5. Efforts to work with the Guardian Ad Litem Review Board under the Board of 
Overseers of the Bar, the judicial branch and other interested parties to improve the training 
and support of guardians ad litem; and 
6. Any recommendations on how to further protect the State's children, through 
department policy and rulemaking and legislation. 
Sec. 3. Legislation authorized. Resolved: That the joint standing committee of 
the Legislature havingjurisdiction over health and human services matters is authorized to 
report out related legislation to the next regular or special session of the Legislature after 
any quarterly report submitted pursuant to this resolve. 
Emergency clause. In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
takes effect when approved. 
Page 2 - l30LR2278(()3)
