Testimony of Melissa Hackett 
Policy Associate, Maine Children's Alliance 
LD 1325, An Act to Make Permanent the Submission of Certain Reports to the Legislature 
Concerning Child Welfare 
April 21, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee. My name is Melissa Hackett. I am a policy associate with the Maine Children's 
Alliance, and the coordinator for the Maine Child Welfare Action Network. I am here today to 
offer my support for LD 1325. 
The Maine Child Welfare Action Network strongly supported the establishment of quarterly 
reports by the various child welfare oversight entities, as directed by LD 1853 in the second 
session of the 130"‘ legislature. ‘ While the Network has not participated in these sessions, we 
have observed them, and from our perspective, they have created an important opportunity for 
increased and improved information sharing between the various oversight bodies, this 
committee, and OCFS. Given the many recommendations and ongoing efforts to improve 
Maine's child welfare system, we believe making these meetings permanent is a strong way to 
ensure continued information sharing and coordination among these entities whose 
perspectives are critical to strengthening the child welfare system in our state. 
We would offer a recommendation for additional consideration for this committee as it relates 
to the annual and quarterly reports from OCFS, regarding the inclusion of data points that are 
helpful benchmarks in establishing the health of the state's child welfare agency. For example, 
including regular updates on the number of child protective reports and substantiations, risk 
factors identiﬁed during investigation or removal, and the number of children coming into state 
custody, as well as those exiting and their reasons for exit (reuniﬁcation, adoption, etc.). Having 
this data by county/district ofﬁce also provides an opportunity to consider where regional 
differences might be apparent and indicate targeted approaches to make improvements. 
We appreciated the steps this committee took in the last legislative session to ensure more 
frequent communication between child welfare oversight bodies, the legislature, and the state 
child welfare agency. We encourage you to support this legislation now to make permanent this 
important means of sharing information and encouraging coordination to improve the state's 
child welfare system. 
Thank you. 
‘ https:[/legislature.mainegov/legg/bills/displav__ps.as; ﬁPID:1{i§6&spum=13O&paper=&paperld=l&ld=1853
