 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 21, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1325, An Act to Make Permanent the Submission of Certain Reports to the Legislature Concerning Child 
Welfare  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 1325, An Act to Make Permanent the Submission of Certain 
Reports to the Legislature Concerning Child Welfare . This bill would make permanent a requirement enacted last 
session that the Maine Child Welfare Advisory Panel (MCWAP) and the Child Death and Serio us Injury Review 
Panel (CDSIRP) submit their annual report to this Committee, as well as a requirement that OCFS provide 
quarterly reports to the Committee.  
 
OCFS supports continuing a system of regular engagement with  this Committee  but would suggest some 
modifications for consideration. Section 2 of the bill would require  the Department  to submit annual reports on the 
Child Welfare Advisory Panel. OCFS believes that the Panel should be tasked with providing its own reports , as the 
reports are prepared by them , and not by the Department. Department staff, as non-voting members of MCWAP , 
may provide information or feedback on the report but it is not a Department report . 
 
Section three of the bill outlines  what OCFS’ reports to the Com mittee must include. OCFS has reservations about 
including specific reference to the Collaborative Safety Review in this statute as a permanent reporting 
requirement. While the review, completed in October 2021, is currently still relevant, it likely w ill not be in the 
future .  
 
Finally, OCFS would recommend that the Committee consider the frequency of these reports. Reporting quarterly 
requires significant effort from the panels (which are comprised of citizen volunteers) and the Department. 
Furthermore, the panels do not meet in  the summer, giving them little to update the Committee on in September. If 
there are topics of particular interest to the Committee between reports, OCFS could certainly provide information 
during that time without the statutory requirement of a quarterly  report.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If you have any 
further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Todd Landry, Ph.D  
Director  
Office of Child and Family Service s 

