 
3 Industrial Parkway, Suite 1 - Brunswick, Maine 04011  
Ph. 207 725 4371 - Fax 207 725 1416 - Toll Free 877 653 4760  
www.independenceassociation.org 
 
 
 
To:      Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers, and distinguished 
members of  
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services.  
 
From: Alli Vercoe, Director of Case Management, Independence Association 
 
Subject:   LD 473 Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the  
Number of Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by 
the MaineCare Program 
 
Date:   March 28, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Myers and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Alli 
Vercoe and  I am the Director of Case Management at Independence Association, 
in Brunswick, Maine. Independence Association is a non-profit organization that 
has supported people with Intellectual Disabilities since 1966.  I am submitting 
written testimony supporting RE: LD 473: Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for 
and Increase the Number of Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services 
Authorized by the MaineCare Program.   
 
I have been working with children and adults with intellectual disabilities for 
almost 26 years, and truly, I feel that currently, the system of care for children and 
adults with intellectual disabilities is at a breaking point and that the state needs to 
ensure better clinical oversight and supports to these individuals. Most of the 
individuals that I see come through the system that we support have dual 
diagnosis of intellectual disabilities and mental health. In my role, I supervise case 
managers as well as have a caseload of adults with intellectual disabilities/mental 
health and or autism and what I experience over and over again is that providers 
are not willing to support the most challenging/vulnerable of clients, as they are 
not equipped with the resources to manage these most challenging of 
circumstances. In the state of Maine, if a client has challenging behaviors, there 
are rules in place which require a level 3-5 oversight clinical plan. In these cases, 
clinicians (LCSW or BCBA) or required to oversee these plans but are only 
authorized for 16.5 hours per year of support reimbursed through Maine Care. 
These clients require support from the clinician in developing a positive 2022 - 2023
OFFICERS
David Cowing
Chairperson
Eric Uhl
Vice 
Chairperson
Richard 
Estabrook
Secretary
Charles Frizzle
Treasurer
DIRECTORS
          Ed 
Blanchard
Deborah Dionne
Vicki Durrell
David Eldridge
Kenneth 
Faulkner
John Gagnon
Thomas Handel
Toni Kemmerle
       Melissa 
Knutson
Hank Pfeifle
     Kathy 
Rickards
Executive 
Director
Ray Nagel
Mission:  To 
assist
adults and 
children
with disabilities 
in
obtaining full 
and 
inclusive lives in 
their chosen 
communities.
 
3 Industrial Parkway, Suite 1 - Brunswick, Maine 04011  
Ph. 207 725 4371 - Fax 207 725 1416 - Toll Free 877 653 4760  
www.independenceassociation.org 
behavioral support plan, reviewing team’s progress and the whole clients’ treatment plan and 
history, overseeing monthly training and support to the direct support staff (DSP) and teams, 
documenting progress or steps to reduce these challenging behaviors and oversight to the state 3 
person committee on a quarterly basis.  16.5 hours per year does not even skim the surface to 
support these individuals and at the current rate of reimbursement, there are very limited number 
of clinicians willing to even contract to provide this intense level of supports for intensity needed.  
Under the children services system, the hours are at 120 but yet, that same child who turns 18 and 
still requires that amount of BCBA support, once in the adult system, during transition which is 
the hardest time, will only receive 16.5 hours from an adult provider. We case manage several 
individuals that have been waiting for a long time to get these services but cannot access them as 
there are very limited resources of clinicians willing at this point to provide this extremely 
important service. I request the hours be amended to reflect a minimum of 120 per year and be 
extended to individuals on Section 29. 
 
The state of Maine ID services is in a very reactive mode, where providers are trained to 
document reportable events, but given no resources to provide intervention or supports, or 
extremely limited resources. I have witnessed behavioral intervention, specifically ABA done 
successfully and for this to be done successfully, the hours need to be increased to match the 
current children’s services model, in order that the clinician has time to meet with the team and 
adjust the plan as accordingly. Instead, currently, as most of these challenging clients have no 
behavioral oversight, the answer is that providers are not equipped for these clients, discharge 
them to ER’s and they end up bouncing from placement to placement and back and forth to the 
ER and crisis system or sent out of state to placements that are willing out of state to fund the 
services needed to ensure success for this client.  The system of care is imploding, and I am 
saddened that Maine’s most vulnerable population is not being given the resources that they 
deserve, to ensure that they are successfully staying in places and not bouncing from provider to 
provider. The ABA model is a proven method that works, that I have seen work over and over 
again and I urge this committee to support this important legislation. Thank you for your time and 
attention to this matter.  
 
 
Alli Vercoe, LSW 
Director of Case Management  
Independence Association 
avercoe@iaofmaine.org  
207.751-8015 
 
