 
3 Industrial Parkway, Suite 1 - Brunswick, Maine 04011  
Ph. 207 725 4371 - Fax 207 725 1416 - Toll Free 877 653 4760  
www.independenceassociation.org 
 
 
To:      Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers and distinguished 
members of  
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services.  
 
From: Amy Eisenbach, ACCM, Independence Association  
 
Subject:   LD 473 Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the  
Number of Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by 
the MaineCare Program 
 
Date:   March 29, 2023 
 
I am Amy Eisenbach Adult Community Case Manager with Independence 
Association in Brunswick. We are a non-profit organization that has supported 
people with Intellectual Disabilities since 1966. I am also the guardian for my 
sister who has down syndrome, mile ID and is deaf, she currently resides in a 
waiver funded group home.  I am submitting written testimony supporting RE: LD 
473: Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of Hours of 
Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by the MaineCare Program.   
 
Applied Behavior Analysis is an evidence-based, and proven approach to reduce 
or eliminate harmful behaviors for individuals with complex behavioral 
challenges.  I request the hours be amended to reflect a minimum of 120 per year 
and be extended to individuals on Section 29. 
 
Maine currently uses no clinical approach to support adults with complex 
behavioral needs.  Aside from Dr. Le’Ann Millender, Maine has no clinical 
practitioners on their behavior plan review teams.  The answer to any individual 
with a complex behavioral need is to authorize additional staffing.  This is a 
barbaric practice which is very expensive, and akin to “beefing up the police 
force, in anticipation of a riot”.   
 
 
 Children who have thrived under the ABA services in preschool until the age of 
18, fall off a steep cliff when transitioning to adulthood. Section 28 currently 
allows a minimum of 120 hours and up to 136 to address the complex behavioral 2022 - 2023
OFFICERS
David Cowing
Chairperson
Eric Uhl
Vice 
Chairperson
Richard 
Estabrook
Secretary
Charles Frizzle
Treasurer
DIRECTORS
          Ed 
Blanchard
Deborah Dionne
Vicki Durrell
David Eldridge
Kenneth 
Faulkner
John Gagnon
Thomas Handel
Toni Kemmerle
       Melissa 
Knutson
Hank Pfeifle
     Kathy 
Rickards
Executive 
Director
Ray Nagel
Mission:  To 
assist
adults and 
children
with disabilities 
in
obtaining full 
and 
inclusive lives in 
their chosen 
communities.
 
3 Industrial Parkway, Suite 1 - Brunswick, Maine 04011  
Ph. 207 725 4371 - Fax 207 725 1416 - Toll Free 877 653 4760  
www.independenceassociation.org 
needs of children with intellectual disabilities and autism. They are not suddenly “cured” when 
they are adults, and can benefit from a similar approach in therapy. When you are born with Type 
I diabetes it does not go away when you reach adulthood.  The same insulin needed by a child is 
needed by adults. 16.5 hours per year is not enough time to develop a Functional Behavioral 
Analysis, which ironically is not authorized by Section 21, but is required if that person requires a 
Behavior management plan.  
 
The reason Maine’s behavior management plans do not show progress and appear to continue 
indefinitely is because they are not authored or managed by a BCBA, and BCBAs do not want to 
identify with a service that they know ethically cannot be addressed within 16.5 hours.  
 
As a result, providers dump these individuals into hospital emergency rooms, where they often get 
sent out of state because we do not have the capacity to serve them here. Many of them go to 
Florida, where the organization  led, works with people using an ABA approach.   
 
 
 
Amy Eisenbach 
Adult Case Management  
3 Industrial Pkwy, Suite #1 Brunswick, ME 04011 
Cell: 207-844-0908| Fax: 207-725-1416 
www.independenceassociation.org   
 
 
 
Amy Eisenbach
Brunswick
LD 473
To:    Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers and distinguished members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. 
From:Amy Eisenbach, ACCM, Independence Association 
Subject:   LD 473 Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the 
Number of Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by the 
MaineCare Program
Date:  March 29, 2023
I am Amy Eisenbach Adult Community Case Manager with Independence 
Association in Brunswick. We are a non-profit organization that has supported people
with Intellectual Disabilities since 1966. I am also the guardian for my sister who has 
down syndrome, mile ID and is deaf, she currently resides in a waiver funded group 
home.  I am submitting written testimony supporting RE: LD 473: Resolve, to Expand
the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis 
Services Authorized by the MaineCare Program.  
Applied Behavior Analysis is an evidence-based, and proven approach to reduce or 
eliminate harmful behaviors for individuals with complex behavioral challenges.  I 
request the hours be amended to reflect a minimum of 120 per year and be extended 
to individuals on Section 29.
Maine currently uses no clinical approach to support adults with complex behavioral 
needs.  Aside from Dr. Le’Ann Millender, Maine has no clinical practitioners on their 
behavior plan review teams.  The answer to any individual with a complex behavioral 
need is to authorize additional staffing.  This is a barbaric practice which is very 
expensive, and akin to “beefing up the police force, in anticipation of a riot”.  
 Children who have thrived under the ABA services in preschool until the age of 18, 
fall off a steep cliff when transitioning to adulthood. Section 28 currently allows a 
minimum of 120 hours and up to 136 to address the complex behavioral needs of 
children with intellectual disabilities and autism. They are not suddenly “cured” when
they are adults, and can benefit from a similar approach in therapy. When you are 
born with Type I diabetes it does not go away when you reach adulthood.  The same 
insulin needed by a child is needed by adults. 16.5 hours per year is not enough time 
to develop a Functional Behavioral Analysis, which ironically is not authorized by 
Section 21, but is required if that person requires a Behavior management plan. 
The reason Maine’s behavior management plans do not show progress and appear to 
continue indefinitely is because they are not authored or managed by a BCBA, and 
BCBAs do not want to identify with a service that they know ethically cannot be 
addressed within 16.5 hours. 
As a result, providers dump these individuals into hospital emergency rooms, where 
they often get sent out of state because we do not have the capacity to serve them 
here. Many of them go to Florida, where the organization  led, works with people 
using an ABA approach.  
Amy Eisenbach
Adult Case Management 
3 Industrial Pkwy, Suite #1 Brunswick, ME 04011
Cell: 207-844-0908| Fax: 207-725-1416
www.independenceassociation.org 

