 
 
 Mailing Address: 
 P.O. Box 1280 - Westbrook, ME 04098 
 Street Address: 
 15 Saunders Way, Suite 500-G, Westbrook, ME 04092 
 Telephone 207-523-5170 (V/TTY) – Fax 207-289-7029 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Support of LD 473 
Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of Hours of Applied Behavior 
Analysis Services Authorized by the MaineCare Program 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 2, 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health 
and Human Services Committees.  
 
My name is Ann-Marie Mayberry.  I am the executive director for GMS.   
For over four decades, GMS has been designing and maintaining programs that enhance, 
support, and teach through knowledge, respect, and dignity. GMS provides Shared Living, In-
Home Support, Case Management, and Residential Services.  We are dedicated to serving the 
community by providing a valuable service while working collaboratively with individuals 
served, guardians, family members, agencies, caseworkers, and other advocates. The 
individuals we serve live, work, volunteer and socialize in their community with support from 
dedicated professionals.   
I am writing to offer testimony in support of LD 473 which would increase access to expert 
clinical services needed for adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities with high 
behavioral needs by increasing the number of hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services 
authorized under MaineCare from 16.5 to 120. 
 
The current rate does not support access to experts needed to manage positive support and 
behavior management plans.  The current system and lack of access impacts all people with 
increased behavioral needs in all aspects of implementing the Home and Community Based 
Services regulations.  The inability of service providers to offer quality medical, behavioral, 
residential and social support limits a consumer’s choice of providers and the community in 
which they wish to reside in.  Many agencies have been limited or are no longer serving adults 
with increased behavior due to the lack of expert clinical services. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
 
Ann-Marie Mayberry 
ammayberry@gmsme.org  
 
