To: Health and Human Services Committee 
From: Ben Springer M.Ed., C.A.G.S., BCBA, Senior Behavior Analyst, RISE Inc 
Re: Written Testimony LD-473- Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of Hours 
of Applied Behavior Analysis Services offered by the Maine Care Program 
Date: 03/29/2023 
 
Dear Committee, 
I am writing to testify  in support of LD-473 (Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase 
the Number of Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services offered by the Maine Care Program). I have 
been a Board-Certified Behavior Analyst in the State of Maine since 2015. I have worked with many 
individuals who have transitioned to adulthood and have been left with very limited options for services 
as adults. ABA is an evidenced based science and provides benefits to adults as well as children. In my 
experience the programming needs and behavioral, social and communication needs to not disappear as 
an individual enters adulthood. Many families I have worked with have been left with significantly 
reduced service hours and families are impacted in so far as having to make difficult decisions such as 
deciding if the caretaker is able to continue to work and provide for the family needs.  
With Specialized Section 28 services, we include Parent Training as part of a package of 
behavioral support and interventions to address interfering behaviors individuals exhibit across 
conditions such as home and community environments. In my experience the parent training is an 
important part of treatment however I don’t feel it prepares parents for a lifetime of caretaking after 
the individual no longer qualifies for Specialized Section 28 services or ABA services. Ideally there would 
be availability of ABA services after the transition to adulthood that would be meaningful and beneficial. 
As a practitioner I do not see how a meaningful program for an adult with developmental disabilities or 
behavioral disorders could be implemented meaningfully with the current available service hours of 16.5 
hours.  
I want to thank the committee for its time and consideration in this matter and would invite any 
questions that I can answer for you based on my experience in the field of ABA.  
 
Sincerely, 
Ben Springer, M.Ed., C.A.G.S., BCBA 
 
