To: Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services.  
From: Brett Bulmer - Director of Programs, Independence Association, Brunswick, ME  
Subject: LD473 Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of Hours of 
Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by the MaineCare Program 
Date: March 29, 2023 
 
My name is Brett Bulmer. I am the Director of Programs at Independence Association in 
Brunswick. For the last 25 years, I have supported individuals with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities. I am submitting written testimony regarding LD473 “Resolve, to 
Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis 
Services Authorized by the MaineCare Program.” 
 
I am urging you to support LD473. 
 
Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) is a proven evidence-based approach to addressing dangerous 
or maladaptive behaviors in individuals with complex behavioral challenges.  
 
Frankly, the current limit on ABA services for adults does not pass the “straight face test”, as it 
does not allow for a truly effective and therapeutic level of service. For many individuals, the 
need for ABA does not diminish with the transition from childhood to adulthood. In fact, the 
need can often increase when faced with the changes surrounding the transition to adult 
services. If needed, these individuals should be able to receive up to the 120 hours of ABA 
outlined in this bill. I would also point out that appropriate and effective interventions have the 
potential of reducing the long-term costs associated with supporting individuals with complex 
behavioral needs. 
 
Thank you for considering my testimony. 
 
Brett Bulmer 
Gardiner, Maine 
 
Brett Bulmer
Gardiner
LD 473
To: Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. 
From: Brett Bulmer - Director of Programs, Independence Association, Brunswick, 
ME 
Subject: LD473 Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of 
Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by the MaineCare Program
Date: March 29, 2023
My name is Brett Bulmer. I am the Director of Programs at Independence Association
in Brunswick. For the last 25 years, I have supported individuals with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities. I am submitting written testimony regarding LD473 
“Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of Hours of Applied 
Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by the MaineCare Program.”
I am urging you to support LD473.
Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) is a proven evidence-based approach to addressing
dangerous or maladaptive behaviors in individuals with complex behavioral 
challenges. 
Frankly, the current limit on ABA services for adults does not pass the “straight face 
test”, as it does not allow for a truly effective and therapeutic level of service. For 
many individuals, the need for ABA does not diminish with the transition from 
childhood to adulthood. In fact, the need can often increase when faced with the 
changes surrounding the transition to adult services. If needed, these individuals 
should be able to receive up to the 120 hours of ABA outlined in this bill. I would 
also point out that appropriate and effective interventions have the potential of 
reducing the long-term costs associated with supporting individuals with complex 
behavioral needs.
Thank you for considering my testimony.
Brett Bulmer
Gardiner, Maine

