 
(207) 866-3769            info@iamsupport s.org          www.iam support s.org 
 
Testimony of Catherine Thibedeau, Executive Director 
In Support of LD 473 
Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of H ours of Applied Behavior Analysis 
Services Authorized by the MaineCare Program  
 
Joint Standing Committee on H ealth and Human Services  
March 29th 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representativ e Meyer, and esteemed members of  the Health and Human Services 
Committees: 
 
My name is Catherine Thibedeau, a nd I am the Executive Director  of Independence Advocates of 
Maine. Our agency provides services and supports for  people with Intellectual/Dev elopmental 
Disabilities and Autism (IDD/A)  in the northern part of our Sta te, specifically in Penobscot, 
Piscataquis, Hancock, and Aroos took Counties. We have been in o peration since 1977, and our 
services include various types of  services within Sections 20, 21, 29, and 50 of MaineCare. Through 
these services, we support many of  Maine's most complex clients  in our various residential services.  
I'm writing in strong support  of LD 473. In addition, I support  MACSP's testimony on this bill,  LD 
473, that Jennifer Putnam submit ted. There have been long-stand ing issues within our service delivery 
system where those with complex b ehavioral health needs need mo re funding or support to meet their 
needs within the com munity. This is a simp le but incredibly eff ective step in the co rrect direction. It 
will improve access to Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) services  for adults with IDD who have 
complex high behavioral needs and receive services under MaineC are Sections 21 or 29. When an 
individual moves from children's services to adult services, th eir funding for ABA  consultation drops 
by 89%; from 139 to 16.5 hours annually.  
Given all of the inadequacies of  our state's support and respon se system to those with complex 
behavioral needs, especially Cri sis Service, it is a no-brainer  to afford this modest increase to support 
and therapeutic services. It is a n essential to improve the abi lity for People with IDD/A to live 
successfully and safely within their communities. Therefore, I urge ssupport LD 473.   
Thank you for your time and consideration. Please reach out wit h any questions you may have.  
 
 
Respectfully Submitted,   Catherine Thibedeau cthibedeau@iamsupports.org  
 
