Dianne Cote
Personal Onsite Development
LD 473
ln Support of LD 473
Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of Hours of Applied 
Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by the MaineCare Program 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 6, 2023
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of 
the Health and Human Services Committee.
 My name is Dianne Cote, I am the Executive Director of Personal Onsite 
Development. We are located in Auburn Maine and provide work and community 
support services for adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD), I 
am in strong support of LD 473.
Since 2019, we have asked for support to ensure adequate access to Applied Behavior
Analysis (ABA) services for adults with IDD who have complex high behavioral 
needs and are receiving services under MaineCare Sections 21 or 29. 
Currently, children can receive ABA services through school or community settings 
upwards of 139 hours each year, but when they reach adulthood they are limited to 
only 16.5 hours per year. Many adults who require a Positive Behavior Support Plan 
(PBSP), a functional assessment and/or a Behavior Management Plan are currently 
unable to access Board Certified Behavior Analysts who are willing to do the work 
under such limited circumstances. 16.5 hours, for example, this is barely enough time 
to write an individual positive behavior support plan, and is an inadequate amount of 
time to be able to write a more complex behavior management plan. Those who 
provide this service want to do right by the individuals who require such a plan in 
order to manage their behaviors.
I agree with the testimony submitted by MACSP. This unfunded mandate leaves 
individuals with the highest behavior management needs without adequate resources 
to address the behaviors constructively, and perpetuates a cycle of inadequately 
managed behavior that impacts quality of life, housing stability and placement 
decisions and access to the community. Fewer providers are able to support people 
with complex needs, due to an inadequate rate and lack of reimbursement for the 
utilization of clinicians such as BCBAs. Crisis management is not a solution, nor are 
costly out of state placements which separate people from family, and community 
supports. 
Increasing the number of hours of behavioral consultation can lead to effective 
treatment and support of the Mainers with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities
who have high behavior management needs. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
Respectfully Submitted,
Dianne L. Cote
Personal Onsite Development
pod.d.cote@podmaine.org

