James Collins
Independence Association
LD 473
I am James Collins,Director of Shared Living for Independence Association in 
Brunswick. We are a non-profit organization that has supported people with 
Intellectual Disabilities for over 55 years.  I am submitting written testimony 
supporting RE: LD 473: Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the 
Number of Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by the 
MaineCare Program.  
Applied Behavior Analysis is an evidence-based, and proven approach to reduce or 
eliminate harmful behaviors for individuals with complex behavioral challenges.  I 
request the hours be amended to reflect a minimum of 120 per year and be extended 
to individuals on Section 29. 16.5 hours is not enough time for Section 21 clients to 
receive proper attention for this service. The fact that Section 29 does not have any 
hours for this service is insulting and unfortunate.
Children who have received this service their whole life become adults and then only 
receive a fraction of the service which is extremely lopsided and unfair. Section 28 
currently allows a minimum of 120 hours and up to 136 to address the complex 
behavioral needs of children with intellectual disabilities and autism. Their needs do 
not go away when they turn 18, if anything they are more necessary to address with 
the maturity of the person. Independence Association has always put the clients first 
when it comes to ABA services and IA has invested their own money (More than the 
allotted 16 hrs.) into having this department staffed and available for them. 
The reason Maine’s behavior management plans do not show progress and appear to 
continue indefinitely is because they are not authored or managed by a BCBA, and 
BCBAs do not want to identify with a service that they know ethically cannot be 
addressed within 16.5 hours. 
As a result, providers dump these individuals into hospital emergency rooms, where 
they often get sent out of state because we do not have the capacity to serve them 
here. Many of them go to Florida, where the organization I led, works with people 
using an ABA approach.  
Thank you,
James Collins

