Le'Ann Milinder
Association for Maine Behavior Analysis
LD 473
Testimony Submitted by the Association for Maine Behavior Analysis
president@mainebehavioranalysis.org 
Executive Summary
The Association for Maine Behavior Analysis (AMeBA) urges the Committee on 
Health and Human Services to recommend passage of HP 290/LD 473, “Resolve, to 
Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of Hours of Applied Behavior 
Analysis Services Authorized by the MaineCare Program” with amendment.
Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) is an evidence-based, proven approach to reducing
or eliminating harmful behavior and increasing relevant replacement behaviors. 
Under current rules, MaineCare limits the type and hours of ABA services (Section 
21) or does not cover ABA services (Section 29), preventing individuals from 
receiving effective treatment. Lack of effective treatment causes poor quality of life, 
limited community access, and over-utilization of more restrictive resources such as 
crisis services, visits to the emergency department, and the involvement of law 
enforcement. The proposed amendment would significantly increase the number of 
hours allowed for ABA services from 16.5 hours to 120 hours annually. We commend
the committee for expanding access to these essential services for adults with 
intellectual disabilities and autism spectrum disorder. 
We strongly support the proposed increase in allowance for ABA services; however, 
we urge the committee to amend the bill, specifying the provision of up to 120 hours 
annually of the full scope of ABA services. Currently, Section 21 allows access to 
16.5 hours annually to a restricted set of ABA service activities. Rep. Craven’s 
unamended bill proposes changes to the hours of service, but does not explicitly 
increase the scope of allowable ABA services, including such critical activities as 
conducting functional behavior assessments (FBA) and coordinating care with other 
providers. Without access to the full scope of services, the proposed increase in 
service hours is insufficient to address the complex behavioral needs of this 
population. We support the proposed changes to the amount of allowable ABA 
services, and request that the bill be amended to specify coverage for the full scope of 
behavior analytic services: conducting functional assessments, developing 
interventions, training caregivers and significant others, implementing plans, 
analyzing client data, and monitoring plans for effectiveness.
Full Comments
We are writing with regard to HP 290/LD 473, “Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for
and Increase the Number of Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized
by the MaineCare Program.” 
The Association for Maine Behavior Analysis (AMeBA) is a membership 
organization of professional
Board Certified Behavior Analysts (BCBAs®) practicing ABA in the state of Maine. 
Our organization is committed to ensuring that individuals with significant behavioral
needs receive high quality, evidence-based services to support the development of 
positive behaviors and skills. ABA is an applied science used to create socially 
significant behavior change through evidence-based assessment and intervention 
procedures. BCBAs are masters or doctoral level clinicians who have completed a 
course sequence in these assessments and procedures, as well as substantial 
supervised fieldwork, and must pass a qualifying exam for certification. BCBAs are 
overseen by an international board, the Behavior Analysis Certification Board®, and 
practice within a clearly outlined code of ethics that protects individual rights.
As an organization, we support the principle that individuals with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities have a right to effective treatment. As practitioners in the 
field of ABA, we echo the call for appropriate, evidence-based practices implemented
with integrity to ensure that adults with intellectual disabilities or autism receive the 
least restrictive, most effective treatment for behavioral challenges. People who 
experience complex behavioral needs without access to effective treatment often end 
up with behavior management plans that restrict their rights for indefinite periods, 
thereby reducing their quality of life. ABA is a distinct and essential practice for 
positive long-term outcomes. Evidence indicates that most challenging behavior can 
be reduced or eliminated for the long term when appropriate assessments and 
interventions are developed, implemented, and overseen by qualified professionals. 
Currently, adults in Maine with intellectual disabilities or autism and untreated 
complex behavioral needs face significant barriers to accessing services. Providers are
often unable to accept them for service or may terminate services due to limitations 
on authorized service hours and activities. Ethical provision of ABA services requires 
practitioners to conduct assessments, develop interventions, train caregivers and 
significant others, analyze client data, and monitor plans for effectiveness on an 
ongoing basis. The current allowable amount of service hours is grossly insufficient to
allow for the ethical provision of positive behavioral supports. Further, BCBAs are 
required to develop interventions that link directly to the results of a functional 
behavior assessment. Failing to link intervention to assessment can result in 
individuals experiencing ineffective and/or excessively restrictive behavior change 
procedures. Without authorization to conduct an FBA, practitioners are unwilling to 
risk developing interventions that do not align with ABA service standards. As a 
result of current service restrictions, adults with intellectual disabilities and autism 
and complex behavioral needs languish on waiting lists or are even sent to high-cost 
programs out of state. ABA is cost effective. The cost of 120 hours of a BCBA at 
current rates is equal to two weeks of an additional staff during awake hours. If just 
one out-of-state placement is prevented, the savings would fund ABA for 30-50% of 
those on restrictive plans.
Section 28 (Rehabilitative and Community Support Services for Children with 
Cognitive Impairments and Functional Limitations) provides the full range of ABA 
services needed for effective treatment to children. When they enter the adult system, 
those who rely on ABA essentially fall off a treatment cliff. Adults need and deserve 
parity in their services.  Even a highly effective positive intervention plan may require
days or weeks to fully eliminate challenging behaviors. The significant service 
restrictions resulting from the transition from children’s services (e.g., Section 28) to 
adult services (Sections 21 and 29) leaves many individuals with unmet complex 
behavior needs indefinitely. 
We commend the committee for addressing the need to increase the amount of 
authorized ABA services for adult Mainers with intellectual disabilities or autism. As 
an organization, we strongly support the proposed increase to 120 hours annually. We
are concerned, also, that the bill as currently written does not expand the provision of 
ABA services to the full scope of services necessary to address the complex 
behavioral needs of this population. We urge the committee to recommend passage of
this bill with amended language authorizing the full scope of ABA activities, which is
necessary to develop and implement effective treatment.  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this comment. We can be reached via email 
at
president@mainebehavioranalysis.org.
Sincerely, Association for Maine Behavior Analysis

