526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207 -480-1478      833-713-2618     www.maineddc.org  
 
 
  
 
March 29, 2023  
 
Testimony in Support  of LD 473, Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number 
of Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by t he MaineCare Program . 
 
Senator Bald acci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
My name is Nancy Cronin , and I am the Executive Director  of the Maine Developmental 
Disabilities (DD) Council.1 Over the last twenty years there has been a steady and dramatic 
increase in prevalence of children with autism spectrum disorders  (ASD) .  The population 
needing adult DD services is changing , and growing, in re sponse to this increase  of people with 
ASD.   This bill is needed to come in to align ment of the nee ds of the  new population.  Applied 
Behavior Analysis provides an evidence -based  treatment service  that has been widely ava ilable 
for children with DD for years.  Many of the adults i n our system received this ty pe of service 
when they were youth  only to find the lack of availability when they re ached adulthood.   It is 
time to change that , and this bill will make that necessary change.  
 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide input  and I am available for any questions.  
 
 
 
 
1 Councils on Developmental Disabilities were cr eated through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill 
of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970.  Maine’s DD Council has been advocating with and for individuals with 
developmental disabilities for over  50 years.  The DD Council is a federally funded, inde pendent organization with 
members from across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and representatives of public 
and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for services for individuals with developmental 
disabilit ies.  As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, capacity building and systemic change 
activities, with the goal that individuals with developmental and other disabilities of all ages are fully included, 
integrated,  and involved in their comm unities and the decisions impacting their lives.   
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council  
