 
3 Industrial Parkway , Suite 1  - Brunswick, Maine 04011  
Ph. 207 725 4371 - Fax 207 725 1416 - Toll Free 877 653 4760  
www.independenceassociation.org  
 
 
 
To:      Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers and distinguished members of  
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services.  
 
From:  Ray Nagel, MBA, Executive Director   
 
Subject:   LD 473 LD 473 Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the  
Number of Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by 
the MaineCare Program  
 
Date:   March 2 9, 2023  
 
I am Ray Nagel, the Executive Director of Independence Association in 
Brunswick. We are a non -profit organization that has supported people with 
Intellectual Disabilities since 1966.  I am submitting written tes timony supporting  
RE: LD 473: Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of 
Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by the MaineCare 
Program.   
 
Applied Behavior Analysis is an evidence -based, and proven approach to reduce 
or eliminate harmful behaviors for individuals with complex behavioral 
challenges .  I request the hours be amended to reflect a minimum of 120 per year 
and be extended to individ uals on Section 29.  
 
Maine currently uses no clinical approach to support adults with complex 
behavior al needs.  Aside from Dr. Le’Ann Millender, Maine has no clinical 
practitioners on their behavior plan review teams.  The answer to any individual 
with a complex behavioral need is to authorize additional staffing.  This is a 
barbaric practice which is very expensive, and akin to “beefing up the police force, 
in anticipation of a riot”.   
 
“Olivia” is a woman in her mid -40’s with physical disabilities, nonverbal, but can 
use some sign language. When I arrived to Independence Association 13 years 
ago, she had complex behaviors like rectal digging, fecal smearing, pinching and 
scratching others within her reach, incontinence,  and was morbidly obese. She 
rarely left home due to an inability to address these behaviors, and continued to  
2022 - 2023  
OFFICERS  
 
David Cowing  
Chairperson  
Eric Uhl  
Vice Chairperson  
Richard Estabrook  
Secretary  
Charles Frizzle  
Treasurer  
 
DIRECTORS  
          Ed Blanchard  
Deborah Dionne  
Vicki Durrell  
David Eldridge  
Kenneth Faulkner  
John Gagnon  
Thomas Handel  
Toni Kemmerle  
       Melissa Knutson  
Hank Pfeifle  
     Kathy Rickards  
 
Executive Director  
Ray Nagel  
 
Mission:   To assist  
adults and children  
with disabilities in  
obtaining full and  
inclusive lives in 
their chosen 
communities.  
 
 
3 Industrial Parkway , Suite 1  - Brunswick, Maine 04011  
Ph. 207 725 4371 - Fax 207 725 1416 - Toll Free 877 653 4760  
www.independenceassociation.org  
gain weight.  Upon hiring a BCBA, this woman was placed on positive behavior protocols which 
has opened a whole world to her.   
 
She is no longer  incontinent, no longer smears feces and as a result has lost an incredible amount 
of weight because she access her community regularly.   
 
Children who have thrived under the ABA services in preschool until the age of 18, fall off a steep 
cliff when trans itioning to adulthood. Section 28 currently allows a minimum of 120 hours and up 
to 136 to address the complex behavioral needs of children with intellectual disabilities and 
autism. They are not suddenly “cured” when they are adults, and can benefit from a similar 
approach in therapy. When you are born with Type I diabetes it does not go away when you reach 
adulthood.  The same insulin needed by a child is needed by adults. 16.5 hours per year is not 
enough time to develop a Functional Behavioral Analysis,  which ironically is not authorized by 
Section 21, but is required if that person requires a Behavior management plan.   
 
The reason Maine’s behavior management plans do not show progress and appear to continue 
indefinitely is because they are not authored or managed by a BCBA , and BCBAs do not want to 
identify with a service that they know ethically cannot be addressed within 16.5 hours.  
 
As a result, providers dump these individuals into hospital emergency rooms, where they often get 
sent out of state bec ause we do not have the capacity to serve them here. Many of them go to 
Florida, where the organization I led, works with people using an ABA approach.   
 
 
Ray Nagel, MBA  
Executive Director  
Independence Association  
rnagel@iaofmaine.org  
207.504.5817  
 
