 
 
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
 
March 29, 2023  
 
Senator  Joe Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Committee on Health and Human Services  
Cross Office Building, Room 209 Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re:  LD 473, Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of  
Hours of Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by the  MaineCare Program  
 Dear Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee On  Health and Human Services : 
 
My name is Staci Converse and I am a Managing Attorney at Disability Rights Maine 
(DRM). DRM is Maine’s designated Protection and Advocacy Agency , and our mission 
is to advance justice and equality by enforcing rights and expan ding opportunities for 
people with disabilities in Maine. On behalf of DRM , I submit this testimony neither 
for nor against LD 473, Resolve, to Expand the Eligibility for and Increase the Number of Hours 
of Applied Behavior Analysis Services Authorized by  the MaineCare Program.  
 
This legislation would require the Department of Health and Human Services to 
amend its rules to allow reimbursement for up to 120 hours of applied behavior analysis services (ABA) for the Sections 21 and 29 waivers.  DRM  broadly  supports 
increasing reimbursement for consultative services so that  individuals with disabilities 
have access to the services they need to thrive. However, we believe that the current proposal, which limits reimbursement to ABA services, is not  the best approach for 
all people on the Sections 21 and 29 waivers.  
 
While ABA can  be an effective therapy for some individuals with disabilities, it is  not 
appropriate for everyone. Each individual has unique needs and may require different 
types of therapy and support. Moreover, some individuals may not respond well to 
ABA therapy , or may find it distressing.   Additionally, while therapy services are vital 
in supporting individuals, there are other consultative services that are equally 
essentia l in improving the quality of life of individuals with developmental disabilities.  
 Currently, Section 21 covers 16.5 hours  annually  of consultation services, which 
include physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy , and behavioral and 
psychological therapy, including ABA.  DRM supports increasing the limits of hours 
of these consultation services, but, particular for behavioral and psychological therapy, 
it should not be limited to one modality, but should be inclusive so  that individuals 
are able to access the type of therapy that is appropriate  to meet their needs . 
 
Therefore, we suggest that the cap for all consultative services be increased, not just 
limited to ABA services. This will ensure that individuals with developmental 
disabilities receive the full range of care they require to lead fulfilling lives.  
 
Thank you for considering our testimony.  We  appreciate the committee's continued 
efforts to improve access to services for individuals with disabilities. 
 Sincerely,  
   Staci Converse  
Managing Attorney  
    
 
 

