VERSANT A POWER 
Testimony in Support of LD 1659 
Resolve, Authorizing the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of Parks and Lands 
to Enter into Certain Leases 
April 26, 2023 
Senator lngwerson, Representative Pluecker, and members of the committee, my name is James Cote and l am 
here today on behalf of Versant Power in support of LD 1659, speciﬁcally in regard to Section 2 of the legislation. 
First, we would like to extend our gratitude to Senator Black and the Bureau of Public Lands for the work that 
they have done in developing this legislation, and specifically the inclusion of Section 2. 
Section 2 reads as follows: 
Sec. 2. Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands is authorized, but not directed, 
to lease certain land within the Town of Sullivan, Hancock County. Resolved: That the 
Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands within the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry may lease to Versant Power, formerly Bangor Hydro Electric, on such terms and 
conditions as the director may direct, certain land within Donnell Pond Public Reserved Lands in the 
Town of Sullivan, Hancock County. The lease is for an existing 30-foot-wide utility corridor and 
occupies approximately 0.6 acres. The original lease was signed by the bureau in 1997 and expired 
on April 1, 2022. 
The renewal of the existing Sullivan Lease identiﬁed in this section of LD 1659 is critical for the safe and reliable 
delivery of electricity to 13 customers in the Versant Power service territory. As identiﬁed, this lease is for an 
existing 30-foot wide corridor that occupies just over half an acre in size. The lease was originally signed in 1997 
and expired on April 1, 2022. 
Versant Power respects the role that the Legislature plays in the approval of such leases. Because 13 of our 
customers depend on this specific lease for the safe and reliable delivery of electricity to their properties, we 
would ask that the committee support this legislation and section. 
Thank you for your consideration, and we would be pleased to answer any question you might have, or provide 
more information for the work session upon your request. 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
