Testimony from Aaron Palleschi, in Support of L.D. 1895, "An Act Regarding the 
Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind Resources” 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology. My name is Aaron Palleschi and I am a lifelong 
Maine resident and member of Ironworkers local 496 and 7. I’m here today to speak in 
favor of L.D. 1895 
 
After working on a dairy farm, attending and graduating Unity college with a degree in 
Conservation Law enforcement while working summers as a biologist assistant, I had the 
opportunity to join the ironworkers. I knew that this was a good move for my family and 
myself. Especially since my wife Keri was pregnant with our second child and as soon as 
I met the hour requirement, they covered her C-section delivery 100%. 
 
In my 25 year career, I have worked various aspects of our trade all over New England to 
keep that insurance. In doing so, I have held various roles from pre-apprentice to 
superintendent of a portion of the recent expansion at Louisiana Pacific in New Limerick. 
To say I have seen a few things would be a good start, although I have not seen the bottom 
of the ocean as the saying goes. 
 
My view on this proposal is pretty simple. It is good for the entire state, whether or not you 
want to work on this alternative energy project. Ensuring that our youth have the same 
chance I found 25 years ago to provide the security, like health insurance, good wages, and 
a liveable retirement, among other things that go along with that, is vital to the health and 
viability of this great state. We are a strong and proud group of people, yet willing to pitch 
in to help when needed. I feel this is a time when you folks on this committee should step 
up and say to our neighbors and young people starting out we support you. We support 
Maine. We support the future of both. I urge you to wholeheartedly support this measure. 
And in doing so you support everyone in this great state. Thank you for your time and 
consideration, and please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1895. 
 
