 
53 Baxter  Boulevard,  Suite  202 | Portland,  ME 04101  
Phone:  866-554-5380  | Fax: 207-775-5727  | TTY:  877-434-7598  
aarp.org/me  | me@aarp.org  | twitter:  @aarpmaine 
facebook.com/aarpmaine  | instagram.com/aarpme  
 
 
May 18, 2023  
 
Testimony in Opposition:  LD 189 5, AN ACT REGARDING THE PROCUREMENT OF ENERGY FROM 
OFFSHORE WIND RESOURCES [PROPOSED SPONSOR AMENDMENT AS OF MAY 16, 2023]  
 
Chairs Lawrence and Zeigler  and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology. I am Alf Anderson, Associate Director for Advocacy and Outreach for AARP 
Maine.   AARP is a non -profit, non -partisan social mission organization with more than 200,0 00 
members across the state. We work on a range of energy issues at the state level. The core principles 
we approach this work with include affordability, reliability,  sustainability,  and accountability. We 
support low -income energy assistance programs. We also support coordination of outreach and 
enrollment in such programs.  
 
AARP Maine’s opposition to this bill is not an opposition to the development of offshore wind resources  
and tr ansmission per se . We have the following specific concerns about the bill:   
• While Maine’s investments in offshore wind shore and port facilities may be an appropriate  
economic and energy goal , the mandate to procure contracts for 3,800 MW for offshore wind  
using a technology that has not yet been demonstrated as cost effective is therefore premature.  
Last year’s legislative mandate to the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) to negotiate a contract 
for the demonstration of floating wind turbines is not yet co mplete and no scaled 
demonstration project has been implemented. Nor do we know the costs to Maine’s distribution 
ratepayers for this pending contract at the PUC.  Let’s wait until we have the findings before 
going further.  
• The bill mandates that the prices  for procuring this yet -to-be-proven  technology will only assure 
a 60% allocation of benefits to ratepayers . Therefore, ratepayers will pay 100% of the costs that 
will subsidize general economic and natural resource benefits. Benefits that cannot be reflected 
in the rates for essential distribution services should be funded by taxpayers, not ratepayers. 
This bill will make the current regressive nature of electricity rates and pri ces even more harmful 
to lower income and elderly customers.  Alternatively, the state should apply for  funding from 
the Department of Energy rather than ask its ratepayers to foot the bill . 
• The bill contains no limitations on rate increases or  protections to mitigate  bill impacts for 
Maine’s residential customers. The bill states that the newly created fund that may aid low-
income ratepayers only provides 20% of the unidentified fund resources to financial assistance 
to low-income  households. Our concern ab out this misallocation of resources is heightened by 
the fact that the current bill payment assistance program, while unbelievably  valuable, only 
serves a small minority of the actual low -income households in Maine.  
 

 
2 I urge you to consider the already over -burdened electricity ratepayers in Maine and reject this bill . 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide our views  on this important bill.  
 
Alf Anderson  
Associate State Director, Advocacy and Outreach  
AARP Maine  
aanderson@aarp.org   
207-330-1147  
