 
 May 18, 2023 
 
 
Support for LD 1895: An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind 
Resources 
 
To: the Honorable Sen Mark Lawrence (chair), the Honorable Rep. S. Paige Zeigler 
(chair), and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology 
 
I am Anne D. (Andy) Burt, a resident of Edgecomb and long-time climate and 
environmental justice educator and advocate. I strongly urge you to unanimously vote 
Ought to Pass on LD 1895. 
 
Yesterday, the World Meteorological Organization reported that global temperatures are 
likely to climb to record highs over the next five years, propelled by human-caused 
warming and El Nino. Temperatures are likely to exceed the 1.5C limit beyond which 
scientists fear we may experience  dangerous impacts to health, food and water security 
and the environment. 
 
For more than 70 years scientists studying accelerating climate change have warned us 
that we must transition away from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources in order to 
avoid an existential catastrophe. We have continued to procrastinate while the Earth, our 
island home, is becoming less habitable for life.  
 
Today, this committee can move Maine a big step forward in our transition to powering 
our lives with a clean energy resource available just offshore. A diverse group of 
organizations and individuals has created a roadmap that assures that harnessing this 
resource will create good paying wind industry jobs, will assure that siting protects 
wildlife and our fishing and lobstering businesses can continue to thrive, and will consult 
with and provide for environmental justice communities in the continuing stakeholder 
process. Offshore wind will provide a stable and affordable energy source for Maine 
people.  
 
For the health and well-being of our children, grandchildren, and future generations of all 
living beings, please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1895. 
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Anne D. Burt 
Edgecomb 
 
  
Anne Burt
Edgecomb
LD 1895
May 18, 2023
Support for LD 1895: An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from Offshore 
Wind Resources
To: the Honorable Sen Mark Lawrence (chair), the Honorable Rep. S. Paige Zeigler 
(chair), and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology
I am Anne D. (Andy) Burt, a resident of Edgecomb and long-time climate and 
environmental justice educator and advocate. I strongly urge you to unanimously vote
Ought to Pass on LD 1895.
Yesterday, the World Meteorological Organization reported that global temperatures 
are likely to climb to record highs over the next five years, propelled by 
human-caused warming and El Nino. Temperatures are likely to exceed the 1.5C limit
beyond which scientists fear we may experience  dangerous impacts to health, food 
and water security and the environment.
For more than 70 years scientists studying accelerating climate change have warned 
us that we must transition away from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources in order
to avoid an existential catastrophe. We have continued to procrastinate while the 
Earth, our island home, is becoming less habitable for life. 
Today, this committee can move Maine a big step forward in our transition to 
powering our lives with a clean energy resource available just offshore. A diverse 
group of organizations and individuals has created a roadmap that assures that 
harnessing this resource will create good paying wind industry jobs, will assure that 
siting protects wildlife and our fishing and lobstering businesses can continue to 
thrive, and will consult with and provide for environmental justice communities in the
continuing stakeholder process. Offshore wind will provide a stable and affordable 
energy source for Maine people. 
For the health and well-being of our children, grandchildren, and future generations of
all living beings, please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1895.
Respectfully submitted, 
Anne D. Burt
Edgecomb

