Testimony from Christian Duran, in Support of L.D. 1895, "An Act Regarding 
the Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind Resources” 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, my name is Christian Duran, and I’m a second year 
electrician apprentice for IBEW Local 567 and I’m here today to speak in favor of L.D. 
1895. I’ve lived in West Paris for the last 3 years and have grown to love the state of 
Maine and the people in it. 
 
When I came to Maine three years ago, my first project was a solar job that I got through 
a staffing agency, which is pretty typical for the solar industry. They didn’t provide any 
personal protective equipment, and I had to get things necessary for the job from other 
workers as hand-me-downs, like a pair of overalls. By the time this solar job was 
wrapping up, it was the dead of winter, and there was a hole in my only pair of gloves 
that I'd been using for weeks. My fingers were exposed, and I almost caught frostbite. I 
remember going into the buggy to get warm, and being told by my boss: get back out 
there, go back to work, or you’re fired.  
 
Before I joined the union I didn’t know how to stand up for myself, and didn’t feel like I 
could say this isn’t fair, this isn’t right. That’s something I won’t let happen again now 
that I’m a union member. I know that when I see or hear something on the job site that’s 
not right, I can say something and know that the rest of my union brothers and sisters 
have my back. 
 
It is important to me that LD 1895 is passed because if offshore wind comes to fruition it 
needs to be done to the highest standards, and that’s with the union stamp of approval. 
This is an opportunity for union workers in Maine, since we take pride in our respective 
crafts, and means we can bring others into our union to share in the prosperity of a good 
union job. In doing so, not only will that ensure a job well done but that the job will be 
completed with the highest regard to safety and injury mitigation, because a project of 
this size has a lot of things that can go wrong, which we can’t afford. I want offshore 
wind to be remembered as a victory for the people of the state of Maine.  
 
I urge you to support LD 1895. Thank you.  
 
