Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology:  
 
My name is Corliss Davis. I am a resident of Belfast and I am writing in strong support of 
LD1895, An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind Resources. I am also 
writing on behalf of the Maine Unitarian-Universalist State Advocacy Network, an organization 
whose members come from UU congregations throughout the state of Maine.    
I am a member of the Unitarian-Universalist Church of Belfast. One of the principles of our 
denomination is respect for the interdependent web of life of which we are all a part.  That web 
includes our air, water, and climate but also our fishing and lobstering industries, our other 
marine wildlife, and our wonderfully diverse human population. Clean, renewable offshore 
wind energy done right with high standards will benefit them all.   
Another UU principle is the inherent worth and dignity of every person.  LD1895 focuses on 
recruiting a workforce including minorities, women, veterans, LGBTQ+ persons, tribal members, 
and people from impoverished rural communities. Offshore wind will stimulate billions in public 
and private sector investment in our ports, businesses, and communities. High labor standards 
will mean fair wages, meaningful apprenticeship opportunities, equitable job access for workers 
underrepresented in construction and manufacturing, and also offer workers a free and fair 
chance to join a union.  
Climate change is affecting our fisheries, our farms and gardens, our coastline, and our health 
and it’s time to take action in every way we can. Clean, renewable, responsibly sited offshore 
wind energy will help Maine achieve our climate goals. And it will provide a stable and 
affordable source of electricity, protecting Maine people and businesses from the volatile price 
spikes we are experiencing because of the region’s heavy reliance on dirty oil and gas.  
We need to act NOW to ensure that offshore wind facilities in the Gulf of Maine will use 
technology developed at the University of Maine and components that can be manufactured 
and assembled in Maine by Maine workers. 
At 76, I may not live to see the day when some of our electricity comes from offshore wind, but 
our children and grandchildren will. I urge you to take this important step forward by voting 
“ought to pass” on LD1895. Thank you.  
Submitted by Corliss C. Davis, 5 Park St., Belfast ME 04915 
 
 
 
 
