 
Testimony from Derek Proctor, in Support of L.D. 1895, "An Act Regarding 
the Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind Resources” 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, my name is Derek Proctor and 
I’m here today to speak in favor of L.D. 1895. I’m a Journeyman Wireman with 
IBEW 1253 and I live in Troy. 
 I’m going to start by being upfront with you: I’m not sold on climate change. 
I totally understand that we need to get off fossil fuels to stop polluting, but I feel 
that much of what is occurring is part of the natural cycles that the earth goes 
through. So I’m here today to talk to you about how the work should be done, not 
why it should be done. 
 I’m a proud union member, so it’s no surprise that I want the building of this 
port and all of the work done in it to be union. But it’s more than just wanting it done 
by my union. This is a big job, and big jobs are done union because that’s the best 
way to get a lot of skilled workers. Because of our apprenticeship programs, all the 
union trades turn out quality craftsmen. 
 Another thing I believe is important is that once the turbines are complete 
and out in the ocean, any maintenance that needs to be done will probably take a 
lot of people, and sometimes on short notice. Again, when a job like that comes up 
you almost have to go union to get a lot of good people on short notice. 
 Here’s the biggest thing for me, though: I want this work done by Mainers. 
Mainers should get the benefit of the money being spent on these and going union 
is a good way to make sure that gets done. In my union, the International 
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, no one from a different local can even get on a 
job until all of the local people get a chance at the work. By going union with this 
work you’d guarantee that Mainers would get first dibs on the jobs created by 
offshore wind. 
 I haven’t worked in non-union construction, but from what I hear they can 
put anyone to work. If someone is from Texas, Massachusetts, or Illinois that 
person could be hired and put to work even though there are Mainers ready to get 
to work. That wouldn’t happen with unions. The local people would be put to work 
first. 
 
 To sum it up, I know that these offshore wind turbines are going to get built. 
My only concern is that they get built right, and that the people doing the work are 
Mainers and get a fair deal. To me that means building them union. 
Thank you for taking the time to listen, and please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1818. 
 
