Testimony from Derek Proctor, in Support of L.D. 1895, "An Act Regarding 
the Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind Resources” 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, My name is Ellis Reuter. I am an 
electrical apprentice. I live in Pittsfield, and I'm here today to speak in favor of LD 1895.  
 
 We already have passed legislation to approve the production of the 12 turbine 
demonstration Project under a project labor agreement; a great step towards 
decarbonizing our power generation. With that said, I want to see it all built with quality 
craftsmanship. I don't want this to turn into more junk that we are filling the ocean with. If 
we want quality work, we should do it union. We want it done right the first time. You’ve 
probably heard that union members get paid more, and so we’re more expensive. But 
union contractors win competitive bids everyday, and they can win those bids because 
of the quality and efficiency of the workforce. 
 
 Recently on the solar project I was assigned to, I had to change the task I was 
doing due to weather complications for the day. I was assigned to work with a different 
journeyman with whom I'd be doing grounding and bonding, and the journeyman took 
me section by section to all the work that had been done thus far to show me how to do 
the work right the first time. He then allowed me to go off and do the task on my own in 
a different section of the field. After a decent portion of it was done, I retrieved him and 
had him look over my work. He informed me of some corrections that I needed to make 
in order to finish out the work properly. He also noticed a section that I was coming to 
that he had not encountered thus far. He and I workshopped together on what would be 
the correct solution and ensured that I would implement the correct solution so it would 
be done right the first time.  
 
 It's that sort of comradery, cooperation and professionalism that comes from a 
brotherhood and sisterhood. To me, this is uniquely American: In a union, we start out 
as individuals. In our country, we started out as individual states. As we unify in a union, 
our voices become louder and our needs become met. As we unify as a country, our 
voices become louder and we can affect change upon the world. In a real sense, the act 
of founding our country is a vote in favor of unionism.  
 
 To conclude, to have these turbines be built with quality, that is a union trait. To 
be united together despite differences, that is an American trait. Thank you for your time 
and please vote ought to pass on LD 1895.  
 
 
 
