LD 1895 An Act Regarding the Procurement OF Energy from 
Offshore Wind Resources 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and 
members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee.  My name 
is Grant Provost, I am the Business Agent for Ironworkers Local 7 in 
Maine and a Maine State AFL-CIO Executive Board Member.  I serve on 
a host of boards for the State of Maine including the Maine State 
Workforce Board, the Central and Western Maine Workforce Board, 
the Maine Construction Wage Board, and the Maine Offshore Wind 
Roadmap Advisory Board.  I am also on the Climate Jobs National 
Resource Center Board, the Maine State Building and Construction 
Trades Executive Board, The Gulf of Maine Sustainability Alliance, 
Mainers for Offshore Wind and New England for Offshore Wind.  I am a 
Labor advocate through and through, pushing for our members place in 
the reconstruction of our state’s energy infrastructure.  I rise in favor of 
LD 1895 An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from Offshore 
Wind Resources 
      My family is a multi-generational Maine Family.  Both my parents 
were Union Members, my wife and I are as well.  There are many 
benefits offshore wind will bring to Maine both environmentally and 
economically.   One benefit I know for sure is that of the financial win 
for Maine constituents, for when we expand the opportunity for local 
people to not only join a union but enjoy plentiful employment, we 
change the economic future of that constituent’s community.  The life 
my family leads and the opportunities my kids have, lie in my union 
membership.  I can only begin to describe what this has meant to me 
and how I have devoted my life to making sure others have that same 
opportunity.   
       In my testimony I would like to talk about my life and how union 
membership has helped my journey to who I am today.   When I 
graduated high school, I joined Ironworkers local 7.  I was a man 
without plan, I enjoyed the outdoors and working with my hands.  I was 
enrolled in Local 7’s Apprenticeship Program where I learned the skills I 
would need to excel in my field.  I worked for multiple employers while 
having all my benefits stay with me.  On top of that I worked in states 
as far away as Hawaii with all my benefits such as pension, 401k and 
health insurance always following me.  No matter who the signatory 
contractor was.  As I aged, starting a family and settling down became a 
priority. First, we bought an apartment building in Portland, Maine and 
then a house in South Berwick.  I was able to do all this because I 
worked for years in Massachusetts.  The beginning of my own family in 
Maine, a state I am from, would not have been possible if I had not left 
for better pay.  In Massachusetts I worked 5 years straight on PLA 
projects, private and public (Whittier Bridge Replacements, Salem 
Harbor Powerhouse, and the Encore Casino).   Every year I earned close 
to or upwards of six figures, I put a robust amount into my 401 k and 
received 2 pension credits per year due to all the overtime I worked.  
This is what we can bring to Maine for Maine workers.  The Agreements 
(PLA’s) I worked under had language that included not only local hire 
but diversity, equity, and inclusion standards to the point of which the 
Construction Manager guaranteed certain percentages from 
disadvantaged populations by creating a position to hold every sub-
contractor accountable to the standards in the agreement.  PLA’s are 
good for workers, good for the community and good for this State.   
       What this bill also does is protect one of Maines most iconic 
industries, the commercial fishing industry, namely lobstermen and 
women.  The LMA 1 one exclusion has support from fisheries who have 
fished the waters of the coast of Maine for generations.  Before 
telephones, the combustion engine, the diesel locomotive and the  
there were lobstermen and women here fishing the Gulf of Maine.  I 
fully support the LMA 1 language in this bill as it keeps Maines identity 
itself intact.  You cannot be a multi-generational Mainer without having 
a family member or a couple dozen in the fishing community here.  It is 
in our heritage.  My family has been Maine Guides, wood cutters, 
logging camp cooks, mechanics, teachers, ironworkers and fisherman in 
this state for generations.  Vast amounts of my close friends have been 
or are lobstering.  Members of this committee have fished 
commercially and may again someday.  We can have responsibly sited 
projects that decarbonize Maine without putting the lively hoods of the 
men and women who work on the water in jeopardy.     
       Maine has displayed great leadership in its dedication to addressing 
climate change. It is time for the state to show it is equally committed 
to reducing inequality, closing the race and gender wealth gap, and 
building a clean energy economy that allows residents to thrive with 
good jobs and healthy communities.  PLA’s and LPA’s for Offshore Wind 
and Port Infrastructure provide a blueprint for Maine to help abate 
climate change, support and protect high-quality jobs, confront 
inequality, and ensure that frontline communities have access to high-
quality clean energy jobs. Commercial scale offshore wind in the Gulf of 
Maine is an opportunity to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, create 
many good jobs; and build stronger, healthier communities throughout 
the state. Implementing these recommendations will put Maine on a 
path to achieving its climate goals while meeting important job and 
equity objectives. Mainers need to see how executing the state’s 
climate plans will enhance residents’ lives by creating high-quality 
union jobs, lowering energy bills, and cultivating a healthier 
environment.  
 
       Offshore Wind is an Opportunity for Maine to do something historic 
and we can do it together.  Today at this hearing you have heard 
testimony from our amazing coalition.  A group representing 
Environmental Organizations, Labor Unions, Diversity, Equity and 
Inclusion Parties, Youth Climate Action Groups and the Fishing Industry.  
You heard from Mainers, you heard from Maine.  All our concerns align 
to one core message, Offshore Wind is good for Maine and should be 
done responsibly, we stand ready to assist that mission.  We hold 
ourselves accountable to work the long hours, to make the hard 
decisions, and to make sure voices that have not been heard have their 
day.  We do not check boxes, we engage and are proud to work 
collectively with anyone, it only strengthens our movement.  Along the 
way we will not settle for watered down actions or results, there are 
too many depending on us to get this right.  Our coalition has done 
some incredible work moving this legislation before the committee 
today, now you must decide what the best course for Maine.  I trust 
this committee to vote ought to pass and usher in the next chapter in 
Maine resilience.  
 
 
 
 
         
      
Grant Provost
Brunswick
LD 1895
LD 1895 An Act Regarding the Procurement OF Energy from Offshore Wind 
Resources
Good afternoon, Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the 
Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee.  My name is Grant Provost, I am the 
Business Agent for Ironworkers Local 7 in Maine and a Maine State AFL-CIO 
Executive Board Member.  I serve on a host of boards for the State of Maine 
including the Maine State Workforce Board, the Central and Western Maine 
Workforce Board, the Maine Construction Wage Board, and the Maine Offshore 
Wind Roadmap Advisory Board.  I am also on the Climate Jobs National Resource 
Center Board, the Maine State Building and Construction Trades Executive Board, 
The Gulf of Maine Sustainability Alliance, Mainers for Offshore Wind and New 
England for Offshore Wind.  I am a Labor advocate through and through, pushing for 
our members place in the reconstruction of our state’s energy infrastructure.  I rise in 
favor of LD 1895 An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind 
Resources
      My family is a multi-generational Maine Family.  Both my parents were Union 
Members, my wife and I are as well.  There are many benefits offshore wind will 
bring to Maine both environmentally and economically.   One benefit I know for sure 
is that of the financial win for Maine constituents, for when we expand the 
opportunity for local people to not only join a union but enjoy plentiful employment, 
we change the economic future of that constituent’s community.  The life my family 
leads and the opportunities my kids have, lie in my union membership.  I can only 
begin to describe what this has meant to me and how I have devoted my life to 
making sure others have that same opportunity.  
       In my testimony I would like to talk about my life and how union membership 
has helped my journey to who I am today.   When I graduated high school, I joined 
Ironworkers local 7.  I was a man without plan, I enjoyed the outdoors and working 
with my hands.  I was enrolled in Local 7’s Apprenticeship Program where I learned 
the skills I would need to excel in my field.  I worked for multiple employers while 
having all my benefits stay with me.  On top of that I worked in states as far away as 
Hawaii with all my benefits such as pension, 401k and health insurance always 
following me.  No matter who the signatory contractor was.  As I aged, starting a 
family and settling down became a priority. First, we bought an apartment building in 
Portland, Maine and then a house in South Berwick.  I was able to do all this because 
I worked for years in Massachusetts.  The beginning of my own family in Maine, a 
state I am from, would not have been possible if I had not left for better pay.  In 
Massachusetts I worked 5 years straight on PLA projects, private and public (Whittier
Bridge Replacements, Salem Harbor Powerhouse, and the Encore Casino).   Every 
year I earned close to or upwards of six figures, I put a robust amount into my 401 k 
and received 2 pension credits per year due to all the overtime I worked.  This is what 
we can bring to Maine for Maine workers.  The Agreements (PLA’s) I worked under 
had language that included not only local hire but diversity, equity, and inclusion 
standards to the point of which the Construction Manager guaranteed certain 
percentages from disadvantaged populations by creating a position to hold every 
sub-contractor accountable to the standards in the agreement.  PLA’s are good for 
workers, good for the community and good for this State.  
       What this bill also does is protect one of Maines most iconic industries, the 
commercial fishing industry, namely lobstermen and women.  The LMA 1 one 
exclusion has support from fisheries who have fished the waters of the coast of Maine
for generations.  Before telephones, the combustion engine, the diesel locomotive and 
the  there were lobstermen and women here fishing the Gulf of Maine.  I fully support
the LMA 1 language in this bill as it keeps Maines identity itself intact.  You cannot 
be a multi-generational Mainer without having a family member or a couple dozen in 
the fishing community here.  It is in our heritage.  My family has been Maine Guides, 
wood cutters, logging camp cooks, mechanics, teachers, ironworkers and fisherman in
this state for generations.  Vast amounts of my close friends have been or are 
lobstering.  Members of this committee have fished commercially and may again 
someday.  We can have responsibly sited projects that decarbonize Maine without 
putting the lively hoods of the men and women who work on the water in jeopardy.    
       Maine has displayed great leadership in its dedication to addressing climate 
change. It is time for the state to show it is equally committed to reducing inequality, 
closing the race and gender wealth gap, and building a clean energy economy that 
allows residents to thrive with good jobs and healthy communities.  PLA’s and LPA’s
for Offshore Wind and Port Infrastructure provide a blueprint for Maine to help abate 
climate change, support and protect high-quality jobs, confront inequality, and ensure 
that frontline communities have access to high-quality clean energy jobs. Commercial
scale offshore wind in the Gulf of Maine is an opportunity to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions, create many good jobs; and build stronger, healthier communities 
throughout the state. Implementing these recommendations will put Maine on a path 
to achieving its climate goals while meeting important job and equity objectives. 
Mainers need to see how executing the state’s climate plans will enhance residents’ 
lives by creating high-quality union jobs, lowering energy bills, and cultivating a 
healthier environment. 
       Offshore Wind is an Opportunity for Maine to do something historic and we can 
do it together.  Today at this hearing you have heard testimony from our amazing 
coalition.  A group representing Environmental Organizations, Labor Unions, 
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Parties, Youth Climate Action Groups and the Fishing
Industry.  You heard from Mainers, you heard from Maine.  All our concerns align to 
one core message, Offshore Wind is good for Maine and should be done responsibly, 
we stand ready to assist that mission.  We hold ourselves accountable to work the 
long hours, to make the hard decisions, and to make sure voices that have not been 
heard have their day.  We do not check boxes, we engage and are proud to work 
collectively with anyone, it only strengthens our movement.  Along the way we will 
not settle for watered down actions or results, there are too many depending on us to 
get this right.  Our coalition has done some incredible work moving this legislation 
before the committee today, now you must decide what the best course for Maine.  I 
trust this committee to vote ought to pass and usher in the next chapter in Maine 
resilience. 

