Jason Joyce
Swan's Island 
LD 1895
 Dear Committee members,
 I am an 8th generation lobsterman and am opposed to LD1895 as are 99% of the 
lobstermen in Maine.
 The extensive and destructive effects of offshore wind have no place in the fragile 
ecosystem of the Gulf of Maine.
 Outragous claims in the Audubon societies testimony claiming birds will not be 
negatively effected if windfarms are sighted outside of 20 miles denies the years of 
data collected on Seal Island which is located 22 miles offshore. Home to over 400 
nesting pairs of puffins,  the island is an important rest stop for migrating birds with 
224 various species listed by the Audubon Society field observers who may take issue
with that claim. 
 Native American tribal members opposition mirror many of Maine Lobstermen's 
concern over the environmental damage brought by an industrial windfarm and the 
multinational corporations who will be surveying/installation/operation and eventual 
decommissioning in our state waters AND federal waters. 
 While the Native American tribes have been largely ignored, the Maine Lobstermen 
have been misrepresented by various members of unions claiming Lobstermen 
support LD1895. Nothing could be further from the truth.
 Birds, Native American Tribes, Maine Lobstermen and all of the various migrating 
marine species who depend on a protected ecosystem are being ignored while special 
interests and lobbyists dive for the crumbs tossed to them for their cooperation in 
industrializing the Gulf of Maine with 900 foot turbines mounted on 300 foot 
platforms anchored in the most productive habitat with excessive lengths of heavy 8 
foot chain links that will scour the ocean bottom of all life. 
 When supporters of offshore wind in our communities learn of the destructive nature 
of offshore wind development, many question the necessity of destroying the 
ecosystem to save the climate. 
 A Scottish fisherman from Wick recently told me "We have 2 windfarms already in 
operation here, Beatrice windfarm & moray east.  
Moray west is about to start construction then another in Caledonia.... they are taking 
over everything. There used to be a good squid fishery where they are but been next 
to no squid the last few years"
 Considering what is at stake, I would concure with an opinion heard in opposition to 
1895 "there is no amount of monetary gain that is worth destroying the land and the 
sea"
