Testimony from Jayme Skelton, in Support of L.D. 1895, "An Act Regarding the 
Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind Resources” 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Jayme Skelton and I’m here today to 
speak in favor of L.D. 1895.  
 
I am a true Mainer. I was born here in Lewiston Maine and raised in Lisbon Maine 
where I still live to this day. I am a proud member and apprentice of the International 
Union of Operating Engineers Local 4, I am here today to talk to you about the offshore 
windmills and the importance of having them built by union labor. Right now, the 
demand for electricity is higher than it ever has been, and with new technology and 
electric vehicles the demand is only going to continue to grow. With the constant 
concern of greenhouse gases, what better way to supply this demand other than a 
green energy source like offshore wind.  
 
As previously stated, I am a union apprentice, currently in my third year out of a four-
year program. Myself along with all the other operating engineers strive to be the best of 
the best in the business. During the four-year union apprenticeship program we 
dedicate most of our time either in the classroom or in the field training with highly 
experienced instructors and the veterans of our industry. As operating engineers, we 
strive to do the job the right way the first time, and most importantly the safest way 
possible. This allows everyone working with us and around us to go home to their 
families every day the same way they came into work that morning.  
 
Along with my time spent training, I have spent much of my three years on the road 
traveling to Massachusetts to work on union jobs. To do this I have to make a big 
sacrifice. I have to leave behind my wife and two kids. While this is not what I want to 
do, right now I have no other choice to make a livable wage and have the great benefits 
and training the union has to offer.  
 
Bringing more family-sustaining union jobs to the state of Maine will allow Mainers like 
me and many others to have a successful career in our home state that we love. I want 
nothing more than to be able to come home to my family every night. L.D. 1895, if 
passed, is a huge opportunity to keep Mainers working good-paying jobs in Maine.  
 
Strong worker protections and labor standards are key to building Maine’s offshore wind 
industry swiftly, safely, and in a way that truly benefits all Mainers.  
 
Building Maine’s offshore wind power with strong worker protections and benefits will 
create good jobs for local working families and a prosperous economy that works for all 
of us. 
 
Thank you very much and please vote ought to pass on LD 1895.   
 
