May 18, 2023    
 
Jocelyn Runnebaum , Marine Scientist  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401 Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
 
RE: LD 1895, An Act to Reduce Energy Price Volatility and Create a Responsible Offshore 
Wind Industry for Maine  
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Energy, Utilities, and Technology , my name is Jocelyn Runnebaum , I am a Marine Scientist  for 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine . I am currently a member of the Maine Offshore Wind 
Research Consortium and was a member of the Environ ment and Wildlife Working Group for 
the Maine Offshore Wind Road Map.  
 
I appreciate this opportunity to testify  in support of the sponsor’s amendment to LD 1895, 
An Act to Reduce Energy Price Volatility and Create a Responsible Offshore Wind Industry 
for M aine. We want to especially thank Senator Lawrence  for bringing this bill forward, along 
with the many cosponsors including members of this committee.  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we create 
innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges , including climate 
change and biodiversity loss,  so that nature and people can thrive together. We use a 
collabo rative approach that engages local communities, governments, the private sector, and 
other partners  to develop innovative solutions . We work across Maine to restore rivers and 
streams, partner with fishermen in the Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish popul ations . 
 
The most recent IPCC report now advises  that we need to achieve net zero emissions by 2040 , 
instead of  2050 . Several decarbonization studies  in the region  suggest  that New England  will 
need between 40 and 50 GW of offshore wind to reach net zero by 2050.  According to the 
DNV analyses conducted for the Governors Energy Office , New England will need up to 12 
GW of offshore wind from the Gulf of Maine with  Maine ’s energy needs account ing for 
approximately 3GW . This is  in addition to other renewable sources to meet our state  
decarbonization  goals and support our regional commitment s. Given these needs, LD 1895 
is a direct opportunity for the people of Maine to express, in law, how we would like to see 
this new and emerging industry develop ed as we work towards meeting these goals.  TNC 
strongly believe s that long -term sustainability will require us t o tho ughtfully  balance 
competing uses for the benefit of all and with a focus on minimizing cumulative 
impacts.  As we go forward it will also be important to maintain flexibility to ensure 
coordination and optimize the benefits for all of Maine.  
  
TNC supports this bill  in its entirety, but I want to highlight  specific environmental 
considerations that our organization  believes will provide the most benefits to Maine : 
 
1) Procurement – Weighting Criteria  
LD 1895 outlines the process by which a series of phased competitive solicitations would 
be conducted to procure offshore wind energy. It directs the PUC  to use criteria that 
“balances benefits to ratepayers, the economic development benefits and benefits to 
communities and the overall benefits to the State’s economy and natural resources. It 
does this by assigning weights to each category – and specifically assigning a weight of 
25% to economic and community benefits and a weight of 15% to natural resource  
benefits.  This creates incentives for developers to pursue project s that  that support 
environmentally responsible offshore wind development alongside economic development 
and ratepayer benefits.  
 
2) Bid Requirements   
TNC broadly supports the comprehensive bi d requirements outlined in this section that 
account for mitigation plans, a consultation and equity plan, a workforce development 
plan, and a specific fishing communities investment plan. We specifically support:  
i) Item F - requiring a description of how the  proposed project will interconnect to the 
regional grid in the bid.  
Ensuring a project developer considers existing and planned grid and transmission 
facilities is a key aspect of bigger picture planning. If regional transmission 
infrastructure becomes available, urging a selected offshore wind project to 
connect to it would increase grid reliability and efficiency while decreasing costs 
and impacts of transmission of offshore wind power.  
ii) Item H – requirin g a $10,000 per megawatt of the project’s capacity to the Offshore 
Wind Research Consortium Fund.  
The Offshore Wind Research Consortium is using a broad stakeholder approach to 
prioritize the most pressing research needs  to understand  offshore wind in Main e. It 
is critical to support the  long -term funding for the consortium to continue this work  
and take on the new responsibilities outlined in this bill . 
 
3) Wildlife, fisheries , and environmental mitigation plan requirements.  
TNC supports the comprehensive out line of wildlife, fisheries, and marine environment 
mitigation plans in this section. We appreciate the broad range of considerations including  
threatened or endangered species, coastal and marine habitats and ecosystems, non -
commercial fisheries, and comm ercial and recreational fishing.  LD 1895 also requires p re- 
and post -construction monitoring , which  is critical to better understanding floating 
offshore wind . TNC is  especially encouraged by the provision to consider  ecological 
benefits provided by the floating wind project s through project design, enhanced 
ecosystem services, or habitat creation.  We believe this consideration will incentivize 
develop ers to not only mitigate impacts but also  use innovative approaches that will 
support  ecological resilience  of the Gulf of Maine.  
 
4) Expansion of the Maine Offshore Wind Research consortium.   
TNC supports  the proposed expansion of both the scope and the makeup of the Research 
Consortium Advisory Board. As a member of the Advisory Board, I would ask that  the EUT 
consider adding s ocial science  and economic  expertise to the expanded list . We currently 
have a social scientist on the Advisory Board and the group has identified that economic 
expertise will be valuable to the work of the Consortium moving forwa rd.  
 
TNC urges the committee to support LD 1895 . Thank you for the opportunity to comment and 
I am available to answer questions at any time.  
