Testimony from Kimberly Tobias, in Support of L.D. 1895, "An Act Regarding the 
Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind Resources” 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology. My name is Kimberly Tobias and I’m here today to 
speak in favor of L.D. 1895.  I am a member of the International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers Local 1253 and a resident of Monroe. 
 
I’ve been working as an apprentice electrician since 2019 and I’m nearly ready to get my 
journeyman’s license. In that time, I’ve done a variety of work. One thing that I’ve done 
very little of is new industrial work. In Maine, we generally do industrial work on old 
industry. Paper mills built a century ago come to mind. But now we’re looking at a 
totally new industry, not just for Maine, but for the US! Floating offshore wind isn’t 
being done, but it’s about to happen and we need to ensure that it happens the right 
way. 
 
When any construction worker gets to a new jobsite she or he begins putting 
themselves out of a job from day one. It’s the nature of the work. The faster and more 
efficient we are, the sooner the job will end. If there isn’t more work to do then we take 
a lay-off. The size and scale of offshore wind will put a lot of people to work for a long, 
long time. To me this means that I use my daycare slot every week. Because if you have 
kids, you know that whether or not you use the slot you still have to pay for it if you 
want to keep it. For me this means that I’d have health insurance for me and my 3 kids 
at all times, not just when the work picture is good. 
 
And to get that kind of long term job security doing something that actually gives me 
hope for my kids future the way offshore wind does is a huge bonus. Maine has put up a 
lot of solar, but as my husband says, “Everybody wants electricity, but no one wants to 
see it being generated”. We’re already seeing pushback to solar farms, and no one 
wants to distract from the beauty Maine has to offer. Offshore wind will help us 
transition to clean energy and for nearly all Mainers, they’ll never see a turbine creating 
the electricity that will power their cars, their heat, their ovens, and the rest of their 
lives. 
 
And in Maine, people spend money where they make it. If we make the jobs building 
offshore wind the best they can be, it will benefit grocery stores, restaurants, roofers, 
realtors, car dealerships, and anyone else who is part of the local economy. It won’t just 
be the construction workers who benefit. Everyone will win. 
 
To finish up, I’ve made a construction career out of piecing things together: I’ve pieced 
together jobs from one to the next, I’ve pieced together the work of electricians from 
decades ago to get machines running again, and now I have the chance to do brand new 
work and gain skills I'll carry throughout my career. I have the opportunity to create 
something new for me, for Maine, and for all of our families. 
 
Thanks for listening, and please support LD 1895. 
