 
Testimony from Mike McGuigan, in Support of L.D. 1895, "An Act Regarding the 
Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind Resources” 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, my name is Mike McGuigan and I’m here today to 
speak in favor of L.D. 1895. I’m a Business Rep/Organizer with the Carpenters Union, I 
am a member of local 352, I represent Maine carpenters in locals 349 and 352 and I live in 
Windham.  
 
The first thing I’d like to talk about is the fact that we are in a crisis that will make life very 
difficult for our children and our children’s children. Global warming is happening and if 
we don’t start doing big things to change it then we have failed our future generations. This 
project is a huge step in the right direction to ensure we can have a future that looks bright, 
and we keep our fragile planet safe from global warming.  
 
I have been working in Maine as an organizer in the Carpenter’s Union for almost 12 years. 
During this time, I have done a lot of organizing around the underground economy in metal 
frame and drywall on big commercial projects. In the open shop there is no representation 
for workers, unfortunately people get taken advantage of. People are not trained properly 
so safety conditions are not good. They wind up living in terrible living conditions and are 
often mistreated, underpaid or not paid at all. In the open shop there is rampant 
misclassification of workers on jobs including state certified jobs. Tax fraud is happening 
on just about every commercial open shop project in Maine.  
 
If we pass this bill, we can avoid all the issues with misclassification, all union contractors 
pay all their workers legally with a great benefit package that includes health care and 
retirement. If we pass this bill, it ensures that these projects will be built with the utmost 
professionalism and safety because it will be done by legitimate union contractors. With 
that, I ask you to please support LD 1895. Thank you! 
