                         
ACP and RENEW NE Testimon y 1 
 
May 18, 2023  
 
The American Clean Power Association and Renew Northe ast t estimony in support of:  
LD 1895, SP0766 – An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from  Offsh ore Wind Resources  
 
Chairma n Lawrence and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology :  
  
The American Clean Power Association (ACP)  and RENEW Northeast are clean power trade associations  
uniting the power of wind, solar, transmission and storage compa nies and their allied industries, to 
champion policies that enable the growth of renewable energy in the  Northeast and across the  United 
States .  
   
Offshore wind is America’s next major energy source,  representin g a generational opportunity to create 
jobs and bolster the economy. It is an abundant clean energy solution for large population center s, and  
a massive opportunity for economic growth. For Maine to meet state clean energy policy commitments 
and secure its place as a first -in-the-nation supply chai n hub on the east coast , the state wi ll need a 
strong development pipeline in place for manufacturing, operations and maintenance, and construction. 
The development of this pipeline is dependent on the opportunities to build and the proximity to 
projects i n the Gulf of Maine.    
  
Maine’s energy, economic, and environmental priorities  would be  directly supported by new offshore 
wind lease areas and  setting a n offshore  wind target  of 2. 8 gigawatts (GW) will catalyze future industry 
investment.    
  
Building the U.S. offshore wind project pipeline will also revitalize port communities and enhance critical 
port infrastructure.  We strongly support the legislation put  forward  by Sen. Curry  in this regard.  The 
offshore wind industry is investing billions of dollars in a domestic supply  chain, including investments in 
fabrication facilities, port upgrades, vessels, and workforce training .  
   
Recently passed legislation at the federal level – the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) – has put America on a 
path to reducing economy -wide emissions  40 percent below 2005 levels by 2030 while creating 550,000 
new clean energy jobs. The IRA is a critical part of creating America’s clean energy future and keeps the 
U.S. within reach of President Biden’s climate goals .  
   
We thank Senator Lawrence for t he introduction of thi s legislatio n which would  ensur e Maine is well -
positioned to lead on offshore win d – capturing jobs and investment on the coast and inlan d. The bill 
will also advance state goals on carbo n reduction and ensure any floating offshore wi nd development 
occurs in a way that will  protect critical marine habitats and fisheries.    
  
Together, the American Clean Power Association and RENEW Northeast represent all current 
leaseholders on the East Coast and many companies looking to develop float ing projects. On behalf of 
our members, we respectfully raise a  primary area  of concer n in the bil l.   
  
                         
ACP and RENEW NE Testimon y 2 
 
Location is a Cost Drive r  
This legislation offers a  thoughtful  carro t in the form of tax incentive s for developers who choose to  
build projects outside Lobster Management Areas 1 (LMA 1) and the western part of Lobster 
Mana gement Area  3.   
  
We strongly agre e that areas with the most intensive fishing activitie s should not b e available for 
leasin g. The research today  indicate s that there is  very littl e overlap between the nation’s most 
successful fishery and where wind speeds start to increase . However, we are keenly aware that the data 
is lackin g and would urge the committee  to consider holding off on a complete exclusion (or adopting 
provisions in this bill which would achieve  a similar  outcome ) for several reasons :  
• While floating offshore wind i s rapidly scaling up in Europe and Asia, it i s severa l years away 
from commercial deployment in the Gulf of Main e– there is opportunity for  additiona l data  
gatherin g from the first wave of project s to ensure Maine fisheries are protected.  Indeed, some 
of our members have already been studying ways to improve coexistence of floating wind and 
fisheries in Europ e.  Our commitment to the State of Maine is to con tinue  engagin g in this 
conversation through the BOEM proces s. If the data  indicates all of LMA 1 is n ot suitab le for 
development, we will support that assertion .  
• If there are areas within the bounds of LMA 1 where the federal Bureau of Ocean Energy 
Manage ment finds to not  conflict wit h lobstering or other commercial fishing activiti es, the  
shallower  water depth and proximity to  onshore interconnection  could mean significant savings 
to rate payers.    
 
We urge caution – passage of this legislation without ful l consideration of cost impacts an d zeroing out 
areas with good, affordabl e development potential could signal to federal regulators that a smaller lease 
area is a  priority,  limiting options for  locatin g federal  lease area s.  This could result in not enoug h 
projects to support an onshore supply chain and the jobs  that creates,  failing to captur e economies of 
scale, and falling short of  the region’s current and projected clean energy goals .  
  
Coexistence is Possibl e  
The industry respectfully requests the opportunity for collaboration and conversatio n before decisions 
are made about where development can occu r. In the past, we hav e demonstrate d our commitment to 
partnership when we have a seat at the table.  Between 200 9 and 201 5, BOEM reduced the  areas under 
consideration for leasing off  Massachusetts  by over 50% following  feedback and concerns from fishing 
communitie s. ACP member companies then removed  anothe r 30% of the potential energy production of 
their lease areas to  ensure  fisherme n could navigate safel y through projec t area s.   
  
The deployment of offshore wind  can be  compatible with other ocean users, including commercial  
fisherme n, and the science bears  that out.  Through  thorough and ongoing analysis from U.S. state and 
federal regulators  we’r e working collaboratively to site projects cost -effectively and safely. Europe and 
the U.K. have over  30 years of experience with offshore wind and fisheries coexis tence. For example, the 
Holderness Fishing Industry Group and offshore wind company Orsted  conducte d a six-year scientific 
study that found that the construction and operation of a U.K. wind farm near one of the largest 
                         
ACP and RENEW NE Testimon y 3 
 
European commercial fishing grounds for European lobster did not have a significant negative impact on 
the catch rate and economic return f rom lobsters.    
  
Structures in the water can also create habitat for benthic organisms, including commercially important 
fish and invertebrates, which can have benefits to marine communities and some fisheries. Finally, 
climate change has been predicted t o potentially have dramatic effects on the marine environment. 
These effects include the disruption of prey distributions, decreas ed biodiversity, and changes in habitat 
availability. We know that climate variability will result in fishing employment losse s. As lobsters move 
north and east to colder water s, we may continue to see the impacts of climate chang e.   
  
Maine’s phased -in, research -focused approach means that commercial fishing and offshore wind can do 
more than simply coexist in the Gulf of Maine . ACP recognizes that fisheries, and the communities who 
rely on them, are at the heart of the Gulf of Maine region, historically, economically, and socially. We 
believe economic gains from offshore wind and its close partnership with coastal communities w ill yield 
dividends, while the benefits of addressing the climate crisis and limiting warming in ocean waters will 
help preserve fisheries and the region’s way of life. In comments to BOEM, ACP encouraged the agency 
to consider call areas that avoid the mo st productive fishing grounds, while still being large enough to  
provid e flexibility to lease areas that  provide fo r more than 10 GW of commercially  viabl e offshore wind 
generating capacity .  
   
The work of the Fisheries and Environment and Wildlife Workin g Groups has resulted in strategies that 
will make it possible for Maine to pursue offshore wind leasing while still preserving healthy fisheries 
and other natural resources in the Gulf of Maine – all facing impacts from climate change. ACP and 
RENEW North east pledge to work alongside other ocean users, coastal communities, environmental 
groups, and federal, state, and regional partners to implement offshore wind in a collaborative manner 
to achieve the shared goals outlined in the  Roadma p.  
  
Maine's Balan ced Approach is Ke y  
Maine  is the nationa l leader  in their approac h to offshor e wind and fisheries protectio n. The state’s 
careful  and balance d approach to offshore wind development in federal water s include s:  
• A prohibition o n offshore win d in state  water s enshrines important protection s for th e lobster 
industry,  other  fisherie s and recreational activities.    
• The establishment of  the Offshore Wind Research Consortium  Maine , which w ill leverag e 
existing work and leading coordination with stat e agencies, regional  publi c and private entities, 
such as the Regional Wildlife Science Collaborative for Offshore Wind, the Northeast Data 
Portal, and the Responsible Offshore Science Alliance. This framework and expansion of 
research and data  gathering and analysis sets Maine up for continued monitori ng, research, and 
engagement which we strongly support .  
• Finally, the inclusive and robust stakeholder process to develop th e Maine Offshore Win d 
Roadmap  will ensure that offshore wind development i s cost effectiv e, will build an industry 
floating hub for the east coast, and will prioritiz e a stable and predictable investment 
environmen t.   
  
                         
ACP and RENEW NE Testimon y 4 
 
A balanced approach to where offshore wind leasing is possible should be applied to this legislation too. 
Without it, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management may decide to eliminat e the remaining portions of 
LMA 1 which still overlap with their  Call Area . Maine is committed to a carbon -neutral future and has 
built a solid foundation to reach 30,000 clean energy jobs in Maine by 2030. To get there – we need a 
market, and a market will not exist without robust offshore wind leasing in the Gulf of Maine – ideally 
with space to build enough projects to help power the state and the region .  
  
Incredible Potential in the Gulf of Main e  
The Gulf of Maine has the best wind potent ial on the entire East Coas t. With only a few floating offshore 
wind projects currently deployed globally, robust leasing in the Gulf of Maine will help position the U.S. 
to be a global leader in floating offshore wind and reap the benefits of thousands of  jobs in the new 
energy economy .   
  
A National Renew able Energy Laboratory  analysis of offshore wind development found that a single 600 
MW offshore wind facility “could support approximately 4,470 jobs and $445 million in GDP during 
construction and an ongoing 150 jobs and $14 million annually from operation and ma intenance labor, 
materials, and services. ”   
  
Maine’s onshore wind energy workforce has seen  strong growt h in recent years; between 2016 and 
2020 the number of workers grew by 7.1%. The sector also  demonstrate d resiliency through the 
pandemic, growing 4% between 2019 and 2020. Offshore wind has the potential to add  substantially t o 
Maine’s economy, generating new opportunities for the current workforce and future generations.     
  
Floating offshore wind is  once -in-a-generation opportunity to  advance scie nce pioneered in Maine, to  
build out America’s clean energy resource s in an affordable  way an d is an investment in US worker s and 
national energy securit y.   
  
On behalf of the members of the American Clean Power Association and RENEW Northeast, we strongly 
urge the committee to adopt a careful and considered approach to ensure that offshore wind in the Gulf 
of Maine means a thriving industry on the shores of Mai ne.  
  
Respectfully,    
  
  
Moira R. Cypher s     Francis Pullar o  
Eastern Region State Affair s    Executive Directo r  
The American Clean Power Associatio n   RENEW Northeas t   
MCyphers@cleanpower.or g    FPullar o@renew -ne.or g  
(301) 318 -4220      (646) 734 -8768     
 
