 
 
 
 
 
 
Maine Joint Committee on Energy , Utilities , and Technology  
Testimony on LD 1895  
 
The New England Power Generators Association (NEPGA)1 appreciates the opportunity  to 
provide written testimony  on LD 1895 , An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from 
Offshore Wind Resources . NEPGA appreciates  Maine’s  objective  of addressing climate change 
and achieving greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction mandates. To meet these 
objectives , NEPGA supports competitive , market -driven mechanisms that best balance cost, 
reliability, and necessary investments to meet the climate challen ge. Carve outs for individual 
technologies or resource types, however, undermine these goals and put at serious risk the 
cost-efficiency and reliability investments that must underlie energy and environmental policies.  
 
For that reason, NEPGA cautions that  long-term contracting and other state programs harm 
New England’s  competitive wholesale electricity markets  and incentivize  the premature 
retirement of generating capacity needed for reliability. Instead, to efficiently and cost -effectively 
meet its decar bonization mandates and grow its clean -energy economy, NEPGA urges Maine  to 
build on collaborative efforts with other New England states to identify mechanisms that 
meaningfully price environmental attributes in the wholesale electricity markets. As numerous 
studies have indicated, including that by ISO New England, the best, most efficient way forward 
is putting a meaningful price on carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions . 
 
NEPGA is the trade association that represen ts competitive electric generating  companies in 
New England. NEPGA’s member companies account for over 90% of all  generating capacity 
throughout New England – with approximately  3,500 MW in Main e – and own and operate over 
7,500 MW of renewable and zero-carbon resources  throughout the region. NEPGA companies 
provide well -paying, highly skilled jobs to the  Maine  workforce, pay millions of dollars in taxes to 
the state  and its  cities and towns, and provide millions of dollars more in income taxes paid by 
emplo yees.  
 
The Competitive Wholesale Electricity Markets  
For more than 20 years, Maine  has relied on competitive wholesale electricity markets to  
produce a reliable supply of electricity at least cost. Market forces drive innovation and  
efficiencies, providing  not only considerable value to the State ’s consumers,  but also critical 
support to Maine ’ economy. The competitive markets have also ensured sufficient electricity 
supplies to meet future  demand needs with 9,627 MW of new generation capacity developed at 
historically low  prices.2 Thes e investments are the result of market price signals that incentivize 
investment in facilities  – both new and existing – where and when they are needed, ensuring the 
region will  have firm, reliable energy in future years. The competitive markets accomplish this  
without exposing Maine’s consumers to the risk of cost overruns or poor  investment choices.  
 
Market competition has also helped cut GHG emissions in Maine  and in the  other New England 
states, resulting in a cl eaner, more efficient fleet of generating  resources. Annual CO2 
emissions from fossil fuel combustion in Maine’s electric power sector have decreased by 91% 
 
1 The comments expressed herein represent those of NEPGA as an organization, but not necessarily  
those of any particular member.  
2 https://www.iso -ne.com/about/key -stats/markets#fcaresults  
since they peaked in 2002 , largely by replacing high carbon fuels with lower carbon energy 
sources, primarily natural gas and renewable sources, according to  state of Maine estimates.3 
 
Aligning the Competitive Markets with Maine ’ Laws and Policies  
Maine  and the other New England states are poised to add unprecedented  amounts of 
renewable resources through long -term contracting and other state  programs over the next 
several years. Analysis conducted in 2018 found that state -supported resources are on tra ck to 
comprise over 50% of the region’s generation mix  by 2027 – an amount that is clearly 
understated given recent legislation requiring more  out-of-market procurements. These state -
supported resources impact the region’s competitive wholesale electricity  markets in two ways.  
 
First, the introduction of state -supported resources will displace  existing merchant ones, 
including those that will be needed for their unique reliability  aspects as well as those that are 
cost-effectively meeting the State ’s decar bonization goals today. Second, because state -
supported resources receive  revenue outside the market, they will likely bid into the Energy 
Market as price takers  (i.e., at $0/MWh), putting downward pressure on the Energy Market 
prices that  merchant generat ors rely upon to continue operations and make capital investments 
in existing facilities. These resources operate in the market without reven ue or cost  guarantees 
and without consumer -backed long -term contracts, leaving them reliant on a  fair and 
competiti ve market. Price suppression in the market has very real  consequences for the viability 
of these facilities to continue to reliably supply  Maine  and the region with electricity and to 
enable a decarbonized future.  
 
It is also important to appreciate that a contract for a particular resource does not guarantee that 
the resource will be built at the price agreed to. For example, two major offshore wind 
developers entered into two, 20 -year, multi -billion dollar contr acts with Massachusetts electric 
distribution companies in spring 2022 only to back out of them in the fall, saying the  prices 
agreed to were not high enough.4 Given post -pandemic supply chain challenges and persistent 
inflation, this is likely the least appropriate time to lock consumers into multi -decade contracts.  
 
Rather than continue on a path of subsidies, as LD 1895 propose s, the goal should be to design 
the next generation of the region’s wholesale  electricity market : A market that maintains the c ost 
and reliability benefits of the  competitive markets but meaningfully accounts for the carbon 
intensity of a given  resource – an element that is currently missing from today’s wholesale 
markets. This  future market design must continue to prioritize reli ability by recognizing the value 
of different fast, flexible resources that can address peak demand and balance the system,  
especially as more weather -dependent renewables, like wind and solar, enter the  system.  
 
Recent studies examining the changing energ y landscape in New England confirm the  need to 
preserve reliability services as the regional system evolves to include more  weather -dependent 
resources. A report from Energy + Environmental Economics (E3)  and Energy Futures Initiative 
(EFI), led by former U.S. Secretary of Energy Ernest  Moniz, finds that current New England 
states’ laws to decarbonize across the economy  will require addition al large amounts of wind, 
solar, and battery storage resources,  “complemented by firm capacity to provide generation 
during extended periods of low  wind and solar availability. Firm capacity includes natural gas 
power plants, nuclear,  hydrogen generation, or other yet -to-be commercialized options such as 
long-duration  storage.”5  
 
Given these complexities, Maine ’ energy and decarbonization objective s cannot  and should not 
be met by a single -state, out -of-market solution. NEPGA and  other stakeholders are now 
 
3 https://www.maine.gov/dep/news/news.html?id=8474333  
4 https://commonwealthmagazine.org/energy/mass -offsh ore-wind-developers -stalling -for-time/  
5https://static1.squarespace.com/static/58ec1 23cb3db2bd94e057628/t/5fd2997d26324029a116f9b4/1607637387632/
E3+EFI_Report+New+England+Reliability+Under+Deep+Decarbonization_Full+Report_November_2020.pdf   
actively working on developing a long -term solution to help  Maine  and the ot her New England 
states meet their energy and climate -related  obligations, including the state -led New England 
Energy Vision process, which began  in late 2020 .6 These ongoing regional forums are focused 
on designing a wholesale  market that can leverage the  cost and reliability benefits of the 
competitive markets  while also addressing the clean energy and decarbonization objectives 
underlying LD 1895.  Working regionally to develop  market -based mechanisms to achieve state 
environmental objectives can help con tinue  the remarkable benefits of the wholesale electricity 
markets over the last 20 years, while  addressing the critical decarbonization challenges that lie 
ahead.  
 
To achieve substantial carbon emissions reductions, Maine  must also take a holistic approach 
that links  economic sectors an d supports broad electrification of transportation and buildings,  
which make up the bulk of the state’s  emissions today. To meet this challenge in a  harmonized 
manner, NEPGA has long advocated for a multi -sector carbon price, one  that not only 
addresses power sector emissions, but also those from transportation  and buildings. There may 
be other market -based solutions for meeting Maine ’s climate mandates, and NEPGA is 
committed to playing a constructive role in state and  regional discussions for the one that best 
meets those needs.  The alternative is continued reliance on single -state solutions that ad dress 
only one  source of the state’s overall emissions and impose additional costs and risks on  Maine ’ 
ratepayers. Mandates such as long -term contra cting of renewables carve up the wholesale 
markets, displacing opportunities for competitive  resources to help Maine  meet its 
decarbonization goals reliably and at the least  cost. Long -term contracting also exposes Maine  
consumers  to the risk of  paying for  investments that may appear innovative and cost -effective 
today but could  prove outdated, ineffici ent, and costly in the future. The path forward is a 
challenging  one, but there is an opportunity to chart a course that maintains the benefits of the  
compet itive markets coupled with the promise of future innovations and enhancements  
to Maine ’ clean energy economy.  
 
Conclusion  
As the Committee reviews these bills, NEPGA asks that it give current regional efforts  an 
opportunity to develop a wholesale market de sign that can help Maine  implement its clean 
energy and decarbonization mandates, rather than committing  consumers  to back costly long -
term contracts and other programs. NEPGA remains  committed to working with Maine  and 
others to develop a solution tha t harnesses the competitive markets to attract investment in 
clean energy resources,  further reduce CO2 emissions, and maintain system reliability, all at 
competitive market  pricing.  NEPGA is ready to provide the Committee with more information as 
needed. Thank  you for the opportunity to provide this testimony.  
 
May 18, 2023  
 
6 https://new englandenergyvision.com/   
 
