  Scaling Renewable Energy  
 
 
 
401 Edgewater Place, Suite 680 | Wakefield, MA 01880 | T: 781 -683-0711 | info@anbaric.com | anbaric.com  
 
May 18th, 2023  
 
Anbaric Testimony on L.D. 1895  
Chair Lawrence, Chair Zeigler , and members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology  Committee:  
Anbaric Development Partners (Anbaric) appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony in support of 
L.D. 1895 , An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind Resources  and to suggest 
revisions to enhance regional coordination.  Anbaric  develops electric transmission  projects that supply 
renewable energy to customers and projects that optimize the power grid using energy storage.  Anbaric 
is developing multiple projects in the Northeast, including projects to interconnect offshore wind from 
the Gulf of Maine . 
Offshore wind holds great promise for Maine and the region, and collaborating with other New England 
states to deploy offshore wind will reduce consumer costs and im pacts on the environment, on fisheries 
and on coastal communities.  L.D. 1895 recognizes and encourages multi -state coordination in Section 
7(1)(H), requiring that the Governor’s Energy Office  (GEO)  and commission:  
“Collaborate with other states' entities  when appropriate on regional issues including, but not 
limited to, transmission and distribution infrastructure and energy procurement as well as 
research and monitoring relating to wildlife, fisheries and the Gulf of Maine ecosystem;”  
Ensure Flexibility to Enable Regional Coordination  
In order to realize the benefits of regional coordination  the GEO should be provided discretion to 
develop a schedule for solicitation  of offshore wind generation and transmission  that aligns with multi -
state or regional planning and procurement processes.  Section 8(1)(C) of L.D. 1895 requires that 
offshore wind generation solicitations occur every 24 months .  This rigid requirement could put Maine 
out-of-cycle with other states, which would complicate coordination and limit competition.  As a 
cautionary example, following legislative direction Rhode Island recently issued an offshore wind 
solicitation in isolation from other states and received responses from only one bidder.i   
A rigid procurement calendar could also complicate efforts to secure  federal funding for offshore wind 
transmission .  Through  the Joint State Innovation Partnership for Offshore Wind (the “Joint 
Partnership”) Maine and other New England states submitted an initial application to the Department of 
Energyii requesting  $250 million for each of three shared offshore wind transmission systems.  Full 
applications are due May 19th, and Massachusetts’ requirement to issue a generation solicitation every  
24 months complicates submission of a full proposal by creating uncertainty about the capacity, 
interconnection location and transmission needs of offshore wind projects that Massachusetts may 
select  in its current generation solicitation .   
It additional ly bears noting that Massachusetts is the only state with a rigid offshore wind procurement 
schedule set in statute.  In both New Jerseyiii and New Yorkiv the executive branch was given discretion 
to achieve an overall procurement target, enabling both stat es to develop synchronized offshore wind 
generation and transmission procurement processes.  New Jersey’s offshore wind procurement 
schedule has already been amended once, and the state  further  commits to : 
“[C]ontinue  to evaluate each forthcoming planned solicitation, as detailed in the OSW 
Solicitation  Schedule.   NJBPU will consider a number of factors that could influence the timing 
and the OSW capacity to be procured including, but not limited to, transmission solut ions and 
  Scaling Renewable Energy  
 
 
 
401 Edgewater Place, Suite 680 | Wakefield, MA 01880 | T: 781 -683-0711 | info@anbaric.com | anbaric.com  
 
development schedule, the status of additional lease areas, permitting, port readiness, 
establishment of a supply chain, workforce training, and cost trends.”v 
As an alternative  to the current language in L.D. 1895, S ection 8(1)(C) could encourag e regional 
coordination explicitly and provide the GEO flexibility to achieve the objective , as follows :    
C. The phased procurement schedule for solicitation of floating extraterritorial wind projects or 
portions of projects must facilitate alignment with p rocurements of floating extraterritorial wind 
projects and transmission infrastructure conducted by other states or an entity  procuring on 
behalf of states ensure that any subsequent solicitation occurs within 24 months of a previous 
solicitation . 
Maintaining the overall offshore wind deployment targets of 1,000 MW by 2030 and 2,800 MW by 2035 
will ensure that Maine achieves offshore wind goals  without constraining regional coordination . 
Aligning Transmission and Offshore Wind Procurement  
Section 9 of L.D. 1895 requires the commission to solicit  transmission  for offshore wind , and in doing so 
provides a key too l for Maine  to achieve offshore wind  targets most cost effectively  and with least 
adverse impact .  Analysis from the Brattle Group released earlier this year found that planning 
transmission to achieve the Biden Administration’s 100 GW offshore wind goal would produce $20 
billion in savings, cut ocean cabling by half, and reduce shore crossings and onshore upgrades by 60 -
70%.vi   
In order to realize the benefits of independent transmission procurement, and to ensure alignment with 
generation procurement, the phased procurement schedule required in Section 8(1)(A) could be 
expanded to include transmission , as follows : 
A. The Governor’s Energy Office shall establish a phased procurement schedule for floating 
extraterritorial wind projects under this section and for transmission service to serve offshore 
wind power projects procured under Section 9  no later than January 1, 2025.  
Additional Benefits  of Independent Transmission  
Independent offshore transmission will increase competition between offshore wind developers, level  
the playing  field between leaseholders nearer and farther from shore and driv e down prices.  In Europe, 
strategic investments in transmission have enabled countries such as the Netherlands to deploy offshore 
wind without subsidies or utility -backed contracts.vii   
Planned transmission can additionally serve as a platform for third -party purchases of renewable energy 
through power purchase agreements (PPAs), thus enabling financing and deployment of offshore wind 
without relying on state -led procurements.  In Texas, strategic investments in transmission through the 
Competitive Renewable Energy Zone (CREZ) program have enabled over 2,000MW of onshore wind 
energy PPAs from 22 corporate buyers.viii  In the Netherlands planned transmission has enabled 
corporate PPAs for offshore wind.ix  
Strategic investment in transmission can enable market -driven offshore wind deployment by large 
corporate and non -profit entities in the Northeast seeking local rene wables to meet sustainability 
commitments.  For offshore wind in particular , independent planned transmission is a necessary 
platform to enable small and mid -sized procurements by third -party buyers.  High voltage alternating 
current (HVAC) transmission sy stems are most economical in the 300MW to 500MW range, and high 
voltage direct current (HVDC) systems are most economical in the 1000MW to 2000MW range, both of 
  Scaling Renewable Energy  
 
 
 
401 Edgewater Place, Suite 680 | Wakefield, MA 01880 | T: 781 -683-0711 | info@anbaric.com | anbaric.com  
 
which are far larger than most third -party buyer s can support.  However, by making transmission  
available to serve as a platform for procurement, states can enable third -party purchases  that in 
aggregate will fully utilize new transmission lines,  and in doing so unlock a large source of demand.  
Offshore wind can play a critical role in achieving Mai ne’s energy and climate objectives and in 
supporting local economic activity.  Region coordination will  reduce the costs and impacts of offshore 
wind deployment .  Anbaric appreciates the opportunity to provide recommendations to facilitate 
regional coordi nation and rationalize the buildout of transmission needed to integrate offshore wind.  
 
 
Peter Shattuck  
President, New England  
pshattuck@anbaric.com  
 
 
Endnotes : 
 
i See: https://www.bostonglobe.com/2023/03/17/metro/ri -utility -request -yields -single -bid-offshore -wind -power/    
ii Available at: https://newenglandenergyvision.com/new -england -states -transmission -initiative/   
iii New Jersey’s offshore wind solicitation schedul e is available at: https://www.njcleanenergy.com/renewable -
energy/programs/nj -offshore -wind/solicitations   
iv New York’s offshore wind solicitation schedule is available at: https://www.nyserda.ny.gov/All -
Programs/Offshore -Wind/Focus -Areas/Offshore -Wind -Solicitations   
v Supra, note iii.  
vi Available at: https://www.brattle.com/insights -events/publications/brattle -consult ants -highlight -the-benefits -of-
collaborative -planning -process -for-offshore -wind -transmission -in-new -report/   
vii See https://www.government.nl/latest/news/2019/07/10/vattenfall -to-build -second -unsubsidised -dutch -
offshore -wind -farm  
viii See Corporate Renewable Procurement and Transmission Planning, 2019, available at:  
https://windsolaralliance.org/wp -content/uploads/2018/10/Corporates -Renewable -Procurement -and-
Transmission -Report -FINAL.pdf  
ix See: https://cleantechnica.com/2019/05/28/microsoft -announces -new -offshore -wind -energy -agreement -in-the-
netherlands/  

Peter Shattuck
Anbaric Development Partners
LD 1895
On behalf of the transmission developer Anbaric Development Partners I submit this 
testimony recommending approaches to facilitate coordination with other states on 
offshore wind transmission development.
