Testimony from Phillip Joseph, in Support of L.D. 1895, “An Act 
Regarding the Procurement of Energy ﬁom Offshore Wind Resources ” 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, my narne is Phillip 
Joseph. I’m a 5"’ Year electrical apprentice with IBEW L.U. 567 and I’m here 
today to speak in favor of L.D. 1895. 
Power infrastructure is what makes our way of life possible; its 
importance cannot be overstated. The ever—present question of how best to 
provide our power hasn’t faded over time, only increased in complexity and 
urgency. As we Mamers seek to answer this question, let’s strive towarda 
solution that sets safety, our high ethical standard, and local Mainers at its 
core. To that end, I offer my story. 
Before joining the IBEW, I Worked for a non-union contractor. At the 
company, management did everything they could to obstruct pay 
transparency. As a result, I was paid less than other employees with the same 
job title and description I had, despite my having more experience and 
responsibility. They were able to commit this and many other abuses because 
my employer diligently cultivated an atmosphere of silence. If they wanted to 
pay you unfairly, they could. If they wanted you to complete a task in an 
unreasonable or unsafe manner, you did. And all this in silence because if not,
the repercussions were severe. There were no third parties or representatives 
present to ensure that we were being treated lawfully and most of us had no 
feasible recourse in the event of retaliation. 
While Working in that enviromnent I performed tasks which nearly cost 
me my life on more than one occasion. And for What? The product We produced 
was subpar, we didn’t have a formal apprenticeship program so there was very 
little knowledge of and respect for the electrical code, and people got hurt. All 
this so my employers could cut labor costs. The company wanted to save on 
labor, so the workers paid the price. 
Since joining the union, I’ve been able to look with pride at cleaner, safer 
jobsites where stewards and safety staff ensure that workers are treated fairly, 
and job hazards are dealt with according to rigorous procedure. Our wages are 
appropriate and administered transparently. When Brothers see something 
wrong, they make their voices heard. Because of this and a well-structured 
apprenticeship, workers are more knowledgeable, content, and focused. Tasks 
are completed rapidly and correctly with quality workmanship the first time. 
And, union constitution bound to pI'10I‘l13lZ6 local hires, Mainers have the 
greatest access to these opportunities. 
As we continue to face the big question of how to supply Maine’s growing 
power needs, bills like this one that ﬁrmly defend the rights of Mainers to
safety in the Workplace, fair pay, and gainful employment opportunities are 
indispensable. LD 1895 ensures these rights to every Worker, umon or non- 
union, operating under a labor agreement on installations Withm its purv1evv 
Thank you for your time.
