Sam Saltonstall
Brunswick
LD 1895
Thanks for giving me the opportunity to advocate for LD 1895, which I was given to 
understand may be a topic in a work session this coming week.  
My name is Sam Saltonstall and I live in Brunswick.  I am Citizens' Climate Lobby's 
Maine MidCoast South Chapter Leader, former Board President of Windowdressers, 
the insulating window insert nonprofit, and winner of NRCM's 2021 People's Choice 
Award.  
I tested the wind resource on Peaks Island with a meteorological tower provided at no 
cost by the University of Maine over a decade ago, have visited the Advanced 
Composite Center in Orono, and have a deep and abiding interest in seeing offshore 
wind realized in the Gulf of Maine as quickly as possible, given the urgency of 
mitigating a climate that is changing much too fast.
From what I understand, LD 1895 has been prepared with great care to ensure Maine 
is an important, collaborative player in the offshore wind effort.  Scheduling energy 
procurement from the turbines to be deployed is of extreme importance - this aspect 
of the bill is critical move in the effort to benefit Maine as offshore wind moves 
forward with or without us.  
Given that the turbines will be situated where they will do little if any damage to the 
fisheries so important to our State, and that provisions are written into the bill to 
continue research and mitigate any potentially negative impacts to birds and other 
organisms, I am impressed by the care taken in writing the bill.
I see offshore wind as a great opportunity to use Maine labor, fairly provided, and to 
reduce the nasty cost swings so prevalent these days with fossil fuels impacting 
Mainers' struggles to make ends meet.  Offshore wind is an incredible opportunity to 
provide homegrown clean energy to Maine (and other states as well), generated with 
forethought to take advantage of what's been learned from earlier efforts, especially 
efficiency opportunities that reduce costs, such as using one commonly shared cable 
to the shore.  
If we are to electrify everything to realize the emissions reductions so urgently needed
to realize our state's climate goals, to me offshore wind provides the State with a huge
opportunity not to be ignored.  I urge you to recommend passage of the bill as written 
or with amendments that make it even stronger, and thank you for your work on this 
and so many other energy issues of concern to those of us who care deeply about 
Maine's healthy future.
