 
 PO Box 182   •   Islesboro, Maine  04848   •   207 -734-6907   •   www. islesboroislandstrust.org  
 
May 16, 2023  
 
Committee On Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 
RE: LD18 95 – An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind Resources  
 
 
Co-Chairs Senator Lawrence and Representative Zeigler, and members of the Committee On Energy, 
Utilities and Technology , Islesboro Islands Trust (IIT)  appreciate s this opportunity to submit oral and  
written comments in support of LD18 95 – An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from 
Offshore Wind Resources . However , with all due respect, we urge amending the bill to explicitly 
recognize siting and development of offshore wind manufacturing, assembling and launching 
facilities as integral to procurement o f energy from offshore wind resources and therefore subject to 
the beneficial workforce and environmental standards of LD1985.  
 
IIT advances land conservation, ecosystem education and environmental advocacy in the Penobscot 
Watershed. For nearly 40  years, IIT’s conservation, education, advocacy, and research demonstrate a 
commitment to protect the quality and integrity of the watershed, including a commitment to 
sweeping response to climate change. I am IIT’s Executive Director, a life-long Mainer  and gradu ate 
of the University of Maine. I also serve on Maine’s Offshore Wind Port Advisory Group.  
 
IIT applauds our State Government’s vigorous response to climate change and offshore wind 
research.  LD1895 recognizes that responsible offshore wind projects should  proceed without further 
ecological harm  that would exacerbate climate change (and thereby undermine the central offshore 
wind goals of reducing carbon emissions , producing affordable electric al energy  and providing 
workforce benefits) . For example, LD1895 would amend  Sec. 7, 35 -A MRSA §3406, sub -§1, as 
enacted by PL 2021, c. 407, §3, to read: “C.  Develop recommendations, using the best available 
science, for avoiding, minimizing or mitigating impacts to wildlife and the marine environment 
in the development and construction of offshore wind power projects , including appropriate 
preconstruction and postconstruction monitoring. ” [Emphasis added.]  
 
However, unless explicitly captured by simple but appropr iate new language , the bill as presented 
may not be clear  that siting and development of manufacturing, assembling and launching facilities 
are or should be subject to LD1895 provisions .  
 
Title 35 -A, Part 3, Chapter 34 -A defines an offshore wind project a s, “an offshore project that uses a 
windmill or wind turbine to convert wind energy to electrical energy.  ‘Offshore wind power project ’ 
includes both generating facilities as defined by section 3451, subsection 5 and associated facilities , 
without regard t o whether the electrical energy is for sale or use by a person other than the generator.  
[Emphasis added.]  
 
That statute then defines “associated facilities ” as “elements of a wind energy development other than 
its generating facilities that are necessary  to the proper operation and maintenance of the wind energy 
development, including but not limited to buildings, access roads, generator lead lines and 
substations. ” 
  
 
 PO Box 182   •   Islesboro, Maine  04848   •   207 -734-6907   •   www. islesboroislandstrust.org  
 
Facilities sited and constructed  to manufacture, assemble and launch offshore wind turbin es constitute  
critical, essential elements in  any offshore wind project and fall within the meaning of “associated 
facilities” as defined in Title 35 -A: PUBLIC UTILITIES, Part 3: ELECTRIC POWER, Chapter 34 -A. 
 
Because offshore wind  manufacturing, assemblin g and launching facilities are clearly "necessary to 
the proper operation and maintenance of the energy wind development" and function much like 
buildings and roads associated with upland wind development, we believe that the legislative intent of 
Title 35 A would embrace an amendment to LD1895 that broaden s its protection of workers and the 
environment to siting and construction of the manufacturing, assembling and launching facility or 
facilities , whether undertaken by private or state developers.  
 
Therefore, we strongly urge amending “An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from Offshore 
Wind Resource” to specifically require developers of any offshore wind manufacturing, assembling 
and/or launching facility, including the State of Maine, to (1) ensure that the least environmentally 
damaging plan is pursued, (2) favor repurposing outdated energy locations,  (3) avoid damaging intact, 
undeveloped and ecologically significant locations, and (4) consider wildlife, fisheries, and 
environmental mitigation plans in costs projections.  
 
Thank you.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stephen Miller
Islesboro Islands Trust
LD 1895
May 16, 2023
Committee On Energy, Utilities and Technology
RE: LD1895 – An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind 
Resources
Co-Chairs Senator Lawrence and Representative Zeigler, and members of the 
Committee On Energy, Utilities and Technology, Islesboro Islands Trust (IIT) 
appreciates this opportunity to submit oral and written comments in support of 
LD1895 – An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy from Offshore Wind 
Resources. However, with all due respect, we urge amending the bill to explicitly 
recognize siting and development of offshore wind manufacturing, assembling and 
launching facilities as integral to procurement of energy from offshore wind resources
and therefore subject to the beneficial workforce and environmental standards of 
LD1985.
IIT advances land conservation, ecosystem education and environmental advocacy in 
the Penobscot Watershed. For nearly 40 years, IIT’s conservation, education, 
advocacy, and research demonstrate a commitment to protect the quality and integrity 
of the watershed, including a commitment to sweeping response to climate change. I 
am IIT’s Executive Director, a life-long Mainer and graduate of the University of 
Maine. I also serve on Maine’s Offshore Wind Port Advisory Group.
IIT applauds our State Government’s vigorous response to climate change and 
offshore wind research. LD1895 recognizes that responsible offshore wind projects 
should proceed without further ecological harm that would exacerbate climate change 
(and thereby undermine the central offshore wind goals of reducing carbon emissions,
producing affordable electrical energy and providing workforce benefits). For 
example, LD1895 would amend Sec. 7, 35-A MRSA §3406, sub-§1, as enacted by PL
2021, c. 407, §3, to read: “C.  Develop recommendations, using the best available 
science, for avoiding, minimizing or mitigating impacts to wildlife and the marine 
environment in the development and construction of offshore wind power projects, 
including appropriate preconstruction and postconstruction monitoring.” [Emphasis 
added.]
However, unless explicitly captured by simple but appropriate new language, the bill 
as presented may not be clear that siting and development of manufacturing, 
assembling and launching facilities are or should be subject to LD1895 provisions. 
Title 35-A, Part 3, Chapter 34-A defines an offshore wind project as, “an offshore 
project that uses a windmill or wind turbine to convert wind energy to electrical 
energy. ‘Offshore wind power project’ includes both generating facilities as defined 
by section 3451, subsection 5 and associated facilities, without regard to whether the 
electrical energy is for sale or use by a person other than the generator. [Emphasis 
added.] 
That statute then defines “associated facilities” as “elements of a wind energy 
development other than its generating facilities that are necessary to the proper 
operation and maintenance of the wind energy development, including but not limited
to buildings, access roads, generator lead lines and substations.”
 
Facilities sited and constructed to manufacture, assemble and launch offshore wind 
turbines constitute critical, essential elements in any offshore wind project and fall 
within the meaning of “associated facilities” as defined in Title 35-A: PUBLIC 
UTILITIES, Part 3: ELECTRIC POWER, Chapter 34-A.
Because offshore wind manufacturing, assembling and launching facilities are clearly 
"necessary to the proper operation and maintenance of the energy wind development" 
and function much like buildings and roads associated with upland wind 
development, we believe that the legislative intent of Title 35A would embrace an 
amendment to LD1895 that broadens its protection of workers and the environment to
siting and construction of the manufacturing, assembling and launching facility or 
facilities, whether undertaken by private or state developers.
Therefore, we strongly urge amending “An Act Regarding the Procurement of Energy
from Offshore Wind Resource” to specifically require developers of any offshore 
wind manufacturing, assembling and/or launching facility, including the State of 
Maine, to (1) ensure that the least environmentally damaging plan is pursued, (2) 
favor repurposing outdated energy locations, (3) avoid damaging intact, undeveloped 
and ecologically significant locations, and (4) consider wildlife, fisheries, and 
environmental mitigation plans in costs projections.
Thank you.
