Testimony from Tyler Matz, in Support of L.D. 1895, "An Act Regarding the Procurement 
of Energy from Offshore Wind Resources” 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology, my name is Tyler Matz, I live in District 2, in the beautiful 
town of Portland and I am here today to speak in favor of L.D. 1895. 
 
I am a union electrical worker, a proud member of the IBEW, and a union delegate to the 
Southern Maine Labor Council.  
The Maine Offshore Wind project we are undertaking in the next few years is groundbreaking. I 
am told that one of its size has not been done before in the U.S. and as our global emissions 
footprint brings us further and further away from being able to reach our goals of a sustainable 
world for our future generations, it is important that new projects like these are done right so that 
we can set a standard for those that follow. In Maine's last push for green energy during the solar 
boom, we saw far too many contracts go to non-union contractors that relied on under 
experienced and underpaid labor, and what resulted was dozens of poorly built fields that were a 
far cry from the example we need to set for Maine's new flagship fleet of offshore wind turbines. 
It is for this reason in particular that L.D. 1895 is necessary. It addresses the problem of 
contractors using cheap and untrained labor by requiring that developers prioritize the use of 
registered apprenticeship and pre-apprenticeship programs. However, this bill is not just 
addressing the quality and sustainability of wind energy initiatives in Maine, but also supports 
working class people like myself and many of my brothers and sisters in here with me today. 
This bill aims to ensure that my fellow tradespeople are compensated fairly for our labor, by 
requiring developers to enter into Project Labor Agreements and Labor Peace Agreements. This 
means that those working on this project are compensated with a livable wage and benefits 
which becomes increasingly important as working class people are priced out of more and more 
areas. I love Maine, I plan to stay in Maine, I'm sure everyone in here with me today feels the 
same. But to live here and support a family, we don't just need work, we need work that pays for 
housing, food, and healthcare. 
It is with this in mind that I ask you all to support this bill. Allowing organized and fairly 
compensated labor to be a part of a project this important means that it will be done right, the 
first time, by Mainers.  
Thank you for your work, and please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1818. 
