 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 860 – “An Act to Identify the Railroad Lines from Portland to Bangor as 
an Extended Major Corridor and to Fund a Feasibility Study”  
 
 
April 14 , 2023  
 
Sen.  Chipman , Rep. Williams , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Transportation . I am Deb orah  Laurie, City Manager of the City of Bangor, and I am providing 
testimony in support of LD  860, “An Act to Identify the Railroad Lines from Portland to Bangor as an 
Extended Major Corridor and to Fund a Feasibility Study .” 
Transportation is the key to continued prosperity and a necessary balance of travel options to 
Bangor, Maine’s third largest city . As the City continues to invest in our transit system, and other 
meas ures to become more climate friendly, we believe rail is an option worth evaluating as it could 
be directly linked to existing transportation options.  This would allow individuals in the Bangor area 
and beyond to connect with other cities in Maine , increasing tourism and dependable transportation 
options for those without private vehicles.  A passenger -ready rail line to Bangor would also support 
improved freight movement increasing economic development opportunities and allowing for Maine 
products to be competitively exported.  
We have shown our support for studies to improve transit through our monetary support of LD 227. 
It is now time for the State to move forward with a feasibility study allowing Bangor to receive 
“corridor designation” so that federal funds can be utilized to make Bangor and the surrounding 
region  truly integrated with the rest of the nation.  We believe the feasibility study will better 
demonstrate the potential benefits and costs of expanding rai l access.  
On behalf of the Bangor City Council, I urge you to pass LD 860 to identify the railroad lines from 
Portland to Bangor as an extended major corridor and to fund a feasibility study.  
Thank you for your consideration. Please do not hesitate to rea ch out with questions.  
 
Debbie Laurie, City Manager, debbie.laurie@bangormaine.gov  
Courtney O’Donnell, Assistant City Manager, courtney.odonnell@ bangormaine.gov   
Richard Fournier, City Council Chair, richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov  
 
 
 

