 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com 
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • 
Portland • Westbrook 
 
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 860-An Act to Identify the Railroad Lines from Portland 
to Bangor as a Major Corridor and to Fund a Feasibility Study 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
April 12, 2023 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Committee on 
Transportation, 
 
My name is Eamonn Dundon, and I am the Director of Advocacy of the Portland Regional 
Chamber of Commerce, representing 1,300 businesses in our region that employ over 65,000 
Mainers. I am submitting this testimony today to express our organization's opposition to LD 
860.  
 
Our organization highly values a frequent, reliable, and sustainable public transportation 
system. In fact, public transportation is one of our top three policy priorities. I spend much of 
my time in our region working with municipal, agency, and non-profit partners through the 
Portland Area Comprehensive Transportation System (PACTS) to advance this goal. However, 
we believe that the proposal before you today is a costly solution to an ill-defined problem 
that will weaken our existing transportation systems, while providing little material benefit to 
the vast majority of Mainers.  
 
The Bangor Transit Propensity Study1 completed by VHB for Maine DOT in January of this 
year, provides all the evidence we need to conclude that funding future studies of this corridor 
for rail is throwing good money after bad. The report demonstrated, through multiple 
methodologies, that in 2040, the highest projected demand for rail trips on this corridor comes 
out to 88,000 trips annually. Additionally, to achieve that ridership, the lowest-end cost to 
build out rail on the corridor would be $628MM. Comparing that ridership to the Downeaster, 
 
1 Bangor Transit Propensity Study  
 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com 
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • 
Portland • Westbrook 
 
we see that at its’ pre-pandemic height, the Downeaster transported nearly 575,000 riders in 
2019. This means that to achieve the vision contemplated by this legislation, we would need 
to spend over $600MM to achieve peak ridership that is just 15% of the Downeaster at its 
peak.  
 
The folly of this proposal becomes more apparent if we consider the alternatives we could 
spend even a fraction of that contemplated cost on. For instance, you heard from urban bus 
providers just a few weeks ago about the benefits that would be realized with additional state 
operating subsidy of just $6.8MM annually for those operators. You could provide that subsidy 
for decades at the cost of this rail proposal, benefiting operators like Greater Portland 
METRO, which had 2.1MM trips in 20192, 23 times that of this Portland to Bangor rail proposal.  
 
Applicable to this bill and others before you today on the expansion of rail service, even in our 
densest areas, Maine does not even approach the density per acre needed to support future 
investments in heavy rail expansions. According to most research, in order to support heavy 
rail investments areas need a density of at least 11,500 people per square kilometer, while 
Portland, the densest municipality on our state averages about 1,200 people per square 
kilometer.  
 
We thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers. We ask that this committee vote 
Ought Not to Pass on this important legislation.  
  
 
2 METRO Ridership Topped 2.1 Million in 2019  
