Testimony in favor of LD 860 by Edward W. Hanscom of Gardiner on April 12, 2023 
Back in September of 2022, the Maine Rail Group crafted a petition to see what kind of support 
exists for a feasibility study to extend passenger rail service from Brunswick to Augusta, 
Waterville, and Bangor. After attending a handful of public events with a single clipboard, the 
Maine Rail Group collected signatures from over 600 individuals in favor of such a study as an 
important step toward the expansion of passenger rail beyond York and Cumberland Counties. 
Over 500 of these individuals live in Maine and they represent every region of the state and all 
16 of Maine's Counties. Maine's support for passenger rail comes in equal amounts from men 
and women and cuts across all age groups, from seniors to students, who know that the future 
depends on making the most of our sustainable transportation options in the face of changing 
climates. The petition also found passenger rail support from more than 100 out-of-state 
citizens, showing that visitors to our state want the ability to reach more of Maine by rail. The 
Maine Rail Group's petition only scratches the surface Maine's support for passenger rail, which 
is broad-based and on the rise. Do you remember the skepticism that existed when the 
Downeaster was just an idea? We've come a long way since then. Let's continue Downeast on 
this journey. Support LD 860. 
Testimony in favor of LD 406 by Edward W. Hanscom of Gardiner on April 12, 2023 
Over the years, the people of Maine had the foresight to acquire and protect railroad lines in 
danger of abandonment. The four rail lines identified in this bill as the "covered corridors" have 
been largely preserved for the day when a vision for their return to productive rail passenger 
and freight service can take shape. That day is upon us now. As the new Maine State Rail Plan 
shows, the Downeaster is in full recovery and expansion mode with ridership growth, and more 
trains and new passenger stations in the planning stages. The Rail Plan also forecasts a tripling 
of freight movement by rail in Maine, now that the state benefits from service by two Class1 
railroads --- the Canadian Pacific and CSX. With growth in passenger and freight traffic, the 
value of the four covered corridors also grows. The Berlin Subdivision offers some unique 
passenger rail opportunities between Portland and Lewiston and along the I-295 corridor. The 
Lower Road offers passenger rail extension potential for the Kennebec Valley and beyond. An 
active Lower Road would also add reliability and resilience for passenger and freight services 
between Portland and Bangor. The Mountain Division is an interstate rail corridor with both 
passenger and freight potential. The Rockland Branch is already demonstrating increased value 
as a passenger and freight rail corridor. Let's develop a long-term vision for these rail corridors, 
and take steps toward making that vision a reality. Support LD 406.
