April 12, 2023 
Testimony of Patricia Quinn 
Northern New England Passenger Rail Authority 
Before the 131"‘ Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
In Opposition 
LD 860 
An Act to Identify the Railroad Lines from Portland to Bangor as a Major Corridor 
and to Fund a Feasibility Study 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation. l\/ly name is Patricia Quinn and I am the Executive Director of 
the Northern New England Passenger Rail Authority (NNEPRA). NNEPRA respectfully opposes 
LD 860, An Act to Identify the Railroad Lines from Portland to Bangor as a Major Corridor and to 
Fund a Feasibility Study. Although this bill is a concept draft, the title suggests a concept 
NNEPRA cannot support. 
NNEPRA was established for the general purpose of promoting passenger rail service and is 
directed to take all actions that are reasonably necessary to do so. NNEPRA managed the 
construction and service development activities to initiate the Amtrak Downeaster in 2001 and 
remains actively involved in all facets of day-to-day operations to deliver quality and seamless 
passenger rail service that meets the needs of the traveling public and provides public benefit. 
To date, the Downeaster has transported nearly 9 million riders more than 650 million 
passenger miles. 
NNEPRA participated in the Project Advisory Group that was established to oversee and guidea 
study conducted by MaineDOT to evaluate the travel propensity and demand for transit service 
between Portland and Bangor. The Propensity Study, which concluded with a final report in 
March 2023, determined that the corridor has low population density and low transit demand, 
therefore a rail alternative would likely not provide equity or climate benefits. The corridor is 
already served by a high-capacity highway that is not congested and provides a trip time faster 
than a rail alternative. Further, the investment needed to support passenger rail service 
between Bangor and Portland is significant, as would be the ongoing operating costs. 
The findings of the Propensity Study demonstrate that the characteristics of the Bangor- 
Portland Corridor would likely not satisfy the evaluation and selection criteria developed by the 
Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) to be considered a candidate for the Corridor lD Program 
and therefore would not qualify for passenger rail service development at this time. Further 
study and evaluation of the existing conditions will likely not produce different results. 
75 West Commercial Street, Suite 104, Portland, l\/laine 04105 207-780-1000 nnepra.com
ln many areas of the country, intercity bus service has been used to meet immediate mobility 
needs and build demand for a higher-capacity rail alternative over time. An intercity bus pilot 
along this corridor is a logical next step. 
NNEPRA appreciates the Sponsor's interest in expanding passenger rail service but, for the 
reasons stated, recommends that the committee vote "Ought Not To Pass” on LD 860.
