 David LaFountain   MAINE SENA TE  3 State House Station  
 Senate District 16   131st Legislature   Augusta, Maine 04333  
 Testimony of Senator Dave LaFountain In Support of 
 LD 860, An Act to Identify the Railroad Lines from Portland to Bangor as a Major  
 Corridor and to Fund a Feasibility Study  
 before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
 April 12, 2023 at 1:00 pm 
 Senator Chipman, Representative W illiams, and honorable Members of the Joint Standing  
 Committee on T ransportation, my name is Dave LaFountain. I have the honor of representing the  
 good people in Senate District 16, including Albion, Fairfield, Oakland, W aterville, and my  
 hometown of W inslow . Today , I am here to testify in support of Senator Baldacci’ s bill, LD 860,  
 “An Act to Identify the Railroad Lines from Portland to Bangor as a Major Corridor and to Fund  
 a Feasibility Study .” 
 The path to Northern Maine runs through W aterville. Or at least it used to.  
 We are in 2023. W e need to modernize our modes of transportation, including the creation of  
 passenger rail lines from Portland to Bangor . We have the foundation to establish this service,  
 and it is time we do just that.  
 This legislation would bring us one step closer from one day being able to ride the Amtrak from  
 Portland to Bangor . Our state relies a great deal on the tourism industry . This proposed route  
 would take Mainers and visitors alike through the heart of our economy . The Portland, Lewiston,  
 Waterville, and Bangor areas all play an instrumental role in our state’ s success, so let's make it  
 easier to get here from there. This bill will also help our economy by creating jobs and engaging  
 workers in a new field of work who may not otherwise. Passenger rail service would also help  
 our ef forts to reduce carbon emissions by reducing the amount of traf fic on the roads.  

 Connecting Mainers, students, and tourists with small businesses, universities in my district, and  
 small businesses in a more af fordable, ef ficient manner than we are currently operating on is  
 paramount. Staying competitive with other states who enjoy expanded passenger rail service is  
 something everyone in this body should consider a priority . Historically , rail service worked. W e 
 relied a great deal on it to build and develop parts of our country , and we know it is reliable.  
 I am excited for the prospect of passenger rail to go through the city of W aterville, and expand  
 access to institutions such as Colby and Thomas Colleges.  
 Thank you to Senator Baldacci for bringing this bill forward, and I’m happy to answer any  
 questions the committee may have.  
