Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Transportation 
Committee, 
Thank you for taking the time today to listen to this testimony. My name is Tessa Hartley 
and I am from Bangor, Maine. Today I am here to express my strong support for LD 860, a bill 
that will potentially re-establish passenger train service from Portland to Bangor. 
The creation of a passenger train line stretching from Portland to Bangor holds a number 
of beneﬁts, including lower carbon emissions compared to cars or airplanes and the economic 
growth that follows the creation of new jobs and supporting of local businesses 
However, I would like to emphasize a speciﬁc beneﬁt to myself, and those in my same 
situation, that the creation of a passenger train would help immensely. I am currently a senior in 
high school, and I am set to attend a University right outside of Boston this upcoming fall. My 
school does not allow you to keep or register a car on campus, therefore to visit my family I will 
need to use other methods of transportation. I have the option of taking a bus (for example the 
Greyhound bus line) that runs from Boston to Bangor. This bus ride takes at least 5 hours and 30 
minutes, and costs on average 45 dollars. 
Another option would be to take the Amtrak train, whose service currently runs from 
Boston to Portland, but to continue North one must then take a bus from Portland to Bangor. This 
costs on average 25 dollars, and then l6 dollars for the bus ride, and the trip takes much less 
time, spanning 5 hours at most. A train line reaching all the way from Boston to Bangor would 
allow me to access my community with greater ease and convenience. It would cost no more 
money than current bus or train accommodations, take much less time to commute, and perhaps 
even pave the way for myself and other rural Maine students to better access Universities in 
Boston, and other areas along the East Coast. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions.
