Andres Abreu
Southwest Harbor & Maine Association of Psychiatric Physicians
LD 224
Testimony regarding LD224 "An Act to Strengthen Maine's Health Care Workforce 
by Preventing Discrimination by Requiring Maintenance of Certification for 
Insurance Reimbursement”
Dear Committee Members:
Thank you for this opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD224. My name is 
Andres Abreu. I am a physician and I practice psychiatry in Downeast. I completed 
my residency at Maine Medical Center, and apart from a brief time outside the state to
pursue fellowship training in Massachusetts, I have been living and working in Maine
since 2013. I make my home in Southwest Harbor, and I have seen firsthand the 
difficulties of recruiting physicians to practice in our largely rural state. In 2017, I 
worked with my professional organization to advocate for the passage of LD1200 
which also addressed Maintenance of Certification and I hope that you will support 
the current bill.
 
I would like to start by stating the obvious--the path to becoming a physician is long 
and arduous. The journey begins in college and includes all the pre-requisite 
coursework as well as the Medical College Admission Test (MCAT). Of course, then 
there’s medical school, which itself is four years of intense study. It is during medical 
school that students begin to take their licensing exams. For allopathic students, these 
exams are called the United States Medical Licensing Examination and there are three
parts: Step 1, Step 2, and Step 3. Each exam is about 8 hours long. Step 3, is typically 
completed in the first year of residency, which is commonly referred to as internship. 
The length of residency varies by specialty and ranges from 3 to 7 years. Many 
physicians opt to pursue further specialization after completing their residency 
training and do so through a fellowship program. The duration of fellowship also 
varies widely and ranges from 1 to 4 years. Fellowship is what trains a physician to 
become a cardiologist, child psychiatrist, oncologist, breast surgeon, endocrinologist, 
pediatric nephrologist, and many other different types of specialists.
 
In Maine, allopathic physicians are able to apply for a Maine medical doctor license 
through the Board of Licensure in Medicine after having passed their Step 
examination and completing three years of post-graduate training or residency. Once 
licensed to practice in Maine, physicians are required to complete a minimum of 40 
hours of Continuing Medical Education (CME) in order to renew a medical license. 
Most physicians complete many more hours of CME beyond the 40 CME 
requirement (in my case, I have earned just about 950 CME credits over the past 5 
years).
 
Separate and apart from the medical licensing process, many physicians opt to 
participate in an additional, voluntary process called board certification. Board 
certification has been a way of demonstrating competency in a specific medical 
specialty or subspecialty through an examination process. The psychiatry board 
examination is an 8 hourlong exam and usually is completed the year after completing
a psychiatry residency program. In the past, specialty board certification was valid for
the duration of a physician's career.
 
I am proud to have passed my initial board certification in 2017 and I am now a 
diplomate of both the National Board of Physicians and Surgeons and the American 
Board of Psychiatry and Neurology. However, over the last two decades, medical 
specialty boards have been creating ever more onerous and expensive hurdles for 
physicians participating in the board certification process. These new programs are 
named Maintenance of Certification (MOC) and require physicians to participate in 
continuous re-certification in order to maintain their board certification status.
 
This is problematic for many reasons. Put simply, a physician who has completed all 
the above steps in order to be a well-trained, competent, licensed physician in good 
standing with the State medical board, but who does not participate in MOC, faces 
discrimination in terms of insurance empanelment and insurance reimbursement. This
is why I cannot simply elect not to participate in MOC. This has led to a situation in 
which physicians have been coerced into participating in Maintenance of Certification
programs in order to practice medicine and treat their patients.
 
MOC is redundant because the Maine Board of Licensure in Medicine already 
requires Continuing Medical Education. MOC is also expensive and time-consuming, 
and has not demonstrated meaningful benefits in terms of improving quality of care or
patient outcomes. MOC represents increased bureaucracy and increased physician 
burn out. MOC represents a private, non-governmental tax on physicians that is 
ultimately passed down to patients in terms of increased costs, shorter visits with their
doctor, and longer wait times to see a physician. MOC equals fewer physicians due to 
earlier retirements, more physician shortages, and greater difficulty recruiting 
physicians.
 
In these times of public health crisis, MOC is getting in the way of doctors being able 
to treat patients. Maintenance of Certification is what LD224 attempts to address by 
focusing on two specific, but extremely significant issues—insurance empanelment 
and insurance reimbursement.
 
In a world of political hyper-polarization, LD224 is a bill that should appeal to 
Democrats, Republicans, Greens, Independents, Socialists, Trump supporters, Biden 
supporters, fiscal conservatives, social liberals and everyone in between.
 
Passage of LD224 is a win-win-win. It’s good for patients, good for doctors, good for 
hospitals, good for job creation, and good for business. Passage of LD224 means less 
red tape, and more focus on delivering healthcare. It also means physicians with more
time to focus on their patients, and less time spent completing busy work that detracts 
from the practice of medicine and care of patients.
 
Passage of LD224 is good for most everyone, except insurance companies that will 
have to pay out more of their members’ claims, and out-of-state specialty board 
organizations that will see a loss in their revenue stream with physicians having 
greater freedom not to participate in MOC. In short, LD224 is good for patients, good 
for doctors, good for business, and good for job creation.
Respectfully,
Andres Abreu, MD

