Edward Pontius
Portland, Maine
LD 224
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Members of the Committee On Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services-
I am a Maine resident and a psychiatric physician. I've been practicing in Maine for 
the past 25 years. I care about the health and welfare of the people of Maine and I 
want to do what I can to help ensure that Maine has the physician workforce needed 
now and in the future.  I write to you today to express my strong support for LD 224, 
'An Act to Strengthen Maine's Health Care Workforce by Preventing Discrimination 
by Requiring Maintenance of Certification for Insurance Reimbursement'.
As you've likely learned by now, Maintenance of Certification (MOC) is a process of on-going 
credentialing developed by
specialty boards of the American Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS) and the American Osteopathic 
Association (AOA)- boards such as the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology (ABPN). These 
boards have for decades managed the process of 'Board Certification'- establishing whether a physician
with specialty training has achieved mastery of knowledge and skills and deserves to be acknowledged 
as a peer practicing in that specialty. Board-certification has had a value for physicians and for the 
public. 
In recent years, boards in the various specialty organizations within ABMS/AOA 
have been tireless in promoting another product- 'Maintenance of Certification'. 
Rather than a once-in-a-career process (the way Board Certification had functioned 
previously) 'MOC' is a certification process with a short shelf-life that ties specialty 
physicians to time-consuming and expensive training and testing requirements 
throughout their careers. 
Healthcare is important and decisions about healthcare policy affecting every 
specialty in medicine and impacting every member of the population deserve to be 
based on evidence. Behind the self-serving platitudes and hype provided by the 
specialty organizations within ABMS/AOA, there is NO data demonstrating that the 
expensive and burdensome MOC process benefits patients or patient outcomes. This 
hasn't stopped the lobbying of very well-funded specialty organizations within 
ABMS/AOA. MOC has unfortunately become a de facto requirement in many states, 
with licensing boards, insurers, and hospitals demanding MOC for licensure, 
reimbursement, and privileging.
Maine already has a process to ensure that physicians continue to stay up to date 
including documenting continuing medical education for each bi-annual license 
renewal. Requiring of physicians an additional MOC process, a process unsupported 
by evidence, will not improve health care in Maine.
To the contrary- allowing MOC to be imposed on Maine physicians makes our state 
LESS ATTRACTIVE for much-needed physicians to come and practice here. I have 
had considerable experience with recruiting physicians to our state. As a former 
Medical Director I was tasked with recruiting psychiatrists and child psychiatrists to 
serve across the state. I frequently would hear concerns from young physicians, 
worried about providing for their families in Maine and the opportunity to pay off the 
substantial debts accumulated during their specialty training. If MOC is allowed to 
stay in place in Maine it gives physicians an opportunity to consider whether they 
want to give up the unending hours and the substantial fees that MOC demands. And 
Maine needs to stay attractive and competitive. In my specialty of psychiatry, HRSA 
forecasts a national shortage of 18,000-21,000 psychiatrists by 2030. We need to do 
all we can to recruit and retain Maine physicians for the years to come.
LD 224, 'An Act to Strengthen Maine's Health Care Workforce by Preventing 
Discrimination by Requiring Maintenance of Certification for Insurance 
Reimbursement', will help to maintain Maine as wonderful place for physicians to 
come and practice. I ask that you please support this legislation.
Thank you.
Edward Pontius, MD
Portland, Maine

