Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and FinancialServices Committee, my name is Jeffrey Barkin. I’m a psychiatric physician practicing here in Maine andthe immediate past president at the Maine Medical Association . I urge you to vote “out to pass” on LD224. Here are my comments.
One of us received a call from a physician colleague about his wife, Amy, who had just given birth anddeveloped a severe postpartum depression after the delivery of a healthy daughter. The physician,willing to drive anywhere in Maine, emailed psychiatrists, eager to have his wife seen for disablingdepression. Rather than being discharged home to bond with her newborn, she  stayed in the hospital asthere was no psychiatrist taking new patients within a six hour drive.
Children and adolescents experiencing mental health crises are languishing in emergency roomsthroughout Maine, again because of lack of access to psychiatric physicians and other mental healthprofessionals to safely discharge them to. Our hospitals are filled with patients with severe mental healthstruggles, unable to be safely discharged, but taking up critically needed hospital beds. At Maine MedicalCenter, there are 40 patients unable to be discharged, many of whom have psychosocial obstacles. Andevery time a hospital bed is filled, it is not available should any of us become ill or injured. Were this notbad enough, diagnoses of mental health disorders have increased profoundly throughout CoVid.Diagnoses of depression, anxiety, substance abuse, and suicide have risen 40 % in a short period of time.Indeed, screening all children for anxiety is now a screening recommended by the CDC. The 13 %increase in suicide in teenage girls is terrifying, with too many l brilliant and hopeful lives lost needlessly.
How did we get here and what can we do now? There are simple and easy steps we can take to addressour mental health crisis in Maine, the least of which is to pass LD 224, ”An Act to Strengthen Maine’sHealthcare Workforce by Preventing Discrimination by Requiring Maintenance of Certification forInsurance Reimbursement.” As it stands, physicians are required to recertify in their specialty by takingan examination every ten years and completing mandatory classes; all of this is redundant from theother requirements we must adhere to. While we strongly believe that physicians must always becompetent, safe, and up to date to practice medicine, we already have license requirements for ongoingcontinuing medical education for each and every license cycle. This means physicians must spend –separate from board recertification – upwards of 100 hours each and every year or two to maintain ourlicenses in each state they are licensed. In addition, we must become board certified in our specialty,which we do after years of education as a junior physician. In fact, every physician already has 12-15years of additional education after graduating from high school. We are steeped in science and medicinefor all of our 20s and some of our 30s. To graduate medical school and residency requires more teststhan one can even imagine. It is safe to say that we are well trained and “show our awesome” every yearor two when we renew our licenses. And yet, in addition to all of this, we are asked to recertify and takea massive and expensive test every 10 years. A test which does not correlate with clinical skillswhatsoever, with a pass rate so high as to render it useless. The only benefit is to the organizations whichmake the tests, who’s executives make obscene amounts of money by essentially building a toll bridge inour driveways every 10 years. Out of state, Maine doesn’t see a penny of this returned in taxes by thesecompanies.
This is a blatant example of  overreach and bizarre control gone amuck. Maine is the oldest state and oneof the most rural and our physicians are similarly aging. They are leaving practice, with half of the
psychiatric workforce retiring these past few years and many more set to do so. And why are so many ofus leaving practice? This predatory maintenance of certification is top on the list of reasons, compellingmany highly experienced and wise physicians to leave the workforce at a time they are needed most. LD224 would eliminate this redundant over burdensome regulation, one that benefits businesses andpeople who do not live in Maine. It burdens your physicians, who should instead be taking care of you,our patients, not spending hours each day and thousands each year for unneeded testing. Let us go backto taking care of the Amy’s amongst us who need our services more than ever.
Thank you.
