Testimony in support: 
LD 224, “An Act to Strengthen Maine's Health Care Workforce by Preventing Discrimination by 
Requiring Maintenance of Certification for Insurance Reimbursement" 
February 9, 2023 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Sen/ices Committee, my name is Mary Dudzik. I am a Family Practice doctor in 
Maine, and I am licensed by the Maine Board of Medicine, as are all MD's. DO's are licensed by 
the Board of Osteopathic Medicine. We are required to re-license every 3 years, and must prove 
150 hours of continuing medical education (CME) over those 3 years. I just renewed my license, 
the cost of that was just under $1000. The cost of 150 hours of education was $3500, not 
including travel. I report my CME to the American Academy of Family Physicians, who keep 
track of it for me. Yearly cost of that is $725, and goes up every year. 
I am certified by the American Board of Family Medicine (ABFM), and I have been since 1992 
when I ﬁnished residency. At that time I took a certiﬁcation exam, and for the ﬁrst 15 years or so 
of my career I was required to take an exam to measure competency every 7 years. Truly,I 
have no problem taking an exam to make sure I am competent, I think it is a good idea for all 
clinicians, and I am disturbed by the fact that many specialties and all nurse practitioners do not 
have to take an exam to prove competence over time like we do. However over the last 15 
years or so, the ABFM has moved to a MOC model where you need to certify every 3 years. In 
addition to the licensing requirements outlined above, I need to do CME that comes directly 
from the ABFM, which I have to pay the ABFM for. The CME I do for my licensure does not 
count towards the "50 points" the ABFM wants me to do through them. This is composed of 
three 10 point units that I can choose from, focused on a specific topic such as women's health, 
pediatrics, heart disease, etc. Each of these takes hours of online learning, each costs around 
$300. And I have to do a quality project that counts for 20 points using my own patient charts. I 
can pick from topics such as improving diabetic blood sugar control, improving patients ’ blood 
pressures, and others that are all worthy of improving. This quality project is something that has 
to be done over months. You need to identify something you want to improve, come up witha 
plan, discuss it with your office, implement it, and follow over time to see if it is working. The 
problem is, these are all topics that are part of quality assurance in all health care institutions; it 
is redundant. We do this all the time already, and we have staff to help us. And at a cost of $500 
dollars, it is a costly way to show work that has already been done and doesn't come near to 
compensating us for the work we had to do. The "reward" for all that is that we now only takea 
certification exam every 10 years instead of every 7 years, an exam that costs $1200 between 
the exam fee and the fee for where you take the exam. 
Most employed family physicians have a CME budget, which we can use for CME as well as 
MOC. Most institutions in Maine give MD's around $3500 if they are full time, and it is prorated 
down if you are part time. MOC is the same whether you are part time or full time. If you are 
independent or your employer does not provide money for CME, you can see that it is quitea
large out of pocket expense. If money for CME is spent on MOC, there is no way for doctors to 
attend conferences and educational programs that are of interest to them, that might provide 
new skills and knowledge a community really needs. And in the long run that means the health 
of a community has less room to grow. 
But more than the cost and the time of MOC, what is the most difficult is the duplication of what 
is already being done as part of hospital privileges and state licensing. This feels like a money 
grab by the ABFM, who is charging members every 3 years now instead of every 7-10 years 
while increasing their profits and causing us to do more work. I know physicians that have left 
medicine rather than go through another certification cycle. 
The number of physicians suffering from burnout is at an all time high, that is well known. Most 
doctors, like me, love their patients, love the work of actually caring for patients. Sadly that is no 
longer the major part of our job, that is not where most of our time is spent. Most of our time is 
spent charting, making sure data is entered so insurance companies pay our employer or us. 
We spend time talking to insurance companies to get prior authorization for medications and 
imaging studies our patients need. Please do not allow MOC to be yet another hoop doctors 
have to jump through in order to pay us for the hard work we do. It will increase burnout and will 
be the last straw for a lot of docs who are oven/vhelmed and simply cannot cope with any more 
busy work to lengthen their days and shorten their careers. This will ultimately impact patient 
care, as those doctors left will have less time to see patients and more patients to see. All 
because insurance companies are looking for yet another way out of paying for patient care. 
Please protect physicians from this superﬂuous discrimination by insurance companies and vote 
“ought to pass” on LD 224. 
Thank you. 
Mary Dudzik MD 
Bar Harbor, ME
