February 9, 2023
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services, please accept this written testimony expressing MaineHealth’s 
concerns with removing the requirement of maintenance of certification 
for insurance reimbursement as proposed in LD 224, “An Act to 
Strengthen Maine's Health Care Workforce by Preventing Discrimination 
by Requiring Maintenance of Certification for Insurance Reimbursement.” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to communities throughout Maine and 
New Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support 
our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest 
in America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty 
physician services to a continuum of behavioral health care services, 
community and tertiary hospital care, home health care and a lab.
MaineHealth is fully committed to providing safe, high-quality, and 
accessible health care for Maine people. In fact, Maine Medical Center, 
Southern Maine Health Care, and Mid Coast-Parkview Health all recently 
received “A” safety ratings from the Leapfrog Group; and Maine Medical 
Center and Southern Maine were also rated as top teaching hospitals. 
Rounding our recognition for quality, both Maine Medical Center and Mid 
Coast-Parkview hospitals and their nursing teams have achieved the 
American Nurses Credential Center (ANCC) Magnet Recognition® status 
multiple times, and all of our eligible hospitals are accredited by The Joint 
Commission. 
As part of this commitment to providing high-quality care, MaineHealth 
maintains robust credentialing standards for our providers, including 
requiring that our physicians be certified in their primary area of practice 
by the appropriate specialty or subspecialty board of the American Board 
of Medical Specialties (ABMS). Moreover, the Accreditation Council for 
Graduate Medical Education requires that MaineHealth faculty teaching 
our future physicians in their residencies maintain board certification. 
The practice of medicine is constantly changing and evolving and it is 
critical that our providers – your physicians – remain current with these 
medical advancements. Moreover, physicians have an ethical obligation to 
lifelong learning. One component of maintaining and developing clinical 
competency is through board certification and continuing certification.
While we recognize that there is debate amongst the medical community regarding continuing 
certification, we believe that the professional societies and their corresponding boards should 
address these concerns at the national level. With that said, it is critical that Maine maintain 
evidenced-based professional standards that continue to assess core competencies and on which 
patients can rely. Patients in Maine should feel confident knowing that their physicians are 
committed to meeting rigorous continuing medical education standards and are keeping up-to-
date on advances in medical knowledge – in part, through maintenance of certification – 
regardless of where their provider practices. 
Thank you for your consideration and, as always, please feel free to contact me should you have 
any questions or concerns. 
