Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 400 
 
“Resolve, Directing the Department of Environmental Protection to Examine 
Setback Requirements for Outdoor Wood Boilers ” 
 
March 1 , 2023  
 
Patrick Strauch , Executive  Director  
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich  and members of the Committee on Environm ent and 
Natural Reso urces , the following is  testimony submitted on behalf of the Maine F orest Products 
Council in support of  LD 400, “Resolve, Directing the Department of Environmental Protection to 
Examine Setback Requirements for Outdoor Wood Boilers .”  
 
As we like to say at the Council, nothing works like wood. There are several  reasons why homeowners opt 
to use outdoor wood boilers  for heating purposes . Because the boilers are larger than a  typical indoor 
wood stove  and are in  a stand -alone structure , they offer longer burning times  and are capable of 
heating more than one building . They are thermostat controlled, allowing for greater control of heat 
delivery. Like traditional woodstove s, they are an affordable heating option, especially  for those  in 
rural Maine  who cut their own firewood or source it locally . 
 
According to the Governor ’s Energy Office heating fuel prices as of February 21, 2023, firew ood is 
by far the most affordable heating fuel , on a dollar per million Btu basis , making this a critical 
resource for those in rural Maine and those who are living on a fixed income .  
 
Here is the breakdown:  
 
 
 
 
 
Wood is also more reliable than imported fossil fuels which , as we have seen this winter, are subject 
to volatility  in pricing and availability  based on global events beyond our control. Wood heat is  
renewable, it supports local jobs and the local economy and, importantly it supports sound 
management of Maine’s forests, which sequester  currently  75%  of Maine ’s overall  carbon emi ssions.   
 
The Department of Environmental Protections established the  current  outdoor wood boiler rules in 2007. Since that time,  the 
import of high emitting units  into the  state of Maine has been prohibited , and units sold or installed after March of 2019 have 
required EPA testing and approval . Since the time the rules were adopted, technology and design advancem ents have allowed 

2 
 for the manufact uring of outdoor wood boilers that are far  more efficient , and the  EPA has implemented stringent rules 
requiring that homeowners inst all only high- efficiency boilers for residential use.  
 
Consi dering the changes that have occurred  since 2007, the Co uncil agrees with the bill sponsors that now is an appropriate 
time for the Maine DEP to re examine the setback requirements , which are 270 feet from a neighboring dwelling or 250 feet 
from a property boundary.  
 
Upon re view,  if the Department opt s to change the setback requirements, the Council feels that section 3 of §610- B dealing with 
nuisance condi tions provides adequate protections for  abutting properties , providing that, “ A person may not operate an outdoor 
wood boiler in a manner that creates a nuisance condition as defined in the department's rules. ” Section 4 pro vides that, “ If the commissioner 
finds after investigation that an outdoor wood boiler is being operated in a manner that creates a nuisance condition or may create or creates a 
danger to public health or safety, the commissioner may order the owner or any per son operating that outdoor wood boiler to immediately 
cease or prevent that operation, and the commissioner may take such action as may be necessary to terminate or mitigate the d anger or 
likelihood of danger.”  
 Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have at the work session.  
 
 
