March 1, 2023
To: Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and 
Natural Resources Committee
From: Shirley Hager, 129 Chesterville Hill Road, Chesterville, ME 04938
shirley.hager@maine.edu, 207-491-0982
Re: Support for LD 400, "Resolve, Directing the Department of Environmental Protection to 
Examine Setback Requirements for Outdoor Wood Boilers"
I am testifying in support of LD 400, "Resolve, Directing the Department of Environmental 
Protection to Examine Setback Requirements for Outdoor Wood Boilers.”
Last Spring, my husband and I decided it was time to replace our current outdoor wood boiler 
with a new and more efficient boiler, especially to take advantage of current tax breaks and 
Efficiency Maine rebates. What we decided to replace it with was a Central Boiler Classic Edge 
760. Here is the link to the EPA fact sheet on that wood boiler, where you can see that it is 
listed as having a .10 emission rate (lb/mmBTU): 
https://cfpub.epa.gov/oarweb/woodstove/index.cfm?fuseaction=app.searchResultsWH
While this replacement would be much more efficient and less polluting than our current 
boiler, we learned that current DEP regulations prevent us from installing it, given our setbacks, 
unless we install a stack that would be so high that it becomes almost impossible to stabilize, 
not to mention unwieldy and unsightly. We currently have three four-foot lengths of stovepipe 
on our boiler, but we have a two-story house and current regulations would require yet another 
two lengths of four-foot pipe to get it at a height equal to two feet above the peak of our roof.
The current DEP regulations require a 300-foot setback from all abutting residences, but these 
regulations are based on a particulate emission limit of .32 lbs/mmBTU. The new boilers do 
much better than that, including the one we want to purchase (again, .10 lbs./mmBTU). We 
meet this setback on all sides of us except one, where a residence sits (through the woods) at 
185 feet from the boiler location. 
Here are the applicable DEP regs: Chapter 150: Control of Emissions from Outdoor Wood 
Boilers, Section 06-96 B, Setback Requirements (3); and, C, Stack Height Requirements(3)(a) and 
(b).
We had a site visit from Tim Smith of the DEP Air Bureau. He acknowledged the dilemma and 
confirmed that, in situations like ours, it is very difficult to secure stack heights that are 
required by the regulations (he said that 50% of them fail in the first storm). 
The irony is that we were excited not only to take advantage of some great incentives to 
replace our current boiler, but we were pleased to be installing something that was better for 
the environment and much preferred to burning oil or other petroleum products.  We've 
learned that these new boilers are so efficient that you can't even see the smoke coming out of 
the stack. And, by the way, we’ve never had a neighbor complaint even with our current boiler.
We decided to keep our old boiler for another year or two, hoping that the same cost 
incentives will stay in place and hoping that legislation might be able to change the regulations 
to reflect the new products on the market; or, failing that, possibly legislation that would allow 
for variances.
Thank you for your time and attention to this issue. We hope that you will be able to do 
something that addresses this concern, and that encourages the use of these new, energy-
efficient boilers, both from an environmental and an economic standpoint.
