l Testimony in Opposition to LD 862l 
”An Act to Move Jurisdiction over Railroad Lines from the Department 
of Transportation to an Independent Rail Authority" 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, members of the Committee on 
Transportation, my name is Anthony Hourihan and I represent l\/laine Northern 
Railway and I am testifying in opposition to LD 862. Our company operates rail 
freight services on over 535 miles of track in lVlaine and New Brunswick, 400 miles 
of which is in Maine including 233 miles of State-owned rail running from 
Millinocket to Madawaska. These are critical links for freight coming in to and 
leaving the State, and especially important links for our forest products industry. 
Maine Northern has grown from a workforce of 46 in 2011 to 134 people today, 
and that team has increased volume from an average of 100 cars per week to 400 
carloads per week in the same 12 years. The long~term positive relationship with 
l\/laine DOT staff on planning and support of the rail system in Maine is reflected 
in the continuing growth and improvement of rail performance. Since we began 
operating the northern line the State Department of Transportation has beena 
great partner, the professional staff have management acumen and knowledge of 
rail, along with relationships with businesses, shippers, municipal officials, and 
railroad operators. The department has worked tirelessly with the Congressional 
delegation in ensuring available funds come to the State to improve the railroad 
system, and they continue to promote moving freight off highways and on to 
railroads by programs such as IRAP. 
In fact, the focus on rail by the department has seen the State's railroads evolve 
from underfunded, underperforming railroads, now the State is host to three 
Class 1 railroads and efficient shortline connections such as our lines. During the 
same time Maine has seen an increase in passenger rail as well. The professionals 
at DOT were surely some of the attractions that brought these multinational 
carriers to the State.
This bill that seeks to take rail out of the Maine Department of Transportation and 
form an independent rail authority is a cure for what problem? This is not 
apparent to anyone associated with the industry. The State has the advantage of 
overseeing all modes of transport in the State all of which are inter-connected, 
not to mention that railroads are highly controlled by federal rules and the State 
is in constant communication with their Federal counterparts. There is no 
indication of who would be part of this independent authority, who would pick 
the members, and what role they would play with the private companies 
operating railroads in the State. Maine DOT has a professional, effective and 
efficient system to deal with railroads today. Why would we want to fix 
something that isn't broke? 
Railroads are a key to increase freight and passenger efficiencies as we combat 
global warming, I urge the committee to think carefully before creating a bad 
situation for rail carriers. Please Vote Ought Not to pass on LD 862. 
Anthony Hourihan
