Alex Greenlaw
Bath Cannabis Company
LD 94
I am writing in my testimony today to stop LD 94.
It is outrageous to think that it is a good idea to ban concentrates from the medical 
program as many of the patients depend on having their medicine (Concentrates) 
available to them in this form for serious conditions. 
Medical patients are protected and need to continue being protected as it is not the 
governments place or this person that has submitted such an atrocious bill to further 
this agenda and to hurt the medical patients opportunities to purchase and receive the 
medicine of there choosing and with PRIVACY.  
This atrocious proposal bill would prevent Medical Patients from the use of Cannabis 
for common conditions which make no sense whatsoever.  Most reasonable and 
intelligent people can understand that common conditions can certainly worsen and 
manifest other and potentially serious conditions if left untreated.  So to propose and 
support a bill like this I cannot in good faith as it would just do a disservice to the 
great people in the State of Maine who rely and use this medicine that actually can 
help them.
As this atrocious bill proposes to prohibit Physician assistants to proscribe 
certifications to patients is unjust as they are fully qualified to take on a responsibility 
in a normal doctors office to proscribe medicine to patients, how is this any different 
from those practices, this bill is just filled with hypocrisy as you can clearly see this 
person and the proposed bill does not care about Maine and its important and great 
medical program.  The other big issue is that this would delay patients the opportunity
to receive treatment which we just can not allow to happen.
This is my testimony and I think this proposed bill is ridiculous and if anything will  
hurt more then just patients in the state of Maine.  It would impact patients, store 
owners, employees, Physician assistants and so many more who are a part of this 
great community. The amount of trickle down effect would be massive and we cannot
stand for this. 
Thank you,

