Andelena  Henderson 
West Paris Provisions
LD 94
Senator Craig Hickman, Laura Supica, and other distinguised members of the joint 
committee of Veterans and Legal Affairs, I am submitting Testimony today against 
LD94
My name is Andelena Henderson and I am the owner and caregiver of West Paris 
Provisions, West Paris, Maine. 
LD94 is A MAJOR step backwards for the Medical Cannabis Program. Placing these 
massive restrictions on what qualifies a person to be a medical card holder would 
devastate many patients including some of my staff (who gave verbal permission to 
talk about them and their medical cannabis use) 
I have a young man employed in my Headshop, West Paris Mercantile. He was born 
without all 4 full limbs, and part of his jaw. By these qualifications outlined in the 
language of LD94 he would not qualify for his medical cannabis card. 
I have another employee who suffers from massive headaches, ADHD, and 
depression; all of which she effectivly treats by including medical cannabis into her 
medical routine. None of which are included in the language of the outlined 
qualifications. 
Further, it is my understanding that this bill could potentially take away the 
availability for Out of State Medical Card holders to be able to purchase in Maine. 
Who is the government to stand in between a patient and a doctor to say who qualifies
for a medication for a medical condition? Who is the government to dictate whether 
my staffs pain level meet your standard for receiving medical care? I’m sorry, but this
bill and the language that was dropped on it late last night giving caregivers and their 
employees and all other Pro Cannabis Activists minimal time to respond effectively, 
should not even be in question. The space in between a doctor and a patient, 
regardless from what state they are from, or what age a patient is (given a doctor and 
parents have agreed to specific types of treatment), is a sacred space between the the 
patient and their doctor. Who are we to decide who qualifies and who doesn’t? Thats 
a medical decision, NOT a political decision.
Please vote ought not to pass on LD94. This bill would devastate Maine Medical 
Program and a large population of its patients who rely on Medical Cannabis to live a 
meaningful life. Thank you for your time and Consideration. 
