Brittney Dalton
Anson
LD 94
Good morning, I am writing to you all as a medical cannabis caregiver but most 
importantly as a parent of a child who utilizes medical cannabis to control tics that he 
experiences as a result of tourettes. I have several concerns regarding what 
implications this could have on my child's access to his medicine. My first concern is 
excluding concentrates and hemp from the definition of medical cannabis. For my 
child, and a vast majority of children in the pediatric cannabis program, removing 
these things will severely limit their access to their medicine. I grow my child's 
medicine, bring it to a state licensed extraction facility and there, it is made into a 
concentrate which is later emulsified into a carrier oil specially formulated for my 
specific child per Dr Sulak's recommendation. This emulsified concentrate is then 
taken by the drop. Administering his cannabis this way ensures that we maintain a 
consistent dose, increasing his dose by one drop at a time also allows us to dose 
differently depending on his needs and the severity of his tics. He takes less in the 
morning and afternoon than he does at night. If you were to try and create this tincture
using just plant material that hasn't been processed into a concentrate, the results 
would not be the same and testing proves that. Using an extraction facility also 
removes many impurities that sometimes come with the territory of growing outdoors 
(pine needles, bugs, dirt etc.)
As a caregiver who sells both to patients and wholesale, distinguishing different types
of caregivers is unnecessary as we already distinguish what type of business we're 
conducting when we apply to be a caregiver. Distinguishing types of patients is also 
unnecessary. I'm not sure why the age of the child matters, when everyone's birth date
is clearly already visible on the card. That would be like requiring your driver's 
license to list your age when your birth date is already visible. It's redundant and just 
unnecessary. 
Requiring a code to distinguish a child's diagnosis is hovering over the line of his 
HIPPA rights. It is no one's business what their diagnosis is. Reinstating the list of 
qualifying conditions is a huge step back in the medical cannabis program as well. If a
Dr feels their patient would benefit from medical cannabis they should be able to 
prescribe it. I know personally for my child, tourettes wasn't always on the list of 
qualifying conditions and then later added. This restricts a child's access to 
medication under the direct guidance of a Dr. It's an over reach of the program and 
teeters on the line of non physicians practicing medicine, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your time in reading my testimony this morning. I ask that you please 
carefully consider the implications this could have on Maine's most vulnerable 
patients in the medical cannabis program. 
