 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and esteemed members of the Veteran ’s and Legal Aff airs Committee , my name is Deborah Hagler, MD, 
MPH and I am a resident of H arpswell and the immediate past pres ident of the 
Maine Chapter of the AAP.   I am writing to share information for you to consider as you debate LD 94 , 
"An Act Regarding the Use of Medical Cannabis by Minors" . 
 Here are a few key points I hope you will consider as you discuss and make recommendations around cannabis use for youth.  
 1. 65% of high school students perceived little or no harm from using marijuana a few times a week . With  increased availability  in the US of medical 
and recreational marijuana.  Perception of harm from marijuana use is slowly decreasing in youth.  2 Regular  use of  marijuana in adolescents during a time period when the brain 
is still developing increase risk of learning problems, depression, psychotic illness and suicide.  3. The Brain continues to develop until the  mid to late 20s.  
 4. In 2021 47% of youth felt marijuana easily accessible and this data was collected during a pandemic when conditions for youth gathering altered but 
the landscape of the pandemic.  
 5. I am continually astonished by the ease and continue to be increasingly concerned by the number of 18 year old patients with mental illness who apply for a green card for medical marijuana with no clear indication.   Insisting on 
increase education for clinicians providing cards  to young adults will ensure 
appropriate  consideration during a  critical phase of development.  
 6. Ensuring strict criteria are utilized for the dispensation of green cards  to 
young adults whose brains are developing will protect them from further harm but will allow compassionate consideration where the data suggests  in some 
populations access to medical marijuana may be helpful as an adjunct therapy. 
 
The Maine AAP  realizes  there are so many factors around cannabis legislation,  and 
we hope that you identify a clear process for reviewing applicants and add a compassionate use category.  
 
I am happy to answer any questions you may have so please don’t hes itate to reach 
out to me  if I can be of assistance.  
  
