Jeremy Click
Manchester
LD 94
I would like to submit my testimony to oppose LD 94. Which I feel is taking some big
steps in the wrong direction for the medical program in the state of Maine.
I am writing today to express my complete dismay and disappointment in the bill LD 
94 being proposed today.  Being a long-time, involved, educated cannabis industry 
member here in Maine, I am extremely proud of our program and how it serves to be 
the ultimate role model for all other states looking to offer a natural approach to 
healthcare to its citizens.
 
It is blatantly evident, LD 94 is born out of ignorance to the many benefits cannabis in
each form provides, with concentrates being one of them.  Our storefront provides 
concentrates to hundreds of patients who are in need of a stronger, high dose 
treatment to help with their pain and comfort.  There will be thousands of Maine 
citizens who will unnecessarily suffer with pain each and every day if this bill 
mistakenly passes.
The current ease of access for Maine citizens obtaining medical cards is well 
recognized.  Physicians assistants are qualified to handle the task of diagnosing 
ailments and health issues, and taking on the liability of doing so.  They are certainly 
qualified to handle the simple task of certifying a medical card, just as they should be.
Qualifying conditions should also be expanded, not retracted.  The medical program 
is about helping those in need.  LD 94 will be installing new limits on those who are 
now getting that help and is a huge setback to our highly successful medical program. 
Again, there will be thousands of Maine citizens who will unnecessarily suffer each 
and every day if this bill mistakenly passes.
OCP should not ever have access to confidential lists of patients.  They are just that.  
Confidential.  The cannabis medical program is no different than a western medicine 
program, other than the lack of an endless list of side effects.  Medical privacy needs 
to be respected and protected.  There is simply no reason that would justify this 
action.  
I proudly stand up for our patient’s rights and access to natural medicine, and in the 
strongest degree, oppose LD 94.
