Jordan  Smith
Pownal 
LD 94
Good Morning, My name is Jordan Smith. I am Saddened to have to write yet again 
today to defend the rights of patients and caregivers in the great state of Maine. 
      Ld 94 seeks to strip the rights we have worked so hard for over the last 13+ years. 
This is nothing short of a thinly veiled attempt to push more market share into the 
pockets of the adult use program and the state's coffers. This bill seeks to destroy the 
medical cannabis program under the guise of "public safety" 
      One of the most egregious components is the ban on cannabis concentrates. 
Concentrates are the best way to administer medicine with the least amount of other 
impurities. Much like any pharmaceutical compound we are not consuming the entire 
product it was derived from but the active ingredients for safe and efficient dosing. 
There has been a lot of vilification of concentrates lately with no basis is fact. not only
that but there is a large portion of product produced by every grower that can only be 
used to make concentrates. Concentrates are used in all edible product and beverages 
and can make up up to 50% of any particular caregiver's total sales. 
       Going back to only allowing certain "qualifying conditions" for medical cannabis
is not only inhumane but is also another way to force people to buy their cannabis 
from the highly taxed adult use program (for which the only qualifying condition is 
being 21+ years old) Creating a database of cannabis patients is also highly 
inappropriate and a violation of those individuals privacy. If medical users need to be 
in a database and "recreational" users do not that makes zero sense and obviously has 
nothing to do with public safety.
A lot of the other language is very ambiguous regarding patient/ caregiver 
relationships, The training required by caregivers and so on. this is concerning 
considering the intent and scope of the rest of this bill.  There have been a handful of 
"training classes or schools" that have all been pretty big failures throughout the 
country. I would be quite surprised if this would be anything different. Caregivers 
already have a pretty concise set of rules and regulations they need to follow. 
      For years many caregivers have relied on being able to sell to out of state patients 
and this is in many cases the only thing that has kept some in business and had also 
indirectly kept many other Maine businesses afloat as well. Banning this is YET 
ANOTHER way this bill seeks to push sales into the adult use program which has no 
such restrictions. It sickens me to see bills like this that seek to sacrifice the hard work
and well being of the thousands of amazing Maine caregivers for the benefit of the 
adult use program which is largely controlled by large out of state corporations. Make
no mistake this bill has nothing to do with public safety and everything to do with 
market share and tax revenue. This bill would be a thousand steps backwards for the 
Maine medical cannabis program.
       Please consider the livelihood of the tens of thousands of Mainers this would 
negatively impact as well as the hundreds of thousands of patients who rely on them 
for safe, effective and affordable medicine. At the end of the day please remember 
each caregiver is only allowed a very small 500sf garden or 30 flowering plants and 
that is already a huge limitation. We are up against corporations with gardens 60 
times that size who are constantly lobbying against us with the help of politicians who
have been convinced small Maine businesses are the enemy. 
       I am always amazed how prohibitionist politicians are harnessed as pawns for the
corporate takeover of the cannabis Industry. The pseudo regulation and fear 
mongering that large corporations push to gain these alliances is nothing short 
amazing. Pease don’t fall for this trap. 
       Thank your for your time and consideration. I am certain you will make the right 
decision for the amazing people that rely on your reason and compassion. 
Very best,
Jordan A Smith
