Good Afternoon, 
My name is Kevin Warren and I am writing on behalf of the Maine Medical Cannabis 
community. First I want to say that I do not support LD94. My reasoning on this is pretty strong. 
First I am employed by the Maine Medical Cannabis Program and I currently am the Lab 
Manager. So I am embedded in this program. Any changes that you make will be detrimental to 
not only me economically but also personally. 
I am an Army Veteran of ten years. When I got out of the military I was diagnosed with 
PTSD. The VA put me on 11 prescription drugs each drug to counter the side effects of 
something else they put me on. The list was extensive. They gave me Ambian, Kolonopins, 
Zoloft, Prozac, Seroquil, Gabapentin just to name a few. I was on a cocktail. I tried committing 
suicide because I felt like a vegetable. Then one time I slept for 52 straight hours and losta 
couple of days. That was the worst feeling in the world. After I got over the confusion and loss of 
the days I realized that I needed to do something. So I talked to my VA representative and 
basically was told there was nothing that they could do as they handed me refills of these 
prescription drugs. I left the Togus VA that day and threw them in trash. 
I had read studies on how Cannabis can help with PTSD so I went and purchased some 
on the illicit market. I was actually impressed by how much it actually helped me. It really helped 
me get off these prescriptions. When I was getting off these prescriptions I was violently ill with 
Fevers, Chills and Vomiting. Cannabis helped me get through the withdrawals of the drugs the 
VA had put me on. 
Ever since then I have never turned back. Cannabis helps me live my daily life. If LD94 
was to go through I would not have this luxury of utilizing cannabis anymore. This bill would 
require me to get a recommendation from a medical physician from the VA since that is my 
medical provider. The VA will not write me a prescription for Cannabis. Instead they will give me 
a prescription for 11 pills. 
If this passes thousands of veterans like me will be restricted from this medicine. This 
state has one of the highest veteran counts per population in the nation. 1 in 10 people in this 
state are veterans. I would like you to think about how it would affect the people of this state.I 
see freedoms taken away everyday and this is something that should not be as it really helps 
people. 
I also believe that LD94 would be a disaster financially to this state. Cannabis is the 
number one tax generating revenue in this state at this time. If this was to pass this tax money 
would be no longer and what industry would you fall back on ? We all know its not going to be 
lobster, these fishermen are losing their grounds and giving up their license. its not going to be 
farmers, these farmers are now selling their land to solar farms. 
This state is already in the middle of a crisis, we can't keep our young population. Maine 
has the oldest population in the United States. Young people are moving out of this state 
everyday. Maine is ranked 3rd in the Nation in tax burden right behind New York and Hawaii. If 
LD94 passes I see more of the younger population leaving this state. 
Thank you for taking the time to read this testimony. I hope LD94 never sees the light of 
day for it will be very detrimental to this state. 
Very Respectfully, 
Kevin Warren US Army Veteran 2001-2010 MOS:11B
