 
 
March 29th, 2023 
 
Re: LD 94 “An Act Regarding the Use of Medical Cannabis by Minors”. 
 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and distinguished members of 
the Committee, 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today at the Veteran’s and Legal 
Affairs committee public hearing on LD 94. My name is Kimberly Caldwell 
MPAS, PA-C, I  have been practicing in Lewiston and resident of Auburn 
for over 16 years. As the Vice President of the Maine Association of 
Physician Assistants (MEAPA), I speak today on their behalf in strong 
opposition to the elimination of Physician Assistants (PA) as practitioners 
eligible to certify medical necessity for cannabis use as 
outlined in section 5.4.c of the sponsor’s amendment Bill LD 94 “An Act 
Regarding the Use of Medical Cannabis by Minors”.  
 
PA History:  
The PA profession originated in the 1960’s, at a time when the US was 
experiencing a progressive shortage of physicians, particularly in primary 
care. Duke University’s, first program graduated 4 students in 1967, these 
students were chosen from Naval Corpsmen due to their prior medical 
sciences training and experience. The program was physician leg and  
based on the World War II fast track physician training model. The goal, 
rapidly train and deploy safe and competent clinicians. Throughout the 
years the prevalence of PA’s and the need have continued to grow.  
 
Please see the American Academy of Physician Associates (AAPA) 
(formerly American Academy of Physician Assistants) infographic  which 
summarizes The training, practice and progression of the profession nicely. 
AAPA also has a demographic sheet  on PA’s in Maine.  
 
 
 
PA Training:  
PA’s are highly trained medical providers practicing in all clinical areas and 
specialties. Since the 1990’s, the PA profession has considered a master’s 
degree as the point of entry degree, though some PA’s continue on to earn 
a PhD.  Others are pursuing more specialized training in certain specialties  
via certificates of additional qualifications(CAQ’s), or through fellowship 
programs (ex. Surgical fellowship).  At this point in time, the majority of 
PA’s continue to perfect their skills through on the job training and through 
independent learning.   
 
Depending on the individual’s undergraduate degree, experience and 
prerequisites, the Master’s program typically takes 2-3 years to complete 
and includes a minimum of 2,000 hours of direct clinical patient care. The 
first year or two comprised of didactic training in the classroom, on complex 
topics by body system, and others focused on pharmacology, anatomy and 
physiology, and pathophysiology.  While the final year is dedicated to 
clinical rotations, where PA students are imbedded within a variety of 
practice settings for 1:1 patient interactions. For example these practice 
areas include pediatrics, surgery, psychiatry, geriatrics, primary care to 
name just a few. In my program we did 8 separate clinical rotations, 
spending 6 full time weeks in each location, familiarizing ourselves with the 
various nuances and challenges of each setting.  
 
PA’s are different from our physician and NP colleagues because we are 
considered “generalist trained”, meaning a graduating PA has 
demonstrated competency in a wide assortment of conditions, clinical 
specialties and patient populations.  Where physicians specialize in their 
post graduate residency, then practice within that specialty for the 
remainder of their career, PA’s are able to flex from practicing in one 
specialty to another. By contrast NP’s enter training programs based on the 
 
patient population they hope to treat in the future. Ex. Acute care nurse 
practitioner (ACNP) for those desiring hospital-based practice, family nurse 
practitioner (FNP) for those wishing to treat all ages, psychiatric-mental 
health nurse practitioner (PMHNP) etc.  Because of PA’s generalist training 
and flexibility of clinical practice, being a life long learner is engrained in our 
training and reinforced by national certification and state based licensure 
requirements. PA’s are required to complete a minimum of 100 hours of 
continuing medical education (CME) every 2 years. While no restriction 
exists on what you can learn, there is significant restrictions in what 
qualifies as learning for licensure and certification maintenance, much like 
our physician and NP colleagues. 
 
PA Certification, Licensure and scope: 
PA’s are nationally certified by the National Commission on Certification of 
Physician Assistants (NCCPA) after completing an accredited PA program 
and passing a comprehensive competency examination.  PA’s are then 
Licensed by the state, in Maine this is accomplished through either the 
Maine State Board of Licensure in Medicine or the Maine Osteopathic 
Board of Licensure.  
In the Fall of 2019, just as the pandemic closed the Maine State House and 
the 129th Legislative session, LD 1660, “An Act to improve Access to 
Physician Assistant Care” was passed by both houses. This bill eliminated 
the physician supervisory relationship of PA’s, replacing it with an optimal 
team practice, collaborative model. It also set the scope of PA practice at 
the practice level. There are many other elements to LD 1660, please see 
original text  for greater detail.  
 
LD 94 Opposition: 
Our rigorous training in all the areas outlined above, coupled with our 
ongoing clinical medical educational requirement provides a more than 
adequate understanding of the medicinal substance addressed in this bill. 
 
Including, when to appropriately recommend it as an adjunct to skilled 
medical care.  
 
We feel the proposed changes to section 5 and 8 miss the mark, by not 
taking into account those minors (and adults as this section amends all 
certification, not just those of minors) who are currently under the care of 
PA’s, who depend on this substance as part of their complex treatment 
plan for conditions this bill outlines in section 8 and others such as cancer 
care (including but not limited to the management of chemotherapy induced 
nausea and vomiting), autism spectrum disorder and refractory epilepsy. 
Some clinical evidence suggests a beneficial use in a variety of other 
treatment areas, most notably for anorexia nervosa, complex motor 
disorders, anxiety and sleep disturbances, though in these cases clinical 
research is ongoing.   
 
After additional review of the sponsor’s bill and after discussion with our 
affected constituency, I have a few additional points of contention, which 
were not previously spoken about.  
 
• Also in section 5.  4-C new language now limits physician practice to 
only those “licensed by the Osteopathic Board of Licensure”, making 
no mention of the “Board of Licensure in Medicine”.  Osteopathic 
board licenses doctors of osteopathy (DO’s), while Medicine board 
licenses medical doctors (MD’s). Both boards also license PA’s.  
• Section 1. Medicinal Cannabis should include high potency 
formulations/concentrates as this is primarily used in medicinal 
settings. If we are going to limit this use, perhaps it is most 
appropriate to limit this on the recreational side of the issue.  
• Section 1. Hemp products are widely available, with demonstrated 
safety and were legal long before cannabis in Maine. To limit them at 
this point is highly counterintuitive.  
 
 
In summary, we at the Maine Association of Physician Assistants 
speak/write today in opposition to the proposed changes in section 5, which 
have the effect of eliminating both PA medicinal cannabis certification in 
Maine, which would directly affect access to care and limit appropriate 
clinical utilization of this medicinal substance for Maine adults and select 
Maine youth. We take issue with additional proposed language in sections 
1, 5, as poorly considered and incomplete. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. MEAPA would be open to 
participating in workgroup sessions in the coming weeks/months.  
 
Sincerely,  
Kimberly M. Caldwell MPAS, PA-C 
Vice President of the Maine Association of Physician Assistants  
PO Box 1103, Westbrook, ME 04098 
 
Links:  
AAPA PA Infographic 
https://www.aapa.org/download/80021/  
AAPA Maine PA Demographics 
https://www.aapa.org/download/61399/  
LD 1660 from 129th Legislative session.  
http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/display_ps.asp?ld=1660&PID=14
56&snum=129  
Maine Association of Physician Assistants Website 
https://mainepa.mypanetwork.com/  
