MATT DUBOIS  
matt@duboislawmaine.com  
P.O. Box 22  
BANGOR ME 04402  
207 951 6395  
207 433 1215 FAX  
Vetera ns and Lega l Affairs Committee 
2 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
BY ONLINE FILE SUBMISSION  
March 29, 2023  
RE: LD  94 - An Act Regarding the Use of Medical Cannabis by Minors  
Ought Not to Pass  
Dear Committee Members : 
I am writing to you as a concerned citizen  and an attorne y for Maine patients and careg ivers  to 
urge you to reject LD 94 , "An Act Regarding the Use of Medical Cannabis by Minors". This bill, 
as currently written, would severely undermine the rights and well -being of thousands of Maine 
patients who rely on medical cannabis for their health and quality of life  and largely roll back 
over a decade of progress  in bu ilding o ne of the nation’s strongest medical cannabis progra ms. 
As you may kn ow, LD 94 ’s original summary pr ovided that it was intended “to require approval 
from a minor's primary care provider before that minor may use medical cannabis .”  However,  
the latest version of the bill has gone far beyond  its original scope and would effectively gut 
Maine's medical cannabis program if passed.  
Specifically, LD 94 would:  
- Outlaw cannabis concentrates in the medical program, which are essential for many 
patients who need high doses of cannabinoids to treat  severe pain, seizures, cancer, 
PTSD, and other conditions. Concentrates may also be safer and more convenient than 
smoking or vaping raw cannabis flower,  and s ome pat ients cannot tolerate inhaled 
treatments . 
- Jeopardize patient privacy and delay tre atment by placing  the government in charge of 
issuing certification cards and therefore provide it with a list of all medical cannabis 
patients. This would lead to  increased paperwork and delay for patients who need rel ief, 
as well as undermine doctor -patient confidentiality .  As with prescriptions, a  patient’s 
medical cannabis certification should stay bet ween a doctor and patient.   
- Remove a medical provider's autonomy and bring back a limited list of conditions that 
qualify fo r certification. This would prevent patients from accessing medical cannabis for 
a wide range of conditions that can benefit from its use, such as insomnia, generalized 
 
 
anxiety, end -of-life symptoms, rare neurological disorders, and many more. Medical 
providers are trained and licensed to evaluate each patient's individual needs and risks 
and should be trusted to make informed decisions about the best course of treatment for 
their patients.  
 
- Prohibit physician assistants from providing certifications. Thi s would limit the 
availability and accessibility of medical cannabis for many patients who rely on physician 
assistants as their primary care providers or specialists.   As you know, it can be difficult 
to find or schedule an appointment with a physician , as the physician  shortage continues  
to worsen .  Physician assistants are qualified and authorized to prescribe medications and 
treatment s for their patients and should be able to do so with medical cannabis as well.  
 
These proposed changes would have devastating consequences for thousands of Maine patients 
who depend on medical cannabis for their health and well -being. They would force man y 
patients to either break the law and risk legal repercussions for a victimless crime or go without 
their medicine and suffer from debilitating symptoms and reduced quality of life.  
 
Maine has one of the best medical cannabis programs in the country, than ks to the hard work and 
advocacy of patients, caregivers, providers, and legislators over the past decade. LD 94 would 
undo much of that progress and harm Maine patients in very real and tangible  ways . I urge you 
to vote down this bill and protect the rights and health  of Maine's medical cannabis patients . 
 
Thank you for your time  and attention . 
 
Sincerely , 
 
 
 
Matthew T. Dubois, Esq.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Cc: Douglas Amato  
 James Linsey  
 
MTD/mrp  
