Michelle Breton, EdD, RN 
Testimony against LD 94  
March 29, 2023, 9 AM 
 
 
 
 
Good morning esteemed members of the committee, 
 
I am testifying today against LD 94. I am the mother of a now 10 year old brain cancer survivor 
who has relied on Maine’s excellent medical cannabis program for the last 6 years. When David 
was just 2.5 years old, he was diagnosed with a low grade brain tumor. It was good fortune that 
we moved to Maine to be closer to my family in June 2016, because a few months later, David 
relapsed and had a second craniotomy and the pathology came back malignant. Now dealing 
with an aggressive brain cancer, his entire medical team was on board with medical cannabis. 
When I asked his neurosurgeon about it, his reply was “I think it would be almost irresponsible 
to NOT try it.” So I delved hard into the world of medical cannabis and it became my life. It was 
something I could do for David. We also followed all other recommended protocols. He had a 
third craniotomy, 37 rounds of proton radiation at Mass General, and 10 months of chemo.  
 
The child he is today is thank to all of that. Cannabis did more for us than I could possibly 
describe in words. Not only was it palliative, there is good scientific evidence to show that it 
actually worked synergistically with his other therapies to induce tumor cell apoptosis. This is 
desirable programmed cell death of abnormal neurons, and it is the goal of cancer therapies. 
His team constantly remarked how well David navigated all his treatments. He was sleeping 
well, eating well (he did not lose any weight, which they said they never seen happen before) 
and it helped with his mood and nausea. We were not given good odds. He had an aggressive 
brain cancer that is very rare in children with very little data on how to treat it. He is here today 
and thriving. He has epilepsy, but again cannabis has been an incredible part of our treatment. 
We are now down to about 2 three second seizures per day. Previously, he was up to 200+. This 
is the power of cannabis in combination with other therapies that his doctors felt would be 
helpful. We tried weaning cannabis and just using meds, and he worsened greatly, so everyone 
thought it would be in his best interest to continue. We use both CBD and THC as well as other 
cannabinoids that are present in full spectrum cannabis extracts.  
 
I have several concerns with this bill:  
 
1) Qualifying conditions are not necessary. This should be left between parents and the 
child’s healthcare provider who is knowledgeable about medical cannabis. State 
involvement in this will only serve to potentially reduce access to this potentially life 
altering and even life saving therapy. Please trust parents and knowledgeable trained 
healthcare providers to make this choice. Also, importantly, I notice that cancer is not 
on the proposed list. There is emerging evidence that cannabis can be used to help fight 
cancer – not just palliatively, as previously mentioned. Please see, for example, the 
study at the bottom of this testimony. Furthermore, there are many treatments that a 
physician or other qualified healthcare practitioner may determine would be helped by 
cannabis with the benefits outweighing any risks – including alzheimer’s insomnia, 
generalized anxiety, end-of-life symptoms, various neurological conditions, and many 
more.  
2) Please allow healthcare providers to continue giving patients their card. This preserves 
privacy and allows patients and parents to feel comfortable that they are not the 
potential target of law enforcement stings for treating their child in concert with their 
medical team.  
3) Concentrates are a mainstay of medical cannabis treatment. Eliminating concentrates 
essentially means eliminating the program. This is unacceptable. I am happy to answer 
any questions about how medical cannabis is prepared for children safely – including, 
and especially, the preparation of clean, tested concentrates that are then appropriately 
diluted. Cancer treatment, for example, requires high doses and this can only be 
achieved with concentrates. Please do not criminalize parents like me who were acting 
to protect their child with the full support of his entire medical team.  
4) It is not necessary to change the definition of a caregiver or cardholder. These are 
appropriately defined currently and the program is working.  
5) It is not necessary to separate patients by age groups, as the parents and qualified 
medical professional will decide the best and safest course of action based on evidence 
and clinical experience.  
6) There does not seem to be any good reason to eliminate physician assistants as 
professionals who are able to certify and treat medical cannabis patients. These are 
qualified healthcare professionals who have the ability to do this work and provide a 
service to patients.  
7) The patient’s medical condition should not be printed on the card. This is an invasion of 
privacy.  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony.  
 
Katherine A. Scott, Angus G. Dalgleish, and Wai M. Liu. The Combination of Cannabidiol and Δ9-
Tetrahydrocannabinol Enhances the Anticancer Effects of Radiation in an Orthotopic Murine 
Glioma Model. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics , 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0402  
 
Michelle Breton
Oakland
LD 94
Hi, I submitted this form previously, but have not received a zoom link. Could I get 
instructions on how to join? Thank you. 
