 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 29 , 2023  
 
Senator  Craig Hickman, Chair  
Representative  Laura D. Supica , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 94, An Act Regarding the Use of Medical Cannabis by Minors  
 
Dear Senator  Hickman , Representative Supica , and Members of the Committee  on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs : 
 
This letter is to provide information about L D 94, An Act Regarding the Use of Medical Cannabis by 
Minors , and the potential impact of the proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
LD 94  is a concept draft that  proposes to require approval from a minor's primary care provider before 
that minor may be issued a certification  for cannabis  for medical -use. Maine CDC appreciates the 
opportunity to provide information in response to this concept as you consider this bill.  
 
At present, minor patients in Maine are permitted to obtain medical -use cannabis certifications from a  
physician, a certified nurse practitioner or a physician assistant with whom the minor has a bona fide 
relationship, but who is not required to be the minor’s primary care provider . This medical provider must 
inform the parent or guardian of a qualifying minor patient  under the age of 18 years old about the 
potential risks and benefits of using cannabis  and must be available  to the minor  for consultation at all 
times . (22 MRS 2423 -B.) T here is no exclusive  list of qualifying conditions , and , if the patient’s primary 
care provider is not known to th e certifying provider, the provider , who m ust complete a full assessment 
of patient ’s medical history, is to also conduct an in -person consultat ion before issuing a certification for 
medical -use cannabis.   
 
In some cases, a minor’s primary care provider may not be aware that their patient is being treated by 
another medical provider and using cannabis to address a condition or symptom , interrupting the  
continuity of care . Without the knowledge of use, t he minor patient’s primary healthcare provider  is not 
able to identify potential adverse medication interactions or discuss general or individual risks based on 
the patient’s health histor y. This is a particularly concerning gap in the current system as there are known 
potential drug -drug interactions between delta -9 THC and/or cannabidiol (CBD) and numerous other 
medications prescribed for a variety of medical conditions . In 2020, the Penn  State College of Medicine 
evaluated existing drug information to identify 139 medications which may be affected by compounds in 
CBD and THC, 57 of which can pose a health risk if not corrected[1]. All controlled substances prescribed 
and dispensed in Maine are required to be entered into the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program, with 
information about the date, quantity, dosag e, and more - however, there is no system in place within the 
Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Program (MMCP) to enter and track any such health information 
regarding recommended dosage or instructions for use. Additionally, there is no system in place to 
moni tor whether recommendations for dosage, product, or potency are followed by a patient after the 
certification card is provided, which has the potential to increase risk of drug -drug interactions. While 
providers are obligated to obtain a health history pri or to writing patient certifications for medical -use 
 
 cannabis, two -way transparency with primary healthcare providers is necessary to ensure risks are 
addressed and considered when pharmacologic treatment options are considered for other health 
conditions.   
  
While there are certain conditions with evidence to support medical -use cannabis for minors, sustained 
use of cannabis products containing high potency THC is tied to an increased risk of mental health issues 
including psychosis, schizophrenia, depress ion, and anxiety for individuals whose brains have not 
completed development, a process which is not complete until a person reaches roughly age twenty -
five[2],[3]. Cannabis use is also linked to increased risk of issues with brain development for minors, 
including difficulty with crit ical thinking, memory and learning, and maintaining attention. Seriously 
weighing potential benefits with risks such as these when recommending cannabis for medical use and 
when developing policy around the engagement of a minor patient’s primary care prov ider is an important 
consideration.  
  
While the concept draft for LD 94 has potential to address gaps in healthcare coordination, adding the 
requirement of approval  by a patient’s primary care provider before accessing medical -use cannabis 
could also have  unintended negative  consequences. Not all Maine citizens, or even minors, are seen by or 
assigned to a primary care provider. The saturation of Maine’s primary care workforce differs drastically 
between geographic locations throughout the State, making it  difficult at times to find an accessible PCP. 
In 2021, the Health Resources & Services Administration updated its map of “Health Profession Shortage 
Areas” specific to primary care in Maine, and identified 74 areas throughout the State that were in a 
prim ary care shortage, either based on geography or population -specific factors such as income[4]. If LD 
94 is enacted as writte n, a minor may look to access cannabis by other means if a primary care provider 
does not approve medical cannabis certification, which creates a situation where there is potential for the 
use of THC or CBD products with no oversight from any medical provi der at all.  
  
The Committee could consider adding a requirement of notification to a minor patient’s primary care 
provider rather than requiring approval from them.  
  
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. We understand this is a concept draft and look forward to 
seeing additional details for this proposal. The Maine CDC is available to provide additional details for 
the Committee’s consideration that may be h elpful in determining whether to enact LD 94.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting  Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 
[1] Kocis P, T, Vrana K, E: Delta -9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Cannabidiol Drug -Drug Interactions . 
 Med Cannabis Cannabinoids 2020. doi: 10.1159/000507998[2] National Academies of Sciences 
Engineering and Medicine, “The health effects of cannabis and cannabinoids: Current state of evidence 
and recommendations for research,” Washington, DC, 2017.  
[3] Volkow ND, Swanson JM, Evins AE, DeLisi LE, Meier MH, Gonzalez R, Bloomfield MA, Curran 
HV, Baler R. Effects of Cannabis Use on Human Behavior, Including Cognition, Motivation, and 
Psychosis: A Review. JAM A Psychiatry. 2016 Mar;73(3):292 -7. 
[4] https://da ta.hrsa.gov/tools/shortage -area/hpsa -find 

