Nicholas Brigham
Black Tie Cannabis
LD 94
I have no idea why anyone is trying to make modifications to a thriving medical 
program, but here we are. The medical program is the best in the country. Removing 
the ability to use concentrates accomplishes what goal? Limiting patient access to 
medical products, and stalling the services, accomplishes what goal? We must always 
ask ourselves, “what is the goal?” before changes in policy - or behavior - are made.
It certainly doesn't improve public safety. There are zero statistics pointing to the 
medicinal use of concentrates as causing a public health problem/crisis. In fact, many 
people use concentrates because it's a preferred method of pain relief. 
It certainly doesn't improve the state, economically. Concentrate sales are on the rise 
as individuals are becoming more comfortable using them. They're more cost 
effective than flower, which is an important point to make given how out of control 
inflation currently is. 
It certainly doesn't make the lives of law enforcement or OCP easier. Concentrates are
causing zero problems for OCP or local/state governments.
This seems irrational, much like previously recommended adjustments to the medical 
program. I can only assume this is some largely self-interest driven attempt to reduce 
the medical program in power so that the adult use program can thrive. Just because 
OCP screwed up the adult-use program by making the cost of operation far too high 
through greedy excise taxes, outrageous seed to sale tracking costs, and sky-high 
testing costs doesn't mean the medical program should suffer.
All of the above incredibly reasonable arguments apply to the other components of 
this preposterous bill. 
The government should not have access to a list of patients. That's beyond a violation 
of privacy. What possible reason could the government have for needing this 
information?
Bringing back a limited list of conditions to qualify as a patient? When did the 
government become medical experts, and why should we trust them in making such 
decisions? You wouldn't ask your dentist what's wrong with the motor in your 
vehicle, would you? 
Riseman - someone with experience as a CFO and in economic development - is 
supposed to be a trusted authority on medical marijuana and how patients apply and 
qualify for medicine?
Please ask yourselves: who do these changes truly benefit? Limiting access to medical
marijuana products is purely extravagant government overreach when the proposed 
changes to current rules and statutes does nothin to improve
-Public safety
-Medical solutions
-Governmental efficiencies and effectiveness
