122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Support of:  
LD 94: An Act Regarding the Use of Medical Cannabis by Minors  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
State House, Room 437 Wednesday , March  29, 2023 
 Good morning, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs . My name is Rebecca Boulos . I am a resident of South Portland and 
executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  MPHA i s the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent 
more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all  people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and envir onments that underlie health 
inequities – but  which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied 
to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities , and we take that 
responsibility seriously.  MPHA is i n support of LD 94:  “An Act Regarding the Use of Medical Cannabis by Minors .” This  bill proposes 
changes in definitions and requirements under the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Act . 
 We are supportive of the  nine goals outlined in th e proposed amendment , including distinguishing between 
qualifying patients  by age, distinguishing types of caregivers , and establishing qualif ying conditions . We are 
also supportive of adding a definition of “medical cannab is” to statute  and adding continui ng medical 
educational requirements  for me dical providers .  
 Current Criteria for M aine Medical Canna bis Cards  
Current criteria to receive a Maine medical c annabis c ard are very broad
, and indeed, are marketed that way by 
medical cannabis retailers . For example, on Grass Monkey’s website : 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org   
 
 Since Maine also has an adult -use program, these broad cr iteria really serve to increase acces s to persons under 
21 years of age who can ’t otherwise buy cannabis  in the adult use program . Given that , we would be supportive  
of adding a r equirement fo r a face- to-face (or teleh ealth) visit for medical cannabi s prescriptions . 
 Currently , discou nt websites are selling  medical cannabis cards . For e xample, on LivingSocial , Leafwell is 
offering m edical cann abis cards for $30 : 
 
 
 While there are discounts for other drugs  (such as insulin
); those drugs are regulated  by the U.S. F ood and D rug 
Administration (FDA) , which means manufacturers have to provide  clinical data to demonstrate  safety and 
efficacy, stu dy adverse health effects, and conduct  ongoing monitoring. We would support  provisions to 
prohibit non- medical discount websites from selling reduced -price  medical cannabis cards.  

122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  Qualifying Conditions  
A 2019 Health Affairs article  assessed  the evidence of cannabis’  treatment efficacy across different conditions . 
We pro pose including the heal th conditions  with the strongest evidence  (i.e., “Conclusive evidence of efficacy ” 
and “Substantial evidence of e fficacy ” – see  below)  to inform the list of approved qualifying conditions , with 
the opportunity to add qualifying conditions a s efficacy data become available (e.g., epilepsy) . 
 
 
 
Medical Provider Training  
There is emerging evidence about adverse interactive effects between cannabis and other drugs. For example, new recommendations and guidelines from the American Society of  Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medi cine
 
(ASRA) state that all patients who undergo procedures that require regional or  general anesthesia should be 
asked if, how often, and in what forms they use because data show patients who regularly use cannabis may experience worse pain and nausea after surgery and may require more opioid analgesia.  Training requirements 
for prescribing medical providers  will help e nsure  these health professionals are educated about  these 
interactions. We would also be supportive of adding continuing education about  the physical and mental health 
risks of cannabis use  among 18- 25-year-olds. This training already exists and could easily be provided to the 
medical community.  In 2020, in Maine, there were 5,625 cannabis -related emer gency department visits, a 21% 
increase from 2019.
1 Rates were disproportionately higher for males and for people ages 18 to 25 years old. 
Training about the physical and me ntal health risks associated with cannabis use could help address  – and 
prevent – some of these adverse health impacts.  
 One recommendation from the 2019 Health Affairs  article was  the creat ion of a nationwide patient registry to 
facilitate better understanding of trends in medical cannabis use and its potential t reatment eff icacy . We would 
be supportive of creating such a registr y in Maine. Using this registry, we could also analy ze medical provider 
prescribing patterns (e.g., number of prescriptions, patient  ages , qualifying conditions ), which would be helpful 
for ident ifying potentially risky prescribing patterns . 

122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  We would also ask the committee  to please consider requiring prescribing medical  providers  to disclose if they 
receive compensation from the cannabis industry (e.g., CMS ’ Open Payments , which provides information 
about  payments made by drug and medical device companies to physicians, physician assistants, advanced 
practice nurses and teaching hospitals. ). 
 
We believe the pr ovisions in this amendment  will strengthen existing  regulations and be more pr otective of 
public health. Thank you for consider ing our testimony . 
 
 
1 Marijuana Use Dashboard . Maine State Epidemiological Outcomes Workgroup.  
