Roxanne Kai-Petrovich
West Paris Provisions
LD 94
Senator Craig Hickman, Laura Supica, and other distinguished members of the joint 
committee of Veterans and Legal Affairs, I am submitting Testimony today against 
LD94
My name is Roxy Kai and I am the Media Manager of West Paris Provisions, in West
Paris, Maine. I’m Testifying for myself and a good friend of mine. 
LD94 is a bill where someone clearly wants to play Puppet Master with peoples lives.
Does the writer of this bill have a medical degree? Did they spend time with doctors 
and patients? and did they do substantiated evidence based research before dropping 
language on a medical cannabis bill late the night before a public hearing? Was that 
intentional? I mean, Representative Riseman, you ought to be ashamed of yourself.  
This bill is hopefully an easy block, but it blows my mind that it was even put out 
here the way it was. 
I work with a good friend of mine, He is an amazing individual who was born with no
arms, or legs, and a portion of his jaw and he uses Medical Cannabis for other reasons
- not physical reasons, surprise. He gave me permission to share with you his physical
condition because when you stand him and I next to each other, can you guess who 
qualifies for medical cannabis and who doesn’t?  The answer is I qualify, but in the 
language of this proposed bill, Josh does not.  
So who are we to play GOD? To look at someone and decide that their medical 
condition doesn’t qualify. Do you live with that person and see how they function on 
a day to day? Do you have a medical degree? Have you ever even smoked or 
consumed cannabis? Do you have a chronic condition that you need to treat? Ask 
yourself these questions. And look at me and my friend Josh, who are both currently 
medical cannabis patients. How dare you try to step into that confidential and sacred 
space between the doctor and the patient and pick and choose who does and does not 
qualify by placing strict and minimal qualification perimeters. 
Don’t play God, and let the space between a medical provider and patient stay sacred, 
Protect the Maine Medical Cannabis Program vote ought not to pass on LD94
Thank you.
