Samantha Brown
South Berwick
LD 94
Honorable members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee,
My name is Samantha Brown of South Berwick. 
Today I rise STRONGLY AGAINST LD 94. 
My daughter, now age 11 has been a cannabis patient since 2013 when she was 
diagnosed with Dravet Syndrome. A pharmaceutical resistant catastrophic form of 
epilepsy. 
A complete shock to us, our beautiful healthy baby girl had her first seizure at 9 
months old within 30 days of her last vaccinations. Watching her convulse non stop 
while she turned blue is one of the most awful things a parent will ever have to 
endure. She was rushed to the ER where they gave her medicine that stopped her 1 
hour long seizure. 
We have experienced multiple seizures like the first.  Our ambulance trips were once 
a month.  We have failed multiple anti epileptic drugs that were prescribed by western
medicine doctors, found ourselves addicted to them, and had to go through years of 
weaning.
While western medicine drugs are “studied” and the dangerous side effects are 
known, it makes them first line treatment, even though these treatments are known to 
be ineffective for Dravet syndrome. I had to bring my daughter elsewhere to use a 
safer and most effective medicine, that is available at my very fingertips. Not one 
western medicine doctor that was on my daughter’s team would sign their name on a 
medical cannabis certificate. Cannabis has not been adopted by Western medicine. 
In 2015, with help of Senator Eric Brakey, we introduced a bill that would encourage 
hospitals to change policy to allow cannabis in their facilities, as hospital policy was 
restricting and bullying parents like myself against giving cannabis to their children 
when they were in emergency situations. You can not abruptly take medicine away 
from a seizure patient. To this day, they are STILL bullying patients and they STILL 
reject cannabis as a treatment. 
Seizures are a known side effect listed on vaccine inserts, I decided no more. This 
leaves us in a situation of medical bullying and lack of PCPs that will take my child, 
pushing us to find alternative medical providers, aside from her neurologist. When I 
first saw this bill come out, I freaked out and immediately called her doctor who 
writes out her cannabis certification, and asked him “what the heck am I going to 
do?” his answer was “fight this!” 
Cannabis has eliminated the lengthy seizures that caused her to be a prisoner to the 
house in anticipation of a call for an ambulance. We have not needed the hospital or 
their policy in years. This bill puts us in the very system that hurts her.  Cannabis has 
helps her quality of life and allows us to adventure including travel which is 
something we were never able to do while dealing with pharmaceuticals.  
This horrible language came out last hour, not available to the public, is despicable, 
sneaky and non democratic. No one can absorb this bill the night before and tell 
everyone about it to testify. This is a disgusting bill, and I beg you, not to take 
medicine away from daughter.
Thank you. 

