Scott Gagnon
AdCare Educational Institute of Maine, Inc.
LD 94
Good Morning,
My name is Scott Gagnon and wanted to provide some information to the VLA 
Committee, relevant for the discussions for LD 94, regarding the availability of 
training for medical professionals in areas of cannabis science and prevention. I 
understand there was a suggestion that there was no training available in areas of 
cannabis science, for medical professionals who are providing cannabis 
recommendations.  There is indeed training that has been developed, that can be 
customized, for Maine medical professionals who are providing medical cannabis 
recommendations for youth and young adults, and across the lifespan.  
As quick background, I am the Associate Executive Director for AdCare Educational 
Institute of Maine, Inc., we are a Maine-based non-profit with expertise in providing 
training and technical assistance to the fields of behavioral health, addiction services, 
and public health.  One of the programs we operate is the New England Prevention 
Technology Transfer Center, which we operate through a cooperative agreement with 
the U.S. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).  
Through this cooperative agreement we provide training and technical assistance 
services for all of the New England states, in areas of prevention science.  Given the 
amount of policy change that has happened around Cannabis amongst the New 
England states, we have a specialty area of training in cannabis science.  Our PTTC is
one of 10 regional PTTCs across the country, and our Prevention Technology 
Transfer Center Network has a national Cannabis Prevention workgroup, where we 
develop training and resources to be deployed across the country.  I served as the 
Chair of this national workgroup, where I lead the creation of a 3-module cannabis 
pharmacology course.  Amongst other topics covered in this course, includes research
related to the effects and risks of cannabis for youth and young adults, regarding child
development, brain development, and other health effects.  This information can be 
very helpful for medical professionals as they weigh whether or not a medical 
cannabis recommendation is appropriate for young people, given their medical 
situations.  For reference, I have attached a pdf of the 3 slide banks that make up the 
course.  This is a course that is already posted and can be accessed by anyone in any 
profession, across the country, at no charge.  Additionally, as a federally funded 
training center, through a technical assistance request from the State, we could 
customize this training for Maine medical professionals making medical cannabis 
recommendations, at no cost to the State.  Our PTTC has received a lot of great 
feedback from professionals in the medical and behavioral health fields in New 
England that this training has provided important information that has helped them in 
providing science-based services to their patients.  We have also sponsored some live,
in-person trainings based off of this material, for medical providers in the state.  
I am more than happy to answer any follow-up questions members of the Committee 
may be have, and make myself available at a work-session to address any questions.  
Training is indeed available, and customizable, and I think could be a great benefit to 
Maine providers.  
Thank you for your time,
Scott M. Gagnon, MPP, PS-C
Director, New England Prevention Technology Transfer Center
Associate Executive Director, AdCare Educational Institute of Maine, Inc.  

