Sean Wyatt
Elevate Maine
LD 94
I am opposing LD 94. 
When reading these proposed changes I'm trying to understand who they help the 
most. What seems apparent to me is that these changes will only help the adult use 
market making it more difficult to acquire a medical card, limit the medication 
provided, ban out of state patients, limit providers, and expose patients to revealing 
their medical issues.
 
1. Making it more difficult to acquire a medical card and limit providers. This bill is 
proposing physicians to be the only providers for a medical card and the medical card 
must come from the state. This is rolling the law back to 2009's standards where the 
average medical card price was $300 due to the limited providers. Today the average 
price is $50 because of the large amount of providers available and is necessary for 
patients on a limited budget.
2. Limit the medication provided. LD 94 proposes redefining medical cannabis and 
does not include concentrates. It goes further and restricts concentrates from any 
medical cannabis including edibles. Edible cannabis requires concentrates in order for
them to even be made. Cannabis must be heated past 180 degrees in a process called 
decarboxylation to turn THC-A into bioavailable THC and then bound to a fat or 
sugar as a vehicle to dose any edible. This process itself is creating a concentrate 
making edibles impossible to make due to the prohibited use of concentrates. 
Cannabis concentrates provide a way to consume cannabis without carcinogens from 
plant material and can be taken in small amounts while providing an adequate dose to 
the patient. 
3. Ban out of state patients. LD 94 proposes "qualifying patients" as "a person who 
has been a resident of the State for at least 30 days." Who does this help other than to 
force patients to the adult market? We already limit reciprocation to medical states 
that cooperate with Maine's cannabis program. Maine annually has 20-30 million 
tourist that visit every year and they should have a way to access their medicine. 
Exposing patients to revealing their medical issues. LD 94 proposes that the medical 
card has "a code signifying the qualifying condition identified by the medical 
provider." How is this not a HIPPA violation? this unnecessarily exposes patients to 
revealing their qualifying conditions. You don't need your qualifying condition posted
on your traditional medical prescription from a doctor so why cannabis? 
