Sharon Sandstrum
New Harbor
LD 94
I oppose of 94. I have been a medical user of cannabis since 2011. in those days you 
carried around a tattered piece of paper that your physician signed off on.  At the 
beginning of the medical cannabis program I had a state issued card but needed to 
source cannabis on the black market.  I also didn’t like being on a list of state 
registered cannabis patients. This is a medical issue and I didn’t like my medical 
business on some state controlled database. As a law abiding citizen that put me in a 
bind. Do I get relief from cancer and it’s treatments or do I tough it out until the end. 
My primary physician has always been the person approving my condition for a 
medical card. He knows me my needs and the symptoms I suffer through on a daily 
basis. He was my physician long before the Cannabis program came into being. I was 
relieved when the current cannabis medical program was put in place. 
The cancer I have is called medullary thyroid cancer and I’ve had it since I was 25. 
It’s slow growing and for years there was no proven treatment. My symptoms are 
deep and chronic fatigue, nausea, swelling of the joints, and generalized body pains. I 
now have  tumors in my spine, liver, lungs and soft tissue in my chest. Luckily there’s
a chemotherapeutic genetic therapy that I’ve been on for the last 4 1/2 years. So it 
slows the cancer even more though it has its own host of side effects. Headaches 
nausea, joint pain arthritis liver toxicity gastric issues and eye problems. Cannabis has
given me hope and allowed me to continue with some kind of quality of life. My 
family and friends iare grateful to be able to spend time with me when my symptoms 
are treated with cannabis. 
Re: Concentrates can be taken discreetly and works very quickly in small amounts. 
My life would become more difficult should I not be able to access concentrates.
What do the bills sponsors know about cannabis its properties and how it works? 
What do they know about the suffering of the conditions it helps alleviate? Does this 
governing body want to be known for the prohibitions it puts on a successful medical 
cannabis program that relieves suffering. Or does it want to be known for dredging up
well worn ground and the hard work it took many people including legislators to 
make the current medical program a success? I urge you to vote no on LD 94.
Sharon Sandstrum
New Harbor Maine
