William Harris
PORTLAND
LD 94
Regarding changes to medical cannabis regulations, specifically eliminating 
concentrates from the medical program:
Legislatures all over the country are injecting themselves between doctors and 
patients regarding medication and procedures. Most legislators are not physicians or 
pharmacists. My physician has recommended medical cannabis to manage several 
symptoms of a complex disorder for which I am on permanent disability. The other 
options are addictive opioids and benzodiazapines neither of which address my issues 
as well as cannabis and cannabis is not physically addictive. I do not feel like I have 
had to turn myself into a drug addict to properly treat my disease. This is highly 
liberating for people like me. I also cannot tolerate most even over the counter pain 
medication. 
My physician is a professor of medicine at Harvard University, and regarding 
medication and treatment, the first thing he said to me is that if I am gonig to argue 
with him about what he prescribes, I had better go to Harvard and get my own 
medical degree. I suggest you legislators do the same. Stop coming between us and 
our doctors. It's gross. 
Concentrates in specific are vital to my care. Cannabis prohibition, in light of the real 
damage drugs like alcohol do--and recent studies show there is NO safe level of 
alcohol consumption--it is clear that this is more of the racist nonsense that made 
cannabis illegal in the first place. This is not opinion: it is established fact that 
anti-Mexican racism was largely responsible for the outlawing of cannabis mostly 
because of the same racist trope that stoned "latins" would be a danger to "white 
women". I am not making this up. 
Prohibitionists of alcohol and cannabis put themselves into the company of 
legislatures who act out of racism and who's prohibition of alcohol was single 
handedly responsible for the rise of organized crime in the 30's. 
Are these the people you want your legacies to be associated with?
Also, please explain to the state of maine why this committee has anything to do with 
this law. It's wholly inappropriate. 
You are asking some of us to become addicted to hard prescription drugs. Who do 
you people think you are?
