 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  (MMA)  
 
Neither For Nor Against  
LD 793, An Act to Support Municipal Services with Revenue Sharing   
 
March 30, 2023  
 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee.  My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony “neither for nor against” LD 793 on behalf of 
the 70 municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Assoc iation’s 
Legislative Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal 
interest.   
It is clear to municipal leaders that service center communities invest in the services and 
programs that generate greater sales and income tax  revenues for Maine  and the property 
taxpayers in these towns and cities fund the delivery of services necessary to support daytime 
populations that far exceed that of fulltime populations.  While  the sentiment behind LD 793 is 
greatly appreciated , local officials recognize that municipalities of all populations and capacities 
provide, and at times are mandated to do so, several services, fund K -12 educational programs 
and pay for county programs .  
It is for this reason that m unicipal officials are c oncerned that the changes proposed in the 
bill will have adverse impacts on the amount of state revenue that is shared with  less urban and 
more rural communities.   
As an example,  in 2022 Maine Revenue Services reports that $1.2 billion in personal 
consump tion sales occurred in South Portland, which generated $69 million in taxes, when 
assessed at the 5.5% rate.  If LD 793 was in place and the city elected the 10% option, roughly 
$7 million in funds would be shifted out of the revenue sharing pool. In Minot , the 10% would 
generate a revenue sharing amount of $23,959.  To put those figures into context, in FY 2023 
South Portland and Minot are projected to receive $3.9 million and $ 317,827  in revenue  sharing, 
respectively.   
There  is nonetheless value in shar ing additional broad -based state revenues with larger 
communities.  And, coincidentally, the state has already developed such a mechanism.  
The shared state revenues  (e.g., 5% of state sales and income tax revenues)  are 
distributed to municipalities throug h two different formulas, affectionately referred to as Rev 
Share I and Rev Share II.  Eighty percent (80%) of the total revenues are distributed to each 
municipality through Rev Share I.  The calculation used to distribute the funds is based on each 
commu nity’s proportionate share of the sum yielded when multiplying each municipality’s 
population by its full value mil rate.  

Twenty percent (20%) of the dedicated revenue is distributed according to the formula 
above, except that 10 mils is subtracted from t he community’s full value mil rate. The intent is to 
target the distribution of additional revenues to service center communities. These municipalities 
generally have higher mil rates because the services and amenities found in these towns and 
cities attra ct residents from surrounding regions who in turn place greater demands on public 
services.   
While 390 municipalities will receive Rev Sharing II funds in FY 2023, the amounts vary 
widely, as greater shares are distributed to communities with mil rates th at far exceed the 10 -mil 
base.  For example, Lewiston with a full value mil rate of $20.41 is projected to receive $3 
million in Rev Share II, while Hamlin’s $10.50 mil will cause an extra $6.85 to be distributed to 
the Aroostook County municipality.  The total Rev Share I and II amounts to be distributed to 
Hamlin and Lewiston between July 2022 and June 2023 is projected to be $19,120 and $10 
million, respectively.  
 With sales and income tax revenues continuing to outperform projections, there may be 
an opportunity to review and amend the distribution formula , or the percentage of state sales and 
income tax revenue shared with municipalities .  A different a pproach would accomplish the goal 
of distributing more revenues to economic development centers, without adversely impacting  all 
other communities.   
It is for this reason  that municipal leaders ask that you review all the impacts and work on 
a solution that causes the least amount of harm.  All property taxpayers are worthy of the relief 
the state -municipal revenue sharing provi des.  
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  If you have any 
questions about the Association’s position on this bill, please do not hesitate to contact me at 
kdufour@memun.org  or 1-800-452-8786.  
 
