TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: March 30th, 1:00 PM 
L.D. 793 — “An Act to Support Municipal Services with Revenue Sharing” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Daniel D’Alessandro, Associate Tax 
Policy Counsel in the Maine Revenue Services, Ofﬁce of Tax Policy. I am here 
today at the request of the Administration to testify Against L.D. 793, “An Act to 
Support Municipal Services with Revenue Sharing. ” 
The Administration has a number of concerns regarding this proposal, 
ranging from matters of ﬁscal policy to technical language and administrative 
issues. 
This bill would allow a municipality to elect to receive—-—in lieu of certain 
existing revenue sharing programs- —l0% of the sales or use tax collected within 
that municipality. However, the bill does not provide an administrative process by 
which a municipality may elect to exercise the option, nor does it include an 
effective date, both of which should be included. Additionally, the bill does not 
stipulate whether this altemative revenue sharing calculation is to occur before or 
after the distributions to the Local Government Fund and Dispropoitionate Tax 
Burden Funds, potentially affecting the amount of revenue available in those funds 
for non-electing municipalities. 
As written, L.D. 793 may allow a municipality to “double dip” from two 
large funds, contrary to the spirit of the proposal. Currently, a municipality
1
receives a portion of the Local Government Fund and may also receive a portion of 
the Disproportionate Tax Burden Fund. The bill is unclear as to whether: (A)aV 
municipality could still receive transfers from the larger Local Government Fund 
while replacing the smaller Disproportionate Tax Burden transfer with the 10% of 
sales or use tax collected within the municipality; or (B) the election for sales or 
use tax revenue sharing would prohibit transfers from both the Local Government 
and Disproportionate Tax Burden Funds. 
The phrase “sales Q1; use tax” on Line 5 implies that a municipality must 
choose one tax type. Maine Revenue Services may be unable to determine “use 
tax collected within the municipality ” without the development of signiﬁcant new 
administrative protocols. Use tax currently may be reported on an individual ’s 
income tax return; if that individual is a part-time resident or nonresident, their 
Maine residence may differ from the address listed on their income tax return. 
Further, it is unclear whether the phrase “collected within the municipality ” 
means that the sales tax revenue to be allocated to a municipality must be collected 
by retailers located within that municipality, whether the location of the purchaser 
is a factor, or whether it should include all sales sourced to the municipality. 
Taxpayers do not currently report the information necessary to source sales made 
by out—of-state or online retailers to municipalities. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives ﬁom MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional infonnation and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
2
