1 
Your Inside Connection to Outdoor Legislation  
110 North Carolina Ave. SE • Washington, DC 20003 • 202-543-6850 • 202-543-6853 Fax • congressionalsportsmen.org  
Federal Tax ID • 52-1686163   
To: Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  
Cross Building, Room 206  
100 State House  
Augusta , ME 04333  
Re: LD 626  
LD 1166  
LD 1241  
  Positio n: Support  
  Date: April 12, 2023  
Honorable Members of the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife : 
My name is Joseph Mullin, and I am the Northeastern States  Manager  for the Congressional Sportsmen’s Foundation 
(CSF). I respectfully urge you to support LD 626, LD 1166 , and LD 1241 – three  bills that would lessen the present 
restrictions on Sunday hunting in Maine. Prohibitions on Sunday hunting serve as a hurdle for existing sportsmen 
and women and as a barrier to entry for those who are interested in trying hunting. These limitations also curb 
potential economic benefits that the state would otherwise be ear ning. Nothing in these bills would eliminate private 
property rights or force individual property owners to allow access to their lands on Sundays. Contrarily, LD 626 and 
LD 1166 would  expand property rights by allowing landowners the opportunity to hunt their own properties on 
Sundays should they wish to do so. With these considerations in mind, I urge the Committee to seek ways to increase 
access and opportunity for sportsm en and women by lessening the restrictions on Sunday hunting.  
 
Founded in 1989, CSF is the informed authority across outdoor issues and serves as the primary conduit for 
influencing public policy. Working with the Congressional Sportsmen's Caucus (CSC), the Governors Sportsmen's 
Caucus (GSC), and the National Assemb ly of Sportsmen's Caucuses (NASC), CSF gives a voice to hunters, anglers, 
recreational shooters, and trappers on Capitol Hill and throughout state capitols advocating on vital outdoor issues 
that are the backbone of our nation's conservation legacy.  
 
Acces s is a major limiting factor hindering participation in hunting,  and restrictions on Sunday hunting provide 
a temporal -access barrier to youth and others that work or attend school throughout the week and are often 
involved in extra -curricular activities o n Saturdays . The hunting conservation community strongly supports 
measures that increase access and opportunity for sportsmen and women, and I encourage you to vote in favor of  LD 
626, LD 1166 , and LD 1241 . Through the guidance and leadership of the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife , these  bills would significantly improve access and opportunity for hunters and would likely result in 
increased hunting participation. A lack of access is regularly cited as the number one reason (over whi ch policy 
makers have any control) that lapsed hunters give when asked why they decided to stop hunting, and these  bills pose 

2 
Your Inside Connection to Outdoor Legislation  
110 North Carolina Ave. SE • Washington, DC 20003 • 202-543-6850 • 202-543-6853 Fax • congressionalsportsmen.org  
Federal Tax ID • 52-1686163  to take a step in the right direction.1 As such, the overall increase in access that these bills would create  has the 
potential to boost hunter participation – something that has been on a generally declining trend in Maine for the past 
30 years. Because the MDIFW relies heavily on funding generated by the sale of hunting licenses, the decline of 
hunters in Maine  poses a threat to the future ability of the Department to effectively carry out its mission. Although 
this trend has been present for the past few decades, states across the nation – Maine included – saw increases in 
hunter participation as a result of th e ongoing COVID -19 pandemic.2 Sportsmen and women took to their favorite 
woods, fields, and waterbodies in the pursuit of game. Maine reportedly saw a 9% increase, reflecting a growth in 
the number of hunters heading afield in the Pine Tree State.3 Unfortunately, a recent report from the Council to 
Advance Hunting and the Shooting Sports discovered that 2022 hunting license sales had fallen to pre -pandemic 
levels, decreasing by 3.1% compared to what was seen in 2021.4 With the recent increased int erest in hunting during 
the pandemic, these bills serve as  an opportunity to curb this generally declining trend.  
 
Sportsmen and women are the primary funders of state -level conservation efforts and are thus an important 
constituency t hat provides benefits for all residents of Maine . In 2021 alone, Maine ’s sportsmen and women 
generated more than $25 million dollars for conservation through revenue derived from license sales and excise taxes 
on sporting -related goods through the structure known as the American System of Conservation Funding (ASCF). 
The fun ds collected through this program are the lifeblood of state fish and wildlife agencies (including MDIFW ) – 
the primary managers of our nation’s fish and wildlife resources. These critical conservation dollars fund a variety of 
efforts , such as : enh anced fish and wildlife habitat and populations, recreational access to public and private lands, 
shooting ranges and boat access facilities, wetlands protection and its associated water filtration and flood retention 
functions, and improved soil and water  conservation – all which benefit the public at large, not just sportsmen and 
women.  
 
Allowing Sunday hunting would also significantly benefit Maine’s economy, particularly in rural areas, by 
increasing economic outp ut and job creation . An additional day to hunt would mean more dollars spent by hunters 
in restaurants, hotels, gas stations and stores throughout the state. Maine’s sportsmen and women are a significant 
economic force – spending more than $609 million, su pporting more than 10,387 jobs, and generating $71 million in 
state and local taxes.5 Increasing opportunities on Sundays will allow private landowners , farmers, and others to 
diversify their income sources by allowing an additional day of hunting on their land, thereby helping to provide a 
capital influx into the more rural economies. Throughout this debate, there has been much talk about the economic 
benefits of Sunday hunting to the general economy, but one area that has not been covered in detail is the potential 
for private property owners to lease their land specifically for hunting. Allowing farmers and other landowners  to 
diversify thei r income sources by allowing an additional day of hunting on their land will help to provide a large 
capital influx to rural economies that are hardest hit by the recent pandemic. Creating additional opportunities will 
also encourage out -of-state hunting -related tourism and further bolster rural economies throughout the state.  
 
The desire to remove Sunday hunting restrictions has been a growing theme across the nation, and I encourage 
the Committee to consider lifting this dated “blue law” for the benefit o f the entire state.  The vast majority of states 
with current or previous restrictions on Sunday hunting  – including several within the northeast region – have been 
actively working to lessen or eliminate said prohibitions over the past decade. These states include Connecticut, 
Delaware, Maryland, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Virginia, and West Virginia – all of whom have 
made significant positive changes to their Sunday hunting laws or (in the case of West Virginia) have  eliminated all 
restrictions on hunting on Sundays. In all instances where restrictions have been lessened or eliminated states have 
 
1 Duda, M. D., Jones, M. F., & Criscione, A. (2010). Page 207. The Sportsman’ s Voice: Hunting and Fishing in America. State 
College: Venture Publishing Inc. ISBN -10: 1 -892132 -90-7. 
2 Hunting pastime spikes during pandemic. Conservationists are glad. Here’s why.  The Washington Post, 2021. Available 
online at: https://www.washingt onpost.com/science/hunting -pastime -spikes -during -pandemic -conservationists -are-glad-heres -
why/2021/01/08/d0342dfa -3e5c -11eb -8bc0 -ae155bee4aff_story.html . 
3 IBID.  
4 Hunting License Sales 2021 -2022 . Council to Advance Hunti ng and the Shooting Sports, 2023. Available online at: 
https://cahss.org/our -research/hunting -license -sales -2021 -2022/ . 
5 Congressional Sportsm en’s Foundation, supra . 
3 
Your Inside Connection to Outdoor Legislation  
110 North Carolina Ave. SE • Washington, DC 20003 • 202-543-6850 • 202-543-6853 Fax • congressionalsportsmen.org  
Federal Tax ID • 52-1686163  not seen an increase in enforcement concerns or conflicts between user groups and there have not been any reported 
negative  impacts on wildlife populations. Letters from several state fish and wildlife agencies detailing their positive 
experiences following these policy changes are attached for your consideration.  
 
For the reasons stated above, I respectfully encourage you  to support LD 626, LD 1166 , and LD 1241 . Thank you for 
the opportunity to provide comments on this issue. Should you require any additional information on this, or any 
other sportsmen -related topic, please feel free to contact me at any time.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Joseph Mullin  
Northeastern States  Manager  | Con gression al Sportsm en’s Found ation 
110 No rth Carolina  Ave., SE | Washington, DC 20003  
Jmullin@congressionalsportsmen.org  | 202 -253-6883  
 
 
Enclosed:  Letter from the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection detailing its 
experiences following the passage of legislation to authorize Sunday hunting for deer on private 
lands. 
 
Letter from the Delaware Division of Fish and Wildlife detailing their experiences  following the 
passage of legislation to authorize deer hunting for five Sundays on  private and public lands 
designated by government agencies.  
 
Letter from the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries following the  passage of 
legislation to authorize Sunday hunting on private lands throughout the  state and on public waters 
for waterfowl.  






