Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Melrose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chagter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Ernest Carle 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Mu|liken Court at PO Box 836 is Augusta, ME 04332-0836 sTelephone: 207-626-0005 Email: info@mainewoodIandownersorg s Website: wwwmainewoodlandowners org Dung COMMUNITY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Tom Doak 
Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
In Opposition to Sunday Hunting Bills 
LD 626, LD 1166 and LD 1241 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, my name is Tom Doak, I am 
the Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today in strong 
opposition to LDs 626, 1166 and 1241, bills that all deal with some aspect of Sunday 
hunting. I have already testiﬁed in opposition to LD 6'72. 
Going into this session of the Legislature, I Wasn’t expecting to be standing here 
dealing with four more Sunday hunting bills. By my count, 39 times in the last 46 
years the Legislature has considered overturning that prohibition in some fashion. All 
have failed. Including four just last session. 
Last session, the Maine Legislature, at the urging of this Committee, directed thata 
comprehensive survey of the Sunday hunting issue be undertaken. The Department of 
Inland Fisheries in Wildlife hired an internationally recognized survey ﬁnn with 
expertise in natural resource issues to conduct that survey at a cost of seventy one 
thousand dollars. As part of that Work, the department created a broad stakeholder 
group (which included three members of this Committee) to help develop the survey, 
and held six meetings of the group with the survey team coordinated by an outside 
facilitator. At the ﬁnal meeting, no member of the stakeholder group voiced concern 
about the questions or content of the survey. 
The result was a meticulous, comprehensive 135 page survey of the general public, 
landowners, and hunters regarding Sunday hunting. That survey showed that the 
majority of landowners and the general public oppose Sunday hunting in any form. It 
also showed that hunters are not in favor of Sunday hunting if it results in loss of 
access to private land. And the survey results showed that there would be signiﬁcant 
loss of access to private land, not just for hunting, but for other uses, if Sunday 
hunting was enacted. 
These ﬁndings were backed up by a letter sent to Commissioner Camuso from the 
Landowners and Sportsmen Relations Advisory Board (LSRAB). The LSRAB is 
statutorily created and is comprised of landowners and land users “to advise the 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - IRC 501(c)(3)
Commissioner on landowner-related laws, rules, department policies and other signiﬁcant 
landowner and land user issues” . Regarding the survey, the Board stated: 
“The board feels that the survey conducted (at signiﬁcant cost) by Responsive Management 
provides a comprehensive overview of stakeholders in this issue, based on a representative 
sample of both landowners and land users from throughout the state. This survey indicates thata 
majority of landowners in all regions of the state do not favor Sunday hunting. It concerns the 
board that a majority of landowners indicated that they would respond to a law permitting 
Sunday hunting by restricting access to their land for hunters and other recreational users. The 
board notes that a majority of hunter respondents indicated they are not in favor of Sunday 
hunting if permitting Sunday hunting would lead to restricted access on private land. These 
results echo previous research related to this issue, and they support the opposition to Sunday 
hunting that has long been perceived by groups representing hunters and landowners in Maine. 
Given these survey results, the LSRAB does not see any indication of majority support for 
Sunday hunting” 
The impact of Sunday hunting is not just about hunting, it is also about other users as well and 
the survey spells those out clearly: 
0 Among the landowner sample surveyed, 24% of those who always allow public access 
said they would be more likely to restrict access for activities other than hunting (such as 
hiking, ATV trail-riding and snowmobiling) if Sunday hunting were allowed. 
Additionally 19% of those who often allow public access and 22% of those who 
sometimes do said they would be more likely to restrict access as well. 
0 Half of Maine residents said if Sunday hunting passes it would decrease their 
participation in outdoor recreation. 
0 The survey showed that “44% of those in the sample who do not currently post their land 
say they would be more likely to restrict access to hunting on their land if Sunday hunting 
were allowed” 
Some of the early attempts to pass Sunday hunting were an outright repeal of the prohibition on 
hunting on Sunday. When it was clear an outright repeal would never pass, the strategy turned to 
attempting to pass Sunday hunting in piecemeal form and then once enacted keep trying to build 
on it. 
That is what these bills would do. None of the ideas in the four bills before you today are new. 
With 39 previous attempts there has been a lot of variety in the bills we’ve seen. Here are a few: 
Sundays with dogs, small game after noon on Sunday, Maine residents only, non-residents only, 
youth days, the ﬁrst Sunday after the ﬁrst Saturday, upland and migratory birds, ﬁrst Sunday 
before the ﬁrst Saturday, LURC (LUPC) jurisdiction only, north of the east-west highway, night 
hunting for coyotes, coyotes only, landowner ’s own land, landowners ’ own land and friends, 
Sunday hunting with an increase in license fees, and coyotes in northern Maine. There are many 
more.
And here we are again today with more of the same attempts to legalize Sunday hunting by 
incremental measure. 
LD 626 and the bill heard earlier by this Committee, LD 672, are youth hunting related bills. 
These two bills would allow for youth (under l6, no minimum age) to hunt on Sunday. Youth 
hunters already have the Saturday before the regular ﬁrearm season starts dedicated solely for 
them. The 2022 survey addressed this very question about youth hunting on Sunday. A clear 
majority of hunters, the public, and landowners all opposed this idea. Here are the results: 
Landowners: 
75% opposed/ 20% in favor North/East 
71% Opposed/24% in favor Central 
93% Opposed/3% in favor South 
Public: 
62% opposed/28% in favor 
Hunters: 
44% opposed/ 35% in favor 
One of the arguments for allowing youth hunting on Sunday is that many hunters work or have 
children or grandchildren in school activities on Saturday, so they need the opportunity to hunt 
on Sunday. First, organized youth activities routinely occur on Sunday and just as many Woodlot 
owners work on Saturday or attend school activities with their children as well. Second, youth 
participation in hunting is increasing. Commissioner Camuso indicated in her testimony 
opposing LD 672 that youth hunting participation had increased for the last 20 years (an increase 
of approximately 9,000). 
LD 1166 would allow a landowner who owns 5 acres or more to hunt on his own land. This bill 
is simply an attempt to divide landowners and get some fonn of Sunday hunting on- the books. It 
has been tried several times in the past, including being rejected just last session. This legislation 
would set hunting seasons based on whether someone owns land or not. 
We have heard that allowing landowner to hunt on Sunday is a landowner rights issue. Wildlife 
is owned by the public under the North American Model of Wildlife Conservation, not the 
landowner. So, I am not sure what landowner right exists. I am sure the Department can talk 
about the difﬁculty of enforcing such a law. Not only do the majority of landowners see this as 
simply another attempt to get Sunday hunting by dividing landowners, but this idea has not been 
popular with the large segment of hunters who do not own land. It creates two classes of hunters. 
LD 1241 allows someone to hunt with a bow and arrow or crossbow on Sunday if they purchase 
a $31 Sunday hunting permit. The idea of paying extra to hunt on Sunday has been proposed 
and failed before. The idea that as long as a hunter pays the State more, it is assumed thata 
hunter can hunt on private land unless posted would not sit well with landowners. It is 
essentially the State selling the right to hunt on Sunday.
The question of hunting on Sunday with a bow or crossbow was speciﬁcally part of the 2022 
survey. A clear majority of hunters, the public, and landowners opposed the idea. Here are the 
results: 
Landowners: 
69% opposed/ 24% in favor North/East 
70% opposed/25% in favor Central 
90% opposed/ 10% in favor South 
Public: 
57% opposed/34% in favor 
Hunters: 
46% opposed/ 34% in favor 
Additionally, the seasons for hunting with a bow or crossbow are already ample. Expanded 
archery season starts in mid-September and goes to mid-December. Regular archery and 
crossbow starts October ls’ and goes until the end of the regular deer season — the Saturday after 
Thanksgiving. Those who wish to hunt with a bow or crossbow already have a long season. 
Let’s be clear. Allowing people to hunt, or access your land for any reason, is rarely if evera 
beneﬁt for a landowner. Frankly, it is often a negative. But the majority of landowners allow 
hunting and public access, because they believe it is the right thing to do. But there are limits. 
Through a lot of hard work by a lot pf people and organizations, we have something really 
special here in Maine. Despite having the highest percentage of private land of any state in the 
country, there is no state where access to private land is greater than in Maine. No place where 
access is more available to everyone, not just those who can pay, not just to those who own land. 
This didn’t just happen by good luck or accident. 
We have avoided two red lines: one for land users; one for land owners. The red line for land 
users, particularly for hunters, is not being required to get landowner permission for access. The 
red line for landowners has been keeping Sunday the one day per week they feel they can fully 
enjoy their own land. 
So what has avoiding these red lines done for Maine, particularly for hunting. Hunting use to 
start October ls‘ for game birds; deer hunting started the ﬁrst of November and ended the 
Saturday after Thanksgiving. That was pretty much the hunting season in Maine. 
Hunters have beneﬁtted greatly from the willingness of landowners to accept and support 
expanded hunting opportunities. We now have spring and fall turkey hunting; a special muzzle 
loader season for deer which started as use of a primitive gun but has now tum into hunting with 
a single shot riﬂe; multiple youth hunting days; archery season which begins in September; 
crossbows are now legal and more recently have been allowed during the regular archery season 
that starts October ls‘; bonus deer permits; year round coyote hunting; 8 l/2 months of coyote 
hunting at night; a southern Maine moose hunt; changing the start of partridge (ruffed grouse) 
hunting season from October to September so people could ﬁsh and hunt the same day (most 
ﬁshing ends September 303‘), and many others. Not to mention that this past deer season resulted
in the largest deer kill in Maine history. At the same time, we now have the largest snowmobile 
network east of the Mississippi and more than 6,000 miles of ATV trails. 
This all occurs without hunters having to pay for access or having to get landowner permission. 
Hunters have beneﬁtted greatly from the willingness of landowners to allow continued and 
expanded hunting opportunities. So, what has been the beneﬁt to landowners? I don’t know. 
There are 313 days of hunting in Maine (6 days a week, 52 weeks a year) and extended night 
hunting. 90% of the land in Maine is privately owned, and the majority of land is open and 
available for hunting - for free. No requirement to get landowner permission. In fact, the burden 
falls entirely on the landowner if the landowner want to limit access. Landowners are willingly 
allowing hunting and all other outdoor recreation uses and have supported new hunting 
opportunities. But, those same landowners and fanners have made it clear over the past attempts 
to pass some form of Sunday hunting that they strongly oppose Sunday hunting. The clear 
majority want a day to be left alone; they want a day they don’t have to dress up in orange; they 
want that one day a week to fully enjoy their land. That is not too much to ask. 
We now have an extensive survey of Maine people regarding Sunday hunting. We know Maine 
residents do not want Sunday hunting; we know Maine landowners do not want Sunday hunting; 
we know Maine hunters do not want Sunday hunting if means loss of access; and we know that 
signiﬁcant loss of access for hunting and other public uses of private land will occur if Sunday 
hunting passes. 
After 39 failed attempts in the last 46 years to pass some form of Sunday hunting over the wishes 
of Maine people, it is time to stop. 
Enough is enough.
