Senator Lafountain, Representative Landry and esteemed members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife committee, my name is Tyler Brown and I am speaking today 
in opposition  to LD 626 "An Act to Preserve Maine's Sporting Heritage and Enhance Sporting 
Opportunities for Maine's Youth by Allowing Maine's Youth to Hunt on Sunday" 
 
As a father, I would like nothing better than more hunting opportunities with my sons. 
However, also as a father, I have grave reservations that opening Sundays to hunting will cause 
irreparable harm to future outdoor recreational opportunities not just for my sons, but their 
children, their grandchildren and countless future generations of Mainers through loss of access 
to hunting grounds. 
 
Sundays are considered by the vast majority of private landowners as the one day a 
week they can enjoy their land free of hunting pressure. This one day provides a balance to 
Maine's implied permission structure which grants access to millions of acres of un-posted 
private land. The roots of our land access tradition supersedes Maine statehood and even our 
Country itself, encoded as the "Great ponds Law" in the Colonial Ordinance of Massachusetts 
Bay Colony in 1641 (1). This law was adopted when Maine became a state and was further 
strengthened with the passage of the Landowner Limited Liability law. 
 
This tradition has provided incredible recreational access for everyone from Mainers to 
non-residents and is a contributing factor to Maine's outdoor tourism industry which makes up 
3.6% of our economy, generating 2.8 Billion dollars in economic output in 2021 alone (2). Our 
land access traditions here are unlike many other states where permission is required but is 
balanced with large amounts of public land as compared to Maine. Another aspect from states 
requiring permission is hunting leases, where landowners lease the hunting rights sometimes 
costing tens of thousands of dollars annually, which would be detrimental to hunting 
opportunities in Maine. 
 
This bill creates a double standard for land access and is a slippery slope that could 
reinforce arguments to enact so-called "reverse posting", requiring permission for all access to 
private land. This concern was highlighted in the Responsive Management survey that showed 
support for opening Sundays dropped by 17 percentage points amongst hunters should 
permission be required while averaging a 10 point increase in support amongst the General 
population and Landowners. The most concerning data was the 44% of landowners that 
currently allow access to their lands that would restrict land access should Sundays be opened, 
a potential for millions of acres. 
 
In closing there are three metrics within the survey that help understand the values that 
hunters, landowners and the general population share. The three demographic groups were 
asked to rank what is most important to them regarding outdoor recreation. The most important 
value amongst the general population was that everyone have access and opportunities to 
participate in outdoor recreation in Maine. Amongst Hunters it was that "Maine maintains a 
strong hunting tradition" and for landowners it was that "All types of recreationists have access 
and opportunities to participate in outdoor recreation in Maine"   
Access to the outdoors and our traditions are the top values amongst Mainers. Though 
opening Sunday for youth hunters would seem to preserve Maine's hunting tradition, LD 626 
would jeopardize the continuation of Maine's centuries old tradition of Implied Permission, our 
outdoor recreational opportunities and the industries built around them that are crucial to the 
rural economies of our state. I encourage this committee to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 626 
to preserve our current land access, outdoor recreation and hunting traditions.  
 
Thank you for your time in considering my testimony. 
 
 
(1) "Public Access to Privately Owned Land in Maine" - James M. Acheson, Pg. 21 Sec. 2 
 
(2) News Center Maine - November 10, 2022 
https://www.newscentermaine.com/article/sports/outdoors/outdoor-recreation-industry-maine-
billions-economy/97-7a510e24-5f69-4f73-b47e-
c0316c9ac198#:~:text=Maine's%20outdoor%20recreation%20industry%20made,billion%20in%
20total%20economic%20output . 
 
