TESTIMONY OF 
JEROME GERARD, STATE TAX ASSESSOR 
‘MAINE REVENUE SERVICES
1 
Before the Judiciary Committee 
Hearing Date: 3/8/23 
LD 676 — “An Act to Protect Financial Privacy” 
Senator Camey, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary 
Committee — good moming, my name is Daniel D’Alessandro, Associate Tax 
Policy Counsel in the Ofﬁce of Tax Policy at Maine Revenue Services (MRS).I 
am testifying on behalf of the State Tax Assessor, Jerome Gerard, who could not 
make it here today. I am testifying at the request of the Administration against LD 
676, “An Act to Protect Financial Privacy. ” 
LD 676 repeals the exception in current law that pennits a ﬁnancial 
institution or credit union, authorized to do business in this State, to disclose 
ﬁnancial records about a customer Without a subpoena, summons, warrant or court 
order, in response to a request for information related to establishing, modifying or 
enforcing tax liabilities. In addition, it removes the conﬁdentiality exception that 
allows ﬁnancial institutions to respond to an MRS “request for information ” 
without the request being served on the institution ’s customer ﬁrst and removes a 
liability waiver associated with such responses. MRS believes that the intended 
scope of LD 676 is unclear, and further that in its present form it will negatively 
impact the Bureau’s ability to collect ﬁnal and outstanding tax liabilities due to the 
State. 
It goes without saying that timely and orderly collection of State taxes due 
under the law is a critical function of MRS. And by far most of that tax revenue is
1
timely reported and paid by taxpayers when due or in some circumstances under 
agreed payment plans. Of the nearly $6 billion annual revenue stream managed by 
MRS, the unpaid receivables balance remains relatively low — with outstanding tax 
receivables only totaling approximately $200 million. MRS’s success in 
maintaining low outstanding tax receivables depends on several key collection 
tools set forth in current law, such as the ability to levy bank accounts in those 
instances where non-compliant taxpayers have repeatedly failed to work with 
MRS. Annually, MRS collects between $90 million and $100 million in past-due 
liabilities, of which approximately $7 million amiually is collected through the 
bank levy program, which in turn uses the process in current law known as the 
Financial Institution Data Match or FIDM. The FIDM program began in 2010 and, 
for the past 13 years, MRS has responsibly used this vital program to recover 
millions in outstanding tax liabilities owed to the State. The program in this 
relatively narrow category of tax compliance activity has worked efﬁciently for 
both MRS and ﬁnancial institutions. 
In implementing the FIDM program, MRS contracts with a third-party 
company, who specializes in data matching services with ﬁnancial institutions 
across the country. It should be noted that the Department of Health and Human 
Services (“DHHS”) utilizes the same company, which allows for a synergy 
between both our respective agencies and limits the data ﬁle interactions with 
banks and credit unions by only using one data ﬁle for both DHHS and MRS. 
MRS works closely, and communicates, with taxpayers to help resolve 
outstanding tax liabilities. For instance, barring special circumstances, MRS 
generally sends, at a minimum, nine notices and places at least six phone calls toa 
debtor before a bank levy is even considered. The majority of cases are worked for 
more than a year, where we make every possible attempt to work with taxpayers.
T
2
We strive to maintain contact with taxpayers about their liability and work outa 
feasible payment plan. Unfortunately, some taxpayers ignore our multiple efforts 
to contact them, and it is only after many months, or in most cases years, thata 
case may be considered for bank levy. 
There are three primary concerns with LD 676. First, LD 676 repeals the 
exception in current law that permits a ﬁnancial institution or credit union 
authorized to do business in this State to disclose ﬁnancial records abouta 
customer without a subpoena, summons, warrant or court order in response toa 
request for information related to establishing, modifying or enforcing tax 
liabilities. 
Second, LD 676 removes the conﬁdentiality exception that allows ﬁnancial 
institutions to respond to a MRS “request for information ” without the request 
being served on the institution ’s customer ﬁrst and removes a liability waiver 
associated with such responses. 
Third, if 9-B M.R.S. § 162(6) is repealed by LD 676, this could limit MRS’s 
ability to work with ﬁnancial institutions (banks) to obtain information about the 
accounts that we levy. If the banks do not provide us with basic account 
information, this would cause delays in unfreezing taxpayer accounts in certain 
situations where MRS may seek to update and possibly narrow the amount of the 
levy. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill 
and would be happy to answer any questions.'
3
