. 
, 
A ' 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
;;§ _ 2 STATE House STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
ll 
Rep. John Andrews 
P.O. Box 118 
Paris, ME 04271 
Cell Phone: (207) 739~907s I 
John Andrews@legislaturemai ﬁé.gov '
W
\ 
|l 
March 8th, 2023 '
/ 
Testimony in Support of LD 676 
, "An Act to Protect Financial Privacy"' 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Judiciary/E 
Committee - My nameis John Andrews I represent House District 79 in western Maine. I am 
here today to present my bill LD 676 ‘An Act to Protect Financial Privacy’. 
I will start with the bill's summary which states! 
”This bill repeals the exception in current law that permits a financial institution or credit union 
authorized to do" business in this State todisclose financial records about a customer without a 
lawful subpoena, summons, warrant or court order in response to a request information 
related to establishing, modifying, or enforcing tax liabilities. The bill also clarifies thata 
financial institution or credit union may not disclose records to any federal agency unless the 
records are disclosed pursuant to a lawful subpoena, summons, warrant or court order 
requested by the agency." _' 
The catalyst for this bill was stated and intended overreach by the IRS. They proposed a change 
to tax reporting by financial institutions. The changes would require that financial institutions 
provide a totaldollar amount of incoming and outgoing transactions from every customer 
account that hadgross inflows and outflows of an amount exceeding $600 in a tax year. 
In layman's terms that means that the IRS proposed allowing themselves to snoop into people's 
bank accounts for any transaction over $600 to make sure that they confiscated the maximum 
amount of taxation possible. This was an outrageous proposition. . 
The proposed IRS snooping would primarily impact people who live paycheck to paycheck, 
small businesses and Mainers who make a living in the gig economy. The people who can afford 
the least to give up more of their money to the government.'
I 
- 
1 , , . 
District 79 Paris, Sumner, West Paris, Woodstock
This overreach would not impact the rich and high income earners because they have access to 
the best tax lawyers in the country. The IRS snooping was designed, much like Civil Asset 
Forfeiture, to go after the people who can't afford to legally defend themselves. Preying upon 
the weak is not a best practice for government operations. ; 
When I first started putting this bill together, I was shocked to learn that there was an( 
exception, or loophole, in Maine law that endangers the financial"privacy of Maine citizens. 
I believe this bill closes that loophole and adds Federal protections while still allowing fora 
request for information by the Department of Health and Human Services for purposes related 
to establishing, modifying or enforcing a child support order.r
. 
Requiring a warrant before having to disclose sensitive financial information makes compliance 
easier for our financial institutions. They will no longerbe forced to compromise the financial 
privacy of their customers without due process of law. . ''
, 
The Fourth Amendment states that: Y 
”The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against 
unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but 
upon probable cau' se, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to 
be searched, and the persons or things to be seized."’ 
This bill affirms the'Fourth Amendment and codifies those protections with regard to financial 
privacy into state law. This bill is an important change as we must do everything we can to 
protect the financial privacy of our constituents. \_
_ 
I believe this is why I have a diverse group of well-respected cosponsors for this bill that include 
the Speaker of the House and the Minority Leadership in the House and Senate. This isa 
bipartisan bill that adds much needed privacy protections for our constituents. l urge you to 
please vote ‘Ought to Pass’ on this bill. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, 
'
K 
Representative John Andrews 
Maine House District 79 
District 79 Paris, Sumner, West Paris, Woodstock _
H
‘\
