53 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 202 | Portland, ME 04101
Phone: 866-554-5380 | Fax: 207-775-5727 | TTY: 877-
434-7598
aarp.org/me | me@aarp.org | twitter: @aarpmaine 
facebook.com/aarpmaine | instagram.com/aarpme
March 2, 2023
L.D. 417, An Act to Facilitate Net Energy Billing
BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES, AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE
TESTIMONY OF AARP MAINE: IN OPPOSITION
Chairs Lawrence and Zeigler, and the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology:
Good afternoon. My name is Alf Anderson, and I am an Advocacy and Outreach 
Director with AARP Maine. AARP Maine is a non-partisan, non-profit organization 
with more than 200,000 members statewide. I’m here today to testify IN 
OPPOSITION TO L.D. 417 AS PROPOSED.  
The purpose of this bill is to respond to widespread evidence that there have been serious 
billing complications with regard to the implementation of the community solar projects 
mandated by the Legislature.  These solar companies marketed their contracts based on a 
promise of a 15% bill savings but now find that the actual implementation of that promise 
was not properly considered in light of the billing obligations required to document this 
promise on a monthly basis.
AARP is sympathetic to the consumer concerns that no doubt gave rise to this bill.  
However, as proposed, this bill will impose costs on electric utility ratepayers of CMP and 
Versant Power to respond to these issues.  Furthermore, the bill appears to mandate that 
these electric utilities share customer information with community solar providers that 
raises concerns about the privacy of customer identifying or personal financial 
information.  
Our major concern is that there does not appear to be any mandate imposed on the 
privately owned solar companies to incur the costs necessary to develop a billing system 
to implement a promise that they made to their customers.  As proposed, this bill shifts 
costs to customers that are not responsible for the difficulties being encountered to 
implement these solar company contractual promises.  We urge the Committee to reject 
the bill as proposed or significantly amend the bill to impose the costs necessary to correct 
or modify current billing systems on the community solar industry.  Maine has and will 
continue to pay excessive costs for this uneconomic net energy billing mandate, and we 
cannot support any additional costs to be incurred by suffering Maine ratepayers 
associated with this program.
Thank you,
Alf Anderson
Associate State Director, Advocacy & Outreach
 AARP Maine
