LD417 - An Act to Facilitate Net Energy Billing
Maine State Legislature, Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee
131st Legislature
March 2, 2023
Position: Favorable
Testimony of Arcadia on LD417
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on this legislation. Arcadia urges the Energy,
Utilities and Technology Committee to favorably report out this important legislation. Below is an
introduction to Arcadia and a brief explanation of why we support this legislation, and a solution
to concerns about utility consolidated billing as initially proposed.
Introduction to Arcadia
Arcadia is building the software necessary for Mainers to realize the full benefits of clean
energy. Today, customers face a bewildering assortment of energy technologies – ranging from
energy efficiency and renewable energy to battery storage and electric vehicles – all of which
have unique capabilities, costs, and user experiences. Arcadia’s software makes it possible for
energy technology providers to delight their customers and move clean energy forward by
enabling a simple user experience that saves people money.
The Company’s software is revolutionizing community solar, making it easy for people to sign up
with guaranteed savings and without any risk. Today, Arcadia manages more than 150
megawatts of community solar across 34 projects in the state. Once energized, these projects
will serve approximately 22,500 energy users. Nationwide Arcadia works with more than 40
developers to manage 475 community solar projects representing a combined 1.3 gigawatts of
capacity, making it the largest subscriber manager in the country.
Support for LD417
The Maine NEB program allows all Mainers to access local renewable energy while receiving
guaranteed savings on their power bills each month. However, unnecessary billing and crediting
issues cost Mainers time and money they can’t get back. This bill will allow NEB participants to
have a better experience, by creating more transparency into their community solar billing,
notably into the credits and savings generated by their subscription.
The Maine NEB program expands access to renewable energy for lower income Mainers. Many
of these individuals are also enrolled in budget billing. This bill would allow those customers
enrolled in both NEB and budget billing to enjoy their NEB credits each month, like everyone
else.
Lastly, the performance Based Adjustments in the bill aim to improve billing practices to ensure
that customers receive credits in a timely, accurate manner.
A r c a d i a    |    A d d r e s s :  5 5 5  1 1 t h  S t r e e t  N W  F o u r t h  F l o o r    |    W a s h i n g t o n  D C  2 0 0 0 5

Transparent and reliable billing and crediting is critical in ensuring that Mainers receive the most
out of the NEB program.
We have also recently had very positive dialogue with Central Maine Power and Versant Power
about collaborating on a solution to many of the issues raised in this legislation.  These
discussions are ongoing and we look forward to continuing them and then reporting back to this
committee in the days ahead.
Conclusion
Arcadia asks for a favorable report on LD417. We appreciate the opportunity to provide this
testimony and would be happy to answer questions. Please do not hesitate to contact me at
Aya.Takai@arcadia.com or 314-210-4792 if you would like to discuss further.
Sincerely,
Aya Takai
Policy Specialist
Arcadia
A r c a d ia    |   A d d r e ss: 5 5 5  11th  S tr e e t N W  F o u rth  F lo o r   |   W a sh in g t o n  D C  2 0 0 0 5

