neezomp 
Testimony in support of LD417 ﬁled by Senator Vitelli 
An Act to Facilitate Net Energy Billing 
March 2, 2023 
Chair Lawrence, Chair Zeigler and members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee, 
My name is Carolyn Dykema and l am the Director of Northeast Policy for Nexamp, a 
clean energy company with ofﬁces in Portland, ME and headquartered inBoston, MA.l 
submit this testimony in support of LD417, An Act to Facilitate Net Energy Billing ﬁled by 
Senator Vitelli. 
Nexamp is the largest owner-operator of community solar assets in the country, and we 
believe in the community solar model which allows all Mainers to share in the beneﬁts of 
solar power even if they can't install a rooftop solar system on their home. OurV 
subscribers are enthusiastic proponents of clean energy who are excited that their 
subscriptions are actively helping drive Maine's clean energy transition. Among our 
current Maine subscribers are residents, schools, municipalities, non-profits, and small 
businesses who are seeing meaningful savings annually on their electricity bills ata 
time when energy costs are higher than ever. 
Central to the community solar customer experience is the customer's electric bill. 
Customers receive a share of the energy savings generated by a community solar 
facility through NEB credits purchased at a discount, and these credits are then applied 
to the subscribers monthly electric bill, resulting in overall annual savings for the 
customer.
The concept is relatively simple, but successful implementation and subscriber 
satisfaction are highly dependent on timely and accurate exchange of information 
between the utility and solar project sponsors like Nexamp. Since Nexamp began 
serving NEB customers last year, it's become clear that improved information-sharing 
with the utilities is needed to provide the highest quality, transparent customer 
experience that the legislature, our subscribers, and our company expect. 
This legislation will help achieve that goal by clarifying that data related to a customer's 
energy use belongs to that customer and can be shared by a utility with a solar provider 
at a subscriber's request for the purpose of administering a community solar 
subscription. it also requires information be shared by a utility more frequently and ina 
manner consistent with modern technological standards, and proposes additional 
changes to improve the customer experience for all NEB subscribers in Maine. 
We appreciate the willingness of Central Maine Power and Versant Power to further 
discuss the proposals in this legislation as we seek a common path fOl'W3I'd towarda 
billing approach that provides the highest quality experience for all Maine NEB 
subscribers. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. l welcome the opportunity to provide 
any additional information that may be of interest to the Committee. 
ﬁ€§(OfTip
