‘ﬁts 
STATE OF MAINE 
PUBLIC UTlLlTlES COMMlSSlON 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR 
Randall D. Davis 
Patrick J. Sculiy 
COMMlSSlONERS 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 417, An Act to Facilitate Net Energy Billing' 
March 2, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for nor 
against LD 417, An Act To Facilitate Net Energy Billing on behalf of the Maine Public Utilities 
Commission (Commission). 
Cost Considerations 
This bill makes numerous changes relating to net energy billing data and the sharing and application 
of that data for billing purposes as it relates to a customer, project sponsor and the utility. While the 
Commission does not know the costs associated with the implementation of LD 417 at this time, we 
are concerned that it could be costly to comply with the requirements of this bill and those costs 
would be passed on to all ratepayers. These costs may Well include substantive upgrades to the 
utility billing systems. Thus, the Commission suggests that the Committee explore the utility costs 
to comply with this legislation before proceeding to enactment. 
Project Sponsor Complaints 
Section 5 of the bill requires the Commission to establish a process for receiving and responding to 
complaints from project sponsors related to a transmission and distribution (T&D) utility’s 
compliance with the requirement that a T&D utility correct any net energy billings errors it makes 
within one billing cycle and provide in writing to the customer and project sponsor a description of 
the error and what the utility did to correct that error. The Commission notes that it already hasa 
process to receive and resolve complaints from project sponsors regarding potential violations by 
utilities of the Commission ’s rules and it already deals with customer billing errors; therefore, we 
do not think it is necessary to require the Commission to establish a new process to address these 
types of issues. 
Furthermore, the Commission is not clear what is meant by the following language in the bill - “1;h§ 
commission may direct a transmission and distribution utility to pay to a customer any costs the 
commission ﬁnds to have been incurred by the customer as a direct result of that transmission and 
distribution utility’s error.” If the utility makes a net energy billing error, they are already required 
to credit that customer for that error within 45 days of the discovery of the error. If the intent of this 
language is to address something beyond this, the Commission would ﬁnd it helpful to have more 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-1039
PUC Testimony — LD 417 March 2, 2023 
clarity on what this language is intending to do, that does not already occur in these types of 
situations. 
Assistance Programs 
Section 2 of the Act speciﬁes that a customer ’s participation in a net energy billing program may 
not limit that customer ’s ability to participate in assistance programs administered by the Maine 
State Housing Authority or the Efficiency Maine Trust and we are unclear what is intended by this 
language. Currently, customers ’ qualiﬁcation to participate in a low-income assistance program is 
not affected by a customer ’s choice to enroll with a project sponsor. An issue can arise, however, 
for customers who enroll with a project sponsor and receive assistance because the low-income 
assistance can only be provided towards the customer ’s bill with the electric utility. In these 
situations, there can be a scenario where a customer ’s utility bill is signiﬁcantly reduced, but the 
customer is later charged for the electricity that the customer subscribed to with the project sponsor 
through a separate bill sent by the project sponsor. The system currently does not provide for low- 
income credits to be applied to a bill from a project sponsor. It is important to keep in mind that the 
reason the assistance is applied to charges assessed by the utility is to ensure that the customer stays 
current with their utility bill and does not become disconnected. If the primary goal of this section is 
to enable low-income customers to participate in the beneﬁts of distributed generation, it may be 
worth exploring alternative program designs for these customers given the challenges of trying to 
divert money from low-income programs. 
Application of Net Energy Billing Credits 
LD 417 requires that a T&D utility apply unused net energy billing credits available from the oldest 
previous billing cycle before applying credits generated in the current billing cycle and newer 
unused credits. As speciﬁed, this is likely to require changes to the utilities current billing systems 
and could be costly. Additionally, by applying credits in this manner, it may make it more 
complicated for a customer to compare usage amounts with generated/subscribed amounts in real 
time because the credits will not be applied to the billing period when the credits were generated. 
Further, it does not address the underlying problem of a customer who has over-subscribed witha 
project sponsor, which leads to credits remaining on a customer ’s account for more than 12 months. 
If a customer has subscribed to more electricity than the customer is using, the customer will have 
unused credits, regardless of whether or not the credits are taken from the oldest previous billing 
cycle or the current billing cycle. Furthermore, the application of credits as proposed in LD 417 is in 
direct conﬂict with how net energy billing is deﬁned in statute.1 
The Commission also notes that currently, expired net energy billing (kWh)2 credits are used to 
beneﬁt participants in an arrearage management program (AMP). In the ﬁrst report of the Electric 
Ratepayer Advisory Council, it was recommended that these expired credits be used to fund the 
low-income assistance program, instead of AMP. The Commission notes that net energy billing 
programs result in ratepayer impacts and the Committee may want to consider if it is equitable to 
forego this source of relief for low-income customers. 
1 
35-A M.R.S. § 3209-A(1)(C). "Net energy billing" means a billing and metering practice under which a customer is 
billed on the basis of ﬂre difference between the kilowatt hours delivered by a transmission and distribution utility to the 
customer over a billing period and the kilowatt hours delivered by the customer to the transmission and distribution 
utility over the billing period, taking into account accumulated unused kilowatt hour credits from the previous billing 
period. 
2 35-A M.R.S. §3209-A(8)
2
PUC Testimony — LD 417 March 2, 2023 
Rulemaking 
This bill requires the Commission to adopt rules regarding utility data and crediting. Currently, 
rules adopted pursuant to 35-A M.R.S. § 3209-A are major substantive rules. The Commission 
suggests that if this bill is to go forward that the bill is amended to specify that rules adopted by the 
Commission to initially comply with the requirements of LD 417 are routine technical rules, unless 
the Committee would like the ability to review rules related to this bill before they become 
effective. 
Conclusion 
It is possible that the modiﬁcations contemplated in this bill could result in beneﬁts to customers 
participating in a net energy billing program, however, we would caution against making these 
changes at this time, without ﬁrst looking at this issue more comprehensively with a focus on the 
customer and how those costs may be allocated in a fair manner that does not result in signiﬁcant 
ratepayer impacts. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session.
3
