Testimony in Support of L.D. 417
An Act to Facilitate Net Energy Billing 
Steven L. Weems, Board Member
 Solar Energy Association of Maine
To the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology
March 2, 2023
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and other members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology: my name is Steve 
Weems, past Executive Director and current Board Member of the Solar Energy 
Association of Maine (SEAM).  I am also testifying as President of Dirigo 
Community Solar Group (Dirigo CSG), a nonprofit association of 14 of the 15 
small, original community solar farms.  Both organizations are solidly behind 
Maine’s clean energy goals, the many benefits of distributed generation, and 
specifically the virtues of the net energy billing (NEB) program, particularly for 
smaller projects with customer ownership of the electricity generating 
equipment.  Although the NEB policy framework may change this legislative 
session, we are here today to support Senator Vitelli’s sensible legislation about 
data ownership/sharing, and the current, actual billing procedures of transmission 
and distribution utilities.  Improved and more transparent practices are long 
overdue.  It appears legislation is required to get understandable electric bills.  
SEAM is a broad coalition of solar energy supporters, advocating for the 
development of solar electricity of all project sizes and ownership models, for the 
benefit of all Maine people.  It is a not-for-profit corporation governed by a 
diverse Board of Directors.  Dirigo CSG is a nonprofit membership organization 
providing management services to 14 established, small community solar farms, 
each with a nameplate capacity of 200 KW or less.  This accounts for about 125 
residential customers who cannot put solar on their rooftops.
2The following comments apply equally as well to the more contemporary, 
larger NEB projects featuring the “subscription method” of participation by 
individual utility customers, which we assume have given rise to LD 417.  Our 
comments today are limited to the justification for accurate, understandable bills 
for existing and future projects. We are not addressing any broader issues relating 
to the benefits and costs of distributed generation and net energy billing.
There is no justification for forcing a utility NEB customer to engage in 
forensic accounting, web research for rate data, and billing data manipulation to 
understand and interpret his or her electric bill.  The basic business transaction is 
pretty simple.  A customer owns 100% of an NEB project on his or her property; or 
owns or subscribes to a defined portion of a group project, also known as a 
community solar farm (CSF).  The project generates a defined amount of 
electricity each billing period.  Some or all of this electricity flows onto the grid, 
depending on whether or not some of it is consumed instantaneously behind the 
meter.  The utility provides sufficient energy back to satisfy the customer’s load.  
All of this is straightforward and measured by meters.  Producing utility bills that 
are understandable and provide the customer with key information should be a 
routine process, but it is not.  This creates the need for legislation like LD 417.
Here are some maddening examples from the experience of Dirigo CSG 
customers, including me.  These are members of group projects, or CSFs, receiving 
credits in the form of kilowatt-hours (kWh), not dollars as is the case in the 
Commercial and Institutional (C&I) tariff program.  The customer utility bill shows 
the number of project kWh allocated to the customer, but not the total monthly 
generation of the CSF or the customer’s allocated share of this production.  
Therefore the customer has to go into his or her files and communicate with the 
project manager to get this data, and check the percentage of total kWh of 
project generation allocated to the customer.  There is no good reason for the 
billing system to be this cumbersome.
If the total generation for the billing period allocated to the customer plus 
any banked generation from prior periods she or he may have is sufficient to 
cover the customer’s total electricity use for the billing period, the customer is 
3charged a fixed amount for being connected to the grid, but no delivery or energy 
charges for the kWh consumed.  The value of these credits is not shown on the 
bill, and in the case of the delivery charge the existing utility rate is not displayed, 
so the customer cannot determine the value of his or her credit without looking 
up the current variable residential delivery charge on the web, or in the 
customer’s files, provided the customer keeps notes about current rates.  This 
would be totally unnecessary with simple, transparent billing data.
Another mystery requiring forensic accounting skills comes up if the 
customer has banked kWh credits. Some of these will lapse in a given billing 
period if the customer’s bank of credits includes credits more than 12 months old.  
Lapsing credits is the subject of another bill being heard today.  When that 
happens the lost credits are deducted from the total in the bank, but the amount 
of the deduction is based on an obscure, opaque formula.  This is too complicated 
to attempt to describe here.  However, it could easily be presented on the 
customer’s electric bill, but it is not, which is the subject of LD 417.  The design of 
the current CMP billing system does not provide this kind of useful information to 
the customer.  In the Versant territory the situation is even worse, as it is still 
generating bills for many, if not all, NEB customers manually.
   There are other examples of why LD 417 is needed.  A cynic might say 
passive-aggressive behavior of this nature by our investor-owned utilities has a 
purpose.  Whatever the reasons for the existing situation, it is disrespectful of 
customers and totally unnecessary.  LD 417 or some refined version of it is an 
appropriate solution, and we hope the EUT Committee will see its merits, work it 
up and report it out with a resounding Ought-to-Pass recommendation.  Thank 
you Senator Vitelli for bringing this forward, thank you Representative Zeigler for 
your assist.  
SEAM LD 417 (2023) EUT Committee Testimony 3-2-23
Steven Weems
Solar Energy Association of Maine and Dirigo Community Solar Group 
LD 417
This is Steve Weems, submitting testimony in favor of LD 417, on behalf of both the 
Solar Energy Association of Maine and the nonprofit membership association Dirigo 
Community Solar Group representing 14 smaller community solar farms with 
approximately 125 individual members.  
