Testimony of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group 
In Opposition of_ 
L.D. 417, An Act T 0 Facilitate Net Energy Billing 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
March 2, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and Members of the Joint StandingA 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology. I am Steven Hudson, an attorney with the ﬁrm of Preti 
Flaherty, here today on behalf of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group (IECG). IECG has been 
representing medium and large sized consumers of energy.in Maine‘ 
for more than twenty-ﬁve years at 
the state, regional and federal ‘level. We advocate for policies that reduce the cost of energy for our 
members, helping to maintain their operations in our state and the thousands of jobs provided directly 
and indirectly by those operations.i
. 
Industrial Energy Consumer Group testiﬁes today in opposition to L.D. 1955, An Act T 0 Facilitate Net 
Energy Billing, just over one year to the day when this committee heard an identically titled bill, LD 
1955, proposing. the same new set of costs to be imposed on Maine ratepayers for the beneﬁt of solar 
developers. These bills are sosimilar that IECG’s testimony on LD 1955 is attached to this testimony, 
and we request that it be considered part of our testimony today. , 
IECG asks this Committee once again to adopt the attached amendment we proposed last year for LD 
1955. We ask the committee to adopt this amendment in lieu of the current text of LD 417. We said last 
year that “[t]he Committee has spentincredible amounts of time .dealing with NEB-related issues for 
more than six years.” We can now make that SEVEN. And it appears that this bill and LD 509 are only 
the ﬁrst two bills that will deal with distributed solar generation this session. While some of that. 
committee time was necessary, this bill, LD 509, and others to come before you illustrate what we said 
last year: “that the committee is being asked by out of state developers to write increasingly detailed‘ 
tweaks to the NEB regulatory scheme.” IECG’s proposed amendment would explicitly give the PUC 
the authority to make changes to the NEB scheme as long as such changes are designed to meet the 
PUC’s purposes under 35-A MRS §10l to:- 
V‘ 
ensure safe, reasonable and adequate service, to assist in minimizing the cost of energy available 
to the State’s consumers, to ensure that the rates of public utilities subject to rateregulation are 
just and reasonable to customers and public utilities and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 
meet the greenhouse gas emissions reduction levels set forth in Title 38, section 576-A.
1
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments. IECG is prepared to work with the sponsor, 
this Committee, and all parties to address the issues presented by LD 1955. IECG is happy to answer 
questions now or at the work session" 
~..
2
Amendment to LD 417 .- 
Proposed by Industrial Energy Consumer Group 
February 22, 2022 
And again on March 2, 2023 _ ,A 
35-A MRSA §3474. Determination of public policy; state solar energy generation 
goals is amended as follows:' 
p- 
1. ' 
Encouragement of solar energy-related development. It is the policy of the State in furtherance of the 
goals established in subsection 2 to encourage the attraction of appropriately sited development related 
to solar energy generation, including any additional transmission, distribution and other energy 
infrastructure needed to transport additional solar energy to market, consistent with all state , 
environmental standards; the permitting and ﬁnancing of solar energy projects; appropriate utility rate 
structures; and the siting, permitting, ﬁnancing and construction of solar energy research and _ 
manufacturing facilities for the beneﬁt of all ratepayers. _V
' 
1-A. Conformance with commission purposes. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title, 
the commission shall develop and adopt such rules and policies related to distributed generation of 
solar energy as it determinesenecessary in conformance with the regulato _rLpurposes“ 
set out in 35- 
A MRSA section 10l. Rules adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined 
in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A. t'
_
_
3
Testimony of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group 
In Opposition ofi 
L.D. 1955, An Act T 0 Facilitate Net Energy Billing" 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
February 22, 2022 
Good morning, Senator Lawrence, Representative Berry and Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities and Technology. I am Steven Hudson, an attorney with the ﬁrm of Preti F laherty, 
here today on behalf of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group lIECG). IECG has been representing 
medium and large sized consumers of energy in Maine for more than twenty-ﬁve years at the state, 
regional and federal level. We advocate for policies that reduce the cost of energy for our members, 
helping to maintain their operations in our state and the thousands of jobs provided directly and 
indirectly by those operations. 
Industrial Energy Consumer Group testiﬁes today in opposition to L.D. .1955, An Act T 0 Facilitate Net 
Energy Billing not because IECG opposes the concept that customers ’ energy data belongs to them, but 
rather because the consumer protections provided in the bill are directed only to one subset of 
customers, those participating in net energy billing. We are also concerned that the very broad 
protection against disclosure may risk disadvantaging Maine’s energy regulatory agencies in carrying 
out their responsibilities. We are also concerned that, as with so many other net energy billing statutes, 
this bill appears to place costs on the great majority of ratepayers in order to beneﬁt a’ small subset of 
ratepayers and the out of state NEB developers who are already beneﬁting from existing subsidies. 
Finally, we offer an amendment to the bill designed to allow the PUC to clearly conform NEB policies 
to its overarching purposes contained within 35-A MRS §101. 
The precept that customer energy data belongs to the customer is one of the fundamental principles of 
IECC; Just as customers have the right to self-generate energy for their own usage, so too do they have 
the right of unrestricted ownership of their energy data. ~ 
However, if a bill is to be enacted that codiﬁes 
this right, it must include all ratepayers withinits protections. The right of ownership and the right to 
privacy extends to all ratepayers, not just those receiving NEB subsidies, nor their out of state 
developers. If not conﬁrmed for all, it should not be conﬁrmed for any, as the exclusion of some risks 
compromising their rights.
1
IECG also supports the restriction on T&D utilities sharing or selling any customers ’ energy data 
without explicit permission of the customers affected. This is an outgrowth of the now Well-accepted 
principle of customer sovereignty behind the meter. If this concept if to be enshrined in statute, it should 
be clear that this restriction applies to the data of all ratepayers, not just those beneﬁting from NEB 
subsidies. IECG notes that it is not aware of any Maine T&D utility ever disclosing such customer_ 
data without the lawful order of, and appropriate protections from, the PUC or a court of competent 
jurisdiction. IECG further suggests that it be clearly stated in the bill that the PUC and OPA both have 
the right to obtain and use such data without the approval of individual ratepayers, provided that 
appropriate conﬁdentiality protections are extended to such data.T 
Several provisions of the bill create a~ risk of increased costs being imposed upon Maine’s T&D utilities. 
As it is not speciﬁed whether such costs will be borne by the utilities and their shareholders, there isa 
legitimate concem that such costs will be recovered from all ratepayers, not just those beneﬁting from 
NEB subsidies. IECG submits that the bill should be amended to‘ 
either specify that such costs should 
be bome by utility shareholders or all NEB subscribers. Other ratepayers should be held harmless from 
such costs." »
_ 
Finally, IECG asks this Committee to adopt the attached amendment. The Committee has spent 
incredible amounts of time dealing with NEB-related issues for more than six years. VVhile some of that 
timewasnecessary, this bill and LD 1819 illustrate that the committee is being asked by out of state 
developers to write increasingly detailed tweaks to the NEB regulatory scheme.i 
IECG’s proposed 
amendment would explicitly give the PUC the authority to make changes to the NEB scheme as long as 
such changes are designed to meet the PUC’s purposes under 35-A MRS §10l to: 
ensure safe, reasonable and adequate service, to assist in minimizing the cost of energy available 
to the State’s consumers, to ensure that the rates of public utilities subject to rate regulation are 
just and reasonable to customers and public utilities and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to' 
meet the greenhouse gas emissions reduction levels set forth in Title 38, section 576-A. 
Thank youfor the opportunity to submit these comments. IECG is prepared to work with the sponsor, 
this Committee, and all parties to address the issues presented by LD 1955. IECG ‘is happy to answeri 
questions now or at the work session ‘''
2
Amendment to LD 19554 
Proposed by Industrial Energy Consumer Group 
» 
February 22, 2022 _ 
35-A MRSA §3474. Determination of public policy; state solar energy generation 
goals is amended as follows: 
l. Encouragement of solar energy-related development. It is the policy of the State in furtherance of the 
goals established in subsection 2 to encourage the attraction of appropriately sited development related 
to solar energy generation, including any additional transmission, distribution and other energy 
infrastructure needed to transport additional solar energy to market, consistent with all state- 
environmental standards; the permitting and ﬁnancing of solar energy projects; appropriate utility rate 
structures; and the siting, permitting, ﬁnancing and construction of solar energy research and 
manufacturing facilities for the beneﬁt of all ratepayers.‘
4 
1-A. Conformance with commission purposes. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title, 
the commission shall develop and adopt such rules and policies related to distributed generation of 
solar energy as it determines necessary in conformance with the regulatoryzpurposes set out in 35- 
A MRSA section 101. Rules adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined 
in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.-
»
3.
            
,"qp‘~\ 
/<0! 21 
3614;,- 
.>-..=:<>.~r\ V .2, _ >. . .. 
Q1 
n@ “Q *§\.»¥“5' 
V ‘ 5 .\.7"\:\I
‘       
130th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION-2022 
Legislative Document~ 
V N0. 1955 
S.P.V 693 ~ In Senate, February 3, 2022 
' 
_An Act To Facilitate Net Energy Billing 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. »r 
__ 
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on February 1, 2022. Referred to the Committee 
on Energy, Utilities and Technology pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered printed.
( 
'_i)@/0». 4:?" 
DAREK M.’ GRANT 
, , Secretary of the Senate 
Presented by Senator VITELLI of Sagadahoc. 
Cosponsored by Senator: LAWRENCE of York. 
Pnnted on recycled paper
1
2           
8
9 
10 
ll 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
Sec. 1. 35-A MRSA §3209-A, sub-§1, 1[C-1 is enacted to read: 
C-1. "Net energy billing data" means customer information in the possession ofa 
transmission and distribution utility that is necessary to conduct and administer a net 
A energy billing arrangement. including but not limited to a customer's electricity usagg, 
energyproduction and historical payment information. as determined by rules adopted 
by the commission.~
_ 
Sec. 2. 35-A MRSA §3209-A, Sub-§5-A is enacted to read: 
S-A. Customer protection: energy assistance. Notwithstanding angprovision of law 
to the contrary, a customer's participation in net energy billing and any credits received 
through such participation may not limit. reduce or otherwise affect a customer's 
Qualiﬁcation for or receipt of beneﬁts from any energy conservation or assistance program 
administered by the Maine State Housing Authority or the Efficiency Maine Trust. 
A 
Sec. 3. 35-A MRSA §3209-A, sub-§8 is enacted to read: 
8. Utility data andcrediting. Net energy billing data is the property of the customer 
to which it relates. A transmission and distribution utility shall release net energy billing 
data to 3rd parties. ‘ including_project sponsors. when directed to do so by the customer in 
writing. A transmission and distribution utility shall release net energy billing data toa 
project sponsor in accordance with this subsection if the project sponsor provides to the 
utility a signed sales contract with the customer and .the customer's written consent to the 
release of the data. In accordance with nrles adopted by the commission, a transmission 
and distribution utility shall:3 
A. At no cost to the customer. _provide access by the customer to that customer's net 
energy billing data through an appropriate computer application or programming 
interface 
B. At no cost to the customer. transmit in near real time. and no later than 7 days after 
the data is generated. to a project sponsor net energy billing data necessary for the 
project sponsor to produce a net energy billing statement or bill; 
C. At no cost to the customer, when the customer is entering into a net energy billing 
arrangement with a project sponsor. provide conﬁrmation of acceptance and 
implementation of the net energy billing arrangement to the customer and the project 
sponsoriwithin 7 days of that acceptance;' 
D. Synchronize the customer's net energy billing cycle with the project sponsor's net 
energy billing cycle so that net energy billing credits are applied in real time; 
E. Implement automated billing and crediting__procedures determined by the 
commission to be necessary to ensure billing accuracy and timeliness; 
L_A_m>_ln . 
_(_ll Unused net energy billing credits available from the oldest previous billing 
- 
gycle to the customer's bill before applying newer unused credits; 
(2) Newlypgenerated net "energy billing credits to the customer's bill aiterall 
previouslygenerated credits have been applied; and .A 
Page 12 130LR2302(0l)
1
2          
7
8
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 (3) ’ All available net energy billing credits up to the full amount of the charges that 
are billed in that billing cycle;' 
G. In the case of a customer in a billing assistance program provided by the 
transmission and distribution utilitjgppply net energy billing credits as cash against the 
balance of the bill on a monthly basis and excess credits to the customer's credit 
account; 
H. Provide to a project sponsor. within 7 days after the end of a net energy billing 
cycle: A - -' 
( ll The total energyproduction for the project; 
(2) For each customer, the number of new. kilowatt-hours credited to the customer 
account. the credit rate for each kilowatt-hour. the total credits applied for the 
billing cycle and the monetary value of the applied credits, any unused credit 
amounts applied from prior billing cycles and the months in which those credits 
were generated. unused kilowatt-hour or dollar credits being carried over to the 
next billing cycle. the expiration date of any unused credits and the customer's 
energy supply rate if the customer is not receiving the standard offer service and 
the name of that supplier; ,“ 
(3) Noticeof the customer's enrollment in any special billing arrangement. 
participation in any energy conservation or assistance programgparticipation in any 
other net energy billing or demand-response program or in any electric vehicle 
charging proggam; and" 
(4) Any additional data that the commission may require by rule; and 
I. Provide to a net energy billing customer:_ 
(1) The identity of the project sponsor providing the kilowatt-hours; 
(2) The number of new kilowatt-hours credited;~ 
(3) The credit rate for each kilowatt-hour;1
t 
(4) The total credit applied for the billing cycle and the monetary value of the 
applied credit amount;-
. 
(5) Any unused credit amounts applied from prior billing cycles and the months 
in which those credits were generated; A 
(6) Unusedkilowatt-liour or dollar credits being carried over to the next billing 
cycle; and . . t'
. 
(7) The expiration date of any unused credits. 
Sec. 4. 35-A MRSA §3209-A,Asub-§9 is enacted to read: -'
. 
9. Billing errors. A transmission and distribution utility shall correct anv net energy 
billing errors made by the transmission and distribution utility within one billing cycle of 
the error g and provide written conﬁrmation to .the customer and the project sponsor 
describing the error and what was done to correct the error. The commission may directa 
transmission and distribution utility to pay to a customer any costs the commission ﬁnds to 
have been incurred by the customer as a direct result of that transmissioni and distribution 
utility's billing error.’ 
.~
_ 
Page 2 - l30LR2302(01)
1             
7
8
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 Sec. 5. 35-A MRSA §3209-A, sub-§10 is enacted to read: 
10. Complaints. The commission shall establish a process for receiving complaints 
from project sponsors related to transmission and distribution utility compliance with 
subsections 8 and 9. The commission shall publish on its publicly accessible website useful 
information about the complaints received and any evaluative information the commission 
determines would be useful to current or prospective net energy billing customers. 
SUMMARY 
This bill establishes various requirements for transmission and distribution utilities to 
share information, ‘ handle billing and otherwise interact with customers and project 
sponsors in net energy billing arrangements, including timely delivery of net energy billing 
data, synchronization of billing cycles, application of net energy billing credits and 
development of a mechanism for electronic access to data in near real time. The bill requires 
the Public Utilities Commission to establish a complaint handling process for project 
sponsor complaints about transmission and distribution utility compliance with data 
sharing and billing requirements and provides that the commission may direct a 
transmission and distribution utility to pay costs resulting from billing errors.' 
Page 3 -i 
130LR2302(0l)
