May 4, 2023  
Re: Additional information in support of LD 1544, An Act to Improve Economic Security for Maine 
Children by Establishing the Maine Dependent Tax Credit  
Chair Perry, Chair Grohoski, and Distinguished Members of the Committee on Taxation:  
Thank you for this opportunity to provide follow -on written information to supplement my oral 
testimony and previous written testimony in support of LD 1544.  
Because it came to my attention during public hearing that the bill’s refundable depende nt tax credit 
also pertained to adult dependents —including adult dependents with disabilities —I shared additional 
information at public hearing about the vast disproportionality of poverty among people with 
disabilities —information close to me personally a s the parent of a young adult with a significant 
disability and close to me professionally as director of the University of Maine Center for Community 
Inclusion and Disability Studie s (CCIDS)1. This disproportionality is even larger for Mainers  with 
disab ilities.  Here is more detail, with full sourcing:  
Disproportionality of Poverty Among People with Disabilities2 
• People with disabilities are disproportionately in poverty, in Maine even more than in the 
United States at large:  
o In 2018, among people age 16 -64 without a disability, Maine’s poverty rate (8.2%) 
was one -quarter below the national average (10.9%) —yet among people age 16 -64 
with a disability, Maine’s poverty rate (32.8%) was about one -quarter above  the 
national average (26.0%) . 
• The disparity is e ven more pronounced for people age 16 -64 with a cognitive disability:  
o In 2018, among people age 16 -64 with a cognitive disability, Maine’s poverty rate 
(42.0%) was more than one -third  above the national average (30.8%) . 
• Among people with disabilities age 1 6-64, Maine’s poverty rate (32.8%) is about one -quarter 
above the national average . 
• Among p eople w cognitive disability age 16 -64, Maine’s poverty rate (42.0%) is more than 
one-third  above the national average . 
The bill would thus target an even more vulne rable group of Mainers than I had understood. I therefore 
urge the Committee even more strongly to please support the proposed legislation.  
Respectfully,  
Alan B. Cobo -Lewis, PhD  
 
1 I am submitting this testimony in my personal capacity, as I had already testified on the bill in my personal capacity  before I 
fully understood the disability connection . However, I do note that part of the federal mandate of CCIDS , as a federally 
funded University Center for Excellence in Developmental Disabilities authorized by the Developmental Disabilities 
Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000, is to educate and advise policymakers, including members of the state legislature.  
2 Winsor, Jean; Timmons, Jaimie; Butterworth, John; Migliore, Alberto; Domin, Daria; Zalewska, Agnes; Shepard, John. 
(2021). StateData: The national report on employment services and outcomes through 2018. Boston, MA: University of 
Massachusetts Boston, Institu te for Community Inclusion. Retrieved 05/04/2023 from 
https://www.thinkwork.org/sites/default/files/files/state_data_2021_F.pdf   
