Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation, hello and good afternoon. My name is Alex Jackimovicz. l live in 
Boothbay and am here today to support LD 1544, “An- Act to Improve Economic Security for 
Maine Children by Establishing the Maine Dependent Tax Credit." 
As someone who has personally benefited from the child tax credit in the past, I would like to 
share my story with the committee. It is important to assist individuals and families who may fall 
through the cracks and be positively impacted by ﬁscally responsible measures like the child tax 
credit. l hope that my experience can help illustrate this importance to the committee. 
A few decades ago, I became a young father and took on the primary responsibility of 
supporting my family financially. Despite working full-time as an electrician's helper and my 
spouse working part-time while caring for our son, we struggled to make ends meet. Our income 
was barely above minimum wage, and we were conﬁned to low-income housing. We couldn't 
afford health insurance and fell into the gap between Medicaid and private insurance. As 
someone with lifelong severe asthma, l had to rely on expensive medication samples provided 
by doctors to survive. 
During these years, my family struggled to make ends meet and occasionally needed ﬁnancial 
assistance from our parents. Each year. we eagerly awaited the Child Tax Credit, which helped 
us pay our overdue bills and alleviated some of our ﬁnancial stress. Eventually, as l worked my 
way up from the lower working class to the middle class, l became a master electrician and 
self-employed contractor. 
Although l may no longer be eligible for the Child Tax Credit, l can empathize with those in- 
similar situations. As a parent of an adult dependent who relies on my income to cover basic 
expenses, l understand the challenges they face. My heart goes out to those who struggle to 
access resources for their families, especially those with dependents who have special needs.I 
can relate because that is my past life experience. 
l strongly believe that the Child Tax Credit is a crucial tool for reducing childhood poverty and 
supporting local economies. As someone who understands its importance, l urge the committee 
to support LD 1544 as a smart investment in the people of Maine. Families with limited 
resources, including those with dependents who have special needs, need and deserve this 
support. 
Thank you for your time. 
Alex Jackimovicz 
Boothbay
