126 Sewall Street ' ' 
A D f th 
Augusta, ME 04330-6822 M&1H€ E 113.1 LlSl1C€ "“ ~ an °'
. 
_ POllCY Advocate 
TTY/Voice. (207) 626-7058 (207) 626_7o58 X216 
: 2 7 - 48 v ~ , 
:,avfw_(m:jg_§fg1 81 People Policy Solutions adanforth@meJp.org 
Testimony on Behalf of Maine Equal Justice in support of LD 1544, An Act to Improve Economic 
Security for Maine Children by Establishing the Maine Dependent Tax Credit 
May 4, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My 
name is Ann Danforth and I use she/her pronouns. l’m a Policy Advocate at Maine Equal Justice, a nonproﬁt 
legal aid provider working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. 
l’m excited to be here today to testify in support of LD 1544 — a bill that would improve our state's Child 
Tax Credit (CTC) equivalent by ﬁxing a ﬂaw in the credit’s design, which leaves out families with low 
income who need it most, and increasing the credit to $350. 
Maine Equal Justice's work to identify and pursue evidence-based policy solutions that will increase the 
likelihood that every Maine child has a fair shot at a bright future led us to focus on the CTC. A fully 
refundable CTC is one of the best tools in our toolbox to achieve this goal. The 2021 expanded federal 
CTC provided direct relief to low income Mainers who previously had been ineligible for the credit. That 
expanded federal CTC helped cut Maine's child poverty rate nearly in half. investing in families with low 
income through policies like the CTC has been proven to help kids throughout their lives, supporting 
higher educational attainment, better health, and higher earnings as adults? Economists say every dollar 
spent on the federal credit has a $10 return on investment to society because of these long-run 
beneﬁts? 
While these data make a strong case for the CTC, Maine Equal Justice's experience convening and 
overseeing outreach, enrollment and advocacy efforts for the enhanced federal CTC and the state $850 
and $450 relief payments provided ﬁrst-hand insights into the impact direct cash assistance can have. It 
1 https://www.cbpp.org/blog/many-states-are-creating-or-expanding —tax-credits-to-help-families-afford-the-basics 
2 
This is based on an analysis of making the enhanced federal CTC permanent and comparing the cost to generated 
social beneﬁts: Researchers at the Center on Poverty and Social Policy at Columbia University predict thata 
permanently expanded credit would cost taxpayers $97 billion per year but generate "social beneﬁts" with a value 
of $929 billion via future earnings and tax contributions, decreased infant mortality and other negative health 
outcomes, and reductions in child protection and law enforcement involvement. 
https;//www.povertvcentencolurnbia.edu/newsénternai/2021/ch5ld~allowance/cost¢bene ﬁt~analvsis
provides families with the flexibility to spend the money on what they need, enabling people to be 
better parents, buy necessities for their families, pay for child care, pursue educational opportunities, get 
to work, and much more. 
Here are some of the ways parents in Maine used the CTC: 
"These payments have helped put food in my kids’ bellies on a schedule that I can actually count 
on." - Jessica, Blue Hill 
"Less anxiety about making ends meet means more eye contact with my children when I get 
home from work. What more could I say?" - Andrea, Farmingdale 
“We are going to use this to get full time childcare instead of scrambling to make it work with 
part time care, which will enable me to work full time and my partner can take the community 
college classes he needs to advance his career!” - mom from Richmond 
"This makes my life a little easier because l am a single mother. This money alleviates stress 
around paying for my car to get back and forth for work in order to put food in my son's mouth." 
— 
mom from Thomaston 
Unfortunately, many of the positive impacts of the CTC have been reversed with the expiration of the 
enhanced CTC. Maine now has the chance to pick up where Congress left off by improving our state's 
CTC equivalent, which would provide ongoing targeted tax relief to Maine families who need it most. 
Maine could join states across the country that are creating or expanding state-level Child Tax Credits, 
including our New England neighbors in Connecticut, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Vermont. 
Conclusion 
LD 1544 is an opportunity to build on the success of a proven effective policy. It would take a step 
towards reducing child poverty in Maine, boost the local and state economy, and set families and kids up 
to thrive in the short and long-term. lt’s a smart investment with signiﬁcant rewards for our state's 
families and economy. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today in support of this bill. I am happy to answer any questions 
you might have.
