5% 
Y HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
“"t ,_, .
x 
’ ‘ 
j 
, 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
W AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 2237-1400 
Anne Graham TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
97 Farms Edge Road 
North Yarmouth, ME 04097 
Cell Phone: 846-0049 
Anne.Graham@legislature.maine.gov 
May 4, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Anne Graham in opposition to 
LD 1544, An Act to Improve Economic Security for Maine Children by Establishing the 
Maine Dependent Tax Credit 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and the esteemed hard workers of the Taxation Cormnittee, I am Rep. 
Anne Graham and I serve the communities of North Yarmouth and Gray. I am here to testify in strong support 
of LD 1544, An Act to Improve Economic Security for Maine Children by Establishing the Maine 
Dependent Tax Credit. 
l want to thank you for considering this bill. As a member of the Health and Human Services (HHS) 
Committee, a retired pediatric nurse practitioner and a mom, the bill that Leader Terry has proposed is beyond 
impactful. Many, many bills before HHS deal with child welfare. Our increasing rates of mental health illness, 
adolescent and young adult suicide have reached crisis proportions. We, on HHS, work on passing legislation 
that may help our children with severe problems. We prefer to focus on prevention. LD 1544 will help with that. 
Additionally, the Department of Health and Human Services and the Governor have made clear that addressing 
children ’s health is a key priority. 
The Childrerfs Cabinet, reinstated in 2019 after an eight-year hiatus, aims to ensure that “all Maine youth enter 
adulthood healthy, connected to the workforce and/or education, with a primary focus on ensuring the basic 
needs of youth and their families are met.” While the Cabinet outlines many avenues to increase important 
programming and services for families, the power of cash should not be ignored, as it has administrative 
simplicity on its side and is backed by research demonstrating direct impact on the immediate economic 
stability of families with children and those ohildren ’s ability to achieve in school and thrive later in life. 
According to federal census data, combined with other relief efforts, the expansion of the federal credit helped 
lower child poverty by more than 40 percent between 2020 and 2021, reaching a record low of 5.2 percent. It 
gave families the ability to put food on their table, buy gas for their car, afford child care so they could go to 
work and pay their rent or mortgage. During the period of the expanded federal credit, we learned that a little bit 
of targeted support goes a long way. A Maine child tax credit will restore that help and support more Maine 
families. It is quite simple, pay now or pay later. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. 
District 105: North Yarmouth and Gray
