34 Wing Farm Parkway  |  Bath, Maine 04530  
P 207 -442-7963  |   1-800-221-2221 (toll -free)  |  F 207 -443-7447  
Midcoast Maine Community Action is an Equal Opportunity Employer  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Claire Berkowitz  to the Taxation  Committee  regarding  
LD 1544 : An Act to Improve Economic Security for Maine Children by  
Establishing the Maine Dependent Tax Credit  
 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Taxation Committee: 
my name is Claire Berkowitz  - I live in Bath  and I am submitting testimony  regarding  LD 1544 . 
 
I am the President/CEO of Midcoast Maine Community Action ( MMCA ), one of ten community 
action agencies in the state providing programs and services to communities along the 
midcoast,  from Brunswick to Belfast. Our mission is to empower people to build better lives for 
stronger communities. The agency connects the commun ity with resources that promote 
health and quality of life, education, and economic independence. We do this through our Head 
Start, WIC, Whole Families, and other vital programs.  
 
We know from the federal C hild Tax Credit (CTC) , which cut the child poverty  rate nearly in half, 
that the CTC is one of the most powerful tools in our toolbox to reduce child poverty and 
strengthen Maine families. Maine can pick up where Congress left off by investing in low and 
middle -income families through the CTC.  
 
This bill would improve our state’s dependent exemption tax credit (our state’s closest 
equivalent to the Child Tax Credit), which currently provides a $300 annual tax credit per 
dependent. It would fix a flaw in the credit’s design, which leaves out families with l ow income 
who need it most and  increases  the credit to $350. This means more money in families’ pockets 
to spend on the things they need most.  
 
As an employer in Maine, my staff with children would benefit  from this improvement in the 
state CTC. Along the midcoast and across the state, the cost of housing , food, and energy has 
increased dramatically. Many of my hard -working, mission -driven  staff  with children earn 
wages that are considered low income. An additional $50 in the credit per child could be a cart 
of groceries, or a CMP bill. We need a vibrant workforce in the midcoast for the many industries 
that support the local economy –grocery st ores, restaurants, hotels, and small shops and 
businesses. Many of these essential workers are barely making enough money to afford the 
rents in our area, especially those with children. These families need the additional income 
through this credit to ensure that their kids get what they need  to thrive.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony, and for you r time and service.  

