Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation: 
My name is Flavia DeBrito, l am a resident of Waterville, and l am here today to testify in favor of LD 
1544. Tax credits like the Child Tax Credit that target relief to low-income families make a huge difference 
for our future, our children. 
What would this mean to my kids? 
This would help me pay for Mady's music lessons that she has been asking me for. 
This would help pay for Bella's math tutoring we started at the beginning ofthe year and had to stop 
because it got too expensive. 
This would help pay for Anthony's soccer equipment and summer camp. 
l’m a single mom who has worked two jobs to help provide for my kids. This past year has not been easy 
on us like many other Mainers with children with the cost of everything from rent to food to gas.l 
bettered myself, went to college, got a careerjob and still can't make ends meet for my kids. lt's sad to 
say that the tax credit at the end of the year is what we look for every year to celebrate in our family. 
When spring comes around the kids are excited because they understand that l will have extra income 
coming in, extra money for summer camp, or music lessons, or even a new pair of glasses. Sometimes l 
feel like a failure because they see me going to work all the time and barely any time to spend with them 
and can't even provide for them what they deserve. LD1544—would be able to help me provide these 
services to my children once a year, it may not mean a lot to others but to my family, this is a big deal. lt 
is a big deal because it helps boost my self-con ﬁdence and my ability to go to work and knowing that 
little by little l'm getting ahead. l'm here today to urge you all to pass LD1544 to help build success for 
our Maine children. Every child deserves this opportunity no matter their parent's current situation. 
LD1544 in Maine would help so many parents like me, that little boost that would come atjust the right 
time— three hundred ﬁfty dollars a year may not be a lot, but it would make a big difference in a child's 
family.
_
