 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
May 4 , 2023  
 
Supporting : 
LD 1544 , “An Act to Improve Economic Security for Maine Children by Establishing the Maine 
Dependent Tax Credit ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative Terry  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation , I 
am Hannah Hudson , Policy and Communications Manager at the Maine Primary Care Association 
(MPCA).  
 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make  up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
 
We support  LD 1544  and thank  Representative Terry  and the cosponsors for bringing this bill forward . 
The federal Child Tax Credit was transformative for Maine families, and we encourage the Committee to 
build on the success of this policy. This bill would improve our state’s dependent exemption tax credit by 
fixing a flaw in the credit’s design, which leaves out families with low income who need it most , and 
increasing the credit from $300 to $350.  According to the Institute on Taxat ion and Economic Policy , 
these changes would reduce child poverty in our state by 12.3%, moving 3,500 Maine kids out of 
poverty . 
 
Every day, staff at Community Health Centers utilize a “whole person” approach to providing primary 
care services , from preven tative medicine to dental care to behavioral health. This care -team model 
allows them to also understand and respond to patient needs that come from inequities in the Social 
Drivers of Health (SDOH). Being able to live in safe neighborhoods, achieve economic stability, and have 
access to food and transportation are examples of SDOH that can have wide -ranging effe cts on the 
health and survival of their patients. CHC providers see first -hand the stress that inflation, rising energy 
costs, housing and childcare can put on family budgets.  
 
LD 1544 provides an opportunity  to address inequities in SDOH and invest  in fa milies with low income . 
Expanding the child tax credit  will help kids throughout their whole lives, supporting higher educational 
attainment, better health, and higher earnings as adults. This is a targeted policy to help Maine families 
build economic secu rity that will make a  positive difference for kids and , in the end, benefit  us all.  
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please do 
not hesitate  to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
 
Hannah Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
