/~\\ . 
:5‘? ma‘ l\/laine Association for the 
:\?§\‘ i 
Education of Young Children 
Testimony of Heather Marden 
On behalf of the Maine Association for the Education of Young Children 
ln support of LD 1544: An Act to improve Economic Security for Maine Children by Establishing 
the Maine Dependent Tax Credit 
5/4/O23 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Taxation, my name is Heather Marden, Co-Executive Director of the Maine Association for the 
Education of Young Children (MaineAEYC). 
MaineAEYC promotes high-quality early Ieaming for each and every child, birth through age 8, 
by connecting practice, policy, and research. We advance a diverse, dynamic early childhood 
profession and support all who care for, educate, and work on behalf of young children. 
Poverty is often misunderstood and mischaracterized as simply lacking resources. 
However, for children of poverty, the consequences of circumstances can be lifelong. it 
can have negative effects on the developing child; even altering the fundamental 
architecture of the brain. This is a contributing factor for poverty being generational. 
From birth to age 5, a child's brain develops more rapidly than at any other time in life. 
And while genetics plays a signiﬁcant role, scientiﬁc research has made clear that the 
quality of a child's experiences in the first few years of life - positive or negative - helps 
shape how their brain develops. And that these experiences have lasting impact on their 
health and ability to learn and succeed in school and in life. 
“Children growing up in poverty, when compared with their economically more secure 
peers, fall behind early. Starting in infancy, gaps are evident in key aspects of learning, 
knowledge, and social-emotional development. When left unaddressed, these early 
gaps become progressively wider. Early optimal development tends to open doors to 
further optimal development, while impoverished development tends to close those 
doors. So, poor children lag behind their peers at entry to kindergarten, in ;ga_di gg_a_biﬂty 
at the end of third grade, in the important self-monitoring skills often called “executive 
functioning, ” and in school attendance in eighth grade. Poor children are more likely to 
drop out of school, or fail to obtain p_ost- secondary education. ”
What has been widely recognized is that you cannot just resource a child to solve the 
negative effects that poverty can have on development. We must look at two 
generational approaches to both support the family and the child. To support economic 
stability such as providing a refundable child tax credit, can reduce the stress a family 
has about putting food on the table, or paying for child care, or getting their car ﬁxed so 
they can make it to work. Income support enhances children's lifetime social and 
economic outcomes by allowing families to meet basic needs and by increasing 
families ’ income stability.' 
To care for Maine’s children and strengthen the future outcomes has to come at the 
willingness to support their families. Please support LD 1544.
