 
 
Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
LD 1544:An Act To  Improve Economic Security for Maine Children by Establishing the Maine Dependent Tax Credit 
 
May 4, 2023 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and Members of the Committee: 
 
I am Rev. Jane Field, a resident of Portland, an ordained Presbyterian pastor, and the Executive Director of the 
Maine Council of Churches, an ecumenical coalition of seven member-denominations (Episcopal, Lutheran 
(ELCA), Presbyterian (PCUSA), Quaker, Unitarian Universalist, United Methodist and United Church of 
Christ) who have 437 local congregations across this state with 55,000 members in their care.  I am here to 
testify on the Council’s behalf in support of LD 1544.   
 
I would imagine it’s unusual for a clergy person to appear before your committee, but I am here because the 
Maine Child Tax Credit bill addresses a moral issue – how we as a state can better support families living in 
poverty.  Both the Hebrew and the Christian Scriptures remind us that one of the roles and responsibilities of 
government is to provide for the common good — to care for the most vulnerable and marginalized of our 
society.  
 
We at the Maine Council of Churches (whose work is rooted in those scriptures) have a “Moral Agenda” that 
guides our advocacy and programmatic work.  One plank in that platform is the “elimination of hunger and 
poverty, and enactment of policies benefiting the most vulnerable.”   Because of this commitment, we call our 
legislators to join us in holding fast to the vision of a society that ensures that every child has equal access to the 
basics like food, shelter, clothing and heat.  The Child Tax Credit has been proven to be one of the most 
effective ways to put needed money into the hands of Maine families, lift children from poverty, increase 
employment of parents and boost local economies.  But most importantly, this bill can move 3,500 Maine kids 
out of poverty. 
 
Another plank in our Moral Agenda platform is supporting “tax and budget policies that reduce disparities 
between rich and poor…”  The Maine Child Tax Credit would help make our tax code fairer to the families and 
individuals who don’t benefit as much as the wealthiest do from state and federal income tax advantages. 
 
For all these reasons, LD 1544 is the right thing to do.  It’s the moral thing to do.  And we at the Maine Council 
of Churches urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 1544. 
 
 
 

Jane Field
Maine Council of Churches
LD 1544
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and Members of the Committee:
I am Rev. Jane Field, a resident of Portland, an ordained Presbyterian pastor, and the 
Executive Director of the Maine Council of Churches, an ecumenical coalition of 
seven member-denominations (Episcopal, Lutheran (ELCA), Presbyterian (PCUSA), 
Quaker, Unitarian Universalist, United Methodist and United Church of Christ) who 
have 437 local congregations across this state with 55,000 members in their care.  I 
am here to testify on the Council’s behalf in support of LD 1544.  
I would imagine it’s unusual for a clergy person to appear before your committee, but 
I am here because the Maine Child Tax Credit bill addresses a moral issue – how we 
as a state can better support families living in poverty.  Both the Hebrew and the 
Christian Scriptures remind us that one of the roles and responsibilities of government
is to provide for the common good — to care for the most vulnerable and 
marginalized of our society. 
We at the Maine Council of Churches (whose work is rooted in those scriptures) have 
a “Moral Agenda” that guides our advocacy and programmatic work.  One plank in 
that platform is the “elimination of hunger and poverty, and enactment of policies 
benefiting the most vulnerable.”   Because of this commitment, we call our legislators
to join us in holding fast to the vision of a society that ensures that every child has 
equal access to the basics like food, shelter, clothing and heat.  The Child Tax Credit 
has been proven to be one of the most effective ways to put needed money into the 
hands of Maine families, lift children from poverty, increase employment of parents 
and boost local economies.  But most importantly, this bill can move 3,500 Maine 
kids out of poverty.
Another plank in our Moral Agenda platform is supporting “tax and budget policies 
that reduce disparities between rich and poor…”  The Maine Child Tax Credit would 
help make our tax code fairer to the families and individuals who don’t benefit as 
much as the wealthiest do from state and federal income tax advantages.
For all these reasons, LD 1544 is the right thing to do.  It’s the moral thing to do.  And
we at the Maine Council of Churches urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 1544.

