Maine Center for >::.»~ 
. - UH 
1 Economic Policy 2°' 
..iiiZiil 
Testimony in support of LD 1544, “An Act to improve Economic Security for 
Maine Children by Establishing the Maine Dependent Tax Credit." 
josie Phil/fps, Policy Fellow | 5/4/2023 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Grohoski and Perry. My name islosie Phillips, and I am 
representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. l am testifying in favor of LD 1544 because 
the Dependent Tax Credit is a powerful and proven tool to help families deal with rising 
costs, reduce child poverty, and improve long-term outcomes for children and families. The 
broader consequences of these outcomes for Maine's economy make this a win-win for 
everyone. 
Maine's current version of the Dependent Tax Credit provides some financial stability to 
families in the form of a $300, non-refundable annual credit. However, the credit's value 
has not been updated to keep pace with rising costs and continues to leave families that do 
not meet minimum income requirements behind. LD 1544 would update the Dependent 
Exemption Credit to more meaningfully support over 200,000 Maine children and 118,000 
adult dependents. ‘ By making Maine's Child Tax Credit refundable, the bill would extend 
this crucial support to the state's most economically vulnerable children, many of whom 
live in rural Maine. Updating the value of the credit from $300 to $350 would help families 
keep up with the costs of essentials — which have risen significantly since the credit was 
first created in 2017 — and lift an estimated 3,500 Maine children out of poverty. “ 
Maine has already witnessed the difference an increased refundable Child Tax Credit would 
mean for familie-s. “' The 2021 expansion of the federal Child Tax Credit eliminated 
minimum income requirements and allowed Maine children in families with very low 
income to access the credit for the first time, helping them pay for necessities like 
food, rent, and child care.“’ 
The income boosting effects of the Child Tax Credit puts families in a better position to 
thrive. For children, the credit provides resources they need to be safer,” better nourished, “ 
and better educated, both now and in adulthood."" For adults, the credit's assistance in 
meeting their families ’ basic needs reduces the psychological strain that poverty can place 
on parents, enabling them to be more attentive and supportive with their chi|dren." ‘“ ‘X 
Because they alleviate the stress of financial hardship, tax credits for families have been 
shown to reduce rates of child neglect and abuse.‘ The Child Tax Credit has sucha 
transformational impact on children's lives that every dollar spent on the credit hasa 
ten dollar return on investment to society in the form of increased future earnings, 
better health, improved educational outcomes, and reduced involvement with the criminal 
justice system for impacted children. “
Marne Center for 
1 Economic Policy 1 “ss;t;.1%; 
Despite the more publicized name of ”Child Tax Credit," updating Maine's Dependent Tax 
Credit would help more than just families with children. Because the credit is also 
available to families with adult dependents, increasing its value and making it available to 
families with low incomes would also support some of the 166,000 Mainers who care 
for aging family members or family members with disabilities." “ Across the spectrum 
of family types and compositions, a modernized Dependent Tax Credit would enable 
Mainers to better care for their loved ones, stay connected to the labor force, and make 
our communities healthier and more resilient in the process. 
By modernizing Maine's Dependent Tax Credit, LD 1544 would make it possible for 
hundreds of thousands of Maine families, adult dependents, and children to deal with 
rising costs and achieve greater economic security. We urge this committee to give our 
state a stronger, more prosperous future by voting yes on LD 1544. 
‘ 
institute on Taxation and Economic Polity analysis of LD T544, requested by Maine Center for Economic Policy 
“ Columbia University Center on Poverty and Social Policy analysis of LD 1544, requested by Maine Center for Economic Policy 
ll 
Maine Center for Economic Policy, ”Child Tax Credit expansion reducing hunger, increasing security for Maine kids - Congress must continue 
this life-changing program." https://wvvw.meceporg/blog/child-tax-credit-reducing-hunger-increasing-security-for-maine-kids-congress-musi- 
continue-this-life-changing-program/ 
‘V 
Maine Center for Economic Policy," REPORT: How the Child Tax Credit was spent in Maine." htips://www.mecep.org/taxes-and-budget/report- 
how-the-child-tax-credit-was-spent-in-maine/ 
V 
Population Reference Bureau, "Anti-Poverty Tax Credits Linked to Declines in Reports of Child Neglect, Youth Violence, andiuvenile Convictions." 
https://www.prb.org/resources/anti-poverty-tax-crediis-linked-to-declines-in-reports-of-chiid-neglect-youth-violence-and-juvenile~convictions/ 
V‘ 
Brookings institute, "The impacts of the 2021 expanded child tax credit on family employment, nutrition, and financial well-being." 
htips://www.brookings.edu/research/the-impacts-of-the-2021-expanded-chiid-tax-credit-on-famiiy-employment-nutrition~and-financia|-well- 
being/ 
V“ 
Society for Research in Child Development, “Reducing Child Poverty Can Promote Children's Development and Productivity in Adulthood." 
https://www.srcd.org/research/reducing-chiid-poverty-can-promote-chiidrens-development-and-productivity-adulthood 
ll“ 
Health Affairs, "Effects Of The 2021 Expanded Child Tax Credit On Adults’ Mental Health: A Quasi-Experimental Study." 
htips://www.healthaffairsorg/dot/full/10.1377/hlthaff.2022.00733 
‘* 
Pubivied Central, ”Poverty, Parenting, and Psychiatry." htips://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PiviC66969i4/ 
L 
Population Reference Bureau, "Anti-Poverty Tax Credits Linked to Declines in Reports of Child Neglect, Youth Violence, and Juvenile Convictions." 
htips://vvww.prb.org/resources/anti-poverty-tax-credits-linked-to-declines-in-reports-of-chiId-negleci-youth-violence-and-juvenile-convictions/ 
X‘ 
Columbia Center on Poverty and Social Policy, "Child allowances are a winning investment. ” https://www.povertycenter.columbia.edu/news- 
intemaI/2021/chiid-allowance/cost-benefit-analysis 
X" 
AARP, "N Family Caregivers in Maine Provide 2.9 Billion in Unpaid Care to Loved Ones.” htips://staiesaarp.org/maine/valuing-invaluable-report
Maine Center for 
Economic Policy 
The Child Tax Credit -- An Explainer 
What is the Child Tax Credit? 
The Child Tax Credit (CTC) is one of the most effective tools for 
helping families manage the rising cost of raising children. The 
program provides financial relief to American taxpayers with 
dependent children and has lifted millions of children out of 
poverty. Congress expanded the program in 2021 to provide up to 
$3,600 per year for each child under age 6 and $3,000 for each 
child aged 6 to 17. The expansion allowed many taxpayers to 
receive some of the credit as advance monthly payments and 
also eliminated minimum income requirements. This critical 
change allowed families with the lowest incomes to receive the 
full benefit for the first time. 
Despite studies showing that the expanded Child Tax Credit cut 
child poverty nearly in half, Congress failed to renew the expansion in 2022. At a time when the 
costs of basic daily needs like housing, child care, food, and utilities are higher than ever, the 
families who earn the least will again have less or no access to the credit. Those who retain it will 
see dramatic reductions. 
Why is the Child Tax Credit important? 
- Lowers the cost of living for working families. Reaching more than 36 million 
households, including many essential workers with low income, expanded Child Tax Credits 
were primarily used for immediate needs like food, utilities, housing, clothing, and 
education expenses. The tax benefits also support local economies. Every dollar of a Child 
Tax Credit generates $1.50 to $2 in local spending. 
- Dramatically reduces child poverty. Nearly iignillion children were lifted out of poverty in 
just one year of expansion, resulting in a child poverty rate that fell by 46 percent toa 
record low. Rolling back the improvements makes the credit eight times less effective at 
reducing child poverty. ln the year following the expansion rollback, almost 4 million 
children are estimated to have fallen back into poverty. The impact of child poverty, 
including poor outcomes in health, education, and economic mobility, cost the nation 
between $800 billion and $1.1 trillion each year. 
- Improves rural and racial equity. Before expansion, gf/Q_P_ri _iﬂig_n children in families with 
the lowest income - including halfof all rural, Black, and Hispanic children received less or 
no help from the Child Tax Credit. Roughly _Qn__e__in three rural ki;:l _s_ were unable to receive 
the full credit because their families didn't earn enough to qualify. By eliminating the 
minimum income requirement, the expansion ensured that almost all children received the 
full benefit amount for the first time. 
- Builds long-term opportunity. Researchers estimate that making the expanded Child Tax 
Credit permanent would cost about $100 billion per year, while generating $1 triiljpn worth
Maine Center :0.- 
Economic Policy 
How of societai beneﬁts resulting from improvements in education, earnings, health and 
reduced costs related to child protection and criminal justice. That's a 1,000 percent return 
on investment. 
Ensures kids and families don't fall through the cracks. Children have no control over 
their parents’ income, and people without reproductive rights are denied control over their 
economic futures. As abortion bans take effect across the country, notably in states 
that spend the least on families and kids, more babies will be born to people already 
experiencing financial hardships. The expanded Child Tax Credit is urgently needed in 
states limiting reproductive freedom. 
are Mainers impacted? 
1512 000 Maine families with 229,000 children received the expanded Child Tax Credit in 
2021. Almost all families with minor children were eligible for the expanded credit, 
including an estimated 49 000 children under 17 who currently receive less than the full 
credit or no credit at all because their families ’ incomes are too low. 
When federal and state supplemental assistance like the Child Tax Credit were factored in 
for the three-year period between 2019 and 2021, Maine ranked among the eight states 
with the lowest child poverty rates in the nation. In 2021, the expanded CTC led to an 
estimated 40 percent reductiqp. in Maine's child poverty rate. 
ii&percent of Maine families with low income use their Child Tax Credit for basic needs like 
food, utilities, housing, clothing, and education expenses. Following the expansion 
rollback, six times more famiiies reported food insecurity and four times more families 
reported difficulty paying for household expenses. 
Maine is one of 12 states that also has its own child tax credit program, the Dependent 
Exemption Tax Credit, which provides $300 for each qualifying dependent. But because 
families must meet income requirements to qualify, thousands of children in families with 
low income lose out on the full benefits. 
What can be done to restore the expanded tax credit? 
On the federal level: President Biden's 2023 budget proposal includes an enhanced Child 
Tax Credit based on the 2021 expansion. If enacted, families with the lowest income would 
receive the most benefit. That would mean an average monthly credit of $335 for the 
bottom 20 percent of earners (families with income below $27,200). 
On the state level: Legislation being considered this year would expand and improve 
Maine's Dependent Exemption Tax Credit, increasing the value of the credit from $300 to 
$350 per dependent and, importantly, removing minimum income requirements so that 
families with the lowest incomes can qualify. The Center on Poverty and Social Policy 
estimates the improvements would lift 3,500 Maine children out of poverty. And because 
the credit can also be used by families with adult dependents, it would also support 
the 166 000 Mainers providing direct care for family members who are aging or have 
disabilities.
Maine Center for 
Economic Policy 
Did you know...? 
- The Child Tax Credit was first introduced in 1997 as a $400 income-qualifying credit as part 
of the Taxpayer Relief Act enacted during the Clinton administration. The credit was later 
increased and expanded under George W. Bush, Trump, and Biden administrations. The 
current Child Tax Credit exists as a component of The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 and 
expires at the end of 2025. 
- The Child Tax Credits minimum income requirements mean that a single mom of two 
making $15,000 per year gets half the credit of a family making $150,000 per year. 
- 87 percent of the anti-poverty impact of the expanded Child Tax Credit comes from 
eliminating the minimum income requirement. 
- Only children who are US citizens are eligible for federal Child Tax Credit benefits. 
About one million children are left behind by this rule, including 500 in Maine. 
. Researchers recently looked for evidence that the expanded Child Tax Credit reduced 
participation in the labor force. They found no evidence that it did and, in fact, analysis 
suggests that like the Earned Income Tax Credit, an expanded Child Tax Credit may actually 
help increase labor force participation. 
For reference links, visit 
mecep.org/blog/the-chiId-tax-credit--an-explainer
