WV; 101 Western Ave.
” s c c 
P_O. Box 
The Maine Caalitien Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
t9 l.3Q€ﬁ§S§i€ ‘afi§I§ﬁCQ 
Testimony of Karen Wyman, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
In Support of LD 1544: “An Act to lmprove Economic Security for Maine Children By 
Establishing the Maine Dependent Tax Credit" 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Thursday, May 4, 2023 
Senator C-rohoski, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation, I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End 
Domestic Violence (MCEDV)‘ in support of LD 1544, “An Act to Improve Economic Security 
for Maine Children by Establishing the Maine Dependent Tax Credit.” 
Most survivors ofdomestic abuse and violence in Maine experience economic abuse 
from their partner, and financial issues create real and lasting barriers to survivors 
separating from the person causing them harm, and child support is rarely paid as ordered 
by the court? In response to what we have learned about the prevalence of economic abuse 
and the barriers to safety and stability it presents, MCEDV and our member programs have 
built our capacity both to talk to survivors about theirfinancial struggles and to help support 
survivors in addressing these issues. Through this work with survivors, we have seen time 
and again how so little goes such a long way. 
Through private philanthropy during the pandemic, MCEDV has been able to create 
and sustain our Liberation Fund, which allows advocates across the state to help survivors 
with concrete financial needs that a survivor articulates as a barrier to safety. This has 
included things like: like paying for new tires for their car, so that they can get to work and 
get their children to school; covering the cost of next semester's textbooks as they continue 
their education; paying an overdue creditcard bill, so that it doesn’t go into collections and 
damage their credit; and supporting the cost of getting utilities turned back on. What we 
have observed through our Liberation Fund program is that just the relatively small amount 
of financial support that we are able to offer (the average request of our fund is less than 
‘MCEDV represents a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers across Maine as 
well as the immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more than 
12,000 survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children in our state, which included providing 
emergency shelter to more than 260 children who fled abuse with their parent. 
1 See "A Report on the Impact of Economic Abuse on Survivors of Domestic Violence in Maine," presented to 
the Maine Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary (February 7, 2019). Accessible at: httgs:[[bit.ly[2D' |s9f§. (81% of 
respondents cite economic abuse as a barrier to separating from the person abusing them). 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mceclv.org
MC EDV Page 2 of2 
$600 per survivor), can be enough to support a family with no to low income to live and 
work in their community more safely and with greater stability. 
The proposed expansion of Maine’s Dependent Tax Credit will work much the same 
way. We saw this during the pandemic when survivors received the federal Child Tax Credit. 
Putting just a little more money in a family's hands to spend on the things they need most 
can be transformational. For so many of the survivors that our network supports, just a little 
bit of help decreases economic barriers to creating a safe and stable independent household 
for themselves and their child, away from the person harming them. As policymakers and 
appropriators look at ways to increase the long-term wellbeing of children in Maine, 
enacting policies that will best support parents to create safe and stable homes is essential. 
We urge you to support LD 1544. Thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective. 
Contact Information: 
Karen Wyman 
Prevention and Intervention Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph= (107) 430-8334 
Email: karen@mcedv.org
