TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May 4, 2023 
LD 1544 — “An Act to Improve Economic Security for Maine Children by 
Establishing the Maine Dependent Tax Credit” 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD 1544, 
“An Act to Improve Economic Security for Maine Children by Establishing the 
Maine Dependent Tax Credit.” 
This bill effectively replaces the existing non-refundable $300 Maine 
dependent exemption tax credit with a broader and refundable $350 Maine 
dependent tax credit. For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2023, the bill 
proposes to sunset the nonrefundable dependent exemption tax credit and to 
establish the refundable Maine dependent tax credit (“Credit”). The Credit is equal 
to $350 for each individual for whom the taxpayer has provided more than 50% of 
the individual ’s financial support during the tax year and who was either born 
during the tax year or lived with the taxpayer for more than half of the tax year. 
The Credit is subject to a phase-out equal to $7.50 for each $1,000, or fraction 
thereof, that the taxpayer ’s Maine adjusted gross income exceeds $200,000 
($400,000 for married taxpayers ﬁling jointly). The credit is indexed for inﬂation 
annually beginning in 2024 and is prorated for nonresidents and part-year residents 
based on Maine-source income. Further, the Credit may not be considered income,
1
an asset, or a resource for purposes of any state or municipal beneﬁts or assistance 
programs. 
The bill speciﬁes the way the credit must appear on tax forms and directs the 
State Tax Assessor and the Commissioner of Health and Human Services (DHHS) 
to coordinate efforts and make “the application ” for the Credit — that is, the tax 
return and relevant forms and worksheets — available through the DHHS publicly 
accessible state beneﬁts web portal for food supplement, health care, cash 
assistance or childcare beneﬁts. The State Tax Assessor is also required to add 
certain information to the tax expenditure report submitted to the Legislature by 
February 15"‘ of each odd-numbered year. 
The Administration opposes this bill taken as a whole, but not all its 
elements. For example, enhancing the current dependent tax exemption credit and 
indexing for inﬂation could be one component of a workable income tax relief and 
assistance proposal/package. That said, the bill adds signiﬁcant complexity by 
requiring taxpayers and MRS to make “dependent ” determinations independent of 
federal determinations. These determinations are already widely considered to be 
a complicated, fact-speci ﬁc area under the Code. MRS currently relies on the 
validation process used by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for purposes of 
determining dependents. The IRS currently has resources available to validate the 
social security number and individual identiﬁcation number for claimed 
dependents at the time the return is processed, whereas MRS does not currently 
have access to these same resources. For simpliﬁcation and consistency with 
federal treatment, MRS recommends that the deﬁnition of “dependent ” in Section 
5 of the bill should remain linked to the federal determination under the Code. 
Further, the additional information necessary to meet the requirements for 
the expenditure report, including the age of the dependent and geographic location
2
of the taxpayer, would ultimately add complexity to the individual income tax 
return. Next, the creation of additional refundable tax credits adds complexity and 
limits ﬁscal ﬂexibility when there are times of revenue shortfalls. Finally, the 
effectiveness of the existing refundable personal income tax credits in providing 
targeted income tax relief — such as the sales tax fairness and the property tax 
fairness credits — should be considered before creating another refundable tax 
credit. 
Note that the DAFS/MRS income tax “Conformity Bill” , LD 7, in Section 5 
of the Committee Amendment “A” proposes, for tax years beginning on or after 
January l, 2026, to adjust the base for the dependent exemption tax credit to the 
number of federal personal exemptions that the taxpayer is eligible to claim for the 
same taxable year under Internal Revenue Code, Section 151. Any action on this 
bill should include review of the status of LD 7. 
The there are additional possible technical concerns: 
0 The bill overlaps the personal exemption amount allowed for a taxpayer ’s 
spouse under 36 M.R.S. § 5126-A. 
0 For consistency, the term “fraction ” (page 2 of the bill, line 13) should 
be replaced with “ratio.” 
Q As drafted, the Credit will ﬁrst be adjusted for inﬂation during 2024 for 
taxable years beginning in 2025. 
The estimated revenue impact of implementing refundabilily of the current 
$300 dependent exemption tax credit would reduce the General Fund revenues by 
approximately $25 million a year. Increasing the credit to $350 and making it 
refundable obviously would result in a larger reduction in tax liability.
3
The extent of required computer programming changes and additional staff 
required to process and audit affected returns is unclear; estimated administrative 
costs are under review. Significant administrative costs would apply if MRS must 
audit tax forms to independently substantiate the eligibility of dependents for 
Maine income tax purposes. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
4
