Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the ]oint Standing 
Committee on Taxation: my name is Rebekah Sousa, I am a resident of Iefferson, ME 
and I am here today to testify in favor of LD 1544. 
Knowing that this testimony is a matter of public record, knowing that going forward, 
a Google search will show more than what I've cultivated on social media and in my 
professional life is really hard, but this is my truth. 
Being a mom is the most important thing I will do with my life. As a Mainer—my family 
roots in the midcoast spread back at least to the early 1700s-I’m tough. I'm a survivor. 
I'm a planner. I strive to be self-sufficient and hard-working. And I love that my 
neighbors are the same! As an example, my family "invested" a portion of our federal 
tax credit on fruit trees and stocking the pond with fish "just in case." 
And yet despite being a veteran, holding a master's degree, and having a ton of 
privilege and advantages, I find it ridiculously hard to provide for AND raise my 
children. If only a few of us in a community were struggling, we could pin it on 
personal failings, but these are some of the systemic problems we're up against: 
0 Lack of affordable, safe housing 
0 Inﬂation 
0 Rising energy costs 
0 Childcare being unavailable, prohibitively expensive, or harmfully low quality 
0 Mental health services being unavailable while at the same time, so many of us 
are holding on by our fingernails. 
My ugly truth is that I want to give my kids better than I am right now, and not for lack 
of trying. Because this is a vulnerable season. Because even if I was able to get 
childcare [I've been waitlisted for over a year), I'm still at the mercy of their health 
and school schedule. I'm still taking jobs with “mom hours" and praying for 
sympathetic supervisors. 
I don't think that $350 a year is going to solve all of these problems, but every little bit 
helps. I do think it is essential to include ALL children, especially in low income 
families like mine.
I love how Maine leads the way for therest of the country in many policies. I think LD 
1544- could be a vote for supporting families —especially through the hard times-and I 
hope we can help blaze this trail across the nation and into Washington D.C. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I am happy to take questions or be 
available at another time for deeper discussion.
