 
May 3, 2023 
 
Senator Nicole Grohoski 
Representative Joe Perry 
Honorable Members of the Taxation Committee  
Maine State Legislature 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: Testimony in support of LD 1544 – An Act to Improve Economic Security for Maine Children by 
Establishing the Maine Dependent Tax Credit 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Taxation Committee: 
 
My name is Richard A. Hooks Wayman, and I am a resident of Maine and serve as the President & CEO 
for VOA Northern New England which is headquartered in Brunswick.  I wish to offer this letter as my 
written testimony in support of LD 1544 to establish the Maine Dependent Tax Credit.  
 
Volunteers of America (VOA) Northern New England is a faith-based community nonprofit that works 
with households experiencing deep poverty, disabilities, and homelessness.  Our organization provides 
affordable housing and homeless services to people across our state. We know the importance of 
providing direct cash assistance to persons who live at or below the poverty line. 
 
The federal Child Tax Credit was directly responsible for reducing child poverty in Maine by one-half.  
Child tax credits, and Maine’s existing dependent exemption tax credit, are some of the most powerful 
tools the state has at its disposal to reduce child poverty and bolster families.  As a nonprofit employee for 
over 270 persons in Maine, I heard from several parents last year how important the child tax credit was 
for them to pay utilities, purchase school supplies, or lessen personal debts.   
 
Raising children is expensive. As families struggle with rising housing costs, inflation, increasing energy 
costs, and childcare expenses, strengthening this tax credit will provide tangible support. By establishing 
the Maine Child Tax Credit at $350 per child, this proposal will reduce child poverty by over 12% 
according to the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy. This is a positive win for families! 
 
I would ask you to give this bill your consideration and approval.  Thank you for your public service. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Richard A. Hooks Wayman 
President & CEO 
VOA Northern New England 

14 Maine Street, Suite 100 
Brunswick, ME  04011 
rich.hookswayman@voanne.org   
www.voanne.org  
207-373-1140 
 
