Roxy Kai
Woodstock
LD 1544
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing
Committee on Taxation: my name is Roxy Kai, I am a resident of Woodstock, and I 
am submitting this testimony today in favor of LD 1544.
When the Child Tax Credit was expanded federally, my family felt so much relief. 
Pressure was lifted off of us. We had a sense of security knowing that we could 100%
pay our bills and not feel panicked. We now have the ability to expand access to the 
Child Tax Credit in Maine and help so many families like mine.
This past year, my furnace broke. We were without heat in November for a week. 
Thankfully we weren’t in the dead of winter yet, but it was still an expensive and 
necessary fix. At the same time, the two cars my husband and I used to drive to and 
from work, to and from doctors appointments, to and from errands both became 
undriveable. If that wasn’t enough, we also lost a significant amount of propane due 
to a leak at the same time, leaving my family without a stove or oven. What’s the 
saying?: when it rains, it pours! How do you choose what to fix on a limited income? 
My family lives paycheck to paycheck. More money in our pocket means we can 
prepare for repairs like these and have a safe environment for my daughter to grow up
in.
Increasing the annual state credit from $300 to $350 and making it fully refundable 
will help so many families like my own. I want to provide the best life for my 
daughter and having more money in my family’s pocket can make that future a 
possibility. I know I am not alone in this, there are so many other parents who feel the
same.
My daughter turned ten years old this year. She attends the public school just down 
the street. I live in a rural area of the state and need to drive for some time to get us to 
our doctors appointments, to work, to go grocery shopping, and more. Just like so 
many other parents, I want to provide so much for my daughter. Expanding the Child 
Tax Credit here in Maine will help move us towards a future where children are 
strongly supportive. Please join me in supporting LD 1544.
