c:/- 
MA. NE 
IMM IGRAFQTS ‘ 
F1‘i(5‘riT?5 
CC).-'»\l_!Ti €'Ji\l 
TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE IMMIGRANTS ’ RIGHTS COALITION (MIRC) 
SUPPORTING L.D. 1544: An Act to Improve Economic Security for Maine Children by 
Establishing the Maine Dependent Tax Credit 
Sponsor: Representative Maureen Terry 
Public Hearing: Thursday, May 4, 2023 at 1:00pm 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, Members of the Committee on Taxation: 
My name is Tobin Williamson and I live in the Androscoggin County city of Lewiston. I am the 
Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants ’ Rights Coalition (MIRC), a statewide network 
of almost 100 member organizations all working to enhance the lives of Maine’s immigrant 
communities through collaborative advocacy around systemic changes and smart policymaking. 
We saw from the federal Child Tax Credit of 202l just how successful and lifechanging policies 
like this can be; in Maine, child poverty decreased by 40%. L.D. 1544 is a chance for Maine to 
continue this successful program by making improvements to the state’s dependent exemption 
tax credit for Maine residents who ﬁle a tax return. 
As costs like housing, childcare, and groceries rise, low-income families would beneﬁt froma 
fully refundable dependent tax credit. L.D. 1544 improves the existing policy by including 
lowest-income families who need the credit the most and by making the credit fully refundable. 
We are encouraged that this bill increases the creditfrom $300 to $350 per dependent and allows 
for annual adjustments for inﬂation, too. 
The Center on Poverty and Social Policy estimates over 3,000 Maine kids would be lifted out of 
poverty by this policy. That’s a big deal! This policy would also support more than 150,000 
Maine residents who provide direct care for family members who are aging and/or have 
disabilities. Speaking for the communities that MIRC serves, we know a disproportionate 
number of Maine’s immigrant families are impacted by this. 
MIRC is proud to join our partner organizations like Maine Equal Justice, the Maine Center for 
Economic Policy, the Maine Children ’s Alliance, and more in supporting L.D. 1544, and we 
hope that you will, too. Thank you very much for your consideration of this important issue. 
### 
1 Marginai I/Vay I FL 2 ] Portland, ME 04101 l t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679 
www.maineimmigrantrightsorg | FB: (gijtvlEImmigrantRiglrts ﬂoaliliorr l T: @MaineRiglrts 1 IO: @l\/lairrelmmig|antRights
