Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Taxation Committee, 
My name is Trudy-Ann Logan Turbide and l’m here today to talk a little about my experience as 
one of the Child Tax Credit helpers and a parent. 
l live in Waten/ille where my husband and l own a construction business. l am also in the 
Healthcare industry, and l am currently enrolled in college to pursue a future career in nursing. 
I have always had a passion for helping families and children which led me to join the Parent 
Ambassadors, where I support and advocate for parents and children's needs. 
l’d like to first share my experience as a parent getting the child tax credit. I am a mother of4 
and l used that money for anything extra that my children may need. My 14-year-old daughter 
Nevaeh got the opportunity to go to Canada on a school trip because she is an honor student 
and because l was able to put my child tax credit aside l can afford to send her with money so 
she can enjoy her trip. 
As a Child Credit Helper, l have come across plenty of people who are in dire need of this 
money. l have met families that use their money for food, we’ve helped people who reside in the 
homeless shelter, people who are unhoused, and a lot of low-income or disabled people who 
really need the assistance. 
One case that really stood out to me was on the last day to file we helped a disabled man and 
his special needs son who didn’t know he was eligible to receive the child tax credit. After doing 
his taxes, he realized how much money he was getting back. Both father and child were in tears 
and grateful to us, we could not help getting emotional ourselves. 
Seeing firsthand the impact the child tax credit had on everyone ’s lives, l am in full support of LD 1544. l know and trust that our legislators will see the difference the child tax credit has made in 
our lives and vote to pass LD 1544 because we can help so many more families to support their 
children. g 
Thank you for your support and your time here today.
