Eben Sumnmer
Maine Growers Alliance
LD 978
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and the esteemed members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee. My name is Eben Sumner, I’m a resident of West Baldwin, Maine. 
I’m here today speaking as the President and Legislative Chair of the Maine Growers 
Alliance, founding member of the Cannabis Council of Maine, shaper participant in 
Seed2Heatlh, and business owner in the cannabis space.
I am writing today in support of LD978 ought to pass, An Act to Maintain Legislative Oversight
of the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Program by Requiring Major Substantive Rulemaking. 
I was part of the stakeholders that drafted LD1242 in the 130th Congress, the initial bill that 
yielded rulemaking power from the Office of Cannabis Policy (OCP), made it major 
substantive, and delivered it’s oversite to this committee. It is my opinion, along with the many
stakeholders in the Medical Program, that LD1242 rescued the Medical Program from closure
through predatory and regulatory capture. For this year’s newest members of the VLA 
Committee, the progress that was made through nine hours of supportive public testimonies, 
stakeholder work groups, and continuous efforts to work with OCP, it is imperative that the 
VLA Committee retains oversite of any rulemaking in the future. 
The reason why I feel this is so important is because of the multiple attempts made by OCP 
to submit rules that would have devastated the medical program. OCP was given the chance 
to simplify their rules package after the initial hearing. However, they did not change the 80+ 
pages of over burdensome regulations, instead they ignored the will of Mainers and 
resubmitted the rules package with minor and insignificant changes. Thankfully, after LD1242 
passed, we were able to rescue the program, yet we see more of the same behavior coming 
from OCP. In the short time LD1242 became law, we’ve seen OCP release guidelines 
regarding tobacco and cannabis. These guidelines, which OCP technically should not have 
released, caused a major uproar for the Medical Program participants that took stakeholder 
groups a lot of effort and time to educate the Attorney General on the differences between 
tobacco products, and medically prescribed cannabis products. We also see an effort by OCP
to create sting operations at their own will and on their own timeline, this is yet another over 
reach by the department after the passing of LD1242 as these actions are not defined in 
statute.
It is my opinion, as well as many stakeholders, that OCP is still mired in a position where 
cannabis is looked at in a negative and criminal light. We don’t feel that OCP has yet earned 
its rights back to regulate our program without oversite.  
I urge you today to vote for LD978 ought to pass to continue oversite of the rules and 
regulation coming from the Office of Cannabis Policy. 
I am available for any follow up questions.
Thank you,
Eben Sumner

