Elizabeth Hayes
Mercer
LD 978
To the members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee.
My name is Elizabeth Hayes, resident of Mercer and a medical cannabis caregiver. I am 
writing in support of LD978 An Act to Maintain Legislative Oversight of the Maine Medical Use
of Cannabis Program by Requiring Major Substantive Rulemaking. 
The proposed rules introduced by the Office of Cannabis Policy in early 2022 were evidence 
to me that they are not able to appropriately or effectively create a framework of rules and 
regulations to ensure patient access, success of caregiver businesses and public safety. A 
recent social media post by OCP on 3/14 laid bare their opinion of the medical industry as an 
under-regulated one. I have also seen this implied in a letter to Adult Use registrants referring 
to “unregulated and underregulated markets”. Their clear bias against the medical program is 
why registrants and patients would like to see the legislature as a backstop against 
regulations that limit patients access to affordable medicine and stop small businesses and 
microbusinesses like my own from being able to succeed.
There have been many good faith efforts by the medical cannabis industry to meet with OCP 
and offer suggestions of how to address the concerns of the department regarding track and 
trace and testing. My own suggestion that we look to MOFGA Organic Certification protocols, 
which include record keeping requirements that enable a trace-back-audit to ensure there is 
no inversion of non-organic products, was met with dismissal. Vern Malloch told me that this 
suggestion had been brought up before, but it would not suffice as it was not updated in real 
time digitally. Someone present at the listening session who works in the shellfish industry 
spoke up to mention that in tracking shellfish through the supply chain, it is done effectively 
through paper record keeping and not instantaneous online connected platforms like Metric. 
This is of note because shellfish carry a far more severe public safety risk than cannabis, with
cases of paralysis and risk of death. We are seeking commonsense solutions to tracking and 
testing that are used in other areas of agriculture and food safety.
Having grown organic hemp under a program administered by the Department of Agriculture 
Conservation and Forestry, there is a drastic difference in the two programs, which both 
regulate cannabis sativa. In the hemp program we are working with regulators with a 
background in forestry, agriculture and entomology, whereas in the medical program we are 
regulated by current and retired law enforcement. We need continued legislative oversight to 
ensure the protection and preservation of our medical program, which in my estimation is the 
best in the country in regard to affordable, high-quality medicine for patients and equitable 
access to licensure for producers.
I thank you for considering my perspective and ask that you please vote ought to pass on 
LD978.

