. i ii'iiii::;ti..]l MlLEsroNEsu...'.'.'.ll.o FEDERAL CREDIT uNloN
We're here for your every milestone!
In Opposition to LD 1546
An Act Regarding Nondiscrimination in Financial Services
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
April 27, 2023
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Committee on
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services,
My name is Amanda Piper and I serve as the President and Chief Executive Officer of Milestones Federal
Credit Union. Milestones has nearly 1,800 members and holds $28 million in member assets. The majority
of our members are employees of the municipalities of Lewiston and Auburn and their family members.
For nearly 80 years, our credit union has served Maine residents within our field of membership with a
focus on fulfilling the credit union industry's long-standing philosophy of "People Helping People" as a
true not-for-profit financial cooperative by providing products and solutions that suppoft the members'
lives and financial goals.
I am testifying in opposition to LD 1546 because it would impair our ability to serve and provide essential
services to our membership.
Our credit union loan policy provides clear structure and underwriting requirements, but it also includes a
number of "guidelines" to allow for flexible underwriting within prescribed thresholds in order to best
serve and support the members. Traditionally, underwriting for lending was based on "5 C's of lending":
character, capacity, capital, collateral, and conditions. Historically, credit unions generally had small and
often closed fields of membership and were thus uniquely positioned to use the charabter and conditions
factors to meaningful effect.
As traditional underwriting made way for automated underwriting, the focus increasingly shifted to
quantitative factors. This shift in focus seems logical in a theoretical application and for routine loan
applications; however, each numerical value has its own shortcomings and relying solely on quantitative
data would lead to reductive lending that fails to recognize the whole person and their unique
circumstances.
Loan-to-value ratios seem simple to calculate quantitatively: they are based on the collateral's value as
compared to the value of the loan. There are multiple resources for a consumer and/or a financial institution
to determine the value of collateral for the purpose of borrowing/lending. However, each of the valuation
resources define and use their own factors and algorithms, often resulting in a wide range of values for the
same item. For example, when looking at vehicles, each valuation system may or may not consider zip
code or region, add-on accessories, mileage, and the timing of the model year turnover, all of which can
have a significant impact on the calculated purported value at the time of the loan application.
Another factor in the calculation of loan-to-value is the external factors which are evaluated and adjusted
independently by each of the valuation resources. Over the pastZ4-months, the values for used automobiles
spiked and then subsequently dropped by approximately 25%o in a period of 3-6 months late last year.
These swings in values can have a significant impact on consumers -not just on the affordability of a loan,
but sometimes they can actually prevent an application from being approved.
milestonesfcu.com 291 Pine Street Lewiston, ME 04240-6308 {207) 783-3991
Credit scores have similar problems in terms of differing model valuations. While they are an easy
quantitative factor to obtain and document, there are multiple credit reporting agencies each using varying
ranges of credit scores, varying definitions and weight assigned to each credit factor (examples include
utilization, age of oldest account, delinquencies), and geographical regions with each of these variations
having a significant influence on the data reporting and resulting consumer credit scores. Credit reporting
agencies independently determine the algorithms used and they can be altered at any time without input
from consumers or financial institutions.
Credit scores are also affected by incomplete and inaccurate reporting; for example, many institutions do
not repoft their consumer data to all of the credit reporting agencies, so an individual moving to our area
likely won't have all of their tradelines / credit histgry reported to the most commonly used agency in our
region for consumer lending.
Underwriting with strictly quantitative factors would result in consumers in entirely different circumstances
with the same credit score being approved or denied based on the score itself. For example, the following
three consumer profiles would likely have a credit score of about 600: one may have very limited credit
history with no credit bureau tradelines older than 6 months, another might have always paid their bills on
time untilthey had an accident resulting in excessive medicalbills some of which went unpaid, or someone
may have a small business that struggled during the pandemic, but they're back on track present day. Each
of those applicant profiles presents a distinct level of lending risk to the institution. While using a consumer
credit score in underwriting can be one legitimate consideration, it does not at all adequately calculate or
analyze the risk associated with an application profile.
A key element of service and a central function of being a financial cooperative would be lost if
underwriting were required to be strictly quantitative in nature and we were unable to take all known
factors into consideration in the underwriting process.
The segment of Maine residents who would be most adversely affected bLthis legislation are the very
consumers who are the most in need of flexible financial opportunities based on both quantitative and
qualitative factors.
Established potential borrowers with traditional employment, some personal assets, and who haven't
suffered a detrimental significant life event typically easily qualify in any lending program regardless of the
underwriting criteria. However, potential borrowers with limited credit experience (often young adults who
do not have any options for a co-signer for a loan), no or minimal personal assets, and/or life events such as
non-traditional, seasonal, or tip-based employment, divorce, out-of-pocket medical expenses, small
business ownership, the loss of a primary income, or the death of a family's primary wage earner need
alternatives to traditional lending with quantitative underwriting criteria. Financial institutions like ours
have both the willingness and the resources to provide these necessary opportunities to these potential
borrowers who are in the most need of a financial relief through a hand-up, rather than a hand-out from
government programs and/or non-profit charities.
For these reasons and our commitment to our mission, our Loan Officers frequently consider qualitative
factors in addition to traditional, quantitative, risk-based underwriting standards in order to accommodate a
wide range of circumstances and financial situations members are faced with and in doing so, we are able
to provide essential, often life-changing support to the members. This approach has served our membership
and our institution well for these nearly 80 years as evidenced by both our loan growth and our far lower'
than-peer ratios for delinquency and charge-offs.
milestonesfcu.com 291 Pine Street Lewiston, ME 04240-6308 (207) 783-3?91
We have innumerable examples of individual borrowers who benefited from our combined qualitative and
quantitative approach to underwriting.
One of our members was unemployed for a year and as a result had experienced multiple charge-
offs and delinquencies. The member procured a job offer from an out-of-state employer but he
didn't have reliable transportation for the long daily commute. Because of the negative credit
activity resulting from his year of unemployment, he was unable to obtain a car loan under strictly
quantitative underwriting guidelines and without a reliable vehicle, he would have had to turn down
this life-changing opportunity. His long-term relationship with the credit union and a new, clearly
defined personal budget offset the quantitative risks and we approved the loan. Today, two years
later, the member continues to make timely. payments, commute daily with the vehicle, and he has
turned things around for his family. This is just one example of the many members who have faced
compounding financial challenges and needed help that required taking the full scope of their
circumstances and the associated risks into consideration, rather than only quantitative metrics such
as a credit score and collateral value.
Another member was faced with simultaneously dealing with a divorce, her student loans coming
out of deferment, and a car accident that resulted in her vehicle being totaled with a deficiency
balance on the car loan after the insurance company's claim payment was applied to the loan. When
the member reached out to apply for a car loan, her credit score had dropped to under 500, meaning
she was ineligible for a loan at many institutions based on the credit score alone. However, our
Loan Officers reviewed the application and member's circumstances in their entirety including her
long-term relationship with the credit union which untilthat period of time had included consistent
deposits, timely loan payments, and stable employment. Given these additional factors, we were
able to approve a used car loan to replace her totaled vehicle and she was able to retain her
employment and she now has nearly paid the loan in full.
The inclusion of qualitative factors in our underwriting process creates the opportunity for our institution to
provide a financial bridge from where people find themselves in need of an opportunity to successfully
getting back on their feet by taking the entirety of their circumstances into consideration. Loan-to-value
ratios and credit scores are not objective, standardized scores, and they fail to take into account the unique
needs of our members and individual Maine residents.
I would be remiss to not include a note about the significant adverse impact this legislation would have on
our credit union as a small business in Maine, if it were to pass. This legislation would not only inhibit our
ability to fulfill our mission and serve our members, it would also adversely affect our ability to operate.
Every day we make lending decisions that simultaneously focus on the serving our members and align with
our mission of people helping people. LD I 546 would harm our ability to do this, negatively impact our
members, our credit union, and our community.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill, and I urge the committee to vote Ought Not to Pass on
LD 1546.
Sincerely,
President & Chief Executive Officer
milestonesfcu.com 291 Pine Street Lewiston, ME 04240-5308 (207) 783-3991
