 
In Opposition to LD 1546  
An Act Regarding Nondiscrimination in Financial Services  
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
April 27 , 2023  
Good Afternoon , Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services,  
My name is April Gleason  and I am the  Chief Loan Officer for University Credit Union  (UCU) . 
UCU serves the members and families of the University of Maine System as well as several 
other organizations. We represent more than 28,000 members and $459 million in assets. We 
are submitting testimony today in opposition to LD 1546.  
LD 1546 seeks to legislate our credit union’s decision -making  process in an attempt to 
provide “fair access to financial services .” It is always our goal to provide fair access to 
financial services for our members, and we are governed by Federal Fair Lending Laws that 
require we do so. By forcing us to reduce our members to “financial criteria” only, many loans 
would be denied,  and our members left underserved. The advantage of using nonfinancial 
criteria is that we can extend loans to many wh en other institutions can not and help fill in the 
gaps.  
For example, we had a new member who was referred to us from a local community bank. It 
was November, and the furnace in their new home was failing. They had good payment and 
job history, but a fairly high debt to income ration that disqualified them from receiving a 
loan through the community bank or Efficiency Maine. By requiring direct deposit, we were 
able to make an $8200 loan, allowing the new homeowner to replace the furnace in time for 
winter.  
Often, we see members who h ave a high debt to income ratio, but have been making 
payments . While on paper, many of these people would not qualify for loans to consolidate 
their debt, we are able to look at the entire situation and realize that if they are making higher 
monthly payme nts, they will be able to make lower payments. It’s not just about the numbers, 
it’s about who people are and what their situation is. By having flexible guidelines in our 
lending, we’re able to find solutions where others cannot.  
People and businesses ar e more than numbers. They are community members. LD 1546 
would restrict our ability to treat them as such, and we urge the committee to vote ought not 
to pass.  
