Committee: Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Bill: LD 1546, An Act Regarding Nondiscrimination in Financial Services. 
Speaking IN FAVOR of the bill. 
Burnell Bailey, South Benivick, April 27 2023 
This bill does not prevent any company from using non-financial metrics in its business if it so 
chooses. This bill does prevent our financial institutions from discriminating against 
individuals or businesses based upon ratings made up of subjective, non-financial related 
criteria. 
The non-financial criteria, often called ESG, Environmental, Social and Governance, makes 
up a rating system, your score, determined most often by third party rating companies, 
thereby imposing vague, subjective criteria on individuals and business. One of these rating 
companies describes the scoring system as an always moving target, shifting as industry 
conditions change thus resulting in them being fluid and arbitrary making it difficult for people 
to meet and it does not add anything to the company's product or ability to hire people. 
Businesses would face a wide range of rating factors, some very vague. From nothing less 
than the Harvard Business Review, ESG rated companies perform poorly in financial terms. 
None of the high ESG rated funds outperformed any of the lowest rated funds and ESG 
companies had worse compliance records for both labor and environmental rules. We should 
protect our business from these burdens freeing them to do their work. 
On the individual side, lmpact Investor, a major ESG investor firm, says your score depends 
on a range of factors, including the company’s policies from which your score is obtained. 
They envision individual scores including among other things: 
1 Your investments. 
How many miles you travel. 
Energy use, 
Cryptocurrency profile, 
Food consumption, 
Buying a gun, alcohol, or even clothing. 
Your political affiliations. 
Even the type OfW 
Unlike credit scores with a clear method of tabulation, with cause and effect, ESG scores 
depend on a wide variety of factors that most people have yet to consider and are vague. 
l consider all of the above onerous and a maze that none of our citizens or businesses should 
have to navigate. 
ln conclusion, l ask you to support LD1546, and not allow businesses to discriminate against 
our Maine citizens and businesses. 
End
