MMNEBANKERS Association 
April 27,2023 
Testimony to the 131“ Maine Legislature 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, honorable members of the Committee. My name 
is Charlie Soltan and l am here on behalf of the Maine Bankers Association. We are testifying today 
regarding L.D. 1546, An Act Regarding Nondiscrimination in Financial Services. We respectfully oppose 
the bill. 
This proposal would severely restrict any bank's ability to serve Maine people. The bill's prohibition on 
”nonfinancial criteria ” would limit the factors a lender can utilize in their decision-making process, 
removing tools that help first-time homebuyers, small businesses, and families across the state. Maine 
bankers are neighbors, embedded in their communities, who understand customers as more thana 
number. This depth of understanding, far beyond numbers, is what empowers bankers to meet the needs 
of customers and communities with an array of financial services. LD 1546 would remove that flexibility 
and constrain bankers to rigid formulas. Bank customers deserve to be more than an algorithm. 
Many sound and trustworthy customer simply do not look appealing on paper, but are in fact good 
customers, worthy oftrust and a bank loan. For example: a teenager trying to buy their first car who has 
no credit history, but works hard at several part time jobs. A young family buying their first home with 
limited assets, but a strong work ethic and history of paying bills on time. A new startup business with an 
untested concept, but a solid business plan that meets a need and is poised to grow. Later today you will 
hear from bankers with experience helping customers like these thrive; customers that might not have 
had a chance under LD 1546. 
Additionally, we are concerned that this bill’s definition of "fair access" might require financial institutions 
to provide services to every customer in a certain geography. This could lead to concentrations and 
remove a bank's ability to manage that risk. From recent events in the news, we know that concentration 
risk is a particularly concerning issue in the overall health of financial institutions. 
The bill creates additional regulations, monitoring, and oversight of financial services which are 
unnecessary, duplicative, and do not create benefit for customers. We fear that this additional regulatory 
overlay will result in new compliance red tape, and most importantly, less access to loans and deposits 
for Maine people. We thank the Committee for its consideration and are happy to answer any questions. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Maine Bankers Association 
2 Thomas Drive l Westbrook] Maine 04092 207.791.8400 www.mainebankers.com
