...O 
0' 2':O 
Federal Credit Union 
In Opposition to LD1546 
An Act Regarding Nondiscrimination in Financial Services 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
April 27, 2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, 
My name is Joann Bisson and I am the President and CEO of Oxford Federal Credit Union. 
Oxford Federal Credit Union serves anyone who lives, works, worships, or goes to school in 
Androscoggin, Cumberland, Franklin, Kennebec, Knox, Lincoln, Oxford, Sagadahoc, 
Somerset, or York counties. We have over 18,000 members and hold nearly $308miIIion in 
assets. I am testifying in opposition to LD 1546 because I believe it would significantly harm 
our ability to provide services to our members. 
Like many financial institutions, we have loan approval guidelines that follow debt to income 
limits. For us however, this is a guideline, and we often account for an individual's 
circumstances outside of quantitative factors. For example: 
A couple that were long-time members of ours were applying for a vehicle loan but 
had a higher debt ratio than we would normally approve. One ofthem had recently 
retired, and was not yet eligible for Social Security benefits. Because of their 
longstanding relationship with us, we were able to approve the car loan. 
A young person who had only recently established credit applied for a car loan. 
Despite not having a significant credit history, and becoming self-employed in 2022, 
we were able to take into account how he worked in the same field through high 
school and had a down payment and approved his vehicle loan. 
Some people mightjump to the conclusion that by approving loans with a higher debt to 
income ratio, we are putting the borrower in a situation where they may be over leveraged. 
However, we can take into account other information, like past history or future employment 
in seasonal work or social security that gives us assurances that the borrower will be able to 
make their payments. These are not quantitative factors that can be measured through strict 
guidelines. 
Our concern with this legislation is that not only would it prevent us from approving these 
sorts of relationship-based loans, it would tie us into strict matrices. If, as a credit union we 
would face penalties for not relying strictly on numbers, we would likely automate our 
underwriting process and would say no to people automatically, without hearing their stories. 
I've worked for a bank, I hated saying ‘no’ to reasonable requests or not supporting situations 
that made sense due to the circumstances. I love working in this industry where we figure out 
how to say yes. I hope the committee will factor in the people behind these decisions when 
considering this legislation. Thank you for hearing our testimony.
