 
April 25, 2023 
 
 
 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair  
Representative Anne Perry, Chair  
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: Testimony to the 131st Maine Legislature Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Service related to opposing 
LD 1546 An Act Regarding Nondiscrimination in Financial Services 
 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee: 
 
My name is Katherine Hill and I have been in the banking industry for almost twenty years. I have concerns about the proposed bill, 
LD 1546, An Act Regarding Nondiscrimination in Financial Services, as I think there would be unintended consequences to 
consumers, as well as to the financial services industry. I respectfully oppose this bill. 
 
Today, Banks in the United States must follow fair lending laws and guidelines; however, we are given some discretion as to who we 
do business with. There is already legislation that requires certain steps be taken when someone is denied a loan or deposit account 
based on certain information that is gathered and used in the decision-making process. While the intent behind the bill is to address 
the denial of services, this bill would take discretion away from Banks when trying to make a loan or open a deposit account for 
someone who may not meet the exact criteria that is normally required. This would prevent banks from making decisions based on 
someone’s character or history with the bank because they could be penalized. I’ve had situations in the past where I’ve worked 
with an established customer who has brought their child in for their first loan. The child didn’t have credit history, but as a bank we 
were able to make the decision to do business with the customer and accept the risk. We also have examples of someone starting 
their first business and we were able to help them when they didn’t necessarily meet all the criteria. This bill would prevent that. We 
have also had instances where someone was rude or hostile with our staff and we currently have the option to refuse doing business 
with someone for that reason. This bill would prevent that. 
 
This bill references the use of a social credit scoring system and while I know there is concern this type of system being used to make 
a credit decision, I think the likelihood of Banks using this type of credit scoring system is highly unlikely in the United States. A social 
credit scoring system gathers information from social media or from other online behavior and could potentially lead to 
discrimination which could contradict fair lending laws and most banks are not willing to take this type of risk. As an example, if the 
social credit scoring system assigned a lower score to someone because they were associated with certain racial or religious groups 
or because of their gender, this would be a violation of fair lending laws.  
 
Again, while I believe there is good intent behind the bill, the unintended consequences that could result if it were passed would be 
detrimental to consumers and would add more red tape to the financial industry, which would result in making is more difficult to 
obtain credit or open a new account rather than easier. 
 
I thank the committee for its consideration of opposing this bill and am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
 
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
 
 
Katherine Hill 
VP, Bank Operations Manager 
