Mdine Credit Union Ledgue
A 2 Ledgeview Drive -Westbrook, ME 04092 
Mailing Address: P.O. Box 1236 - 
Portland, ME 04104 
207-773-5671 - 
1-800-442-6715 
www.mainecul.org 
ln Opposition to LD 1546 
An Act Regard/ng Nond/scrirnination in Financial Sen/ices 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
April 27, 2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members ofthe Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, 
My name is Krista Simonis, and I am the Director of Governmental Affairs at the Maine Credit Union 
League. The Maine Credit Union League is the trade association for Maine's 50 credit unions and over 
725,000 members statewide. We respectfully submit the following testimony in opposition to LD 1546. 
Credit unions are community-based, member-owned, financial cooperatives. Part of serving our 
communities means accounting for factors that affect our community's health. When considering 
whether to provide financial services, these factors and many more all inform lenders. Maine's credit 
unions support efforts to eliminate discrimination for individuals accessing financial services; however, 
LD 1546 fails to appropriately proscribe bad conduct or prescribe sensible remedies. Instead, it 
admonishes credit unions who attempt to serve the good of their communities. 
As financial cooperatives, credit unions are limited in extending financial services only to their 
membership. Many of these fields of membership extend geographically, however not all. LD 1546 
requires credit unions to extend services "to each person in the geographic market.” For credit unions 
who do not have a geographic field of membership, this requirement would conflict with their charters, 
creating a catch-22 wherein they would be in violation of the law. 
Apart from the unworkability of various sections of the bill, the penalties 
outlined are egregious relative to the potential ills. For example, the bill 
requires that adverse action letters be printed in bold 14-point font.A 
violation would result in a $10,000 fine forthe offending institution. 
Credit unions are already prohibited from discrimination under the Federal Housing Act and Fair 
Lending laws. In Maine, our lenders take care to make sure they examine the profile of the whole 
individual and their place in the community. Often, credit unions engage in relationship-based lending 
and decision making, wherein an individual's relationship and payment history with the credit union is 
weighted more heavily than other measures of debt. Sometimes bad things happen to good people, 
and a positive relationship with your financial institution can help make the difference in surviving hard 
times. 
Limiting credit unions’ decision-making abilities will lead to the most restrictive lending practices, 
resulting in fewer loans for individuals and businesses in need. Effectively, this legislation will stymie 
business development and the availability of credit to individuals in Maine. 
The things that are good for people and communities are good for businesses. Credit unions need to 
be able to account for all factors when making loans. This bill makes it sounds like the goal is to protect
Moine Credit Union Leogue 
ll levels of Maine's communities We need individua|s — but the reality is that it would cause harm to a . 
' 
that the place in the people they lend to by allowing to demonstrate the same trust in credit unions y 
them to make their own business decisions. 
We thank 
1546. the committee for hearing our testimony and urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass onLD
