 
 
TO:  
FROM:  
DATE:  
RE:  Members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services  
Rory Whelan, Regional Vice President, NAMIC  
April 27, 2023 --- Public Hearing  
Opposition to LD 1546 --- Insurance Underwriting 
Restrictions & Constraints on Financial Institutions 
 
The National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies (NAMIC)1 and its members, thank you for 
the opportunity to express strong opposition to LD 1546 and urge you vote ought not to pass. 
This bill would place certain undue, impractical, and burdensome restrictions on property & casualty 
insurers (“P&C”) as it relates to providing accurate risk-based liability insurance to Maine’s residents 
and businesses.  
 
I. Concerns about bill drafting and appropriate statute application. 
 
LD 1546 amends 9-B, Maine’s “Banking law” which does not apply to insurance companies. 
Title-24 is Maine’s Insurance Code, which directs the Bureau of Insurance (“Bureau”) to 
regulate every aspect of insurers and insurance products.2  While the bill text of LD 1546 
refers to Title-24, requirements for insurance belong in the Insurance Code. This 
inconsistency will lead to confusion among regulators, insurers, insurance producers and 
consumers. Accordingly, all references to Title-24 insurers, and insurance should be 
removed from the bill. 
 
 
 
II. Questions about the public policy purpose of LD 1546. 
 
It is not at all clear what current market behaviors justify the enactment of new laws, 
especially what is proposed in LD 1546. According to the most recent Bureau Annual Report 
to the Legislature (2021)3 there were just 209 consumer complaints against Maine’s more 
than 1,200 P&C insurers. The Bureau also administers hearings when a policyholder 
believes his/her homeowners or auto policy was unfairly cancelled/non-renewed. In 2021, 
 
1 The National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies consists of more than 1,500 member companies, 
including seven of the top 10 property/casualty insurers in the United States. NAMIC member companies 
write $357 billion in annual premiums and represent 69 percent of homeowners, 56 percent of automobile, 
and 31 percent of the business insurance markets.  
2 Title 24-A: MAINE INSURANCE CODE  
3 2021 Annual Report from the Superintendent of the Bureau of Insurance (digitalmaine.com)  
 
2  
there were 55 hearings scheduled, 17 decisions issued and just 5 findings for the 
policyholder.4  The Bureau is not aware that any of those cases involved issues related to 
environmental, social and governance scores; or diversity, equity, and inclusion matters.  
 
The old idiom “making a mountain out of a molehill” comes to mind – but, in this case there is 
simply no molehill. 
 
 
 
III. Current law prohibits insurers from engaging in unfair discriminatory practices. 
 
Property/casualty insurers are in the business of protecting individuals, families, 
businesses, and employees in Maine and across the nation. A bedrock principle of 
NAMIC’s advocacy, on behalf of our members, is to safeguard the ability of carriers to 
price and underwrite to risk based on actuarily sound considerations and data.  
Insurance is already heavily regulated by the Maine Bureau of Insurance, including 
that rates and eligibility determinations may not be unfairly discriminatory.5  
 
In other words, these determinations are made based on projected risk of loss determined 
through actuarial standards of practice. If the data demonstrates that certain properties have 
a higher risk of loss, they should be priced accordingly. This is core to what insurance is.  
 
Underwriting and ratemaking depend on an insurers’ ability to collect and use accurate 
information about the entity seeking to buy coverage. Part of this information takes the form 
of underwriting or rating variables, known as factors. Every company uses varied factors and 
evaluates them differently, but there is broad agreement that factors should be objective, 
actuarially sound, and have a credible, statistically significant correlation to expected losses 
and expenses. Because factors are correlative, the more information an insurer has and can 
use, the more accurately it will be able to assess the likelihood of a loss; the inverse is also 
true: less information makes accurately assessing the likelihood of loss more difficult.  
 
 
 
 
 
4 2021 Annual Report from the Superintendent of the Bureau of Insurance (digitalmaine.com)  
“When an insurance company issues a notice of cancellation or nonrenewal of a homeowners or personal auto policy, the company must 
advise the insured of the right to request a hearing contesting the action. There is also a statutory right to request a hearing when a 
commercial property or liability policy is cancelled prior to its expiration date. The hearing provides a forum to dispute the reason(s) and 
requires the Bureau to determine whether the cancellation or nonrenewal was done in accordance with Maine law. The following graph 
and table show the number of hearings scheduled and those resulting in decisions. In some cases, the insurance company or the insured 
may cancel the proceeding prior to hearing, which results in no issued decision. The policy will continue if the insurer cancels the hearing 
and the policyholder chooses to keep the policy. The policy ends if the policyholder cancels the hearing. In most cases where a 
policyholder cancels a hearing it is because replacement coverage has been obtained.” 
5 title24-Ach25.pdf (maine.gov)  
“The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public welfare by regulating insurance rates, in accordance with the intent of Congress as 
expressed in Public Law 15 -- 79th Congress, to the end that they shall not be excessive, inadequate or unfairly discriminatory…”  
 
3  
IV. Prohibitions on geographic flexibility should not apply to P&C insurers. 
 
Sect.245(2) in LD 1546 requires financial institutions (including P& C insurers) to “make each 
financial service it offers available to each person in the geographic market served by the 
financial institution on a nondiscriminatory basis.”6  The bill does not define “geographic 
market” nor is the legislative intent clear.  
 
Thus, a primary concern for NAMIC and P&C insurers relates to coastal issues, areas where 
the likelihood of loss is different. With more than 3,500 miles of tidal shoreline and thousands 
of islands in Maine, risks of loss may be higher due to a peril inherent in one location that is 
not inherent in others. Therefore, insurers should be permitted to rate, underwrite, and 
decline to write business in places with significant peril.  
 
An example is a house built near the ocean presents a higher risk of wind and water surge 
than a house that is two or three miles inland. The two houses are different risks, and their 
price and eligibility should reflect that. It is common, therefore, for standard market admitted 
insurers to institute coastal setbacks such that the higher risk properties are ineligible. 
Insurance for these homes is then available through higher risk insurers or the non-admitted 
market.  
 
Prohibiting the use of geography in P&C insurance raises serious concerns about diminishing 
an insurer’s access to the reinsurance market and potential insolvency.  
 
 
 
V. The terms “nonfinancial, nontraditional or subjective criteria” are not defined. 
 
The absence of clear definitions around this key component of the bill will lead to 
unnecessary confusion and arbitrary, uneven, and capricious application in enforcement.  
 
NAMIC believes the bill will inappropriately impose untested and vague statutory 
requirements onto a time-tested process of identifying, pricing, and contracting for the 
transfer of risk as accurately as possible between insurers and consumers, thereby 
potentially destabilizing the state’s insurance market. 
 
 
 
VI. The bill’s penalties are capricious, unnecessary, and onerous.  
 
LD 1546 includes these penalty provisions:7 
• A private right of action --- this is unnecessary and would only create another profit center 
for the plaintiff’s bar and encourage frivolous lawsuits. The Bureau has the experience 
and expertise to effectively regulate the insurance industry. 
 
6 getPDF.asp (maine.gov)  Sect 245(2)  
7 getPDF.asp (maine.gov)  Sect 245(4)  
 
4  
 
• Class D crime for 5 violations within one year and $10,000+ fine per violation --- 
considering that under Maine's laws, a Class D crime includes assault, violations of a 
protective order and certain DWI crimes, punishable by up to 364 days in jail and a fine of 
up to $2,000,8 these penalties are egregious.  
 
 
 
VII. Conclusion  
 
Maine has a well-documented history of providing a robust healthy competitive P&C 
commercial environment where business and innovation can flourish, and where regulations 
are carefully defined to address specific concerns. These policies helped make Maine the 4th 
least expensive state for auto insurance9 and despite severe weather conditions, the 10th 
least expensive for homeowners’ insurance.10 This proposed measure runs counter to these 
achievements by creating uncertainty and disrupting Maine’s competitive marketplace for 
P&C insurance services.  
 
For these reasons, NAMIC and its member companies respectfully ask that you oppose LD 
1546 and vote ought not to pass. Thank you for your consideration.  
 
8 Office of the Maine AG: Crime and Victims: Criminal Justice System  
9 Car insurance rates by state for 2023 – Forbes Advisor  
10 These States Have the Cheapest Home Insurance Premiums (2020) (insurify.com)  
