 
 
 
 
 
 
 
223 Main Street 
P.O. Box 940 
Damariscotta, ME  04543 
Phone: 207.563.3195 Ext: 2022 
Email: susan.norton@thefirst.com 
 
April 27, 2023 
 
 
Testimony to the 131st Maine Legislature 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, honorable members of the Committee.  My name is 
Susan Norton, Executive Vice President, and Chief Administrative Officer at First National Bank, 
headquartered in Damariscotta. I have been a banker in the state of Maine for thirty-six years and Senior 
Compliance Officer at First National for over twenty years.    I am testifying today regarding L.D. 1546, An Act 
Regarding Nondiscrimination in Financial Services and respectfully oppose the bill.   
 
The goal of every financial institution in the state of Maine is to respond to the credit needs of our 
communities, in fact, we are required to do so by the Community Reinvestment Act.  Requiring decisions 
based only on financial criteria can severely hamper the credit process, especially for younger Maine residents 
who we want to encourage to buy homes and start businesses.   
 
Opening up the credit process by using non-financial criteria usually HELPS a customer get a loan.  
 
Some examples: 
a. When students go off to college, we are often able to provide them a credit card due to an ongoing 
relationship with their parents, even though the student may have no credit history – I know that’s 
how I got my first credit card!  
b. When assisting a first-time homebuyer, who may have limited credit history, we can look at payments 
to day care providers, landlords and utility companies.  
c. And for those folks starting new businesses, sometimes a well-done business plan that meets a 
community need becomes a more compelling story than a limited credit history.  
 
Community bankers look beyond the numbers when working with their clients.  This bill bases an entire 
relationship on only the numbers.  
  
Another aspect of this bill, requiring us to notify customers specifically why a loan is declined, already exists 
in regulation.  Regulation B, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act proscribes the time frames for declination, the 
language that must be used and the reasons for which we can decline a loan.  The lending process from 
application to closing or declination is the most thoroughly examined part of the Bank, next to our financials, 
when our examiners and auditors review our policies and procedures.  
 
And lastly, I am concerned with the terminology in this bill requiring “Fair Access”.   This term seems to dictate 
how banks must do business.  My company, for example, has chosen not to bank cannabis businesses or 

 
 
cryptocurrency businesses. Would an unintended consequence of this bill be that we would be required to 
bank these types of businesses?    
 
We have also, unfortunately, seen an increase in consumers wanting to borrow money who have fallen victim 
to a scam.  We have generally been able to dissuade them from applying for a loan, but this bill appears to 
require us to grant the loan if they qualify using only financial criteria.   Preventing our customers from getting 
caught up in scams is something our employees are doing on a daily basis.  We don’t need to make that more 
difficult. 
  
In summary, the addition of this regulation creates an additional regulatory structure without any perceived 
benefits for our customers. More compliance always leads to less time to serve our customers and that is not, 
ultimately, beneficial to Maine consumers.  
 
 
 
