STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL & FINANCIAL REGULATION 
BUREAU OF INSURANCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office Location: 76 Northern Avenue, Gardiner, Maine 04345 
Mailing Address: 34 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
www.maine.gov/insurance 
Phone: (207) 624-8475  TTY: Please Call Maine Relay 711 Consumer Assistance: 1-800-300-5000 Fax: (207) 624-8599 
 
Janet T. Mills
Governor
Anne L. Head
DPFR Commissioner
Timothy N. Schott
Acting Superintendent
 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Senate Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  04333-0100 
Re: L.D. 1546, An Act Regarding Nondiscrimination in Financial Services 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee: 
The Bureau of Insurance submits this letter in opposition to L.D. 1546.   
This bill seeks to prevent financial institutions, defined to include depository institutions and 
insurance companies, among others, from denying financial services to persons that would 
otherwise result in harm to financial institutions’ reputation and social standing.  The bill would 
do this by creating rights of action against financial institutions that discriminate against 
individuals that might cause the financial institutions reputational harm and lessened social 
standing. 
The Bureau has the following issues with this bill.   
The bill tasks the Director of the Bureau of Financial Institutions with its enforcement.  This 
would have the effect of unnecessarily expanding regulatory authority over insurers outside of 
the Bureau of Insurance.  If there are to be new regulations placed on insurance companies, they 
should be enforced primarily by the Superintendent of Insurance.  
The insurance industry is sufficiently different from depositary institutions that insurance 
companies should be excluded from the bill.  Insurers review applicants for coverage and 
existing policyholders for risks that they either do not want to accept or to continue covering.  
This activity is subject to the requirement that insurers not discriminate unfairly – in other words, 
that they not treat similarly situated risks differently.   
Furthermore, the Insurance Code in several provisions prohibits discrimination on such suspect 
classifications as race, religion, and national origin.  
The bill would expand traditional notions of what should constitute a protected class of persons. 
For instance, under the terms of the bill, a person could be protected even if their infamy or 
unpopularity were due to their publicly declaring hostility to existing protected classes or 
attacking members of protected classes.  
Maine insurers are now generally free to refuse business to controversial people or industries. 
Forcing insurers to do business with unpopular people or industries would encroach on insurers’ 
Senator Donna Bailey, Senate Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, House Chair 
April 27, 2023 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
 
Printed on Recycled Paper 
Offices Located as 76 Northern Avenue, Gardiner, Maine 04345 
www.maine.gov/insurance 
Phone: (207) 624-8475  TTY: Please Call Maine Relay 711 Consumer Assistance: 1-800-300-500 Fax: (207) 624-8599 
 
right to avoid business they would otherwise not want to underwrite.  Often insurers have good 
business reasons for passing on business that would otherwise constitute good opportunity.  For 
instance, if insurance companies were to decline to insure large polluters due to concern that 
pollution has an adverse effect on catastrophic weather events and those weather events in turn 
have adverse effects on insurers’ profits, under the mandates of this bill, insurers would 
potentially open themselves up to expensive lawsuits. 
While insurance is generally regulated at the state level, there is incentive for state regulation to 
be based on national models.  We do not want artificial restraints placed on our ability to meet 
and follow national standards for financial regulation of insurers. 
I hope this information is useful to the Committee.  Please let me know if I can provide any 
further assistance. 
Sincerely, 
 
Timothy N. Schott 
Acting Superintendent 
 
cc: Representative Tracy Quint  
