 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com 
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • 
Portland • Westbrook 
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 408-An Act to Establish a “No Fare for Cleaner Air” Law in 
Maine 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
May 11, 2023 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Committee on 
Transportation, 
 
My name is Eamonn Dundon, and I am the Director of Advocacy of the Portland Regional 
Chamber of Commerce. We represent 1,300 businesses in our region who employ over 65,000 
Mainers. We are submitting this written testimony today to express our organization's support 
for the concepts behind Senator Chipman’s amended version of LD 408. 
 
Fare free public transit is a difficult balance to strike, but this bill represents the best path 
forward to realize that vision here in Maine. Especially under our current funding paradigm 
for bus operators in Maine, where public bus operations and maintenance funding is a 
combination of 50% Federal Transit Administration funds, ~25% municipal contributions and 
~25% fare revenue, it is a near impossibility to accomplish this goal without an added stream 
of revenue to bus operators from the state. Many transit agencies around the country, 
including the MTA in Boston and WMATA in Washington, have attempted this in recent years 
to varying degrees and mixed results, because they were cannibalizing fare revenue at the 
expense of ongoing investments in frequency and reliability upgrades. By funding this 
program with state dollars, we would be able to maintain the current mix of O&M funding, 
without incurring the tradeoffs other transit agencies have seen when trying to implement 
fare free transit without backfilling fare revenue with additional funding sources.  
 
As I have said to the committee on several bus related bills this year, the single biggest priority 
for this committee to focus on if we are serious about meeting the transportation emissions 
 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com 
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • 
Portland • Westbrook 
 
reductions targets in Maine Won’t Wait  is adequately funding our public bus operators. We 
know that it is going to be particularly difficult to reduce or eliminate transportation related 
emissions in the rural parts of our state and among the heavy commercial users of our 
roadways, so to accomplish those goals we are going to have to precipitate a massive mode-
shift in the most urban areas of our state away from personal vehicle travel, and towards 
transit and bike/ped solutions. This legislation represents one piece of that puzzle needed to 
accomplish that shift.  
 
While you await the fiscal note on this legislation, I would encourage the committee to look 
at a variety of ways to meet the spirit of this goal. Promotional fare holidays, like the one 
currently running in the Portland region, are a great way to bring new riders into the system 
on a discounted basis, while not incurring the ongoing expense of a permanent fare free 
program. Additionally, any action this committee can take to increase O&M funding to bus 
operators will go directly into improving the frequency and reliability of bus operations, 
another proven strategy towards building long-term ridership. We urge the committee to 
consider the totality of approaches to boost ridership, contribute to emissions reductions, and 
provide safe, frequent, and reliable transit options for workers to get to their jobs and 
contribute to Maine’s economic growth.  
 
We thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers, and we ask for your expeditious 
approval of this important legislation.  
  
