nv. " ' 
101 Western Ave. 
The Maine Coalitieh P'O' BOX 5188 
to End Domestic Violence Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
207.430.8334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso 
in Support of LD 538, “An Act Regarding the Qualifications of Expert Witnesses 
in Certain Family Court Actions. ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Thursday, March 2, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)’ in support of LD 538, “An Act Regarding the Qualifications of Expert 
Witnesses in Certain Family Court Actions, ” as outlined in the proposed amendment. 
MCEDV would like to thank Representative Doudera for her commitment to thoughtfully 
addressing the gaps and challenges brought forward by survivors of domestic abuse and 
violence in her district. 
Why This Issue is Important 
For survivors of domestic abuse and violence, the family court is where long-term 
safety and stability needs are attended to, or it should be. A frequent problem that survivors 
face in our family courts is that decision makers, and those that influence decision makers, do 
not fully appreciate existing or easily foreseeable conflicts and risk. When these are 
insufficiently accounted for, a family is set up for both future harm and future ongoing 
litigation. Family court cases involving domestic abuse and violence are the most litigated and 
some of the most challenging. Over the last several years, the Maine Legislature has passed 
a series of bills that recognize the importance of decision makers and those that influence 
them having a solid foundational understanding of domestic violence, including how abuse 
changes after the parent being abused has physically separated from the parent causing the 
harm, and how this impacts both the parent to parent relationship as well as the parent-child 
relationship. This includes codifying requirements for initial and ongoing training of guardians 
1 
MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
abuse and violence and their children in Maine last year. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.0rg
l\/lCEDV Page 2 of3 
ad litem,’ as well as an annual training requirement for Maine's judicial officers. This bill 
represents the next step in ensuring our family courts have the benefit of as full and as 
informed a picture as possible. 
For those unfamiliar with the family court, there are often two types of professionals 
that make recommendations to the court with respect to how to structure a parental rights 
and responsibilities order that best meets the child’s best interest. The most common isa 
guardian ad litem. A guardian ad litem is essentially a neutral representative of the court that 
engages in fact finding, to include review of records and interviews with relevant individuals. 
Their scope of work is carefully outlined through an appointment order from the court. Most 
people appointed as guardians ad litem in Maine family courts are on a roster, having gone 
through many hours of training that is coordinated by the Maine Judicial Branch. Guardian ad 
litem conduct is governed by a set of rules, approved by the Maine Supreme Judicial Court. 
There is a well-defined process for family court litigants to file complaints when a guardian ad 
litem has engaged in problematic behavior and to have those complaints reviewed bya 
Guardian ad Litem Review Board. There are continuing education requirements of guardians 
ad litem, training that is overseen and approved by the Guardian ad Litem Review Board. 
A second, less frequent group of professionals that influence family court decisions are 
those that are hired, usually by only one of the parties, to similarly review records and conduct 
interviews. That person is then offered forward as an expert witness, again usually by only 
one of the parties, to provide their professional opinion as to things like parental capacity, the 
appropriate decision making structure, and what should be ordered for parent-child contact. 
Titles of these privately engaged individuals include forensic psychologists, custody 
evaluators, and parental capacity evaluators. Unless this person is a licensed mental health 
provider in Maine or is a rostered guardian ad litem, this person does not necessarily have to 
have any particular expertise or training specific to domestic abuse and violence to be 
qualified as an expert witness on any of the above issues, even if the central issues in the case 
involve domestic abuse and violence. They can rest solely on their professional credentials 
and work history. That needs to change. In cases involving domestic abuse and violence, any 
person who is being qualified as an expert witness to discuss an assessment or evaluation 
they have made regarding a family which includes recommendations of how the court should 
structure a parental rights and responsibilities order should be required to demonstrate they 
have, at a minimum, training and expertise in what abuse looks like after the parents separate, 
the effects of abuse on children and the ability of the parents to co-parent, and methods for 
reducing post-separation harm._ 
For survivors contemplating separation from the person who has been abusing them, 
a paramount concern is always what will ultimately happen with the children. When one 
2 
Historically, guardians ad litem have only been required to receive less than two hours of training on issues 
related to domestic abuse and violence as part of their initial training. The Maine Legislature in 2021, increased 
the initial training requirement to 6 hours, and codified a continuing education requirement of 2 additional hours 
of ongoing training on domestic abuse and violence each year.
nv. W 101 Western Ave. 
The Maine Coalition P'O' BOX 5188 
to End Domestic Violence Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
207-430-8334 
parent uses abuse and violence against the other, “leaving” is often little more than a change 
in residence, as the children will remain a life-long tie. Survivors should be able to see our 
family courts as a resource to help them achieve safety and stability. For too many survivors 
in Maine, that is not the reality of their experience. Codifying these requirements around the 
qualifications of custody and parental capacity evaluators in these cases will help ensure that 
the court is being provided with at least a minimally informed perspective. 
Structural Problems with the Original Draft of LD 538 
The type of assessment or evaluation that this bill aims to address, as outlined above, 
is fundamentally different than the “forensic risk assessment ” that currently exists in Title 
19-A, section 1653, subsection 6-C. The subsection 6-C assessment is, in fact, a recognized 
risk assessment conducted when a parent has concerns that the other parent poses a risk to 
the safety of a common child due to that parent’s history of some level of sexual 
misconduct. These two types of evaluations should not be conflated, and the current 
drafting of LD 538 very much conflates them. No changes should be made to existing law in 
Section 1653, subsection 6-C, paragraphs A-D. The proposed amendment, to replace the 
current draft of the bill entirely, would place the appropriate language in Title 19-A, section 
1653, subsection 6, which is the section that deals with how a court should address cases 
involving domestic abuse and violence. The amendment would add a Paragraph H to that 
subsection. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our support for ensuring those giving expert 
testimony as to what is in the best interest of children have the appropriate level of training 
and expertise in those issues involved. I would be happy to serve as a resource to the 
Committee as well as to work with other interested parties as this bill moves through 
process. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 650-4356, Email: an,dr§:a.@m,§,ed,v,.,o.rg 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
_ mcedv.org
