¥¢‘»> 
L 
‘g HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
E 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
$5 , AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) Z87-l400 
TTYI MAINE RELAY 7ll 
Vicki Doudera 
18 Trim Street 
Camden, ME 04843 
(207) 542-1990 
Victoria.Doudera@legislat.ure.maine.gov 
March 2, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Vicki Doudera presenting 
LD 538, An Act Regarding the Qualiﬁcation of Expert 
Witnesses in Certain Family Court Actions 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary. My name is Vicki Doudera and I represent House District 41, 
which includes Camden and Rockpoit. I am here before you today to present LD 538, An Act 
Regarding the Qualification of Expert Witnesses in Certain Family Court Actions. 
The idea for this bill came from a constituent, Sarah McLean, who you will hear from today. She 
and I worked closely with the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence on drafting this 
legislation. You have received a proposed amendment to the bill, which corrects the language 
received from the Revisor of Statutes ’ Office. This was necessary because what we are requiring 
for forensic evaluations in domestic violence custody cases is entirely separate from the forensic 
risk assessments that are outlined elsewhere. 
As this committee knows, forensic evaluations or assessments are used in situations where 
parents camiot agree to the legal or residential custody of a child or if there are credible 
allegations of abuse, neglect, mental health issues or unﬁtness of a parent. 
As amended, LD 538 states that in cases of abuse the court may allow an expert witness to 
provide a forensic evaluation or assessment regarding parental rights and responsibilities only if 
that expert has a certain level of training and expertise in how domestic abuse and violence 
tactics affect parent and child safety post-separation. It requires that a witness who will be 
providing evaluations or assessments be truly well-versed and trained in understanding the 
complicated nature of domestic abuse cases, as well as the factors and conditions that support 
kids’ resilience, safety and security in these particular situations. 
The lived experience of the parents who will testify in support of LD 5 38 will speak more to the 
need for this bill. Meanwhile, I thank you for your time and consideration and I am happy to 
answer any questions you may have. 
Representative Vicki Doudera 
District 41 : Camden and Rockport
iitﬁéttt 
Sec. 1. 19-A MRSA §1653, sub-§ 6, as enacted by PL 1995, c. 694, is amended to read: 
H. In cases involving the existence of domestic abuse between the parents, in the past or 
currently, the court in an action to award or modify parental rights and responsibilities may not 
gualify an expert witness to provide a forensic evaluation or assessment as to how the court 
should structure parent rights and responsibilities and conditions of parent-child contact to 
achieve the best interest of the child unless the court ﬁnds that witness has training and 
demonstrated expertise on at least the following topics: 
(1) The domestic abuse tactics affecting adult and child safety after separation of the parents; 
(2) The effects of domestic abuse and violence on children and conditions that support 
resilience; 
(3) Best practices for recognizing, asking about, and assessing the effects of abuse on the 
parenting and parent-child relationship; and * 
(4) Methods for reducing_post-separation abuse of the non-abusing_parent and promoting child 
safety and security. 
SUMMARY 
This amendment would entirely replace the original draft of LD 538 and provide that the 
court may qualify an expert witness to provide a forensic evaluation or assessment of parental 
rights and responsibilities in cases involving domestic abuse only if that expert can showa 
certain level of training and expertise in how domestic abuse and violence continues after 
separation of the parents and affects child resilience, safety and security.
