Jennifer  Larrabee
Stonington 
LD 1884
With very little notice, I was unable to attend yesterday's hearing.  As a member of a 
multi-generational fishing family and a coastal community member I am opposed to 
any and all offshore wind projects in the Gulf of Maine.  The idea that off shore wind 
and commercial fishing can coexist is simply a false narrative.  If you look at other 
communities further down the Eastern coast where off shore wind expansion is 
happening, you will see substantially smaller fleets than our Maine fleet being 
eradicated from off shore wind lease areas, in spite of promises made that fishing in 
lease areas would be allowed.  Maine should not be asked to trade the heritage, 
income and historical significance of the commercial fishing fleet for large scale 
industrialization of the Gulf of Maine where only a few corporations would 
financially benefit and even fewer would reinvest in our local communities.  I stand 
behind the green initiative, however offshore wind offers no guarantees of offering 
affordable energy to Maine - in fact it promises the opposite with Mainers, not 
developers, footing the bills. We need the truth to supersede false promises.  BOEM 
current proposals include a whopping 9.9 Million acres of potential offshore wind 
lease areas.  The magnitude of the ask is staggering.  How can anyone believe that 
this will have little to no impact on marine wildlife?  We can not and should not 
proceed ANY FURTHER without peer evaluated environmental impact reports.  I 
understand that the lobster Union has testified that Maine lobstermen are supportive 
of measures to move offshore wind outside the '12 mile line' - but your bill only offers
tax incentives to companies that follow that protocol and that is absolutely not a 
guarantee.  I find zero fishermen who support offshore wind in the Gulf of Maine - 
because all are terrified of its potential impact on the current healthy stocks they have 
worked so hard to sustain.  Finally and definitely not least - we have a grave 
responsibility to our Maine Native American tribes.  No projects should be allowed to
move forward without Tribal leaders being part of the conversation.  Currently you 
have offered them a seat at the table only if they support Offshore wind moving 
forward.  The tribes in Maine have a relationship with our State's natural resources 
that supersedes any others.  The profound environmental impact of OffShore wind 
can not be overlooked simply by offering potential employment to our States Native 
Americans.  That is both short sighted and frankly insulting.  Make no mistake - the 
only reason you did not see more opposition at yesterday's hearing was only because 
we were not aware.  We are now on the offense - and plan on seeing many, many 
more of us at the upcoming meetings.

