’ 
‘ 
It. 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
Trafﬁc Safety Unit 
State House Station 20 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS COL. WILLIAM ROSS 
GOVERNOR CHIEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOTT 
COM2vﬂSSlONER DEPUTY cm? 
Testimony of Lt. Bruce Scott 
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 158-7 
An Act to Amend the Motor Vehicle Inspection Law to Exempt Certain 
Motor Vehicles Less than 3 Years Old 
Senator Chipman, Rep. Williams, and distinguished Members of the ]oint 
Standing Committee on Transportation, my name is Lt. Bruce Scott, andI 
am the Commanding Officer of the State Police Trafﬁc Safety Unit. I am 
here today to testify on behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the 
Maine State Police IN OPPOSITION OF LD 1587. 
This bill would exempt any motor vehicle that can be driven with a classC 
driver’ s license from a motor vehicle safety inspection for the ﬁrst three 
years after the month in which it was manufactured. In addition to the 
enforcement nightmare of police ofﬁcers trying to determine the month the 
vehicle was manufactured, or even the year when traveling down the road, 
there are major safety concerns with this bill. There would also be a conﬂict 
with federal law as a “commercial vehicle” is deﬁned as any vehicle over 
10,001 pounds that is engaged in commerce, yet you can operate a vehicle up 
to 26,001 pounds on a class C license, meaning many commercial vehicles 
would be exempted from inspection by this bill. Also, many heavy use 
vehicles like tow trucks, Ubers, limousines, ambulances, cruisers and plow 
trucks are driven under the harshest of conditions and often travel 50,000 or 
more miles per year, meaning they may travel over 150,000 miles without 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
the requirement to be inspected annually. Compounding the problem is in 
three years some of these vehicles will no longer be under warranty and the 
very intent of the bill to save Mainer’ s time and money will have the 
opposite effect. New vehicles are usually covered under warranty, so many 
of the defects found at an annual inspection would be covered under 
warranty, at little or no cost to the owner. 
This bill would also create conﬂict with Title 29-A section 1754 that requires 
all vehicles to be inspected within the 60 days prior to the sale. 
Even brand-new vehicles fail inspection, many arrive at the dealerships with 
safety defects that you may ﬁnd shocking. One study shows that 3.2% of one 
year old vehicles fail inspection and that rate increases annually. ].D. Power 
and Associates stated in a publication last ]une that “new vehicle quality 
declined by 11% last year amid parts shortages, shipping snarls and the 
global trade disruption. ” Last year my Motor Vehicle Inspectors personally 
witnessed new vehicles with defects that included but were not limited to, 
loose spring eyelet and U-bolts, incorrectly installed center bearings, a drag 
link that wasn't securely fastened, and a clevis pin that was completely 
missing. The drag link is a critical steering component that affects the 
maneuverability of a vehicle and without a clevis pin, the air brakes on that 
axle did not work. Loose bolts on the suspension system can greatly affect 
handling and during extreme braking or turning can cause catastrophic 
failure. Center bearings on drive shafts are important as they are used to 
maintain proper alignment and free movement of the shaft as it delivers 
power to the differentials or transaxles. A failure can result in a sudden loss 
of power or even worse, could cause the shaft to fail and become ejected 
from the vehicle causing additional damage and potentially causing the 
vehicle to lose control and crash. Numerous light duty vehicles were 
discovered to have loose brake calipers (bolts completely missing), loose 
stabilizer links, missing or loose suspension mounting hardware, loose 
fasteners on numerous components, electrical issues, etc., that caused them 
to fail an inspection. 
One of my responsibilities in being the Troop Commander of the Traffic 
Safety Unit is serving as our Fleet Director. In that role it is my responsibility 
to ensure that our ﬂeet of 645+- vehicles, that travel approximately 13 
million miles per year, are properly maintained and safe for extreme 
operations. These vehicles can go from sitting at an idle to traveling in 
excess of 1oo miles per hour only moments from leaving our garage aftera 
service or inspection. We frequently discover safety defects during normal 
maintenance intervals of every 8,000 miles. We also see vehicles that 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPAS SION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
develop major safety issues between these maintenance check—ups and those 
vehicles are taken out of service and are brought in for immediate repair. 
With that in mind, it|SO11H(lS very‘ $CHIl'Y toime to think that|o’cher-vehirclies"- 
belonging to other ﬂeets would be exempt from an annual inspection, which 
may be the only time they are looked at by a licensed technician. If this bill 
passed, many ﬂeet vehicles would be sold off due to high mileage and a lack 
of reliability without ever needing to be inspected. 
As you deliberate over this bill you may also want to consider that there 
would be a substantial ﬁscal note of approximately $182,500 a year for 
perpetuity (73,000 new vehicle stickers at $3.50 apiece). There may also bea 
ﬁnancial penalty for backsliding if the State of Maine reduces its carbon 
credits by exempting the annual inspection of motor vehicles in 
Cumberland County. Millions of federal dollars and an increase in crashes 
and human lives are at risk here for a potential savings of $12.50 per year to 
the consumer. Also please keep in mind that most, if not all, new auto 
dealers provide free inspections to their customers for the life of the vehicle, 
meaning there is essentially no savings what-so-ever for the consumer. 
For these reasons, we urge you to vote “Ought Not To Pass" on LD 1587. 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police, I 
thank you for your time and would be happy to try and answer any 
questions that you might have. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMIPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-7088 (Fax)
