, ‘~.;,, ;%. _aa%;;g\ P.O. Box 2667 
A 
....._. 
@ .... 180 Civic Center Drive 
. Augusta, Maine 04338-2667 
"ji 
g, L AUTOMOBILE DEALERS ASSOCIATION IN 
\““‘““‘°“'/ PHONE 623-3882 ' FAX (207) 623-2318 
E-MAIL info@maineautodea|ers.com 
Q Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Bi LD 1587 — An Act to Amend the Motor Vehicle Inspection Law to Exempt Certain Motor Vehicles Less than 3 Years 
Oid 
Good Afternoon, Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation Committee. My name 
is Tom Brown, President of the Maine Automobile Dealers Association, the state-wide organization of the franchised 
new car and truck dealers in Maine, all of which are members of MADA. All MADA members are also licensed safety 
inspection stations, with most of the technicians employed at over 200 locations in Maine being certified inspection 
mechanics. 
MADA testifies in Oggosition to LD 1587- An Act to Amend the Motor Vehicle inspection Law to Exempt Certain Motor 
Vehicles Less than 3 Years Old. The proposal would apparently eliminate the inspection requirement for vehicles driven 
by a Class C driver's license holder until 3 years from the last day of the month in which it was manufactured. 
MADA supports the annual safety inspection of motor vehicles, which we believe benefits all Maine citizens. Miles 
driven and type of driving, combined with the condition of various roads on which we travel, are important factors to 
the safe operation of vehicles. The variety of weather we experience, and the chemicals we use to help treat our roads 
to satisfy the expectations of the driving public to have clear roads immediately after a storm ends, can accelerate the 
deterioration of concrete and pavement, lead to pot holes, frost heaves and uneven road surfaces, and, added to miles 
driven, result in significant wear and tear on motor vehicles. While vehicle owners can readily see windshield wipers, 
glass, and headlights, the deterioration of braking systems, fuel and brake lines, exhaust systems, tire wear and 
undercarriage corrosion are factors which automotive service professionals should be reviewing annually to help the 
safe operation of motor vehicles. 
LD 1587 presents several challenges. When a licensed dealer sells a motor vehicle, they are required to have inspected 
the vehicle no earlier than 60 days prior to the date of sale, regardless of month of manufacture. New vehicles are not 
always sold promptly upon their arrival from the manufacturer, so it could be many months, or a year or more, after 
manufacture when the vehicie is first sold. What happens with a vehicle which changes owners within the first 3 years 
after month of manufacture? The month of manufacture is not readily known to customers. While it is generally 
located in the vehicle, it is not in a standard place nor in a standard format. A 3-year interval based on month of 
manufacture would require the Maine State Police to have multiple years of inspection stickers available for licensed 
inspection stations in order for the station to attach an appropriate sticker to the vehicle for expiration 3 years after 
month of manufacture.‘ 
With all of these factors, MADA urges the Committee to retain the annual inspection requirement. Thank you for the 
opportunity to express MADA's Oggosition to LD 1587.
