STA'l"E or MAINE 
()Fm(fr: or "rm; GOVERNOR
Q _ lS'l‘A'l‘E House S'r.u‘1()x 
AIFGIYST.-X, MAINE 
04333-0001 
J ANET Mitts Dam BURGESS 
GOVERNOR DIRECTOR OF Gov!-;Rl\'0R ’s 
ENERG\' OFFICE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING _ 
An Act to Address Poverty by Increasing Access to Energy Efficiency and Weatherization Programs 
L.D. 1437 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
April 28, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing: My 
name is Caroline Colan, and l am the Legislative Liaison for the Governor's Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies neither for nor against L.D. 1437. 
Thanks for the opportunity to testify on this bill. We understand that the sponsor has proposed several 
changes to the original text with the broad objective to direct Efficiency Maine Trust (EMT) and Maine 
Housing to further prioritize their weatherization and energy efficiency programs to serve Mainers with 
the highest energy burden} to coordinate and improve service provision, and to provide a single point 
of entry into energy assistance payments for qualifying Maine residents. We also understand it seeks to 
direct the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) to establish data sharing and outreach 
mechanisms to facilitate this prioritization. The GEO and the Governor's Office of Policy, Innovation and 
the Future (GOPIF) are broadly supportive of efforts which reduce barriers to enrollment in energy 
assistance programs and better sen/e vulnerable Maine people, and we'd like to take this opportunity to 
share some additional information for consideration. 
Earlier this year, the Equity Subcommittee (ESC) of the Maine Climate Council released its report of 
considerations for equitably implementing the state's climate action plan, Maine Won't Wait. Through 
the preparation of this report, the ESC identified ongoing actions related to the provisions in this bill, as 
well as opportunities for further intervention. Several of those opportunities are reflected in intent, if 
not function, in this bill. In addition, Maine Won't Wait included many opportunities to provide 
weatherization, energy efficiency, and heat pump installations in low income and otherwise vulnerable 
homes. 
Regarding ongoing actions, the following present opportunities that this bill might build on: 
0 i\/laineHousing's heat pump program pays for the cost and installation of a heat pump for 
eligible Maine homeowners, including those eligible for the Home Energy Assistance Program 
(HEAP)2 or Central Heating Improvement Program (CHIP) assistance payments. 
1 
Energy burden refers to the amount of household income spent on energy expenditures. ln Maine, |ow—income 
households spend, on average, 24% of their income on energy, as compared to 4% in moderate and high—income 
households. 
2 This is the same program known as the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program, or LlHEAP, at the federal 
level.
1
0 Through EMT, LMI households are eligible to receive elevated rebates for heat pumps, electric 
vehicles, and weatherization actions. 
0 MaineHousing is taking steps to increase and streamline access to weatherization services and 
health and safety retrofits to low-income households in Maine, including prioritizing 
weatherization services to those with the highest needs first, based on household income, home 
energy costs, and household composition. 
v in 2022, the Public Utilities Commission expanded the Low-Income Assistance Program (LIAP), 
which adds credits to the electric bills of low-income customers, and customers who participate 
in a DHHS means-tested program who are at or below 75% of the Federal poverty line, doubling 
the number of customers eligible for the program and doubling funding for the program from 
$7.8 to $15 million. 
0 Also in 2022, DHHS provided one-time assistance with heating costs for Mainers with low 
incomes, complementing Governor Mills’ Emergency Winter Energy Relief Plan. Assistance was 
made available to approximately 13,000 households with adults over the age of 65 who had 
received Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits. This one-time assistance 
followed separate rounds of heating cost relief for families participating in other social benefit 
programs as well as for low-income families with children. 
0 Maine agencies are collaborating to streamline access to heating and energy assistance for 
Maine people with low incomes, including by: 
o Initiating online applications for heating assistance from MaineHousing; 
o Investigating opportunities to establish a single application across MaineHousing 
programs; 
o Adopting automatic eligibility for HEAP for households who already receive other social 
service benefits, including Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and SNAP; 
and 
o Offering low- and no-cost energy upgrades and other enhanced rebates for eligible low- 
and moderate-income Mainers at EMT?’ These rebates are higher than the standard 
incentives, with the highest amounts for those who are low-income. Qualified low- 
income households include those who currently receive service through HEAP, SNAP, 
TANF, or MaineCare, or who have a tax assessed valuation of land/buildings at or under 
average county values. 
Additionally, the GEO is aware of conversations about further streamlining enrollment in energy 
assistance programs by improving data sharing between DHHS, EMT and MaineHousing. This 
collaboration is ongoing and we are sensitive to the potential technical challenges that DHHS may face in 
sharing participant information securely, but some legislative direction may be helpful in furthering a 
successful solution. 
While programs and incentives for weatherization, efficient heating and cooling, and building standards, 
and the clean energy transition, are designed to reduce energy burden and benefit low-income 
households in the long-term, multiple barriers and intersecting vulnerabilities may delay uptake of these 
programs, preventing households with low-incomes from realizing reductions in energy costs from 
Maine's building and energy improvements immediately. 
3 Eligible moderate-income households include those with an Adjusted Gross Income below $70,000 for an 
individual filing as single, head of household or married ﬁling separately, or $100,000 if married ﬁling jointly or 
individual filing as a qualifying widower. See: https://www.efficiencymainexom/income-based-eiigibiiity; 
verificationf 
Page 2 of3
We continue to work to improve program accessibility and use. As the Maine Climate Council soon 
reconvenes to work on the next iteration of the state's climate plan, it will be specifically analyzing the 
impact of its proposed actions on low income and disadvantaged people. This includes the impact of 
recommendations related to weatherization, energy efficiency, and heat pump installation, across the 
state and for those Maine people most vulnerable. 
The GEO and GOPIF would be happy to work with the Committee and the sponsor on these concepts 
should this legislation move forward. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Cnw\’v-¢-C=Q~\ Caroline Colan, Legislative Liaison 
Governor ’ s Energy Office 
Page 3 of3
