April 28, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Housing  
 
RE: LD 1437 – An Act to Address P overty by Increasing Access to Energy Efficiency and 
Weatherization Programs  
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Housing,  my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the Government Relations Director  for The 
Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this opportunity to submit written 
comments in support of LD 1437 – An Act to Address Poverty by Increasing Access 
to Energy Efficiency and Weatherization Programs . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.  The Nature 
Conservancy has  been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in  the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate.  
 
LD 14 37 simply requires the Maine C limate Council to include in its annual report 
specific recommendations to assist low -income residents of the state in accessing 
energy efficiency and weatherization program s. It also directs the Maine Depa rtment 
of Health and Human Services, the Maine State Housing Authority, a nd the Efficiency 
Maine Trust to amend their rules to better align their programs with serving low -
income Mainers.  
 
TNC Maine ’s State Director, Kate De mpsey, served on the Maine Climate Council and 
many of our staff served on the Climate Council Working Groups. Our organiz ation 
strongly supports the recommendations and actions identi fied by the C limate Council 
to help Maine reduce our greenhouse gas emissions. We know improving energy 
efficiency and weatherization are key climate solut ions and can help save Main ers 
money. We believe the State should i nvest add itional resources in rebate programs to 
support low - and moderate -income residential customers. This bill would be a step in 
the right direction by identifying specific recommendations for the  Department of 
Health and Human Services, the Maine State Housing A uthority, and the Efficiency 
Maine Trust  to address the needs of low -income residents.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment in support of LD 14 37. I’m happy to answer 
questions at any time.  
