STATE or MAINE 
tit‘? DEPARTMENT or TRANSPORTATION 
“?‘v;>j?-,4 ‘ 16 STATE HOUSE STATION 
i e it ,Q y ,_ AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0016 
‘Yarn 
Janet T. Mills Bruce A. Van Note 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
April 12, 2023 
Testimony of Nate Moulton 
Maine Department of Transportation 
Before the 131“ Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
In Opposition 
LD 880 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Transportation to Initiate a Service Development 
Plan for Commuter and Passenger Train Service Between Portland and the Lewiston and 
Auburn Area 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, I am Nate Moulton, a Transportation Planning Division Director 
at MaineDOT. MaineDOT is in opposition to LD 880, Resolve, Directing the Department of 
Transportation to Initiate a Service Development Plan for Commuter and Passenger Train 
Service Between Portland and the Lewiston and Auburn Area. 
LD 880 requires MaineDOT to initiate a service development plan for commuter and passenger 
rail service between Portland and the Lewiston and Aubum area. The plan must identify the 
locations of railway stations in towns along the corridor route and requires that MaineDOT 
submit a progress report to the Transportation Committee by January 15, 2024. 
Last legislative session MaineDOT was directed to conduct an economic evaluation study for 
commuter and passenger rail service between Portland and the Lewiston and Auburn area. This 
study builds upon the 2018 Transit Propensity Analysis and the Lewiston-Auburn Passenger Rail 
Service Plan published in May 2019. The Resolve required that a high-level alternatives analysis 
be conducted of two deﬁned rail corridors as Well as a comparison of other potential 
transportation connections, and that MaineDOT submit a report of the ﬁndings to this committee. 
You should have all recently received a copy of this report. 
Based on information from the most recent study, along with past Lewiston and Auburn 
passenger rail studies, MaineDOT has concluded that passenger rail service to Lewiston and 
Auburn is currently not eligible or competitive for federal discretionary funding. Considering the 
high capital cost and limitations of other sources of funding, including State and local capital 
funding and the need for signiﬁcant ongoing operational support, MaineDOT does not support 
further work designing or constructing a passenger rail alternative between Portland and the 
Lewiston and Auburn area at this time. 
THE MAINE DEP/\RTi\-ll-INT OF TR/\NSlORl"Al “[Oi\‘ IS AN /\FFlRMr\TlVl “ A(TlOl\ - EQUAL Ol'[’()RTUNITY EMPL()\ER 
PllOl\‘E: (Z07) 624-3000 lI‘\ USERS CALL MAINE RE.Lz\\ 7ll FAX: (Z07) 624 'l00|
MaineDOT does, however, plan to pursue the achievable alternative of improved bus service 
serving intercity and commuter needs. This altemative involves much lower capital and 
operational costs in the near and long-term, can be started quickly as a pilot, is more ﬂexible in 
terms of deﬁning and revising workforce and equity needs, is climate friendly, and can serve to 
assess ridership demand for future consideration of passenger rail. 
MaineDOT recommends advancing a 2-year pilot commuter bus service between Portland and 
the Lewiston and Auburn area that provides a level of frequency and service that was envisioned 
by the recent rail studies in this corridor. This service will provide transit access to the Lewiston 
and Aubum area to not only connecting rail and bus going south of Portland but single seat 
transit access to centralized transit and employers in Portland. The pilot service will initially 
focus on both commuter and intercity customers. This is a cost-effective Way to start a public 
transportation connection. It will provide real world data on transit need and demand in the 
corridor and with success can help justify and build towards future consideration of rail service 
and better justiﬁcation for federal funding. MaineDOT intends to start such a commuter bus 
service pilot in the ﬁrst half of 2024. 
Further information supporting MaineDOT ’s position are detailed in the Lewiston-Aubum 
Economic Evaluation Study and memorandum transmitted to this Committee on April ll, 2023. 
lt is for these reasons that we recommend the committee vote ought not to pass on LD 880. 
Thank you. 
THE MAINE l)EP,=\RTi\-IENT OF TRAN§P£)RTAliO'\ ‘ I8 AN AFFlR\!ATl\ F A(Tl()’\E - EQUAL OPPORTl NITY E’\lPLO‘>FR 
PIIQNEI (Z07) 5Z4"39(l0 'l"l"1 USPRS CALL MAENE RE;L\\ 711 F\X: (207) .. §
