TESTIMONY OF 
DANIELLE ALTERI, BUSINESS OFFICE MANAGER 
CARING HANDS OF MAINE DENTAL CENTER 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 789 and LD 876 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH COVERAGE, INSURANCE AND FINANCIAL 
SERVICES 
March 22, 2023 10:00 A.M. 
My name is Danielle Alteri, and I am the Business Office Manager for Caring Hands of Maine Dental 
Center in Ellsworth Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to provide my testimony in support of LD 789 
and LD 876. 
Caring Hands of Maine Dental Center is a private nonprofit in Ellsworth Maine serving patients ofall 
ages. I have experienced firsthand the need for more providers in rural Maine. Many ofour patients 
travel two hours or more to get to us because there is not a provider available to them closer to their 
home. I answer upwards of thirty calls a day from Maine residents looking for dental care, a majority of 
who need an urgent assessment. Since the need for care drastically outweighs the providers available, 
our clinic is at maximum capacity. As of the first of the year we had to regrettably make the difficult 
decision to stop accepting new patients. 
In addition to seeing our established patients in our clinic, our office has been partnering with numerous 
dental schools across the country for the past thirteen years to provide many free dental clinics across 
rural Maine. These mission driven trips would not be possible without the help of out of state, 
volunteer providers. 
I firmly believe that LD 789 and LD 876 offer practical solutions that have the potential to lessen the 
gaps in dental provider coverage in our state. Regardless if a provider is relocating to our beautiful state 
or is simply coming to Maine to volunteer, more qualified dental providers in Maine equates to 
increased access for Maine residents and to me that is a no brainer. 
I want to thank you for allowing me to share my experiences and testify on behalf of these bills thatI 
believe have the potential to help so many Maine residents.
