 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
March 14 , 2023  
 
Neither For Nor Against : 
LD 876, “An Act to Expand Access to Oral Health Care in Rural Maine by Allowing Certain Out -of-state 
Dentists to Practice in Dental Clinics in the State ” 
 
Sponsored by Senator Grohoski  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, I am Hannah Hudson , Policy  and Communications Manager 
at the Maine Primary Care Association (MPCA).  
 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
 
Today, we are testifying “Neither For Nor Against” this bill but wanted to go  on the record stating that 
oral health care access remains a priority for MPCA  and our Community Health Center Network in 
Maine. As an organization, w e are  focused on supporting CHCs with the expansion of MaineCare’s 
comprehensive adult dental benefit. This includes dental assistant training, addressing health equity 
needs, and ensuring that CHC voices are included at relevant state -level meetings.   
 
As more adults have access to the expanded dental benefits, the health centers’ patient population and 
the complexity of the patient needs have increased . CHCs are doing everything they can t o ensure that 
patients receive the quality treatment the y deserve, but waitlists continue to be long across the state.   
 
As we know, Maine is experiencing workforce shortages in many heath care professions, and dental 
providers  are no exception. Rural are as, in particular, are experiencing critical challenges with access to 
care . All efforts that help expand the applicant pool are welcomed to allow for CHCs to be able to hire 
qualified staff to address the huge need that exists  throughout our state .  
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please do 
not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
 
Hannah Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
