                                                  105 2nd St Suite 2A
Hallowell, ME 04347
MOHC@mcdph.org
www.maineoralhealthcoalition.org
Testimony of the Maine Oral Health Coalition 
Neither For Nor Against LD 876, 
An Act to Expand Access to Oral Health Care in Rural Maine by Allowing Certain 
Out-of-State Dentists to Practice in Dental Clinics in the State
March 22, 2023
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance & Financial Services Committee, this testimony is submitted on behalf of the Maine 
Oral Health Coalition. Founded 25 years ago as the Maine Dental Access Coalition, we have 
functioned as a broad network, and maintain a close interest in policy and systems changes 
that can improve access to services and oral health status in Maine. 
The Coalition has been consistently supportive of legislative proposals that come forward with 
the intent to increase access to oral health services throughout Maine. LD 876 demonstrates 
that intent; it would expand options for active dentists “licensed in good standing issued under 
the laws of another state, a Canadian province or a foreign country” to practice in Maine.
We all should do all that we can to encourage and welcome interested dentists to bring their 
skills to care for people in Maine who need that care. These are well-trained individuals who  
can help us address gaps in services that result in too many people waiting too long for 
services, with adverse impacts on their overall health and well-being. However, creating a new 
licensure category may not be the step needed to attract and retain these dentists, and there 
may be other avenues to pursue, such as licensure reciprocity, or an interstate compact, that 
could have positive results. 
We urge the Committee to consider the positive potential of LD 876 for helping to relieve the 
severe and persistent workforce challenges that limit access to oral health care, and resolve 
any issues that it presents. 
Thank you.
Judith Feinstein, MSPH, Coordinator
jafme52@gmail.comMOHC Steering 
Committee
Wendy Alpaugh, DMD
General Practice 
Dentist, Stonington
Kalie Hess, MPH
Children’s Oral Health 
Network of Maine
Beth Pearce
Maine Primary Care 
Association
Bonnie Vaughan, 
IPDH, MEd, MBA 
Kennebec Valley 
Family Dentistry 
Center and Maine 
Dental Hygienists’ 
Association
Judith Feinstein, MSPH
Coordinator 
The Maine Oral Health 
Coalition represents a 
statewide group of 
organizations and 
individuals who work 
together as a network 
to support each other 
in raising awareness 
and promoting oral 
health and dental 
disease prevention 
activities, through 
community education 
and advocacy, with 
the vision that oral 
health is valued as a 
vital element of 
wellness for all Maine 
residents.
