Julie Tucci
Preque Isle, Maine
LD 876
March 22, 2023
TESTIMONY OF
JULIE TUCCI, PRACTICE MANAGER
Nonprofit Dental Clinic
 Presque Isle, Maine  04769
IN SUPPORT TO 876
“An Act to Expand Access to Oral Health Care in Rural Maine by Allowing Certain 
Out-of-state Dentists to Practice in Dental Clinics in the State
 
My name is Julie Tucci and I am the Practice Manager of a nonprofit dental clinic in Northern 
Maine.  Thank you for the opportunity to provide support on LD 876.
The dental clinic is located in Presque Isle and was established in 2011.  We exist to provide dental 
care to the underserved children who live in Aroostook County, especially those who use our state 
Medicaid insurance.  As of 2022, Maine Kids Count reports 12,201 children ages 0-17 reside here and 
7,994 of them receive our state Medicaid insurance.  The dental practice is state of the art, with a well 
trained staff to support our clinical team,  it’s the location in rural Maine that makes it difficult to find a
dentist.  We have been without a full time dentist since July 2022.   Without a dentist, over 3,000 
children in our local communities will not be able to continue to receive dental care here in Aroostook 
County.  Traveling over 2 ½ hours to Bangor is not an option to many of the families.   Currently there 
is a waiting list of over 400 children waiting to become a patient at our clinic.
I am in support of LD 876 because our rural community is in a crisis level shortage of dental 
care providers.  Since Covid-19, there has been a nationwide shortage of dental 
professionals; some retired early, some decided the dental professional was too risky for 
them to continue to work in and some of the shortages are because the dental schools did not
graduate the expected number of dentists or hygienists in 2020, 2021 and 2022.  Pair the 
fewer number of graduating professionals with our location and Northern Maine is 
experiencing a crisis level shortage of dentists and hygienists.
I support LD 876 because a Foreign Trained Dentist has already been trained and 
credentialed in their country.  If the path for them to become licensed to practice in the State 
of Maine was shortened, some of the staffing shortages would be alleviated. A Foreign 
Trained Dentist could be required to have a sponsoring dentist who oversees their work.  I 
understand there could be a negative response to this bill, but I believe if the patients in the 
rural communities had a voice, they would speak in favor of receiving dental care within a few
miles of their homes.  Perhaps using the healthcare model of MD’s overseeing Nurse 
Practitioners care of their patients, the dental profession could set up the same system.  A 
sponsoring dentist could absorb the cost of “training” the Foreign Trained Dentist as well as 
evaluating the quality of their dental work.  
I’ve heard it said all my life as Maine goes, so goes the Nation.  Let’s dip our toes in the water
and explore the possibility of using Foreign Trained Dentists and dentists trained in other 
states to provide the much needed dental care to our communities, especially in rural Maine.  
. 
I thank you for your time and for the opportunity to comment.  

