Nicole Grohoski _ P.O. Box 1732 
Senator, District 7 w _ Ellsworth, ME 04605 
_. it 
Em xl . 
£>:. __. __q,. 
\W* 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Nicole Grohoski 
In Support of LD 876, “An Act to Expand Access to Oral Health Care in Rural Maine by 
Allowing Certain Out-of-state Dentists to Practice in Dental Clinics in the State” 
Before the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
22 March 2023 
Good morning Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. My name is Nicole Grohoski, and I represent 
Senate District 7 which includes most of Hancock County. Thank you for providing me the 
opportunity to introduce and express my support for LD 876, An Act to Expand Access to Oral Health 
Care in Rural Maine by Allowing Certain Out-oflstate Dentists to Practice in Dental Clinics in the 
State. 
For a state of 1.3 million people, slightly over ﬁve hundred practicing dentists is not enough. The 
expansion of dental care under MaineCare and demand for dental care by privately insured 
Mainers requires that we consider many ways to facilitate greater access to dental healthcare in 
Maine. 370,000 Mainers live in places that have shortages of dentists. Many dental school 
graduates choose to practice in more affluent, urban areas, which leaves much of our state ina 
dental care desert. 
This bill establishes a “dental clinic dentist license” in order to allow foreign-educated dentists 
(FED) to practice in Maine where dentistry is not currently available. To grant this licensure, the 
State will verify dental licenses from dentists who have been licensed to practice dentistry 
outside the United States; and second, the state will ensure that such dentists will only ﬁll gaps 
left open by Maine-certi ﬁed dentists. Also, this bill requests that the Board of Dental Practice 
review whether similar licensure pathways are feasible for other types of foreign-certi ﬁed dental 
professionals to be licensed in Maine and report back to your committee. 
Maine has taken steps in the right direction regarding licensure or foreign-educated dentists. I 
received the following information from Penny Vaillancourt of the Dental Board on this subject: 
Rulemaking efforts re: foreign trained dental professionals: The Board adopted 
rulemaking changes effective April 5, 2020 to consider the qualiﬁcations of foreign 
3 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
State House (207) Z87-1515 * Fax (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * I l Y 711 
Nicole.Grohosl<i@legislature.maine.gov * legislature.maine.g0v/ senate
trained dental professionals who were licensed in other jurisdictions. In addition, the 
Board adopted rulemaking changes to each of its licensure chapters as a result of recently 
enacted legislation to include a pathway for foreign trained dental professionals with an 
effective date of December l5, 2021. I can report to you that those rulemaking efforts 
have been realized as the Board has issued 20 licenses to foreign trained dental 
professionals (20 dentists and l dental hygienist) since June of 2020. 
From this response, it would seem that this bill is unnecessary. However, it is my understanding 
that these licenses are for teaching, not for practicing in rural areas of Maine. If we allow 
foreign-educated dentists to teach students who ultimately are licensed and provide dental care in 
Maine, why not allow the foreign-educated dentists to practice in Maine? Thus, this bill aims to 
expand an existing, successful program to help more Mainers access dental care. 
Foreign-educated dentists have a lot to offer and have been successfully practicing in other states 
for years. I have included a short publication authored by Dr. Myron Allukian, Jr. of 
Massachusetts, who not only served on their State Dental Board for ten years, but was also the 
City of Boston Dental Director. The City of Boston has a very robust network of community 
health centers providing safety net care that are staffed in part by foreign-educated dentists. 
Dr. Allukian explains that in Massachusetts, foreign-educated dentists can get a one-year license 
that is renewable for ﬁve years to Work in non-profit dental centers or dental schools. Aﬁer ﬁve 
years, they must take a clinical exam, and if they pass, their license is good forever for non-proﬁt 
work in MA. He also adds that in the thousands of complaints the Dental Board received, he 
doesn’t “remember a single one for a FED.” 
I would like to commend previous Legislatures and our Board of Dental Practice for their efforts 
to expand certain licenses to include foreign-educated dentists. I hope we can build on this work 
and the success stories seen in Massachusetts by passing LD 87 6. 
Thank you for your attention and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
2
