V MAINE 
DENTAL 
_" ASSOCIATION 
Testimony of the Maine Dental Association 
Before Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services Committee 
In Opposition to 
LD 876 An Act to Expand Access to Oral Health Care in Rural Maine by Allowing 
Certain Out-of-State Dentists to Practice in Dental Clinics in the State 
Public Hearing: Wednesday, March 22, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Distinguished Members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee: 
My name is Therese Cahill and I serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Dental 
Association. The MDA is a statewide association dedicated to advancing excellence in 
dentistry. 
The MDA represents 85% of the dentists in Maine; there are 774 practicing and retired 
dentists who are active members of the association. 
On behalf of the Maine Dental Association, I am respectfully providing testimony in opposition 
to LD 876 An Act to Expand Access to Oral Health Care in Rural Maine by Allowing 
Certain Out-of-State Dentists to Practice in Dental Clinics in the State. 
While the MDA appreciates the sponsor's intent and wholeheartedly supports initiatives to 
increase access to care, particularly in rural areas, we cannot in good conscience support an 
initiative that for all intents and purposes appears to lower the Iicensure requirements for 
dentist Iicensure in certain areas of Maine. Furthermore, we cannot support an initiative that 
in any way may serve to compromise the standard of care for dental patients. 
MDA member dentists along with other licensees participated in numerous stakeholder 
meetings convened by the Board of Dental Practice over the course of several years. We 
ﬁrmly believe that the outcome of these meetings and subsequent changes to the Dental 
Practice Act continue to beneﬁt the patients we all serve. 
We recognize that the need across Maine is significant. And while the MDA does not asa 
matter of course track charity care, I would like to highlight a few examples of free or reduced 
fee care provided to patients by Maine dentists: 
In December 2020, the MDA surveyed our members on a variety of issues including free or 
reduced fee care provided to patients: 
v Question: If you provide charity care to patients who cannot afford dental 
treatment, what is the estimated annual value of the free care you provide? Of 
the 231 total respondents, the aggregate total from 118 respondents was $2.4 million, 
averaging $20,348 per respondent.
o ln 2021, 27% of MDA member dentists participated in a national program, Dental 
Lifeline Network, referred to in Maine as Donated Dental Sen/ices (DDS), which 
provides dental treatment to individuals with disabilities or who are elderly or medically 
fragile and cannot afford or otherwise access treatment for severe dental conditions; 
the national average is 17%. 
We recognize that the need in our State is great and will continue to encourage our members 
to actively participate in serving those in need. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 
29 Association Drive, PO Box 215, Manchester, ME 04351 T 207.622.7900 - F 207.622.6210 - medental.org
