*1“ 
CARING HANDS OF MAINE DENTAL CENTER 
72 BEECHLAND ROAD, ELLSWORTH, MAINE 04605 
v: 207.667.6769 / F: 2o7.667.6s76 
22 March 2023 
131$‘ Legislature of the State of Maine 
Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance, & Financial Sen/ices 
Testimony of Timothy W. Oh, Executive Director, Caring Hands of Maine, 
IN SUPPORT of LD 876, “An Act to Expand Access to Oral Health Care in Rural Maine by 
Allowing Certain Out-of-state Dentists to Practice in Dental Clinics in the State” 
Sponsored by Senator Nicole Grohoski 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee. My 
name is Timothy W. Oh, Executive Director, Caring Hands of Maine, and a Maine licensed 
dentist since 2008. Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on LD 876, as 
presented today. 
I am a general dentist and founder of the nonprofit Caring Hands of Maine Dental Center in 
Ellsworth. For the past 15 years my career has been working in Maine nonprofit clinics. We 
have developed an active mobile dental program that has traveled Eastern Maine serving 
dozens of sites from Rockland to Machias to Houlton and Fort Fairfield. We have set up 
regular dental clinics on 6 of the year-round island communities off our shores. Our dental 
center is an externship teaching site for dental students from 7 different universities 
including the University of New England and the University of Maine of Augusta — Bangor 
allied dental programs. I have been faculty with most of these universities for over a dozen 
years. Since 2010 we have had approximately 400 externs come and work with us as part 
of their clinical rotations. In a normal year our program traveled to over 36 sites — most 
every 6 months, and also operated our comprehensive Dental Center in Ellsworth providing 
in total an excess of 10,000 patient visits annually. Approximately % of our patients are 
Mainecare recipients and approximately ‘/2 our patients are under 21years old. Through 
our charitable clinics and Mainecare write offs, we have provided in excess of $5M in 
uncompensated care since our beginning. It is not normal times, however. Since 2020 we, 
and most safety net clinics in Maine, have been facing a crisis of workforce shortage s and 
skyrocketing demand. We are short on dentists, dental hygienists, and certified dental 
assistants. After the pandemic shutdown in 2020 we only accepted new patients under 18 
as there is no pediatric dentist in our primary service areas of Hancock or Washington 
Counties, and due to our shortage of available appointments have had to pause taking any 
new patients as of 2023.
Massachusetts has faced similar workforce challenges of having enough dentists in their 
community health centers and other safety net clinics. For approximately the past decade, 
they have granted a Limited Dental License [234 Mass. Reg. 4.05]. For a fee of $90,a 
dentist, including ones who have graduated from a dental school outside of the US/Canada, 
can apply for a limited license to work in community health centers, schools, or jails. This 
program HAS been successful and has increased access of care for many underserved 
communities in their state. 
This Act seeks to create a similar pathway for Foreign Educated Dentists in Maine to directly 
address the dire shortage of dentists in community health settings across our state. 
THOUSANDS of Maine residents are seeking dental care and the loose knit network of 
safety net clinics in our state cannot meet the need. I cannot highlight enough the current 
crisis — we are turning away over 200 calls per week even after advertising that we cannot 
take new patients. We need immediate assistance and allowing dentists who have been 
reviewed by the board, who have committed to working in a community health setting , and 
WILL serve Maine residents who cannot find care elsewhere. Driving patients to the state's 
hospitals and Emergency Departments is the most expensive, unnecessary option and does 
not provide the patients the care they need. 
Maine law CURRENTLY allows Foreign Educated Dentists to apply for a Faculty or 
Resident Dental License [303c006]. These doctors ARE here, working with patients in 
residency programs, teaching our future dentists in the dental school already. This Act 
expands their potential effectiveness in Maine and creates an additional pathway for these 
providers to work, live, and become a valuable resource in our state. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Timothy Oh, DMD 
ATTACHED: 
(1)Allukian, Myron. Foreign Educated Dentists (FEDs) — An Untapped National 
Resource. Journal Hispanic Dental Association, Winter Issue 2021] 
(2) Massachusetts Title 234 CMR Section 4.05 - Initial Licensure as Limited License 
Full-time Faculty or Limited License Dental Intern
234 Mass. Reg. 4.05 
Current through Register 1490, March 3, 2023 
Section 4.05 - Initial Licensure as Limited License Full-time Faculty or Limited License Dental 
Intem 
Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 112, § 45A, the Board may grant a limited license for an applicant to serve 
as a full-time member of a dental college faculty or as a limited license dental intern in a hospital 
or other institution maintained by the state, a county or municipality, or hospital or dental 
inﬁnnary incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth, provided that the applicant is of 
good moral character, has met all eligibility requirements and has submitted the following 
infonnation to the Board: 
(1) An accurate, complete and signed application as speciﬁed by the Board for that purpose; 
(2) Payment of a non-refundable licensing and application fee as determined by the Executive 
Ofﬁce of Administration and Finance; 
(3) Proof satisfactory to the Board that the applicant has received a diploma in dentistry from the 
faculty of a reputable dental college: 
(a) Graduates of a dental program accredited by CODA or any Board-approved successor 
accrediting agency shall submit an original transcript with the college seal stating the degree 
granted and the date of issue, or a letter including the college's seal signed by the appropriate 
authority attesting to the applicant's degree and date of graduation. 
(b) Graduates of non-CODA or foreign dental programs shall submit an original transcript, with 
college seal stating the date of issuance of a dental diploma. If the transcript is not in English, the 
applicant shall provide a certiﬁed translated copy of the original dental college transcript 
demonstrating the applicant received a dental degree. 
(4) Proof satisfactory to the Board of employment as full-time faculty in a dental school 
accredited by CODA or as a dental intern in a hospital or other institution maintained by the 
state, a county or municipality, or hospital or dental inﬁrmary incorporated under the laws of the 
Commonwealth. 
(a) An applicant for a limited faculty license shall submit an original letter with the college seal 
conﬁrming the applicant's status and dates of appointment as a full-time faculty member ata 
CODA-accredited dental school. The application shall also include the printed name, signature 
and license number of the applicant's supervising licensed dentist, who shall be in good standing 
with the Board. 
(b) An applicant for a limited dental intern license shall submit an application for licensure 
stating the applicant's place(s) of employment and corresponding date(s) of appointment. The
application shall also include the printed name, signature and license number of the applicant's 
supervising licensed dentist, whose license shall be in good standing. 
(5) Documentation of continuing education in the following areas or the applicant's signed 
attestation that the applicant will within one year of initial licensure complete the following in 
accordance with 234 CMR 8.00: Continuing Education: 
(a) A minimum of three CEUs in CDC Guidelines; 
(b) A minimum of three CEUs in OSHA Standards; 
(c) A minimum of six CEUs in treatment planning and diagnosis; 
(d) A minimum of three CEUs in record-keeping; 
(e) A minimum of two CEUs in risk management; and 
(f) A minimum of three CEUs in pharmacology, with emphasis on prescription writing; or 
(g) Evidence of enrollment in a CODA-accredited dental school that includes the areas of study 
included in 234 CMR 4.05(5)(a) through (f). 
(6) Documentation of current BLS certiﬁcation or CPR/AED certiﬁcation; 
(7) If the applicant has graduated from a dental school where the language of instruction 
(including textbooks) is not English, the applicant shall submit documentation the applicant has 
achieved a minimum passing score, as speciﬁed by the Board, on a Board-designated test of 
English proﬁciency; 
(8) A physician's statement made after an examination conducted within one year of the date of 
application, attesting to the health of the applicant and reporting impairments that may affect the 
applicant's ability to practice dentistry; 
(9) Certiﬁed letters of standing from all jurisdictions in. which the applicant has ever been issued 
a license to practice dentistry including report of any past or pending disciplinary action or any 
pending complaints against the applicant; 
(10) A practice history; 
(11) An original report from the NPDB Self-query; 
(12) A statement disclosing any and all disciplinary, civil or criminal action taken or ﬁled against 
the applicant at any time after reaching the age of majority and prior to the date of application, 
with supporting documentation as the Board may require; 
(13) Proof satisfactory to the Board of good moral character;
(14) Documentation of passing the Massachusetts Dental Ethics and J urispmdence Examination 
or a Board-approved successor examination; 
(15) A passport-size color photograph; 
(16) An attestation, signed under pains and penalties of perjury, that the applicant has complied 
with all state tax laws pursuant to M.G.L. c. 62C, § 49A and child support laws pursuant to 
M.G.L. c. 119A, § l6(a); and 
(17) Proof satisfactory to the Board of completion of training required pursuant to M.G.L. c. 
94C, § l8(e) as a condition precedent for obtaining licensure. 
Amended by Mass Register Issue 1271, eff. 10/10/2014. 
Amended by Mass Register Issue 1363, eff. 4/20/2018.
