 
TO:   Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan  
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs   
FROM:  Becky Smith, Director of Government and Community Relations  
RE: Testimony neither for nor against LD 173 , An Act Regarding the Responsibility for 
Technology Instruction Marketing Costs by the Maine Community College System  
DATE:  February  7, 202 3  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs.  Due to my wor k travel to meet with our Congressional delegation,  I am providing 
written testimony neither for nor against LD 173, An Act Regarding the Responsibility for Technology  
Instruction Marketing Costs by the Maine Community College System . The bill proposes to add  a line 
category to the budget reports we already provide to the Governor and  the Legislatur e and also  requires 
a fiscal management plan for the system  by changing a “shall” to a “must .” 
 
MCCS  operates in a transparent, lean and efficient manner.   We provide the  Administration and the 
Legislature with several reports that detail our finances.  I would like to draw your attention to  our Board 
of Trustee R eport , already provided to your committee, that includes our audited financials  from FY21 
and FY 22  and our FY23 budget. As you know, MCCS is  appropriated funds by the legislature  that w e, 
in turn, transfer to our seven colleges . All of  the colleges and the system are audited annually by an 
outside vendor to assure compliance with Maine and Federal laws  and accounting best practices.  
 
Separating out  our marketing budget for “technology instruction” is complex  and likely not possible .  
Most of our marketing materials are driven to  recruit  new students and include all of our programs, not 
just those that might be considered technology related .  
 
As you well know, we offer courses from business to nursing, welding to paramedicine , cyber -security 
to hospitality.  Some of our marketing initiatives stem from the system office —especially th ose like the 
viewbook and program of study brochures as well as our Harold Alfond Center materials . These 
materials are in turn  used by the system and all seven  colleges.  However,  it is critical that our individual 
colleges do their own marketing and outreach as well.   They are of their communities and know how to 
best reach their intended audiences.  F or some colleges , most of the marketing will be on social media.  
Others  may run radio or television advertising  if it makes sense for them .  All visit high school college 
fairs etc. It is the ability to personalize the messages that makes the colleges suc cessful.  
 
We will be interested to learn more about the sponsor’s intent behind this bill and would be happy to 
work with the sponsor if he feels he is lacking any specific information , but we do not feel legislation is 
necessary at this time.  

