PO BOX 263 •254 ALEXANDER REED RD 
 RICHMOND, ME  04357
PHONE: 207-737-4092 • FAX: 207-737-7150
 E-MAIL: MRWA@MAINERWA.ORG
WEBSITE: WWW.MAINERWA.ORG
To:  Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry
From:   Bradley Sawyer, Deputy Director
Date:  March 27, 2023
Re: Testimony in Opposition of L.D. 1110, An Act Regarding Calibration Requirements for Certain 
Testing and Measurement Equipment
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, thank you for the ability to provide brief testimony on L.D. 
1110, An Act Regarding Calibration Requirements for Certain Testing and Measurement Equipment.
The Maine Rural Water Association is a member-driven non-profit organization based in 
Richmond that specializes in training, technical assistance, and advocacy on behalf of our almost 300 
members. The majority of our membership is made up of water and wastewater utilities from around the 
state and are committed to ensuring clean and safe drinking water and a healthy environment through the 
proper treatment of wastewater. 
MRWA opposes this legislation as we believe that the intent of it is already being accomplished. 
Water and wastewater professionals in this state work hard everyday to provide a fair and valuable service 
to their ratepayers, your constituents. That being said, while we often refer to the “water and wastewater 
community” as a single entity, they are regulated in different manners by separate state agencies. Water 
utilities are regulated by the Maine Drinking Water Program, a division of Maine Center for Disease 
Control, Department of Health and Human Services, while wastewater utilities are regulated by the 
Department of Environmental Protection. These separate regulatory regimes each come with their own set 
of rules but both sides currently have calibration regulations that make this legislation unnecessary. 
On the water side, the Maine Public Utilities Commission in Chapter 620: Service Standards for 
Water Utilities, Section 4, part D, lays out the testing requirements for water meters. “To determine the 
accuracy of mechanical and electromagnetic and ultrasonic meters, the water utility must follow the 
standard specifications of the most recent AWWA Manual M6 or the table below or use the 
manufacturer’s recommended testing procedures.” We contend that a reputable water manual or the 
manufacturer’s specifications should be sufficient to ensure proper working conditions. In addition to 
that, the professionals that perform this testing are attempting to find accurate data. If they are not 
confident in the readings that they are getting, they will take corrective action to address any problems. 
For wastewater utilities, there are numerous instances where calibration of instruments is 
discussed. Federal Title 40 (Protection of Environment), Chapter 1, Subchapter D, Part 136 references 
calibration of equipment multiple times and stresses the need for equipment to be in proper working 
condition. This matter has been entrusted to licensed professionals in our communities for decades and 
they have been successful answering that charge for decades. We do not argue that having accurate 
equipment is critical to the mission of our members, however we believe this legislation is unnecessary 
given the current criteria in place for water and wastewater professionals.
This legislation would add cost for our utilities that would ultimately be borne by the ratepayers, 
the citizens of your districts. Our personnel provide great service to their customers at a reasonable price 
and this legislation, if passed, would add yet another cost to their bill. We urge you to vote Ought Not to 
Pass on L.D. 1110. 
If you have any questions or concerns, please do not hesitate to reach out to me at 
Bradley.Sawyer@MaineRWA.org or 207-737-9014. 
