 
 
       March 29, 2023 
 
 
Honorable Henry Ingwersen, Senate Chair 
Honorable William D. Pluecker, House Chair 
Joint Legislative Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re: Testimony in opposition to LD 1110, An Act Regarding Calibration Requirements for 
Certain Testing and Measurement Equipment  
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and Members of the Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation, and Forestry: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony 
regarding LD 1110. MWUA respectfully opposes LD 1110 because the testing and replacement of 
water meters are already subject to regulations administered by the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
(MPUC). 
About MWUA.  The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonprofit association based in Augusta 
that provides support for water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for 
safe drinking water through educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, 
state, and national level. The Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water 
utilities in Maine as members.   
 
Discussion. Water meter standards are established by American National Standards Institute; and the 
American Water Works Association (ANSI/AWWA). MPUC’s Chapter 620 -Service Standards for Water 
Utilities, which was recently revised in 2022, includes a number of provisions relative to the testing of 
water meters. Among those requirements, the following pertain to what LD 1110 seems to attempt to 
accomplish:  
 
• A water utility furnishing water on a metered basis must have provisions in its terms and 
conditions for testing its meters in a manner acceptable to the Commission. 
• Meters placed in service by a water utility must be tested by the manufacturer, with proper 
certification of such testing furnished to the water utility, or by the water utility before 
installation. Thereafter, meters must be tested in accordance with Chapter 620 or more 
frequently if requested by the customer.  
• All meter tests are at the expense of the water utility unless the customer requests more than 
one test in 18 months, in which case the water utility may require the customer to make a 
reasonable deposit, if authorized by the water utility's tariffs, to cover the cost of the test. The 
water utility must provide a written report of the test results, which includes the flow rates at 
which the meters were tested, the volume of water used to test at each of those flow rates and 
the accuracy of the meter (expressed as % registration) to the customer.  
                       
• If a meter tested at the request of a customer does not conform to the Chapter 620 standards, 
the water utility must refund the customer's deposit, if provided. If the meter conforms to the 
Chapter 620 standards, the customer's deposit may be retained by the water utility, and the 
meter may be continued in use at the same location. 
• To determine the accuracy of mechanical and electromagnetic and ultrasonic meters, the water 
utility must follow the standard specifications of the most recent American Water Works 
Association (AWWA) Manual M6, or use the manufacturer’s recommended testing procedures, 
or use testing methodology criteria as specified in Chapter 620. 
• A water utility must not place or continue in service any meter that registers more than 2% 
above or below the intermediate or high flows or below 90% of the low flow. 
• A water utility must replace meters on a schedule determined by manufacturer warranties, 
specifications, and limits, or adopt a replacement schedule, as specified in Chapter 620. 
 
Conclusion. In her testimony, Rep. O’Neil, the bill’s sponsor, states: “a standardized system of 
measurements is fundamental to the way our society functions” and that …. “It is critical that we get 
this right.” The recently revised Chapter 620 of the MPUC Rules and Regulations recognizes the 
significant changes in water meter technologies and metering practices that have occurred over the past 
few decades. Water utility customers are adequately protected by this rule. LD 1110 is not necessary; 
we respectfully request the committee vote this bill out as Ought Not to Pass.  
 
Respectively, 
 
 
 
Jeffrey McNelly, Liaison 
Maine Water Utilities Association  
 
cc:  Bruce Berger, Executive Director, MWUA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel 
 
 

