District 129: Saco (part)  
  
March 27, 2023  
Testimony of Rep. Maggie O’Neil presenting  
LD 1110 , An Act Regarding Calibration Requirements for Certain 
Testing and Measurement Equipment  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and  Forestry  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and honorable members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation , and Forestry  Committee, I am Representative Maggie O’Neil. I represent House 
District 129, part of Saco. Thank you for the opportunity to present  LD 1110, An Act 
Regarding Calibration Requirements for Certain Testing and Measurement Equipment .  
This bill would require public entities, including state government, municipal water utilities , and 
wastewater treatment facilities, to ensure the testing and measurement equipment they use is 
calibrated by an accredited entity or individual .  
When we use equipment, from scales to fuel pumps  to temperature gauges, we rely on the 
accurate calibration of that e quipment to ensure accuracy. It is not something most of us think 
about on a regular basis, but a standardized system of measurement s is fundamental to the way 
our society functions.  
Most of us are able to take this for granted because of  the experts who dedicate themselves to the 
field of calibration and metrology . One of these experts is my constituent, Louis Waterhouse, 
who founded L .A.W. Calibration in Saco. Mr. Waterhouse is a U.S. Air Force veteran who 
trained in the field during his time in the serv ice. He has had a successful civilian career in 
calibration and founded his company in 2010. In 2018, he was recognized with the Maine 
Veteran -Owned Business of the Year Award by the U.S. Small Business Administration.  
Mr. Waterhouse is here today to shar e his expertise and explain why it is so important to ensure 
the highest level of accuracy in the calibration of equipment used by public entities.  
The point I would like to emphasize is that this bill covers  equipment used by government and 
public entiti es, not the private sector. Public agencies are responsible for measurements that  
Margaret O’Neil  
21 Sheila Circle  
Saco, ME 04072  
Phone: (207) 590-1679  
Margaret.ONeil@legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287-1400  
TTY: Maine Relay 711  
 

District 129: Saco (part)  
 contribute to public health, environmental protection and even the legal process. This equipment 
is used to collect the data we use here in the Legislature to make policy for  the entire state, and it 
is used by state and local officials every day to make decisions that impact the lives of Mainers. 
It is critical that we get this right.  
Thank you for your consideration. I am grateful to Mr. Waterhouse for being here today to sp eak 
in more detail to this proposal and encourage you to direct any detailed questions to him, but I 
am happy to answer any question you may have for me.  
1 / 2
Bonnie Pothier of U.S. Sen. Angus King’ s York
County of fice presents L.A.W . Calibration owner
Louis W aterhouse with a certificate of
recognition at his Saco business on Friday
morning. LIZ GOTTHELF/Journal T ribuneBy LIZ GOTTHELF April 28, 2018Saco business recognized by SBA
pressherald.com /2018/04/28/saco-business-recognized-by-sba/
SACO — A Saco small business known for its
precision has received an award from the U.S.
Small Business Administration.
L.A.W . Calibration owner Louis W aterhouse
will be presented with the Maine V eteran
Owned Business of the Y ear award from the
U.S. Small Business Administration at an
awards ceremony on T uesday in Freeport.
Waterhouse gave a tour of his company ,
located at 41 Spring Hill Road, to
representatives from the SBA and other
officials on Friday morning.
Waterhouse was presented on Friday morning
with a certificate of recognition from U.S.
Senator Angus King, Maine-I,  by King’ s York County representative, Bonnie Pothier . 
It was while he served in the U.S. Air Force, which he joined two weeks after graduating from
high school, where W aterhouse said he attended a technical school and learned calibration,
and developed his passion for the field.
“It’s always what I wanted to do,” he said. 
After working for other companies, he started his own business in 2010. The business was
first located in his basement, then he moved it out of the house to the Pepperell Mill Campus
building in Biddeford and then to its current location. 
Waterhouse said his company employes about 10 people and is looking for a few more
employees who have the right skill set to work in this niche field.
Calibration is the determination of an exact measurement. L.A.W . Calibration conducts
measurements in a variety of areas including temperature, electrical wattage and mass.
Nancy Strojny , chairwoman of Portland SCORE, praised W aterhouse for his “breadth of
service,” and said he does work that businesses often contract out-of-state for .
2 / 2The company of fers a wide range of services using state-of-the-art equipment unique to the
region and is able to compute down to fractions of measurement so small they may seem
trivial to the average person, but are essential when precision matters.
— Staff Writer Liz Gotthelf can be contacted at 282-1535, ext. 325 or [email protected]
 
Comments are not available on this story .
filed under:
Journal T ribune News
© 2023
