Impact of LD 1374 on Maine’s Demerit Point System and Defensive Driving 
LD I3 74: An Act to Improve Driver Safety by Requiring the Completion of a Defensive 
Driving Course for Certain Violations 
Impact of LD 1374 on Maine’s Demerit Point System and Defensive Driving 
Under the Bureau of Motor Vehicles ’ demerit point system, any conviction or 
adjudication for a moving motor vehicle violation (a violation related to driving behavior rather 
than to vehicle status such as equipment, registration, or insurance) results in either the addition 
of demerit points to the driver’s record, or a mandatory suspension. Mandatory suspensions are 
reserved for only the most serious offenses. For routine trafﬁc infractions, demerit points are 
assessed instead. 
For each year that a driver has no trafﬁc offenses, they accumulate a demerit point 
“credit” that reduces their demerit point total by one. A driver may have up to four credits at one 
time, so the lowest demerit point total a person can reach under ordinary circumstances is 
negative 4. Violations cause the demerit point total to increase. Most violations are worth 
between 2 and 6 points, though there is a single 8-point violation (the trafﬁc infraction for 
operating after suspension). Points are assessed per violation, not per ticket, so multiple 
violations on a single ticket can result in substantial point increases. 
Points for a given violation remain in effect for one year from the date the conviction or 
adjudication is added to the driver’s record. When a person’s demerit point total reaches 6, they 
are sent a statutorily required warning letter advising them of their accumulation of points and of 
the possibility of suspension. When a person’s demerit point total reaches 12, they are suspended 
for l5 days. Drivers over l8 have a right to an administrative hearing with the Bureau of Motor 
Vehicles to show cause why they should not be suspended. 
Each of the three violations discussed in this bill currently carries 2 demerit points. This 
bill proposes that a driver adjudicated of one of these traffic infractions must complete a 
defensive driving course within 90 days of the adjudication, or additional demerit points will be 
added to their record. The bill does not specify an amount of demerit points to be added, because 
exact demerit point totals have never previously been specified in statute. [If this bill becomes 
law, the Bureau anticipates adding 4 demerit points for failure to complete a defensive driving 
course under this requirenient] 
This approach incentivizes drivers to complete a defensive driving course, which will 
include discussion of the perils of distracted driving, without levying an automatic suspension for 
failure to do so. While certain drivers will reach the demerit point limit based on the added points 
and will face a 15-day license suspension, that will only happen to drivers who have other recent 
violations on their record, and, as mentioned they will have a right to an administrative hearing 
with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to show cause why they should not be suspended. 
Under the current rules, completion of a defensive driving course by any person earnsa 
three-point credit under the demerit point system. [The Bureau anticipates that its amendment to 
the rules as a result of this bill will remove that credit for those who complete the course 
pursuant to the requirement introduced in this bill, while leaving it in place for other drivers.] 
O4/O3/23
