LD 937 Resolve to Establish the Commission Regarding Foreign-trained 
Physicians Living in Maine 
Dear Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name 
is Abdirahman Hersi. I live in Lewiston and I am writing in supportof LD 937,A 
Resolve to Establish the Commission Regarding Foreign-Trained Physicians Living 
in Maine. 
This legislation would address Maine's health care work force shortage and would 
help integrate foreign trained physicians living in Maine to contribute their skills‘ 
and health care knowledge. Foreign trained physicians have been here for many 
years and some of us have undergone Medical Licensing Exams (USMLE) and have 
ECFMG Certification. Despite these credentials, we often have had difficulty to 
integrate into the US and Maine's health care system. 
I am originally from Somalia. I have been living in Maine since 2003 and have 
family and children here in this state. Before coming to the US, I worked asa 
Physician in Pakistan. Since coming to Maine, I have been able to work and 
support my family, while studying for the USMLE exams, which was difficult 
journey. After hard work and dedication, I was able to finish the exams and 
completing ECFMG Certification as well. After getting the certifications required 
to get into residency training, I faced enormous barriers to get into the health 
care system as a physician, such as year of graduation, lack of US clinical 
experience OR internship, which is only designed for US graduates. I applied to 
residency many times, four (4) consecutive years, and remained unmatched. My 
story is not unique. It is one similar to many other IMG doctors all over the US, 
unfortunately, who are not able to get integrated into the health care system. 
During my many years of employment in Maine, I have been working in health 
care as a Research Assistant, Medical Assistant, Pharmacy Technician and, 
currently, as Core-CHI Certified Medical Interpreter for Covenant Health at St. 
Mary's Regional Medical Center. It is my hope that this legislation will help 
provide funding for the integration and formal evaluation, mentorship, or other 
pathways of foreign trained physicians into health care. _ 
While this legislation has the potential of helping foreign trained physicians 
integrate into Maine's health care system by seeking and making options 
available for pathway in which to practice in health care, it also has the possibility
of important benefits in filling the some of the needs of the state's health care 
system. 
I thank the committee for considering this important legislation, which will make 
a big difference for doctors who are of diverse cultural background to serve in the 
State of Maine's health care work force, and to use their skills without 
compromising the safety and quality of patient care. 
Sincerely, 
Abdirahman Hersi 
276 Pine ST APT4 
Lewiston, Maine 04240
