LD 937 — Resolve to Establish a Special Commission Regarding Foreign-Trained Physicians 
Living in Maine 
Axels Samuntu, MD 
South Portland, ME 
Dear Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services, I am 
writing to support LD 937 a resolve to Establish a Special Commission Regarding Foreign- 
Trained Physician Living in Maine. 
The legislation would address integrating foreign-trained physicians living in Maine into 
the healthcare workforce that best reflect their high-skill training. Right now, foreign- 
trained physicians in Maine are not working in the medical field, and they are working far 
from their full potential. The commission will help us to create a Stakeholder, including 
healthcare employers, colleges, Universities, immigrant advocacy groups, workforce 
development, and licensing boards, gather information, issue, and recommendations. 
I have been a practicing physician in the Democratic Republic of Congo for two years, and 
I have been in the United States of America for almost seven years. I never lost my faith 
until I appeared today in front of the Committee to testify; I wish to practice as a physician 
in the United States of America, especially in Maine, but it is not accessible due to many 
barriers. Our work schedules are not flexible, and accessing higher education or 
processing a license for low-wage jobs is not easy. 
I am a student at the University of Southern Maine in the public health program. To be 
enrolled at the university, my process takes two years. This long waiting time to process 
your enrollment is one of the barriers I faced before getting enrolled. I never give up. I am 
still hoping that our future will be better. I work for Maxim Healthcare, a Contactor of the 
Maine Center for Disease Control, as a Covid Case Investigator. Last year at the Maine 
Public health Association awards Ceremony, the ME CDC Case Investigator team received 
the "President Award," the highest award given by MPHA; I and a couple of Foreign- 
Trained physicians in this room received it too. Previously, I worked for Medical Care 
Development. Also, I worked for the City of Portland as a Community Health Outreach
Worker and volunteered for many organizations. l was the first student representative 
for PAE at the School Board, Natural Helper for the City of Portland, Alfond Grand 
Ambassador, and so. 
The Maine legislation could help Foreign Trained physicians first realize the dream to 
practice in Maine or work again as a Physician, second to be hired in a position equivalent 
to the level or close and third to work in the Healthcare field or Public Health. 
Thank you for considering my comments on this critical legislation. It will make a big 
difference and enhance the life of Foreign Trained physicians who live in the State of 
Maine to be able to practice again or use their skills to help the people of Maine state in 
medical or public health fields. 
Sincerely, 
Axels Samuntu, MD 
696 Westbrook Street Apt 2B 
South Portland, ME
