March 1, 2023 
Dear Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services, 
I\/ly name is Cedrick Bisembo, I live in Auburn. Today, I am here in support of LD 937,a 
Resolve to Establish a Special Commission Regarding Foreign-Trained Physicians Living in 
I\/Iaine. 
The legislation that we are here today in support of would address integrating foreign- 
trained physicians residing in I\/Iaine into the healthcare workforce that best reflects our 
high level of skills and training. As foreign-trained physicians in Maine, we are working 
outside our capacity. The commission will consist of stakeholders, including healthcare 
employers, immigrant advocates, workforce development, and licensing boards, 
gathering information, and issuing a report of recommendations. 
The individuals standing before you today as foreign-trained health professionals may be 
part of the solution to the workforce shortage that Maine is suffering from today. 
I moved to Maine from the Democratic Republic of the Congo in late 2016. Before then,I 
have been a practicing physician for five years with experience working in Gynecology, 
obstetrics, and surgery, where I have been the assistant to the supervisor of the 
Department for two years. I have also been caring for the victims of sexual violence. 
In Maine, since 2018, I am working as an Emergency Medical Technician and a Direct 
Support Professional. Recently during the pandemic, I also started working as a Covid-19 
Case Investigator. I have chosen those fields because the access was not so demanding 
and as a bridge to my long journey in the hope of Practicing one day as a Physician or 
close to it. After four years, I realized that the problems or barriers I was hoping to solve 
were still there, such as funding to further my studies due to working in a low-wage job 
with no flexibility or benefit to further education. I am here in support today for this 
legislation because the fields I work in demand less education and training than my role 
as a physician in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
This legislation will benefit physicians living in Maine like myself because it will help us 
realize our dream of being able to work as a physician again. 
Thank you, Dear Committee, for considering my comments on this critical legislation. It 
will make a big difference for the doctors who will be able to use their skills to help people 
and the people they will be able to serve.
