Dear Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
I am writing in support of LD 937 a Resolve to Establish a Special Commission Regarding Foreign- 
Trained Physicians Living in Maine 
This legislation would help foreign-trained Physicians living in Maine to act professionally to their full 
potential, providing services that are immensely needed in our State. Currently, there is not a speciﬁc path 
for a foreign-trained Physician to achieve licensure and start working in Maine. Such a speciﬁc path 
would allow many skilled professionals to be added to the workforce of healthcare providers in our State, 
which has been depleted throughout the years, causing large gaps in the assistance provided to Mainers. 
Before coming to the US in 2015, I have practiced Medicine as a Psychiatrist for 23 years in my country 
of origin, Brazil. There, I graduated ﬁom the renowned University of Sao Paulo, where I also received my 
specialty training (residency) in Psychiatry, and my PhD ir1 the management of aggressive patients at the 
ER. I worked as an Attending Physician at the Medical School Hospital of the University of Sao Paulo, 
providing tertiary care in Psychiatry at the Emergency Department to underserved communities, and 
training Psychiatry residents and medical students in their rotations. During those years, I have trained 
around 400 Psychiatry residents and 2000 medical students. In parallel, I provided care for hundreds of 
patients in my private practice. Even if I were able to stop working to dedicate full time to study and pass 
the USl\/[LE (exam required for foreign-trained doctors to get licensed in the USA), I would still need to 
attend residency to be allowed to practice Medicine here, and many colleagues (American doctors) 
discouraged me in trying that, because since my graduation happened so many years ago, I would not be 
accepted in a residency program in the US. Therefore, sharing my skills and expertise with the people of 
the State that I now call home seems like a very distant dream. 
This legislation would help people like me to be able to practice Medicine in the US, fulﬁlling once more 
the ideals that we carried throughout our lives, dedicating as Physicians in our countries of origin and 
helping to ﬁll the gap to provide more healthcare assistance to Mainers. 
Thank you for considering my comments on this important legislation. It will make a difference in the 
lives of doctors like me, who would be able to work to their full potential, and to the people in need of 
those services. 
Sincerely, 
Celia Mantovani MD, PhD 
77 Blanchard Road Cumberland, ME
