The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people
TO: Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services
FROM: Dan Morin, Director of Communications and Government Affairs
DATE: Tuesday, March 21, 2023
RE: SUPPORT – LD 937; Resolve, to Establish the Commission Regarding Foreign-
trained Physicians Living in Maine
The Maine Medical Association appreciates the opportunity the submit the following comments 
in support of LD 937. The MMA is the largest statewide professional association of physicians 
representing over 4,300 current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties and 
practice settings.
Maine’s licensed physicians are supportive of trying to find a pathway for foreign-trained 
clinicians to integrate with the current health care workforce and look forward to participating on 
a potential commission. 
Our focus & our support would be to assist foreign-trained clinicians with placements & perhaps 
financial assistance as they work to meet current standards for admission to the profession.
The MMA has previously testified before the legislature on the issue of both foreign-trained 
clinicians & persons who trained through the military. Those comments have been clear that we 
cannot endorse anything that approaches waiving the standards that all applicants and licensees 
must currently meet.
We also provide the following information from the American Medical Association concerning 
Practicing medicine in the U.S. as an international medical graduate. It covers:
A certification program for the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates 
(ECFMG)
Establish an Observership for International Medical Graduates
Residency Program Requirements for International Medical Graduates
Immigration Information for International Medical Graduates
Licensure requirements for International Medical Graduates
State Licensure Board Requirements for International Medical Graduates
The Maine Medical Association thanks the committee for accepting our comments.
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. 
