. ,.;,,_ s TATE or MAINE 
. 1- B OARD or LICENSURE IN M EDICINE 
..,,. 5 ,4i 
I 1 37 STATE HOUSE STATION MR 
__ - AUGUSTA, MAINE Dennis E. Smith, JD 
=T=-=1 O43 3 3 __O 1 3 7 axzcunve EMRECTOR Maroulla S. Gleaton, MD 
Janet T. Mills 
eovsauoa Timothy E. Terranova 
assrsmn axscunvz macros 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative AIH16 Peny, Chair 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: LD 937 - “Resolve, to Establish the Commission Regarding F oreign-trained 
Physicians Living in Maine” 
Dear Senator Bailey and Representative Perry: 
The Maine Board of Licensure in Medicine (“B OLD/I”) licenses and regulates -allopathic physicians and physician 
assistants in Maine. BOLIM is composed of ll members: 6 physicians who actively practice medicine; 2 physician 
assistants who actively render medical services; and 3 public members. BOLlM’s mission is to protect the public 
by ensuring its licensees are ethical, professional and competent. It fulﬁlls this mission by licensing, regulating, and 
educating physician and physician assistants. 
BOLIM offers the following comments neither in support of nor against LD 937: 
LD 937 would create a commission to study issues related to integrating foreign-trained physicians living in the 
State into the heath care workforce.u 
BOLIM welcomes the opportunity to participate in a commission that reviews physician licensing in Maine. 
Although BOLIM currently licenses many foreign trained physicians, it welcomes the opportunity to work with the 
many stakeholders and serve on the Commission and review its processes and procedures regarding the licensing of 
foreign-trained physicians. BOLIM has a system for licensing foreign trained physicians that has been effective for 
many years. As of December 31, 2022, there are 1,560 foreign trained physicians licensed by BOLIM, which 
currently make up 21.7% of the population of physicians licensed in Maine. In February 2023, BOLIM issued 81 
“full” medical licenses. Of those, 17 (21%) were issued to foreign trained physicians from 12 different countries. 
BOLIM understands that refugees and asylum seekers, people who did not plan on leaving their country and 
coming to the United States, may have a more difficult time meeting licensure requirements than other foreign 
trained physicians who have planned to come to the United States. However, this bill creates a commission to 
OFFICE LOCATION: 161 CAPITOL STREET, AUGUSTA, ME 
PHONE: (207) 287-3601 wWw.rnaine.gov/mcl FAX: (207) 287-6590
Page 2' 
March 21, 2023 
study and make recommendations that may implicate existing paths to licensure for all foreign trained physicians 
and raises a larger question about whether there should be different standards (pathways) for licensure for different 
population groups and, if so, how those varying standards could affect public safety. 
BOLIM has two concems with the current draft of the bill. 
First, this bill has an emergency preamble. BOLIM does not believe this is an emergency matter. The bill asks that 
the commission review not only licensing, but education, post graduate education, insurance, and work force 
integration. These are complicated matters requiring thorough study and evaluation before comprehensive 
recommendations that implicate public safety should be made. BOLIM believes that providing the Commission 
with an additional six months within which to complete its work would ensure a thorough review of all issues 
before issuing any recommendations. The New Mainers Resource Center (NMRC) indicated at a meeting in 2021, 
that they did not have actual statistics of foreign trained physicians in Maine that they had attempted to help. 
Nl\/LRC estimated that there were about 33 who wanted to practice as physicians between 2013 and 2021. Ata 
webinar hosted by Nl\/[RC on January 19, 2023, one of the speakers reportedly interviewed 28 foreign trained 
physicians currently in the NMRC program. Of those, l7 physicians were eligible to apply for a post-graduate 
residency program; 15 applied and 7 were accepted. This indicates that there are currently only 8 foreign trained 
physicians in Maine who may meet eligibility requirements for post-graduate training who were not admitted to_ 
such a program. Thus, the failure to submit a report by December 6, 2023, will not result in a public health 
emergency or have any major impact on health care currently provided in Maine.‘ 
Second, the BOLIM staff, and speciﬁcally Assistant Executive Director Timothy E. Terranova, is the subject matter 
expert for physician licensing in Maine. He has served as the head of BOLIM’s licensing section for eight years, 
and is BOLIl\/I ’s appointed Commissioner to the Interstate Medical Licensure Compact Commission. Mr. 
Terranova was elected by the Commission members to serve as Chair of the Commission for a year. In addition, 
Mr. Terranova is the Board’s designated representative to the International Association of Medical Regulatory 
Authorities, the Federation of State Medical Boards, and Administrators in Medicine. Mr. Terranova has in-depth 
knowledge regarding physician licensure issues at the State, national and international levels, including knowledge 
about the Educational Commission on Foreign Medical Graduates (ECFMG) — which veriﬁes foreign medical 
education — and initiatives in other states regarding legislation similar to LD 937. In light of this, BOLIM 
respectfully recommends that LD 937 be amended to include both a member of the BOLIM and a physician 
licensing staff member of the BOLIM. 
We also Want to clarify incorrect information that may be provided to you. In several meetings attended by. 
BOLIM licensing staff where foreign trained physicians has been discussed, information was provided that foreign 
trained physicians must complete more post-graduate training (PGT) than US trained physicians. While this may 
be true in other states, it is not true in Maine. In Maine, both US and foreign trained physicians must complete 36 
months of PGT. Below is a graphic showing the path to licensure for both US and foreign trained physicians. 
OFFICE LOCATION: l6 1 CAPITOL ST REET, AUGUSTA, ME 
PHONE: (207) 287-3601 wwW.maine.gov/Ind FAX:(207) 287-6590
Page3 
March 2l, 2023 
US Medical Graduate Foreign Medical Graduate 
Graduate form an accredited medical school Graduate from an unaccredited medical school 
ECFMG Certification 
Pass all 3 steps of USMLE Pass all 3 steps of USMLE 
Complete 36 months of ACGME accredited PGT Complete 36 months of ACGME accredited PGT 
As the graphic depicts, the only difference between US and foreign trained physicians is the ECFMG certiﬁcation. 
ECFMG provides a valuable service that BOLIM simply does not have the resources to complete. ECFMG 
certiﬁcation includes:_ 
0 Veriﬁcation of Medical School — Does the medical school exist (vs a “paperrnill ”) and is it recognized asa 
legal medical school in the country where it is located‘? 
0 Veriﬁcation of Attendance and completion of Medical School - Did the applicant attend and graduate from 
the medical school? 
0 Successful completion USMLE Step 1, Step 2 CK and Step 2 CS (step 2 CS was discontinued in 2020 for 
both US and foreign trained graduates) 
0 English Proﬁciency - This was completed by passage of USMLE step 2CS until 2020. It now includes 
obtaining a 350 (Grade B) on three of the four measured components of Occupational English Test (OET) 
Medicine: Listening, Reading, and Speaking, obtaining a 300 on the measured component of Writing, and 
completing one of six pathways to show clinical competence. The six pathways include: 
0 Already Licensed to Practice Medicine in Another Country 
o Already Passed an Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) for Medical Licensure 
Administered by an Acceptable Medical School 
0 Medical School Accredited by Agency Recognized by World Federation for Medical Education 
(WFME)'
_ 
OFFICE LOCATION: 161 CAPITOL sr REET,AUGUSTA,ME 
PHONE: (207) 2s"/-3601 wWW.maine.gov/md FAX:(207) 281-6590
t 
Page4 
March 21, 2023 
o Medical School Accredited by Agency that Has Received a Determination of Comparability by 
National Committee on Foreign Medical Education and Accreditation (N CFMEA) 
0 Medical School Issues Degree Jointly with a U.S. Medical School Accredited by Liaison Committee 
on Medical Education (LCME) 
o Evaluation of Clinical Patient Encounters by Licensed Physicians 
This may seem much different than the standards for US trained physicians, but, with the exception of the last 
bullet (English proﬁciency), the same type of veriﬁcation for graduates is necessary for licensure. 
ECFMG also sends out regular reports to licensing boards listing applicants who have provided false information 
while trying to become ECFMG certiﬁed, including submitting falsified transcripts, and diplomas. This is not 
something BOLIM, with its limited resources would be able to verify on its own. 
For these reasons, BOLIM recommends: (1) removing the emergency preamble and requiring a report back to the 
ﬁrst regular session of the l32nd legislature; and (2) adding a BOLll\/I licensing staff member to the Commission 
membership. 
In addition, BOLIM recommends that the following additional stakeholders be added to the Commission 
membership: 
v BOLl1\/I requests clariﬁcation regarding the three physician members. BOLIM suggests that it be speciﬁed 
that one immigrant representative be a physician who went to school and planned to come to the United 
States to practice (representative of the 1560 number of currently licensed foreign trained physicians) 
0 BOLIM suggests that a representative from the University of New England be included on the cornmission. 
The commission membership includes representatives from hospitals, insurance, and licensure, but is 
missing representation ﬁom education. Educational opportunities play a large role and UNE hasa 
physician assistant program as well as other educational programs for health-related professions. 
0 BOLIM suggests that a representative from one of the residency programs (PGT) in Maine be included on 
the commission. Entry into PGT is a pain point for both US and foreign trained physicians, with not enough 
slots for graduates. The perspective and knowledge of these programs would be invaluable to the 
commission. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments regarding LD 937 
Since 
Dennis E. Smith, J .D. Executive Director 
orrrcs LOCATION: 161 CAPITOL STREET, AUGUSTA, ME 
PHONE: (207) 287-3601 wWW.maine.gov/md FAX:(207) 287-65901  
