 
 
 
 
 
March 21, 2023  
 
 
RE: LD 937 Resolve, to Establish the Commission Regarding Foreign -trained  
Physicians Living in Maine  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Health Coverage,  
Insurance and Financial Services Committee:  
 
My name is James Herbert, and I serve as President of the University of New England.  
The University of New England is Maine’s largest private university, with two campuses in 
Maine, a one -of-a-kind study -abroad campus in Tan gier, Morocco, and an array of online 
offerings. We offer hands -on learning in an uncommonly welcoming and supportive 
community, empowering students to make a positive impact in a world full of challenges. 
We are the state’s top provider of health professi onals and home to Maine’s only medical 
and dental colleges, a variety of other interprofessionally aligned health care programs, and 
nationally recognized programs in the marine sciences, the natural and social sciences, 
business, the humanities, and the a rts. 
 
I write today in support of LD 937 Resolve, to Establish the Commission Regarding Foreign -
trained Physicians Living in Maine.  
 
Thank you to Assistant Majority Leader Cloutier for submitting this bill , to the community 
leaders who are working on this  issue, and to the members of this committee for your 
interest in this important topic.  
 
While I understand this bill is focused specifically on physicians, I would like to share with 
you some of the work the University of New England is doing to support foreign -trained 
healthcare professionals  overall . For context, as I previously mentioned, UNE is the largest 
educator of health professionals in Maine and includes programs in Osteopathic Medicine, 
Dental Medicine, Pharmacy, Nursing, Physician Assi stant, Nurse Anesthesia, Physical 
Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Dental Hygiene, Social Work, Athletic Training, Applied 
Exercise Science, Public Health, and Nutrition.  
 
Several of our programs have developed pathways for foreign -trained health professiona ls. 
Our College of Dental Medicine has an advanced standing program which allows foreign -
trained dentists to learn over 29 months in an individualized plan, preparing them for 
credentialing in the United States. Our School of Pharmacy offers a similar adva nced 
standing program for foreign -trained pharmacists. Our School of Nursing offers a second -
degree program for students who hold a BA/BS in a different field. This has been a popular 
pathway for immigrant students who wish to become nurses. Our Dental Hyg iene program 
has articulation agreements with Maine’s Community College system to bring in students 
to UNE as direct entry juniors in dental hygiene following completion of their Associate 
Degree. The university also offers the student supports critical fo r success in these highly 
rigorous programs.  
 
These programs have had a positive impact on many individual students, while also helping 
to address the State’s healthcare workforce shortages. In addition, UNE’s creative programs 
have had the added impact of  helping to diversify Maine’s workforce and improve health 
outcomes for Maine residents.  
 
We would be delighted to participate in a Commission focused on the challenges faced by  
foreign trained physicians and their pathway to  becom ing credentialed in Maine . Assuming 
there may be a need for additional education and training for some foreign trained 
physicians seeking licensure in Maine, we recommend there be a position on the 
Commission reserved for a representative from a higher education institution that t rains 
physicians in the State.  We look forward to contributing to this work and urge you to 
support LD 937.  
 
Again, thank you all for your interest in this important topic.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
James D. Herbert  
President  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

