MAINE ASSOCIATION OF 6'3 i‘i"\if1i.:" 4.?~i »'\<;J:li ’%.»i1"~i\i i 
Testimony in support: 
LD 937 "Resolve, to Establish the Commission Regarding Foreign-trained Physicians Living in Maine" 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, insurance and Financial 
Services Committee, my name is Laura Harper and l'm a Senior Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. 
Today i am speaking to you on behalf of the Maine Association of Physician Assistants (MEAPA), a 
constituent organization of the American Association of Physician Assistants founded in 1977. The 
Physician Assistant or PA profession dates back to 1967 when Duke University graduated the first class 
of Physician Assistants. Our profession was created in response to the establishment of Medicare and 
Medicaid in 1965 where millions of Americans newly had access to healthcare without a corresponding 
healthcare provider workforce. The PA profession has filled many gaps in healthcare, yet shortages 
remain. 
MEAPA has followed the concept of foreign—trained health professionals increasing access to care for 
Maine residents with interest. Our legislation, passed in 2020, "An Act to increase Access to Physician 
Assistant Care” was implemented to address provider shortages in Maine. Following this, MEAPA 
successfully collaborated with the Maine Board of Licensure in Medicine and Board of Osteopathic 
Medicine to update the rules and regulations for physician assistant practice. 
MEAPA respectfully recommends the committee add PA representation on the commission as key 
stakeholders with expertise in the healthcare workforce, training needs outside of traditional physician 
or nursing-based models and first-hand experience in the needs of the population. MEAPA is committed 
to supporting access to high quality and safe patient care for Maine residents. Given PA training and 
experience in caring for patients, we believe a PA respresentative would add value to the discussions 
regarding potential solutions to our healthcare access shortcomings in Maine. 
We appreciate your time and consideration of our request. We would welcome an opportunity to share 
thoughts and be a part of the solution to Maine healthcare needs. 
Thank you.
