 
March 21, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial 
Services Committee:  
 
Maine Adult Education Association (MAEA) is testifying in favor of LD 937 - Resolve, to Establish the 
Commission Regarding Foreign -Trained Physicians Living in Maine .  We feel that this legislation is timely 
and necessary to assure foreign -trained physicians a pathway to a professional job in an area that is 
much in need.  
 
This co mmission would include diverse representation including foreign -trained physicians who can tell 
their story to those in charge of developing pathways and making decisions.  The focus of this legislation 
is on refugees and asylum seekers.  
 
From the work of this commission, these much needed results should occur:  
● Develop strategies to integrate foreign -trained physicians into the healthcare workforce;  
● Find other ways, outside of being licensed as physicians, that foreign -trained physicians can be 
supported to  best use their skills and training;  
● Make changes for regulations that may pose unnecessary barriers to practice for foreign -trained 
physicians;  
● Provide necessary supports as foreign -trained physicians move through the different steps in the 
licensing proc ess; 
● Provide opportunities to advocate for corresponding change to national licensing requirements; 
and 
● Attend to any other matters that may arise as this work is done including better pathways for all 
foreign -trained healthcare providers.  
 
We hope that th e commission will be established and that this group will carefully review and identify best 
practice from similar efforts in other states.  From this, we hope that the commission will suggest 
guidelines for conditional and full licensure of  foreign -trained physicians.  We also hope that other 
recommendations will come from this commission so that those foreign -trained can best use their skills to 
obtain meaningful employment to address our state’s workforce shortages.  We also hope that this will 
help tho se refugees and asylum seekers live happy, productive lives in our state.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony.  
 
Shirley Wright, Executive Director  
Maine Adult Education Association  
 
 

