3141 Chestnut Street,  Philadelphia, PA 19104 | Tel: 215.895. 1314| Fax: 215.571.445 4 | drexel.edu/sociology  
 
 
 
 
21 March 2023  
 
LD 937 – Resolve,  to Establish  the Commission Regarding Foreign -trained Physicians Living in 
Maine 
 
Representative  Cloutier, Speaker Ross , Senator Curry , co-sponsors,  and Members of the Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financ ial Services . My name is Susan E. Bell. I am Profe ssor of 
Sociology at Drexel University in Pe nnsylvania . I lived in Maine and was a faculty member at 
Bowdoin College for 30 years. I am pleased to be speaking  in support of LD937.  
 
My research foc uses on f oreign -trained medical doctors who fled to the United States as refugees or 
asylum seekers , and my study includes interviews with f oreign -trained medical doctors living in 
Maine . In my study, n one of the physicians living in Maine are licensed to practice medicine in 
Maine.  
 No matter where  foreign -trained medical doctors  attended medical school, what their specialty is, 
how many years of experience they have had, or what kind of patients they cared for, none of them 
may practice medicine in the United States until they have earned a US medical license. This is a 
long and expensive process . The amount of time it takes to gain a US medical license depends on 
many factors, including English proficiency, specialty, number of years since graduation from 
medical  school, and the ability to study full time for an extended period . The lack of financial 
support is a key barrier that foreign -trained medical doctors face.   
 
There is a shortage of physicians in the United States. Foreign -trained medical doctors come fro m 
diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds, equipping them to provide culturally and 
linguis tically competent care for an increasingly diverse patient population  in Maine . The American 
Association of Medical Colleges predicts the shortage of physicians will grow to between 42,000 
and 121,000 physicians by 2032. A year ago, in February 2022,  its Pres ident , David J. Skorton MD, 
testified before the US House Judici ary Committee on Immigration and Citizenship, that “Simply 
put, we need more doctors from ever ywhere.”  
 
I am pleased to see that the membership of the Commission will include 3 physicians who are 
refugees or immigrants. They have valuable insights to offer about  strategies to integrate 
foreign -trained physicians into the health care workforce , use  their skills and talents , and increase 
health care workforce cultural competency  in Maine . I would be happy to help the Commission  
with its work  if it is established. I  urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD  937. Thank you for your 
consideration of my testimony.  
 
Susan E. Bell, PhD  
Professor of Sociology  
Seb376@drexel.edu  
 
