March 21, 2023 
Dear Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. 
My name is Vick Mulamba and I live in Lewiston. I am delighted to stress out my entire support to the 
LD 937 initiative to establish a Special Commission Regarding Foreign-Trained Physicians Living in 
Maine. 
However, my hope will be centered in the strengthening of the healthcare workforce which get affected 
recently by the pandemic by integrating foreign-trained Physicians living in Maine, in the health 
system on a comprehensive and performance sound program, through the 13 1 st Legislature ’s agenda 
and means. This legislation should capture the neglected and non-utilized intellectual investment, that 
foreign-trained are representing if being unable to work on full capacity. 
Therefore, various stakeholders involvement such as, but not limited to healthcare employers, 
Immigrant advocates, workforce development, and licensing boards, seems to be incumbent on the 
achievement of expected milestones. 
I have been a medical practitioner for 15 years in DR Congo firstly and lastly in Zambia, before 
arriving in United States of America where I am living for 1 year and 6 months. I had encountered so 
many barriers to practicing medicine in United States of America as regards to licensing rules and 
regulations, and high selectivity for residency program, while I have medical skills which can be 
detected by an internship program of 2-3 years aside the specialized medical doctor. 
Besides, I am still facing serious challenges to get access to the education, even though I had decided 
against my will to abandon medicine and perhaps focusing in other area like Public Health, but the 
ﬁnancing constraints, and the scholarship rigidity criteria, had shut down my intrinsic human 
development motivation. 
It is cannot overemphasized, that the State of Maine is losing my ObGyn skills by being blinded with 
all traditional rules and regulations set by various institutions as regards to medical practicing, while 
the underserved community is critically in serious needs. 
I had performed more than 5000 ObGyn emergencies, for which I will be happy to demonstrate during 
the internship program with a supervisor for at least 2 years of supervision and be granted a temporary 
license with appropriate restrictions if applicable until I provide conﬁdence, than making me passing 
USMLE‘s exam which seems to be appropriate for those who are recently graduated. 
Looking forward to considering my comments on this important legislation, and it will be a game 
changer once the neglected doctors are able to use their skills for the underserved community which 
the majority is Immigrant from our home Africa continent. 
Sincerely yours 
Dr. Vick Mulamba 
Lewiston, ME
