Testimony of Jeff McCabe  
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989  
 
Support of LD 121, An Act To Expand Health Insurance Coverage To Certain State 
Employees , sponsored by Senator Craig Hickman  
Before the Senate Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services . 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry , and honorable members of the committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services.  We are providing this testimony in support  of LD 
121, An Act To  Expand Health Insurance Coverage To Certain State Employees . 
 
Many seasonal workers who are planning to return to the same or similar positions for the state 
are often not eligible for unemployment benefits and are often low wage workers. Many are 
earning  around $15 dollars an hour. Numerous examples of this can be found , but we are 
providing one : https://mainebhr.hire.trakstar.com/jobs/fk0xx9m/  
 
We agree with  the bill sponsor that health insurance is a moral imperative . “I present this bill to 
ensure that, as we work to expand health care to more Maine people as a moral imperative, we 
don’t forget to take care of our own. According to the State Office of Emplo yee Health and 
Benefits, over 500 state employees are seasonal or session -only. ” 
 
We are also facing a moment when across all state agencies , we are in crisis with staffing 
shortages . At the same time , the demand on the services seasonal workers are providing is only 
growing.  
 
Maine state park campgrounds set attendance record in 2022 . It marks the third consecutive year of 
record -breaking attendance by campers at state parks : 
https://www.pressherald.com/2023/01/05/maine -state-park-campgrounds -set-attendance -record -
in-2022/  
 
On 3/8/23  - Amanda Beal, commissioner, Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry  explained some these challenges.  
Video testimony at 11:26 AND at 11:34:  Maine Legislature  
 
“When we back out those seasonal positions, our vacancy rate not including those is 7.7%, The 
vast majority of those positions we are the process of recruiting for so they’re posted. There are 
some positions in there that, like the conversations we’ve been having with the Board of 
Pesticides Control that we just don’t have the funding to fill and so  we’re trying to work that out 
with these conversations we’re having here.”  
 
“I have heard from everyone in my bureau --- directors, all four of them. Within the last 
month we’ve had conversations about the challenges we face across the department in 
recru itment and retaining staff because there’s a wage gap between what we can offer and 
what they can get elsewhere, and that’s just a very real challenge that we’re facing.”  
 
“I would say they’re  in the category, of as I spoke before, of there being sort of a wage gap. It is 
one of the places where we have to work really hard. One of the things we have to do, not  just 
these positions but others that are challenges to fill, is post multiple times, 2, 3 times.  
With seasonal positions you get to a point in the season where it doesn’t make sense to post them  
anymore because you’re going to  get somebody on board and b y the time you get them trained 
it’s almost time for their position to be over, so yeah, this is definitely a category where we 
experience that. There are certain positions where there are other opportunities with the same 
skill set where they can go and t hey can make more money. It’s the competitive nature of what 
we can pay them.”  
 
In the department ’s testimony , they flagged : “The fiscal burden of this bill would primarily be 
borne by departments with high concentrations of seasonal employees - namely the Department 
of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry and the Department of Transportation. Furthermore, 
the State has no guarantee that seasonal employees will return to employment each season, as a 
result departments could end up paying for benefits while  an employee is not in active status.”  
 
We see this  bill as actually helping to get employees to return each season to help fill numerous 
vacancies in key natural resource agencies and the Department of Transportation.  The issue of 
seasonal employees payin g their portion of the premiums would be similar to how legislators pay 
theirs premium in the off session , and also due to the low pay  these seasonal workers receive , we 
wonder if they would even make enough to trigger having to pay anything.  
 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions.  
 
