Hello,  
 
This is Mark James writing on my own time in support of LD 483, An Act to Amend 
the Laws Governing Retirement Benefit Reductions for Certain Employees 
Currently Included in the 1998 Special Plan, sponsored by Rep. Pluecker.  
 
I don’t know what exactly to sa y. I could start with it has been a part of the 
changes long enough for it to be old news.  
 
I could point out that a similar bill passed a few years back, but only applied to the 
Sgt’s and Corrections Officers due to the wording of our “Direct care stipend” part 
of our pay. It is my understanding that the intention of the legislature was that it 
also applies to us. That was not the case.  
 
I could point out that last year it went to the Appropriations Committee, but was 
not worked on further as they h ad an early recess (April I believe).  
 
It is a relatively small group with a small impact on the budget.  
 
Right now if an employee were to have something medically happen the 
Retirement Bureau would tell them they are eligible for regular retirement (with 
reductions) but not a medical retirement due to the “25/55” in the retirement 
plan (This happened to me as I had a major stroke in 2020 and missed almost 1 
year at work) if they are over 55.  With the wording of so many thing regarding 
retirement one must m eet the “and otherwise qualify for a full retirement”, so I 
must work till I am 63 for an otherwise 62 retirement.  
 
Some Counties in Maine have a 25 year retirement with no age requirement, we 
are losing good people to these systems at a time when we need them most.  
 
I could talk about “fairness”, that has nothing to do with compensation on so 
many levels and only muddies the water.  
 
I could talk about how long this has been pending, but the past is the past and this 
is something that needs fixing now, no m atter when it started.  
 
We could talk about people get sick earlier in Corrections and die earlier in 
Corrections, while true I ’m not sure it applies to this argument.  
 
I started in January 1987 as a Corrections Officer and worked up the ranks to 
Captain.  
 
I have been here a long time.  
 
I do like my job, but I am tired and there are younger people here who deserve to 
move up.  
 
I would like to spend more time with my family, before I can’t.  
 
I really don’t know what to say, I had conversations with former Representative 
Patrick Corey about this and he supported it. Mr. Corey said I explained it in a way 
that cleared the air.  
 
I hope this letter helps explain why LD 483 needs to be passed and f unded.  
 
Thank You,  
Mark James  
 
