 1 April 10, 2023  
Senator Baldacci, Rep resentative Meyer, Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health  and Human Services:  
My name is Alan Cobo -Lewis. I live in Orono. I am the parent and guardian of a 22 -year -old with 
significant disabilities who receives Section 21 support —though he went seven months without 
any such support because of below -market workforce compensation . I am testifying FOR LD 
1250  to create a private right of action so that Mainers with significant d isabilities can have 
their day in court when waitlists and below -market workforce compensation illegally denies 
them access to Home and Community Based Services (HCBS) . 
Maine Finally Tackled Critical Waitlist Problems Only When Sued  
Maine has a history of  letting waitlists grow and grow. That history shows that the most 
effective way to address waitlists is when Mainers with disabilities exercise their right to sue in 
Maine courts.  
As the top panel in the graph in my testimony shows, Maine did not begin ad dressing the 
Priority 1 portion of the Section 21 waitlist —people who DHHS deemed at highest risk if they 
didn’t get services! —until people with disabilities filed class action suit in 2013 ( Aldrich et al. v. 
LePage et al. , Kennebec Superior Court, CV -2013 -25). 
And as the top and bottom panels in the graph in my testimony show, Maine did not eliminate 
the Priority 1 portion of the Section 21 waitlist , nor eliminate the Section 29 waitlist , until the 
Aldrich  class was closed and the lawsuit settled in 2015.  

 2 Workforce  
Workforce challenges now rival waitlists as a barrier to Mainers with significant disabilities 
receiving the HCBS services and supports they need.  
Because of below -market compensation, my own son went 7 months on the Section 21 waiver 
(not on the wait list!) without receiving any HCBS support —at the same time as he was able to 
receive some support through private health insurance that compensated at rates competitive 
in the labor market.  
It’s Illegal for MaineCare Not to Compensate Enough to Enlist Enough 
Providers —But There’s No Way to Sue  
Under the federal Medicaid Act, the MaineCare state plan filed with the federal Centers for 
Medicare and Medicai d Services (CMS) must provide reimbursement rates that “are consistent 
with efficiency, economy, and quality of care and are sufficient to enlist enough providers so 
that care and service are available  under the plan at least to the extent that such care a nd 
services are available to the general population in the geographic area”. 42 US Code 
§1396a (a)(30)(A)  [highlighting added].  
But the US Supreme Court has r uled that Congress created no private right of action to enforce 
this legal mandate. Armstrong v. Exceptional Child Ctr., Inc.,  575 U.S. ___ (2015) . 
The Samantha R  Case in North Carolina  
It made news throughout the national disability rights community when a state court in North 
Carolina ruled for the plaintiff in the Samantha R  case. Although the state has appealed the 
ruling, it is clear that the court case (and its coverage in the press) has incentivized the State of 
North Carolina to finally start addressing both waitlist and workforce issues —the same issues 
that Maine faces. This critical lawsuit only occurred because state law provided for North 
Caro linians with disabilities to sue to enforce their rights when the state violated them.  
Mainers with Disabilities Deserve the Same Rights as North Carolinians 
with Disabilities  
LD 1250 would allow Mainers with disabilities the same rights as North Carolinia ns with 
disabilities to sue when waitlist or workforce challenges exacerbated by below -market 
compensation —below -market compensation that is illegal under federal law! —causes them to 
be denied access to HCBS services and supports.  
An Amended LD 1250 Could Address AG and Administration Concerns  
I understand that the Attorney General has raised concerns about people at DHHS being 
personally liable to suit under LD 1250. If that is the case then LD 1250 could be amended to 
align with the intention of the North  Carolina law to allow a lawsuit along the lines of the 
 3 Aldrich  suit to proceed in Maine against an appropriate official in their official capacity, rather 
than their personal capacity.  
Lifespan Waiver  
The Mills Administration hopes that the lifespan waive r, along with budget proposals, 
addresses waitlists. But I have not seen a timeline to actually eliminat e all the waitlists. Nor 
have I seen evidence that even the market rate study would actually result in wages sufficient 
to compete against wages in the broader labor market (healthcare and non -healthcare).  
If the lifespan waiver really is as promising as the Administration says, then perhaps the 
Committee might amend LD 1250 so that the right to sue takes effect January 2025, to coincide 
with the lifespan  waiver’s startup.  
Preserving Rights into the Future  
LD 1250, as suitably amended, could make sure that people with disabilities have the tools they 
need to ensure that Maine’s HCBS promise —so often broken in the past and into the present —
is finally fulfil led far into the future.  
