      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 10, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1250, An Act Regarding Paying Providers Sufficiently, Maintaining Short Waiting Lists 
and Creating a Cause of Action for Aggrieved Persons in the System of Care for Clients with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee , my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of 
Maine or CHOM.  I am also the parent of a 26 -year-old son with Intellectual/Developmental 
Disabilities (ID/DD).  I serve as Chair of the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality Services, a 
coalition of some 4000 people, consisting primarily of parents, that focuses on housing and quality 
services for people with ID/DD.  I also serve as chair of the Maine Developmental Services 
Oversight and Advisory Board (MDSOAB).   
 
I am testifying in strong support of LD 1250, An Act Regarding Paying Providers Sufficiently, 
Maintaining Short Waiting Lists and Creating a Cause of Action for Aggrieved Persons in the 
System of Care for Clients with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism .  This bill  would make 
important improvements to the continuum of care for people with intellectual/developmental 
disabilities  (ID/DD) in Maine in a variety of ways . 
 
1. Requiring the Department of Health and Human Services to pay providers of services 
and supports sufficiently to ensure that persons with intellectual disabilities, autism, 
brain injury or other related conditions receive the same level of care as the general 
population.  
 
I urge the Committee to support any bill s which would increase the rates for HCBS, 
specifically rates for direct support professionals (DSPs) .  
 
The reduced rates over t he past decade have made it progressively harder for providers to hire 
and retain direct care staff, or DSPs, the people who work with my son and others with ID/DD.  DSPs are the very nexus of the system of care.  Direct service professionals need to be pa id 
enough to want to work in the field to begin with, and to stay in the field once they’ve begun 
their careers.  If agencies can’t hire anyone, if agencies can’t retain anyone, people like my son 
won’t receive services.  Hiring and retaining essential sup port service staff has become 
increasingly more difficult as starting hourly wages at places like McDonalds and Walmart, which require far less training/credentials than DSPs, have increased dramatically amid the 
workforce crisis.  DSPs ought to be paid a professional salary commensurate with the work 
expected and the training required.  
 
And providers need to be able to keep their doors open while paying a wage high enough to 
accomplish this.  The current rates, though improved in recent years thanks to inv estments by 
the Legislature and the Department, are not yet sustainable for providers to succeed in hiring 
and retaining staff, which has worsened amid the current workforce crisis.  This ultimately 
hurts the recipients of needed services.  Despite the gre at need, agencies can only lose money 
for so long before it becomes completely untenable to provide services.  The situation has become dire for providers across the state.  
 
LD 1250, and other bills before this Committee during this Legislative Session, would increase the funding providers receive so that they have the resources to compensate staff 
equitably which will drastically help agencies attain and retain dedicated direct support 
professional staff, ensuring that people in Maine with ID/DD have acces s to quality, 
continuous, essential support services.    
 
  
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
    
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
2. Requiring the Department of Health and Human Services to ensure that waiting lists under the system are 
sufficiently short to provide the same level of care as received by the general population.   
 
I urge the Committee to support any bills which would reduce/eliminate the waitlists for people with ID/DD.   
 
As of September 20, 2022, there were 2,028 people on the Section 21 waitlist, and 218 people on the Section 29 waitlist 
– with some waiting years for services.  This means there are more than 2,000 people waiting for services lacking 
adequate support and care.  Appropriating funding reduce/eliminate the waitlists, as LD 1250 would do, would greatly 
assist people with ID/DD in accessing  critical services.  So long as agencies have adequate staffing capacity, the crux of 
which is having the ability to pay direct support staff suitable wages – which this bill would also address.  
 
Ensuring that waitlists are sufficiently short to provide th e same level of care as received by the general population is a 
wise solution, and an effective and efficient investment.  People and their families thrive when they are supported in reaching their potential.  Leaving people with no or insufficient support  steers them away from their potential and 
throws individuals and families into expensive and often redundant crises.   
 
I hope that you will invest in helping people with intellectual/development disabilities have access to and receive the 
services they n eed by supporting LD 1250, and any bill that would address the waitlists. 
 
3. Creating a cause of action for persons aggrieved by violations by the Department of Health and Human Services 
in performing the department’s responsibilities under the system . 
 
Establishing in  Statute a process through which people in Maine with an intellectual disability, autism, a brain injury, or 
another related condition can take legal action to remedy violations by the Department in the performance of its 
responsibilities makes good sense.  As a society, we long ago decided:  Care for this vulnerable population should be a 
state obligation, ensuring that our most vulnerable citizens received proper care and support for success in their lives.  
As such, t he Department has a broad array of responsibilities regarding the care of people with disabilities, and people 
with ID/DD deserve the opportunity to uphold and enforce the rights and protections granted to them.  
 
I believe helping everyone reach their full potential is the way to go.  I hope that you will invest in helping people with 
intellectual/development disabilities have access to and receive the services they  need . 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
 
