HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
., 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
; ' 
"gs“ 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
La"1';fAt1 ’hD (207) 287-1400 
Orono, ME 044,3 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
Phone: (207) 944-6743 
Laurie.Osher@legislature.maine.gov 
April 10, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Laurie Osher introducing 
LD 1250: An Act Regarding Paying Providers Sufficiently, Maintaining Short Waiting Lists 
and Creating a Cause of Action for Aggrieved Persons in the System of Care for Clients 
with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Sen/ices 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee. I am Laurie Osher, and I represent District 25, the majority of Orono. 
Thank you for providing me the opportunity to introduce and express my support for LD 1250, 
An Act Regarding Paying Providers Sufficiently, Maintaining Short Waiting Lists and 
Creating a Cause of Action for Aggrieved Persons in the System of Care for Clients with 
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism. 
In the 1990s, because of significant abuse, Maine closed Pineland —the state institution where 
so many Mainers with significant disabilities were confined for much of the 20"‘ century. Maine’s 
promise to people with disabilities who were confined in Pineland —or who would have been 
confined there if it was still open—-was that Maine would maintain a system of Home and 
Community Based Sen’ /ices (HCBS), funded roughly one-third by the state and roughly two- 
thirds by federal Medicaid dollars.A 
But Maine only briefly kept its promise. 
For longer than any of us have been in the Legislature, Mainers with significant disabilities who 
need HCBS have been denied access to those supports. For many years it was because of 
waitlists. Now, it is as much or more because of workforce issues, exacerbated by MaineCare 
compensation rates to community service agencies that are not adequate to pay wages that are 
competitive in today’s labor market. 
The federal Medicaid Act says that states must ensure that Medicaid reimbursement rates for 
healthcare providers “are consistent with efficiency, economy, and quality of care and are 
sufficient to enlist enough providers" in the geographic area. Yet HCBS supports are seriously 
lacking in Maine, even for people not on waitlists. And this is a significant problem in geographic 
areas like the one I represent. But the US Supreme Court has ruled in the case of Armstrong v. 
Exceptional Child Center, 575 U.S. (2015) that Congress created no “private right of action" to 
District 25: Orono (pait)
allow providers to sue to enforce this federal law. Similarly, it is also unclear if people with 
disabilities themselves could sue under this federal law. 
As a member of the Legislature, I respect and value our policymaking role as a co-equal branch 
of government. And I also respect the role of the executive, as another co-equal branch, to 
propose a budget meeting the needs of Mainers. But I recognize that, in the long history of the 
disability rights movement, as in the longer history of the civil rights movement of which it isa 
part, lawsuits in the judiciary —the third co-equal branch—have often been needed to prompt 
executive and legislative action. Witness Brown v. Board of Education. As for Home and 
Community Based Services waitlists, Maine did not eliminate the Priority 1 portion of the Section 
21 waitlist (for people at significant risk of abuse, neglect, or exploitation if they didn't get HCBS 
services) until people with disabilities filed suit in Kennebec County Superior Court in 2012 
(Aldrich lawsuit, CV-2013-25). And Maine did not address the Section 29 waitlist (the first-come- 
first-sen/ed waitlist that was the only option for people waiting years and years for Section 21 
sen/ices) until the Aldrich lawsuit was settled in 2015. 
North Carolina, like Maine, has failed to adequately address waitlist and workforce issues. But 
North Carolina has a state law that allows people with disabilities to sue—not just on waitlists 
but also on workforce. Thus, the Samantha R case in North Carolina has generated national 
headlines in the disability rights movement. The Samantha R lawsuit has finally motivated the 
State of North Carolina to put together a plan to address waitlists and workforce. And, because 
the right to sue would continue under state law, North Carolina has a motivation for 
implementation that will be implemented and sun/ive beyond the current executive and 
legislature in North Carolina. 
ln other words, North Carolinians with significant disabilities had recourse in the courts when the 
state violated requirements for them to make HCBS supports available. 
Why shouldn't Mainers with significant disabilities have the same recourse? 
We all have constituents who are Mainers with significant disabilities. They should be able to get 
their day in court—notjust for waitlists like they did in the Aldrich case, but for workforce 
compensation, too. 
l recognize that the Mills Administration has a plan to partially address waitlists in the biennial 
budget and that Maine DHHS is conducting rate studies that could also address workforce. l 
also recognize that the Mills Administration has proposed LD 659 to create a new HCBS 
lifespan waiver to start up in January 2025. The lifespan waiver may further address waitlists. 
But there are no guarantees. One Legislature cannot bind the next, and the Mills Administration 
will pass the baton to a successor in 2027. But Mainers with disabilities won't go away in 2027. 
And neither will their need for Home and Community Based Services. 
I understand that the Attorney General and the Department of Health and Human Services have 
specific concerns about Section 5 of the bill eliminating immunities and other protections in the 
Maine Tort Claims Act and creating widespread personal exposure to lawsuits. The intention of 
the bill is not to put individuals at risk in their personal capacity, but rather to give Mainers with 
significant disabilities the ability to have their day in court to enforce their right to HCBS services 
District 25: Orono (part)
denied through inadequate attention to waitlist and workforce issues. I would be happy to work 
with this Committee and with the Ofﬁce of the Attorney General to find a solution that would 
maintain the protection of state employees while still offering Mainers with disabilities the 
chance to fight for their rights in court. 
Maine started off with a goal of providing system of Home and Community Based Services for 
all, but it continues to fall short of that goal. What recourse will Mainers with significant 
disabilities have if Maine resumes violating the federal Medicaid Act? 
Please pass LD 1250. 
District 25: Orono (pan)
