 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
April 10, 20 23 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee o f Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1250  – An Act Regarding Paying Providers Sufficiently, Maintaining Short Waiting 
Lists and Creating a Cause of Action for Aggrieved Persons in the System of Care for Clients 
with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint S tanding 
Committee on Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter provides information regarding LD 1250 , An Act Regarding Paying Providers 
Sufficiently, Maintaining Short Waiting Lists and Creating a Cause of Action for 
Aggrieved Persons in the System of Care for Clients with Intellectual Disabilities or 
Autism . The Department opposes this bill . 
 
Section 3 of the bill r equir es the Department to pay providers of services and supports 
sufficiently . MaineCare rate reform  efforts  established in P.L. 2021, c hapter 639, and increases 
to essential support worker pay  in P.L. 2021, chapter  398 have led to significant annual increases 
for Home and Community Based Services (HCBS) each year since 2020  (Table 1 , attached ). 
MaineCare is also continuing its rate reform efforts by initiating a rate determination this 
calendar year for nursing and clinical services under HCBS waiver programs.   
 
In addition, the current biennial budget proposes $84 million to support access an d 
innovation in services for individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities 
(IDD) and brain injury. The proposed funding addresses access by adding individuals to 
Maine’s IDD programs and keeping pace with inflation through additional cost -of-living 
rate adjustments in the upcoming biennium.  
 
Section 4 of the bill requires the Department to ensure that waiting lists under the system are 
sufficiently short to make IDD services as available as they are to the general population of the 
State. A lthough private insurance now provides some coverage for autism services, there is no 
private coverage that comes close to the comprehensive services provided through MaineCare’s 
HCBS waiver programs. As a practical matter, the Department’s programs are th e services 
available to the general public, so the standard set forth in the bill is not operable.   
 
The Department’s Office of Aging and Disability Services (OADS), Office of Child and Family 
Services (OCFS) and Office of MaineCare Services (OMS) are wor king with stakeholders to  
 
develop a new sustainable and innovative Lifespan HCBS program to support changing needs as 
Maine people living with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (IDD), Autism or Other 
Special Conditions transition through various stages of life.  Lifespan is projected to begin 
enrollment in January 2025, and the Department projects that the Section 21 legacy waitlist will 
be eliminated within 4 years of program start -up.  We are working with the Lifespan Stakeholder 
Advisory Group to determine the best method for prioritizing individuals for enrollment once the 
program begins.  While Lifespan is being developed, we will continue to expand access to 
Section 29.  The Governor’s budget proposal includes sufficient funds ($34 million) t o continue 
enrolling all eligible adults while also fully addressing the section 29 waitlist by January 2025 
(900 additional people). Also, during this period, we will continue to use Section 21 reserve 
capacity to serve those who have Priority 1 needs (at  risk of abuse, neglect, exploitation or 
homelessness).  
 
Finally, Section 5 of the bill waives state immunity and allows individuals with disabilities to 
bring civil suits against any person  for violating specified sections of the statute.  This right of 
action would likely result in substantial litigation and workload for the Department and the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG) given the broad nature of what would trigger the right of 
action. It would also likely make it exceptionally difficult to fill state positions ranging from 
front -line crisis workers to executive leaders. After consulting with the OAG, we have the 
following additional concerns. The cause of action proposed in LD 1250, Section 5:  
• departs from the immunity from suit enjoyed by the s tate and its administrative 
departments in providing services and enforcing regulations in all but a few, narrow 
exceptions;  
• is not limited to the Commissioner, but exposes “any person” in the Department to suit;  
• is so broad and so vague as to likely embro il the Department in a significant amount of 
time-consuming and potentially expensive litigation;  
• seemingly eliminates all the immunities and other protections of the Maine Tort Claims 
Act; and  
• arguably offends the separation of powers.  
 
Thank you for t he opportunity to respond to this bill.  If you have follow -up questions, we will 
be happy to provide further information.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Paul Saucier, Director  
Office of Aging and Disability Services  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
  

 
 Table 1. Recent R ate Increases for H ome and Community Based Services   
Policy  Section s & Service s Calendar Year of Reform 
and Services  Rate/Methodology 
Changes  
Home and Community Based 
Services (HCBS) for Members 
with IDD, Autism, Brain 
Injury and Other Special 
Conditions (MaineCare Policy 
Manual, Sections 18, 20, 21 
and 29  
 • Jul 2020: Home & Work 
Supports (18, 20)  • 73.7% median rate 
increase  
• Jan 2020: Home, 
Community, & Work 
Supports (18, 20, 21, 29)  • 29.4% median 
rate increase  
• Jul 2021: Home, 
Family, & 
Community Supports 
(21, 29)  • 5.8% median rate 
increase  
• 2022: All services, 
per Part AAAA  
 • 4.9% COLA for all. For 
services requiring 
additional increase per 
Part AAAA, additional 
median increase of:  
o 18: 5.2%  
o 20: 5.4%  
o 21: 6.9%  
o 29: 41.6%  
 
 
 
