April 10, 2023 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony in support of LD 1250 “An Act Regarding Paying Providers Sufficiently, Maintaining Short 
Waiting Lists and Creating a Cause of Action for Aggrieved Persons in the System of Care for Clients 
with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism”  
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services Committee: 
My name is Tucker Conley and I live in Portland, Maine.  I am a self-advocate and involved with Speaking Up 
For Us.  I am testifying in support of LD 1250 because I think it is important for people and people should be 
able to get the services they need.  
 
Currently there is a lot of turnover with DSP staff. I have had several different support staff leave their 
positions. Many are college students who move on to other jobs. DSP jobs are typically entry level jobs with 
entry level wages and attract people just entering the work force. This leads to staff shortages and turnover I 
have been experiencing.  
 
When I have new staff or a lack of staff available to provide my hours of support, it limits my ability to be in 
and have access to the community. It makes it hard for me to get the support I need to get stuff done around my 
house.  
 
People with disabilities rely on consistency.  It is very inconsistent when you have to always meet new 
staff.  New staff do not know you as well as someone you have known for a long time.  I find myself always 
having to get to know new people.  I have gotten attached to some of my staff, and when they leave I feel sad.  I 
then have to do the entire getting to know you process all over again.  When one staff leaves, it is on to another 
new person.  I have really fell into depression because of all the change. This staff turnover disrupts my life and 
I have to get adjusted to a new person and their style.  Every person might have a different personality.   
 
When there is not a staff person to provide me the support hours I need, there is no process in place for making 
up those hours. There is a lot of support time that I should have gotten. Right now there is no process in place 
for me to make the system change in order to get me the support I need.  
 
I think this is important to pass because people with disabilities should be able to get the services they need. 
Right now people are waiting for services for way too long, and when they do get services the staffing shortage 
causes people to not get the amount of support hours they need. This bill will allow a pathway for people with 
disabilities to take legal action when they experience the system not meeting their needs.  
 
Thank you for the chance to submit my testimony about  LD 1250.  
 
Sincerely, 
Tucker Conley  
Portland, ME 
conleytucker32@gmail.com  
 
