TESTIMONY OF MAINE MOTOR Brian Parke -|-nugpqm 
L.D. 1372, “An Act to Amend the Workers‘ ASSOCIATION MMTA 
Compensation Self-insurance Laws to ’,gfQfI,Q|;_],f;; 
Allow for the Use of Fronting Companies ” (W7)!!!-411!' 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee On 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. My name is Brian Parke and I am the 
President and CEO of the Maine Motor Transport Association and a resident of Brunswick. 
The Association is comprised of more than 1,700 member companies, whose employees 
make up a large portion of the 34,000 people who make their living in the trucking industry in 
Maine. 
I am also the Trust Administrator of our group self-insurance program, the MMTA Workers‘ 
Compensation Trust and I am here today to testify in support of LD 1372. 
I would consider our 32-year program a tremendous success for our participating member 
companies. Born out of necessity when the Maine workers’ compensation markets were in 
shambles — with few carriers and excessively high premium rates — our group was put 
together to gain control of costs and better service our workforce. We did this through 
aggressive safety and loss control, modified duty programs and by changing company 
cultures with the belief that safety investments today will provide financial stability and cost 
predictability in the future. 
Fast forward to today and the crisis of the early 1990's has long abated. But our self-insured 
program continues to make a difference with our solid funding (as the Bureau will attest) and 
our ability to react to member needs with outside-the-box solutions. And the bill you have in 
front of you today offers such a unique opportunity. 
To be clear, our Trust would not be supporting such a bill if we were not confident that the 
processes we have in place to ensure solid, substantial and responsible funding - regulated 
by the watchful eye of the Maine Bureau of Insurance - would be jeopardized by being
allowed to expand coverage for our members in other states through such a fronting 
arrangement. We have been here for 32-years and we expect to be here for at least another 
32-years. 
l urge you to support LD 1372 given the prudent track record of group self-insurance 
programs in Maine and the fact that using such fronting company arrangements will only be 
done voluntarily and with the approval and continued scrutiny of the Bureau of Insurance. 
Thank you for your consideration and for allowing me to testify. l would be happy to answer 
any questions the committee has now or at the Work Session.
