May 10, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
 
RE: LD 1847 – An Act to Modify the Visual Impact Standards for Offshore Wind Port 
Development  
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Environment and Natural Resources , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am 
the Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine . I appreciate 
this opportunity to submit written comments in support of LD 1847 – An Act to 
Mod ify the Visual Impact Standards for Offshore Wind Port Development . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.   
 
TNC has been working  to conserve, protect, and restore coastal and marine habitats 
and species for over four decades.  Our work in the ocean has been focused on 
conserving habitats and marine species, improving and  sharing science that enables 
solution -oriented decision -making, an d mitigating climate impacts to  biodiversity in 
the marine environment. We are committed to using a science -based and pragmatic  
approach to work collaboratively with offshore wind developers, federal and state 
agencies, and  natural resource users to find e xpedient solutions to climate change that 
are beneficial to people  and nature.  
 
We recognize that port development is key to advancing offshore wind in our state and 
region. LD 1847 establishes a new type of port development used for fabricating 
offshore w ind turbines – an offshore wind terminal. It establishes a visual impact 
standard specific to offshore wind terminals and directs how these facilities will be 
reviewed under the site location of development law and the Natural Resources 
Protection Act.  
 
These clear changes are necessary to allow Maine to benefit from the advancement of 
offshore wind, while maintaining important siting and environmental review 
considerations. TNC urges the committee to support LD 1847 . Thank you for the 
opportunity to comm ent and I am available to answer questions at any time.  
