l ST-ATE or MAENE 
593% DEPARTMENT or AE}Mll\1lSTRATi\ ’E & FINANCIAL SERVICFS 
Bmzron M. Cnoss BUlLDiNG. 3RD FLOOR 
78 STATION 
I A0005 E A, E\/lr’\li\lli 04333-0078 
~J.'i12. ‘ 
. SERVING THEPUBLIC AND DELIVERING ESSEN'l‘lAL SERVICES To STATE GOVERNMENT. 
JANET T. MILLS KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
GOVERNOR COMMESSIONER 
Testimony of Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
Testifying Neither For Nor Against 
LD 859, An Act To Assess, Develop, Implement and Fund the Reuse of Existing Facilities at 
Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center to Provide Mental Health, Substance Use Disorder and 
Homelessness Services 
Sponsored by Sen. Baldacci 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Sen/ices 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, l am Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations 
for the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. l am providing testimony Neither 
For Nor Against LD 859, with the suggestion that primary responsibility for the Resolve’s 
charge be redirected from the Department of Health and Human Services to DAFS. We are 
making this suggestion after conferring with DHHS, because both departments agree that 
DAFS is better suited to study this matter. 
The sponsor's proposed amendment to the bill would create a resolve directing the Maine 
Department of Health and Human Services to establish a stakeholder group to include the City 
of Bangor, Northern Light Hospital, St. Joseph Hospital, and the DDPC Superintendent for the 
express purpose of reviewing the existing structures on the DDPC campus. The management 
of State facilities is the pun/iew of DAFS’ Bureau of General Seniices, which is already 
focusing significant attention on the DDPC campus. 
DAFS’ Bureau of General Services completed a Facilities Assessment of the buildings on the 
DDPC campus in 2022. This study revealed that both the Pooler Pavilion and Hedin Hall are 
beyond rehabilitation and should be demolished. BGS is scheduled to follow-up the Facilities 
Assessment with the development of a Master Plan for the DDPC Campus—we expect to 
release the RFP for a consultant to assist with this effort this Fall. 
DAFS also recently completed a Master Plan for Mackworth Island which is home to the Maine 
Education Center for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing as well as a State Park that is widely used 
by the public. The Steering Committee for that effort was headed up by the Bureau of General 
Sen/ices and included representatives of the Maine Department of Education, the Maine 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry — Bureau of Parks and Lands, the Maine 
Education Center for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, the Town of Falmouth, and local State 
PHONE: (207)624-7800 www.Mainc.g0v FAX: (207) 624-7804
legislators. Any steering committee to develop a master plan for the DDPC campus should be 
equally representative of those State agencies currently using the facilities on campus, and 
local stakeholders with a vested interest in the future of the campus. 
Finally, DAFS would suggest that the language of the proposed sponsor’s amendment be 
broadened to not constrain the potential future uses of the campus before the work of 
developing a master plan has even begun. Establishment of transitional, supportive housing 
for persons suffering from mental illness and, or co-occurring diagnoses may be one potential 
future use for campus facilities. However, these are old buildings, and it may be determined 
that the existing facilities don't lend themselves to that purpose—we don't know yet—but the 
door to alternative uses should be left open. 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify, l would be happy to answer any questions. 
PHONE: (207) (>24-7800 www.l‘\/iaine.gov FAX: (267) 624-Z5804
