   
 
 
 
  
Joint Standing Committee on H ealth and Human Services 
Testimony in Support of LD 859 – “An Act to Assess, Develop, Im plement and Fund the Reuse of 
Existing Facilities at Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center to Provi de Mental Health, Substance Use 
Disorder and Homelessness Services” 
 
May 8, 2023 
 Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished membe rs of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services. My name is Deborah Laurie, Bangor Ci ty Manager, and I’m providing 
testimony on behalf of the Bangor City Council in support of LD  859 – An Act to Assess, Develop, 
Implement and Fund the Reuse of Existing Facilities at Dorothea  Dix Psychiatric Center to Provide Mental 
Health, Substance Use Disorder and Homelessness Services.  The City of Bangor, like many communities in Maine, is seeing a  surge in the number of people 
experiencing homelessness and in the severity of the substance use disorder and mental illness with which 
they struggle.  Homelessness, substance use disorder and mental  illness are negatively impacting our 
public spaces, neighborhoods, businesses, and hospitals.  Indiv iduals experiencing homelessness deserve 
our help.  They are mothers and fathers, sons and daughters, br others and sisters.  They are waiting months 
if not years to find suitable housing.  They are languishing in  our hospital emergency departments because 
of a lack of mental health and s ubstance use treatment options.   They are dying in our communities in 
record numbers.  There can be little debate there is a tremendous need for more treatment options and for stable, supportive 
housing.  There must also be a shared recognition that this is not just a local or regional problem, it is a 
statewide problem that deserves attention at the highest levels  of state government.  LD 859 is an 
opportunity for the State of Main e to take a leadership role in  finding lasting soluti ons for a problem that 
is stymying communities across the state.    The Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center (DDPC) campus is located he re in Bangor.  We are well aware it 
has a 99 acre footprint with many underutilized buildings.  Wha t remains to be seen is the true condition 
of those buildings and their suitability for repurposing for mu ch needed treatment centers, transitional 
housing, and long-term housing.  The Department of Administrati ve and Financial Services has done a 
structural analysis of a number of buildings on the DDPC campus , but those results wer e not widely shared 
or discussed.  We cannot afford to wait any longer.  The time i s now to review the findings of that analysis 
or to conduct another to determine how to best utilize DDPC res ources to address what is arguably a 
statewide problem.    Approximately 30 acres of the DDPC complex are undeveloped and an ideal site for housing, including 
transitional, supportive, and long-term.  The area has existing  municipal water and sewer connections and 
is on a regular transit route. I n short, it is an ideal housing  site for those who desperately need it.   
 
The Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center campus is, without a doubt,  an underutilized resource for Maine 
people.  The time is now to bring together stakeholders to disc uss ways in which the campus can be better 
utilized for the health and wel l-being of the public and those most in need of housing, substance use and 
mental health care.  As such, and on behalf of the Bangor City Council, I strongly urge you to pass LD 
859 and to increase the utilization of the Dorothea Dix Psychia tric Center campus.  
 Thank you for your consideration. P lease do not hesitate to rea ch out with questions.  
 Deborah Laurie, City Manager, debbie.laurie@bangormaine.gov 
Courtney O’Donnell, Assistant City  Manager/ Director of Human R esources, 
courtney.odonnell@bangormaine.gov   
Richard Fournier, City Council Chair, richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov  
 
 
