 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 13 1st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
April 20, 202 3 
 
Supporting : 
LD 1522 , “An Act to Provide Economic Justice to Historically Disadvantaged Older Citizens by 
Amending the Laws Governing the Medicare Savings Program ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative Fay  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, I am Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager at Maine Primary Care 
Association (MPCA) .  
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more th an 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
MPCA supports LD 1522 and thanks Representative Fay and the other co -sponsors for bringing forward 
this important legislation that seeks economic justice for older Mainers . Now more than ever, CHCs are  
being called on to meet the diverse and growing needs of vulnerable populations. CHCs’ ability to 
address a wide range of primary care issues, from  dental to behavioral health, while also understanding 
and responding to Social Drivers of Health (SDOH), makes them a crucial part of the nation’s healthcare 
infrastructure and a leader in efforts to address inequities in health care delivery.  Given this role, we 
understand the value of and need for  this legislation.  
Expanding access to the Medicare S avings Program (MSP) would provide economic justice for older 
people with lower incomes by helping to pay for some or all of their Medicare premiums, deductibles, 
copayments, and coinsurance. MSP pays for the Part B premium, which is usually taken from soc ial 
security, so this means the program puts  more money back into the pockets of older Mainers. LD 1522 
would tie eligibility for the MSP Program to the Elder Economic Security Index (EESI), which indicates 
how much income an older person needs in Maine to  meet their basic needs, instead of the Federal 
Poverty Limit, which is tied solely to the cost of food.  
Furthermore, LD 1522 would  help lift historically marginalized older people out of poverty by increasing 
access to eligibility for the Medicare Saving s Program and would make MSP available to tens of 
thousands of lower income older Mainers who do not currently qualify for the program, making it 
possible for them to meet their basic needs with the income they have.  
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for consid ering our comments. Please do 
not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
Hannah A. Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
