>4.’ 
-I, V. 
-' 
. I ". 
n ~- . I 
An z‘. 
1. t. 5 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
Jessica L. Fay AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
141 Spiller Hill Road (2()7) 287_14()() 
Raymond, ME 040711 
Phone: (207) 655-5020 
J essica.Fay@legislature.maine.gov 
April 20, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Jessica Fay introducing 
LD 1522, An Act to Provide Economic Justice to Historically Disadvantaged Older 
Citizens by Amending the Laws Governing the Medicare Savings Program 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good aftemoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee. I am Jessica Fay, and I represent House District 86. I am grateful to be 
before you today to introduce LD 1522, An Act to Provide Economic Justice to Historically 
Disadvantaged Older Citizens by Amending the Laws Governing the Medicare Savings 
Program. 
This bill is both simple and complex at the same time. The complexity comes from the 
mechanisms of the Medicare Savings Program (MSP) and some of my favorite acronyms — 
QMB, SLMB and QI. The simplicity of this bill is that it will increase eligibility for MSP for low 
ﬁxed-income older Mainers. This bill has the potential to increase their ﬁnancial well-being. 
The MSP assists older people with lower incomes by paying for some or all of their Medicare 
premiums, deductibles, copayments and coinsurance. It can also pay for the Part B premium, 
which is usually taken from social security, which means the program actually puts this money 
back into the pockets of older Mainers. 
LD 1522 — with a proposed amendment does two things: 
0 Provides for the removal of an asset test‘ in determining eligibility for Medicare savings 
programs; and 
0 Changes the percentage above the FPL at which people become eligible for MSP by 
using the Elder Economic Security Standard Index’ developed by the Gerontology 
Institute at UMass Boston. 
We heard from so many older Mainers last winter about the cost of heating, their concerns about 
inﬂation and the rising cost of groceries. We are hearing about older adults‘ won'ies about 
increased electricity costs and the affordability of home care. 
I 
l1 _t!ps://www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.20v.dhhs/ ﬁles/inline- ﬁles/2023%20MaincCarc%20Eli2ibilitv%20Guidelines%20%28 l %29_0.pj_f 
1 
hgps://elderindcx.org/ 
District 86: Casco, Frye Island, Raymond and Part of Poland
By increasing eligibility for MSP, we can help alleviate at least some of the anxiety that older 
people on ﬁxed incomes feel worrying about aging with dignity in the communities they are 
connected to. And much of the cost for the MSP program is covered using federal dollars. 
Income and ﬁnancial security later in life is mostly determined by eaming potential during our 
working years. People who have worked hard at lower wage jobs are at greater risk for poverty 
when they age. People who have been caregivers e either to children or older family members, 
which is mostly women who are frequently unpaid — are at even greater risk for ﬁnancial 
insecurity later in life. The average Social Security beneﬁt in the U.S. is a little less than 
$1,700.00/month which adds up to just about $20,000/year. 
I invite you to read the report3 published last year titled “Economic Security of Older Women in 
Maine” prepared by the Muskie School of Public Service. This report shares data and analysis 
regarding the economic security of older women in Maine people who would beneﬁt directly 
from this bill. I do want to point out that the small sample size related to older people of color 
made it difﬁcult to report on racial and ethnic populations of women in Maine. 
How am I going to afford to stay in my home? I am worried about burdening my kids. If onlyI 
had a little bit of help around the house, I could stay in my town. I used to be able to buy presents 
for my grandchildren. I can’t afford all the medication prescribed to me. I’m worried about my 
electric bill. I keep my thermostat low because I can’t afford heat. 
These are all real-life worries of the older people A older women in particular — that I have heard 
expressed by people in my community, even before my time here in the Legislature. If I had to 
guess, each of us who have been elected to the Legislature have heard versions of these same 
WOI‘I‘l€S. 
One of the biggest topics of discussion each session is how we, as a Legislature, create policy to 
help older Mainers. This policy change is one way we can make a difference. This bill won’t 
solve all these concems, but it will certainly help to reduce some of the inequity in the system 
that is created over a lifetime of income inequality. 
I mentioned an amendment earlier. Because of a discussion of the legality of removing SLMB,I 
request that the committee amend the bill to remove the elimination of SLMB and keep that part 
of the program in place. 
I am excited to work on this issue with this Committee. MSP sounds really complicated, and it is. 
However, what it does is very simple: it helps older people on ﬁxed incomes to afford their 
Medicare premiums, and I hope that is something We can all get behind. 
3 
https1//mainecouneilonaging.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/O2/Economic-Securitv-Older-Women-in-Maine-Report-FINAL.pdf
Prepared by Legal Services for the Elderly 
Medicare Part D Appeals Unit 1-877-774-7772 
Updated December 2022 
QMB Fact Sheet 
You have the Medicare Savings Program (the “Buy In”) at the QMB level. 
This means: 
0 The state pays your monthly Medicare Part B premiums, so you don’t have to 
pay them. 
0 The state also covers your copays and deductibles when you use Medicare A 
(hospital) or Medicare B (doctors, lab work, test strips, etc.) as long as you go to 
a Medicare provider and as long as the services are covered by Medicare. Be sure 
your medical providers accept Medicare and will bill the state for QMB. Tell 
all your medical providers and your pharmacy that you have both Medicare 
and QMB, and show them your QMB letter. Because you have QMB, 
Medicare providers are not allowed to bill you for copays or deductibles for 
Medicare services. Call the Medicare Part D Unit if you have problems with 
this. (1-877-774-7772) 
0 Because you have QMB, you may not need to pay for a Medigap Policy (also 
called a Medicare Supplemental Policy). If you have a Medigap policy, talk to 
your local Area Agency on Aging to decide whether to suspend it. (1-877-3 53- 
3771). If you suspend your Medigap policy but later lose QMB you will only 
have 90 days from the day you lose QMB to get a Medigap policy again. 
0 Because you have QMB, you automatically get the federal Low Income 
Subsidy (LIS). This is also called “extra help.” LIS keeps your Medicare 
prescription drug costs very low. This means: 
Q You do not have to pay a monthly premium for your Part D Plan, as long 
as you are in a “benchmark plan.” 
0 In 2023, you should pay $10.35 for brand name drugs and no more 
than $4.15 for generics covered by your Medicare Part D plan, fora 
30 day or a 90 day supply. You have no deductible or Donut Hole. 
0 You have certain Special Enrollment Periods to change your PartD 
Plan. 
Important: Every year DHHS will send you Review papers. You must sign 
and send these back to DHHS or you will lose your beneﬁts. If you need help, 
or don’t understand a letter from DHHS, call the Medicare Part D Unit at 1-877- 
774-7772. We take calls Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. until noon, and 1 to 4 p.m. 
There is no Estate Recovery with the Medicare Savings Program.
Prepared by Legal Services for the Elderly 
Medicare Part D Appeals Unit, 2022 
SLMB and QI Fact Sheet 
You have the Medicare Savings Program (the “Buy In”) at the SLMB or QI 
level. That means: 
0 You no longer have to pay your Medicare Part B premiums. 
0 You get the federal Low Income Subsidy (LIS). This is also called “extra 
help.” LIS keeps your Medicare Part D prescription drug costs very low. 
That means: 
0 You do not have to pay a monthly premium for your Part D Plan, as long 
as you are in a “benchmark plan.” 
0 In 2023, you should pay $10.35 for brand name drugs and no more 
than $4.15 for generics covered by your Medicare Part D plan, fora 
30-day or 90-day supply. You have no deductible or Donut Hole. 
0 You have certain Special Enrollment Periods to change your PartD 
Plan. 
Important: Every year DHHS will send you Review papers. You must sign 
and send these back to DHHS or you will lose your beneﬁts. If you need help, 
or do not understand a letter from DHHS, call the Medicare Part D Unit at 1-877- 
774-7772. We take calls Monday through Friday, 9 am to Noon, and 1 to 4 in the 
afternoon. 
There is no Estate Recovery with the Medicare Savings Program
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES e ‘“ ’7 
"~ 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
7500 Security Boulevard, Mail Stop S2-Z6-12 ~ 
‘ MS Baltimore, Maryland Z1244-1850' 
cenms ron MEDICAIE a MEDICAID SEIVICES 
CENTER FOR MEDICAID It CIIIP SERVICES 
CM CS Informational Bulletin 
DATE: November 1, 2021 
FROM: Daniel Tsai, Deputy Administrator and Director 
Center for Medicaid and CHIP Services 
Tim Engelhardt, Director 
Federal Coordinated Health Care Office 
SUBJECT: Opportunities to Increase Enrollment in Medicare Savings Programs 
The January 28, 2021 Executive Order on Strengthening Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act 
directs the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services, among other things, to 
adopt policies consistent with current statute to reduce barriers to Medicaid coverage. This letter 
describes two ways states can help eligible individuals enroll in the Medicare Savings Programs 
(MSPs), making health care coverage more accessible and affordable. 
MSPs cover Medicare Part A and B premiums and cost sharing for individuals with low income. 
In 2021, over 10 million individuals were enrolled in an MSP. Moreover, federal law prohibits 
all Medicare providers and suppliers — not only those that participate in Medicaid — from 
charging beneﬁciaries enrolled in the Qualiﬁed Medicare Beneﬁciary (QMB) MSP eligibility 
group for Medicare cost sharing. ‘ QMB and other MSPs are essential to the health and economic 
well-being of those enrolled, promoting access to care and helping free up individuals ’ limited 
income for food, housing, and other of life’s necessities. 
This letter provides information on two opportunities for states to increase enrollment in MSPs. 
Speciﬁcally, this letter focuses on using Medicare Part D Low Income Subsidy (LIS) data to 
initiate MSP applications, and maximizing MSP Qualifying Individuals (Q1) enrollment, for 
which there is 100 percent federal funding to states for the payment of Medicare PartB 
pI'CIT11llITlS . 
Using LIS data to initiate MSP applications 
The Medicare Part D LIS program (also called Extra Help) pays Medicare Part D prescription 
drug premiums and cost sharing for over 13 million individuals with low income who meet 
certain resource criteria. Beneﬁciaries with full LIS have income less than 135 percent of the 
federal poverty level (FPL) and resources under $7,970 for an individual and $11,960 fora 
couple in 2021.2 Because full LIS and the MSPs generally target individuals with income less 
than 135 percent of the FPL and have the same limit on resources, we expect that most full LIS 
1 
See sections l902(n)(3)(B), l902(n)(3)(C), 1905(p)(3), 1866(a)(l)(A), and 1848(g)(3)(A) of the Act. 
2 
These amounts exclude burial expenses. With burial expenses, the amounts are $9,470 for an individual and 
$14,960 for a couple in 2021.
CMCS Informational Bulletin 4 Page2 
enrollees would also be enrolled in an MSP.3 However, there are 1.25 million people enrolled in 
full LIS who are not enrolled in an MSP, despite likely being eligible. 
The Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 (MIPPA, P.L. 110-275) 
included several provisions intended to promote the enrollment of LIS applicants into the MSPs. 
Notably, MIPPA section 113 amended section l 144(c)(3) of the Social Security Act (Act) to 
require the Social Security Administration (SSA) to transmit data from LIS applications (“leads 
data”) to state Medicaid agencies. As amended, section l 144(c)(3) of the Act requires that states 
“initiate ” MSP applications using the leads data from SSA. Further, under section 1935(a)(4) of 
the Act, states must accept the leads data and “act on such data in the same manner and in 
accordance with the same deadlines as if the data constituted ” an MSP application submitted by 
the individual. 
We provided guidance to states on initiating MSP applications based on leads data in SMDL 
#10-003. In that letter, we noted that states must treat the leads data as if it was an application for 
MSP beneﬁts submitted directly by the LIS applicant. However, despite our guidance, we have 
heard reports of state practices that would not meet the statutory standard because they do not 
meaningfully utilize the leads data and instead put the onus on the individual to separately apply 
for MSP, including sending a blank MSP application or a letter instructing the applicant how to 
apply for the MSPs. 
In order to meet the statutory standards, set forth by section 1935(a)(4) of the Act, states must 
promptly act on leads data from SSA to determine eligibility for MSP. States must use the 
information contained in the leads data to the maximum extent possible and only request 
additional infonnation that is not contained in the leads data, but is necessary to make an 
eligibility determination. If an applicant is found to be eligible based on leads data, states must 
base their effective date of coverage on the date the LIS application was submitted. 
Per 42 CFR §435.952(c), when verifying eligibility, including infonnation contained in the leads 
data, states must not request additional documentation unless information needed by the agency 
cannot be obtained through data sources available to the state, or the information obtained from 
such data sources is not reasonably compatible. 
MIPPA aligned the MSP and LIS programs more closely by amending section l905(p)(l)(C) of 
the Act to increase the resource limit for three MSPs (QMBs, Speciﬁed Low-Income Medicare 
Beneﬁciaries, and Qls) to the level of the resource limit for full LIS established at section 
l860D- l4(a)(3) of the Act. However, some statutory differences remain between LIS and MSPs 
regarding countable income and assets. In addition, in implementing the LIS, SSA adopted 
several administrative methodological simpliﬁcations that are not required federally for MSPs. 
Therefore, although MSPs and LIS have the same resource eligibility level, differences remain in 
the income and resource eligibility methodologies used to detennine full LIS status and MSP 
eligibility in many states. States can further simplify the enrollment process from LIS to MSP 
and maximize use of the leads data by adopting Medicaid flexibilities to better align LIS and 
MSP eligibility criteria. For example, using section l902(r)(2)(A) authority, states can choose to 
3 
Excluding individuals eligible for full LIS because they are full-bene ﬁt dually eligible individuals residing in an 
institution or using Medicaid home and community-based services.
2
CMCS Informational Bulletin — Page3 
disregard certain income and assets that are counted for MSP but not LIS, such as in-kind 
support, cash value of life insurance, and burial exclusions. Similarly, using section 
l902(r)(2)(A) authority, states can increase the effective income level needed to qualify for 
MSPs. Finally, states can adopt the family size deﬁnition for LIS when determining eligibility 
for MSPs. 
There is signiﬁcant variation among states in the percentage of LIS enrollees who are likely 
eligible for an MSP but are not enrolled, from two percent not enrolled to 24 percent not 
enrolled. A complete state-by-state listing of number and percentage of LIS enrollees who are 
likely eligible for an MSP but are not enrolled is available in Medicare Part D Low Income 
Subsidy Program Enrollment and Medicare Savings Program Enr0llment.4 We encourage states 
to review this list and assess whether their policies and procedures are compliant, and if they are 
using the LIS data to the full extent possible to support streamlined enrollment into an MSP. 
Additionally, on May 7, 2021, the SSA sent each state a data ﬁle of individuals who were likely 
newly eligible for an MSP but not enrolled. We encourage states to use this information to 
support beneﬁciary outreach. Instructions on how states can access that list is available at 
https://www.integratedcareresourcecenter.com/e_a1ert/opportunities-support-enrollment- 
medicare-savings-programs-and-extra-help. 
Maximizing enrollment in the Qualifying Individuals group 
States receive 100 percent federal funding for the payment of Medicare Part B premiums for 
individuals in the QI group. Beneﬁciaries enrolled in QI are not eligible for other Medicaid 
program beneﬁts, but coverage of their Medicare Part B premium helps individuals maintain 
Medicare enrollment and improves economic security. In 2017, the Medicaid and CHIP Payment 
and Access Commission (MACPAC) estimated that only 15 percent of individuals likely eligible 
for the QI group are enrolled.5 Applying that percentage to current enrollment ﬁgures means that 
over 3 million individuals may be paying Medicare Part B premiums despite having income 
levels that would qualify them for the QI group. 
There are federal funds available to support this unmet need. In calendar year 2020, nearly $200 
million of the federal funding available for the QI group remains unspent. We encourage states to 
implement policies and procedures to help more individuals enroll in QI and unlock this 
additional federal money. 
There are several strategies states may consider to increase QI enrollment. Streamlining MSP 
enrollment processes, such as use of LIS leads data as laid out above, can help boost enrollment 
in all MSP groups, including the QI group. States can also accept self-attestation of types of 
income and resources for which providing documentation may be onerous, such as the cash 
4 We note that, in making this calculation, we did not include individuals who are enrolled in partial subsidy LIS and 
may be eligible for MSPs because they live in states that have higher income thresholds for MSP as a result of using 
authority under section l902(r)(2)(A) of the Act to disregard income. We also assumed that LIS enrollees who were 
not enrolled in MSPs did not have signiﬁcant other resources that are not accounted for in the LIS eligibility 
determination process, but would be captured by the MSP process. 
5 
MACPAC August 2017 Issue Brief, “Medicare Savings Program: New Estimates Continue to Show Many Eligible 
Individuals Not Enrolled. ” Available at https1//www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/20l7/08/Medicare-Savings- 
Programs-New-Estimates-Continue-to-Show-Many-Eligible-Individuals-Not-Enrolledpdf.
3
CMCS Informational Bulletin - Page4 
value of whole life insurance. Outreach efforts such as contacting MSP applicants through 
multiple modalities (phone calls, e-mails, and letters) to obtain any additional infonnation 
needed to complete an eligibility determination, as well as partnering with entities such as Aging 
and Disability Resource Centers (ADRCs), State Health Insurance Assistance Programs (SHIPs), 
Area Agencies on Aging (AAAs), and Centers for Independent Living (CILs) to reach those who 
may be eligible for QI can also help to maximize enrollment of eligible individuals. Finally, we 
also remind states of their obligation to comply with the requirements in 42 CFR §435.9l I to 
screen Medicaid applicants for all bases of eligibility, including MSP eligibility, prior to making 
a ﬁnal determination of eligibility. 
By complying with federal law and maximizing eligibility and enrollment simpliﬁcations for 
dually eligible individuals as discussed here and in previous communicationsf states can help 
more individuals with low income enroll in MSPs, which are essential to economic security and 
access to needed medical care. 
Technical Assistance 
We look forward to partnering with states to increase enrollment in the MSPs and better serve 
individuals with low income. If you have any questions regarding the information in this letter or 
suggestions on improving participation in MSPs, please email 
ModemizetheMSPs(a),cms.hhs. gov. 
6 
SHO # 20-O04, Planning for the Resumption of Normal Slate Medicaid, Children' 
s Health Insurance Program 
(CHIP), and Basic Health Program (BHP) Operations Upon Conclusion of the C OVID-19 Public Health 
Emergency. There is also an update to this guidance that was released on August I3. 2021 as SHO #21-O02, 
Updated Guidance Related to Planning for the Resumption of Normal State Medicaid, Children ’s Health Insurance 
Program (CHIP), and Basic Health Program (BHP) Operations Upon Conclusion of the COVID-19 Public Health 
Emergency. However, that update does not list the dual eligible enrollment strategies.
4
