I 
Mailing PO Box 437
_ 
_ V 
a I n e € n e r Street: 1 Weston Court Suite 103 
- *1 
I - Augusta MEO4332 
207 622 7381 
E¢<>"°mI¢ P°|I¢V - 
Testimony in support of LD 1522, An Act to Provide Economic Justice to Historically 
Disadvantaged Older Citizens by Amending the Laws Governing the Medicare Savings 
Program 
Josie Phillips, Policy Fellow 
4/20/2023 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Baldacci and Meyer, and all members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee. My name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for 
Economic Policy. l am testifying in favor of LD 1522 because it provides support for aging 
Mainers struggling to stay financially afloat during retirement, Mainers who disproportionately 
have experienced lifetimes of economic discrimination and marginalization. 
LD 1522 would provide this support by increasing eligibility for the Medicare Savings Program, 
which offsets the costs of health care for aging people with low incomes. More specifically, LD 
1522 would update the eligibility standards to be more reflective of the income actually needed 
to maintain stability in retirement. The bill would also remove the asset test, which currently 
requires retired Mainers to spend down most of their savings before receiving any assistance. ln 
doing so, LD 1522 would better allow the Medicare Savings Program to reach the people it is 
intended to help while allowing recipients to maintain their financial cushions in the case of 
emergencies. By offsetting the costs of health care, this proposal would free up more resources 
for aging Mainers with low incomes to devote to meeting their other needs, needs which they 
might otherwise struggle to meet. 
While expanding access to the Medicare Savings Program would help older Mainers with low 
incomes generally, this access is particularly important to Mainers who experienced economic 
discrimination throughout their careers, inhibiting their ability to save for retirement. Older 
women, for instance, have faced discrimination during their careers that likely contributes to 
their lack of economic security in retirement relative to men? Furthermore, Black, Latino, and 
Native Mainers are paid less than White Mainers on average, even accounting for educational 
attainment." Research by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston shows that median lifetime 
earnings for Black and Latino people are approximately $800,000 less than White people?“ For 
Native women, relative to White men, this lifetime earnings gap is estimated to be $986,000. ” 
Aging LGBT people have also experienced pervasive labor market discrimination which impacts 
retirement savings. Because of this economic discrimination, 40 percent of older LGBT adults— 
and half of older transgender adults, specifically — have incomes below 200% of the federal 
poverty line.“ Extending assistance to these groups would help to address the damage thata 
lifetime of labor market discrimination can inflict on people’s ability to remain financially stable in 
retirement. 
By better targeting the benefits of the Medicare Savings Program to those who need it, 
particularly those who have been persistently economically disadvantaged through no fault of 
their own, LD 1522 would improve the financial resiliency of aging Mainers. Because of these 
benefits, I encourage this committee to vote yes on LD 1522. 
Board of Directors 
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell 
Barbara Burt, Vice-chair l\/laulran Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus llutthins l.u(y Van Hook 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica Maurer
‘Cutler Institute, “Economic Security of Older Women in Maine." https://mainecouncilonaging.org/wp- 
content/uploads/2022/O2/Economic-Security-OIder-Women-in-Maine-Report-FlNAL.pdf 
“ Maine Center for Economic Policy, "State of Working Maine: 2020." https://www.mecep.org/wp- 
content/uploads/2020/11/State-of-Working-Maine-2020.pdf 
"' 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, "The Limited Role of lntergenerational Transfers for Understanding Racial 
Wealth Disparities." https://www.bostonfed.org/publications/current-policy-perspectives/2023/the-limited-role- 
of-intergenerationaI-transfers-for-understanding-raciaI-wealth-disparities.aspx 
“’ National Women's Law Center, "Native American Women Need Action That Closes the Wage Gap." 
https://nwlc.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/O9/Native-Women-Equal-Pay-2021.pdf 
" Movement Advancement Project, "Understanding Issues Facing LGBT Older Adults." 
https://www.lgbtmap.org/file/understanding-issues-facing-lgbt-older-adults.pdf
