 
1 
 LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742    
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
   
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY) 
www.mainelse.org 
April 20, 2023 
 
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D.1522 An Act to Provide Economic Justice to Historically 
Disadvantaged Older Citizens by Amending the Laws Governing the 
Medicare Savings Program before the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services   
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Health and Human Services 
 
On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer comments 
in support of L.D. 1522. Legal Services for the Elderly is a non-profit legal 
services organization that was established in Maine following the passage of 
the Older American’s Act in 1974. Since then, we have provided free legal 
assistance to our disadvantaged older adults when their basic human needs 
are at stake. Our clients are all aged sixty or older and most have very low 
incomes.  
 
This bill proposes to eliminate the asset requirements for the Medicare 
Savings Program (MSP) and produces a method to help pay for this change. 
Our comments will describe the MSP in general terms and then suggest why 
you should take action to remove the asset test.        
 
The Medicare Savings Program (MSP) is a Federal public benefit program 
administered by our Department of Health and Human Services. To qualify 
you must be at least 65 years old or younger and disabled for two years. It 
has income and asset eligibility requirements. The MSP also has three 
different levels of benefits. Depending on a member’s income, each of the 
levels helps pay certain costs of the Medicare Part A and Part B program.  
 
 
2 
 For those who are not familiar with the Medicare program, Medicare Part A 
pays for hospital, hospice and skilled nursing facility benefits. Medicare Part 
B assists in paying for doctors, outpatient hospital care, therapy, ambulance 
and laboratory services. While the MSP program does not directly help with 
the cost of prescription drugs, everyone enrolled in the program qualifies for 
the “full” Low-Income Subsidy Program (LIS). This program provides 
“extra help” with the costs of the Medicare Part D prescription drug program 
with Federal funds and at no cost to the State.  
           
MSP’s three different levels are referred to by their initials: QMB (Qualified 
Medicare Beneficiary), SLMB (Specified Low Income Beneficiary) and QI 
(Qualified Individual). The benefits in the QMB section are extensive. They 
include the costs of  the goods and services delivered to the member as well 
as the member’s cost sharing expenses including  premiums, deductibles, co-
insurance and co-payments. The SLMB and QI levels cover just one cost. 
They pay the member’s monthly Part B premium. The Federal and State 
governments share the expenses of the QMB and SLMB benefit levels. The 
QI level is paid entirely by the Federal government.  
 
This bill proposes to expand the QI level and reduce the SLMB level by 
recalculating the income eligibility limits. Those SLMBs whose incomes no 
longer qualify them for that level will become QIs. This will reduce the State 
share of the premium cost for the SLMB level. While the SLMBs will get 
the same benefit at the QI level the State will not be responsible for the 
expense.  
 
While it’s difficult to believe that the State has the flexibility to tailor these  
eligibility changes, we agree with the sponsor and the other proponents that 
it is legally permissible to do so. If passed, the implementation of the 
changes will likely require final Federal approval in the nature of a State 
Plan Amendment. It’s reasonable to expect that these changes will not be in 
place until well into the second year of the biennium. If this estimate is 
confirmed, it should be reflected in an appropriate effective date for this 
initiative. The cost savings produced by these changes will significantly help 
cover the costs of eliminating the asset test.  
 
Eliminating the asset test is a major goal of this proposed legislation. Since 
an asset requirement is a State option, the Maine MSP program did not have 
an asset test for many years. Unfortunately, due to budget constraints in 
2013, rather than affecting a greater number of older adults by reducing 
 
3 
 eligibility based on income, that legislature decided to impose an asset test to 
produce savings. As a result, a lesser number of MSP members lost their 
eligibility for the program.  
 
We opposed the addition of this asset test at the time and support removing 
it now. It is contrary to the notion that people should be encouraged to save 
for their retirement and it penalizes older adults who have been able to do so. 
Most who have modest retirement savings have very low incomes. They  
will need those savings for expected and unexpected living expenses if they 
wish to stay in their homes for as long as possible during retirement. The 
cost of necessary home repairs like a new roof, heating systems, septic 
system or wells are major expenses. Once funds of that size are spent, they 
cannot be replaced easily or at all. Other challenges such as property taxes, 
medical expenses, fuel, auto repairs and other expenses are also difficult to 
meet without savings. Asset limits unnecessarily jeopardize those who have 
saved all their lives so that they could remain independent and age in place.  
That is a goal that benefits individuals, families, and the communities in 
which they live. We believe that it should be encouraged.  
 
That concludes our comments. We hope that you agree to lend your support 
by voting ought to pass. Thank you for the opportunity to share our 
comments with you.   
 
 
 
