 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE IMMIGRANTS’ RIGHTS COALITION  (MIRC)  
Regarding  L.D.  1522 : An Act to Provide Economic Justice to Historically Disadvantaged 
Older Citizens by Amending the Laws Governing the Medicare Savings Program  
Sponsor:  Representative Jess Fay  
Public Hearing:  Thursday, April 20, 2023 at 1:00pm  
 
 
Dear Members of the  Committee on Health and Human Services : 
 
My name is Tobin Williamson and I am the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ 
Rights Coalition (MIRC), a statewide network of almost 100 member organizations working to 
enhance the lives of Maine’s immigrant commu nities. MIRC works to advance systemic changes 
in Maine through collaborative advocacy to ensure that voices of the state’s large, diverse, and 
growing immigrant communities are heard.  
Maine ’s low-income older people alread y face challenges such as high costs  of heating oil, lack 
of access to public transportation, an d exorbitant  housing prices . In the immigrant community, 
older people and people with disabilities  often  face added challenges , such as language access,  
separation of family members, and/or  traumatic displacem ent from the  place th ey once called 
home . Add itionally , far too many of Maine ’s residents face a lifetime of challen ges due to bi as 
and discrimination  in areas such as housing, employment  opportuni ties, and equal pay . 
By adopting L.D. 1522  and increasing elig ibility for the Medicare S avings Program , life woul d 
become  a little easier for folks w ho are struggling.  Other states have already adop ted the policies 
detailed by L.D. 1 522, and we hope that Maine  will join them.  MIRC is proud to join our partner 
organizations such as the Maine Council on Aging , AARP Maine , Equality Maine, and the 
Maine Center for Economic Policy  in supporting L.D. 1522 and hopes you wil l do t he same.  
Thank you very much for your consideration of this important issue.  
 
### 
 
 
