Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, 
 
Our names are Liz Blackwell-Moore and Alexis Guy and we are testifying to offer information on behalf 
of the Cumberland County Public Health Department (CCPHD) neither for nor against LD 1711, An Act 
to Provide for Safe Roadway Construction Design Criteria. Liz is the Public Health Director and Alexis 
is the Healthy Eating, Active Living Team Lead for Cumberland County. At CCPHD, we envision a 
Cumberland County where communities are thriving; residents, organizations, and local governments 
connect and invest in collaborative actions; and every person has an equitable opportunity to live a 
healthy life. Part of our work is to provide the latest public health research to decision makers as they 
work to create policies and practices that impact the health of the state, the county, our communities 
and ultimately, individuals.   
 
Last year, we completed a 4-year Cumberland County Community Health Improvement Plan that 
provides a vision for improving the health of people and communities in Cumberland County and 
reducing health inequities. The plan used an intensely collaborative process, resulting in prioritized 
strategies that address health at the individual and community level. Improving transportation access 
was identified as a key goal.  
 
Lack of transportation was named as a barrier to employment for people with disabilities, for youth to 
access out-of-school-time opportunities, for people in rural areas to access healthcare and for people 
who are unhoused to get to food stores and look for housing. It is a barrier that disproportionately 
impacts those in certain communities, including rural populations, older adults, immigrants, and people 
with low-income. Incorporating a range of safety and economic metrics into the planning process, along 
with a range of voices at the table, can help address these inequities, create safe walking and biking 
infrastructure that is geographically balanced and addresses diverse transportation needs.  
 
Policies and practices that improve road safety and by design encourage walking, biking, and wheeling, 
have been shown to improve the health of communities in many ways. For people who cannot drive or 
cannot afford a vehicle, safe routes for alternative transportation are essential for accessing 
opportunities and services, including healthcare, employment, education, and child care. Walking, 
biking, and wheeling are also important tools for reducing the environmental impact of the 
transportation system and increasing levels of physical activity. The federal Center of Disease Control 
and Prevention names “Community Design for Physical Activity” as a key strategy for increasing 
physical activity.1 By creating safer streets and roads, we can reduce a major deterrent to active 
transportation and activity.   
 
Thank you for considering the impacts of state policies and practices on the health of our state and our 
communities.  
Sincerely,  
Liz Blackwell-Moore, MPH     Alexis Guy, MPH, RD 
Director      HEAL Team Lead 
 
1https://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/activepeoplehealthynation/strategies-to-increase-physical-activity/index.html 
