              
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 2 3, 2023  
RE: Testimony in  Support of LD 595 – An Act to Require Major Substantive Rulemaking 
for the Companion Animal Sterilization Fund  
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker , and members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry  Committee:  
My name is Beth Gallie and I am President of Maine Animal Coalition. Maine Animal 
Coalition is  a not for profit dedicated to the elimination of animal abuse and exploitation 
through educ ation, advocacy , and example. And we have been involved i n the Help Fix 
Me program since its beginning.  
Today I am writing in support of LD 595 – An Act to Require Major Substantive 
Rulemaking for the Companion Animal Sterilization Fund . As you know, the Animal 
Welfare Program was charged by the Maine Legislatu re to put the Help Fix Me program 
out to bid by August 1, 2022. Instead, late in 2022 they issued routine technical rules 
that in essence made the Help Fix Me program less accessible to Mainers  and unlike ly to 
attract bidders.   
Spay Maine, initiators of t he Help Fix Me program, found many serious  flaws in the 
routine technical rules developed by the Animal Welfare Program. The flaws include 
drastically changing the program to focus on spay/neuter events , which by nature are 
not as accessible as local veter inarians . Also , the new rules  regarding execution,  
 
payment and reporting are needlessly complicated . Finally, by specifying qualifications  
to bid  for the contract that few i f any Maine  organizations possess, the outcome could 
be no bidders at all.   
According to the Maine Administrative Procedure Act  5 M.R.S.A. §8071 2B , major 
substantive rules  are rules that “in the judgment of the Legislature : 
(1) Require the exerci se of significant agency discretion or interpretation in drafting; or   
(2) Because of their subject matter or anticipated impact, are reasonably expected to result in a 
significant increase in the cost of doing business, a significant reduction in propert y values, the 
loss or significant reduc tion of government benefits or services, the imposition of state 
mandates on units of local government as defined in the Constitution of Maine, Article IX, 
Section 21, or other serious burdens on the public or units o f local government. ” 
 
The Help Fix Me rules should be  adopted as  major substantive rules because the Animal 
Welfare Program is exercising significant agency discretion and the anticipated impact 
of the new routine technical rules is a loss of government be nefits  or services  for 
Maine rs and a greater burden on local governments caused by failure to reduce the 
number of unwanted cats and dogs.  
 
Beth Gallie  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
