Casey Cole
Portland
LD 595
I'm Dr. Casey Cole: I'm the chairperson of the Animal Welfare Advisory Council and 
I am writing in opposition of LD 595. I have had extensive experience with the Help 
Fix ME program since 2014 in various capacities. From 2014-2017, I worked in a 
general practice in Pittsfield, Maine that accepted the Help Fix ME vouchers. During 
my last year at that practice, I was the sole surgeon and was in the top 3 clinics in the 
state for procedures performed. From 2017-2019 I served as a member of AWAC and
was involved in discussions around the challenges of administering the program. I 
also serve on the board of directors of the MVMA and have been involved in several 
discussions that Animal Welfare Directors have had with the board about their 
opinions on the program. On account of this, I understand the major issues facing the 
program from both the position of a veterinarian and of the administrator of the 
program.
The two most challenging aspects of administering the program are keeping track of 
vouchers and managing an unpredictable cash flow. The voucher program was great 
and has achieved a lot for the state, but it has caused some major issues in the past. 
Around 4-5 years ago, there were fake vouchers being produced. Clinics accepted 
them, and as the department had to honor them the program went into deficit for a 
long period of time while we sought a solution to the problem. This hasn't been an 
issue since, but could realistically happen again. Additionally, the way the vouchers 
are set up (they partially pay for elective options that the clients can decline) makes it 
difficult to predict exactly how much money is being sent out for any period of time. 
The cash flow is difficult to determine as it comes sporadically throughout the year 
which makes it impossible to plan for the future.  When these two issues are 
combined, it creates a system that requires constant attention and is prone to drastic 
swings in budget.
When the new rules were proposed, we elected for the prepay option as it completely 
removes one of these roadblocks to care. Additionally, it has the added benefit of 
addressing the delay in payment that a lot of veterinarians were experiencing. During 
the rules making process, the concerns about this system were heard and now the new
rules allow for either prepay or voucher payment. This will allow needed flexibility in
the program. 
LD 595 is only going to achieve a further delay in moving the program over to a third 
party, while also making it challenging to quickly and efficiently adapt the program to
changing needs in the future. If you have any questions about the HelpFix ME 
program I'd be happy to answer them at the work session.
Casey Cole BVM
Chair, Animal Welfare Advisory Council
