Robert Fisk, Jr.
Maine Friends of Animals 
LD 595
                            TESTIMONY OF ROBERT FISK, JR. 
                 Founder and President of Maine Friends of Animals
IN SUPPORT of LD 595 “An Act to Require Major Substantive Rulemaking for the 
Companion Animal Sterilization Fund” 
                Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry
                                           February 27, 2023
Good morning Sen. Ingwersen, Rep. Pluecker and members of the committee. My 
name is Robert Fisk, Jr.  I am the founder and president of Maine Friends of Animals,
championing animal protection in Maine’s for over 25 years. Given others will 
address the Animal Welfare Program’s proposed changes to the state’s Help Fix Me 
(HFM), as well as those being proposed by the bill’s proponents, and as a former state
legislator, I will focus my testimony on the process. 
Unfortunately, the administration of the HFM fund by the Animal Welfare Program 
(AWP) has had some on-going challenges. In an effort to address these continuing 
problems, last year this Committee passed legislation (LD 1828), requiring the 
Department’s Commissioner to “contract for the administration of the Companion 
Animal Sterilization Fund”. Yet a year after its enactment nothing has been done to 
implement the directive of LD 1828. 
Instead, the AWP has proposed substantive changes to the program’s procedures, 
changes which were not intended in that legislation. Moreover, the AWP established 
criteria that made it impossible for anyone to feasibly bid on the contract, hence, 
apparently as intended, the program would fall back under the AWP. Without consent
or input of the stakeholders or the legislators, the Department is manipulating the 
process to keep the program in-house, the opposite of the intent of LD 1828.
Why hasn’t an RFP for the contract been executed that was suppose to have been 
done no later than August 1, 2022? While instead the AWP proposed changes to 
“transform the overall structure and design” of the program. That was not the intent of
the LD 1828. Rather than finding ways to implement the contracting out of the HFM 
program, the Department set up  roadblocks to impede it. 
In the last legislature, this Committee heard testimony from stakeholders and voted 
unanimously to pass LD 1828. The committee deserves to know why it has not been 
implemented. If the Department is doing something otherwise, then they need to be 
more transparent and inclusive, and craft an alternative that stakeholders and 
legislators find more acceptable than what they passed just a year ago.   
I hope the  Committee will use LD 595 to consider the proponent’s rules changes 
and/or re-enforce the intent of LD 1828. I strongly urge the committee to vote “Ought
to pass” on LD 595.  I would be happy to answer any questions.  
