February 27, 2023 
LD 595 
Helpﬁxrne 
To Committee Members of the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Department 
My name is Stephanie Mains and I am the President of Cat Coalition of Western Maine, a TNR Program, which has been 
all over Maine Trapping and organizing MASH STYLE Spay and Neutering Clinics. On many occasions we handled the 
trapping of the cats and brought a vet with us to do the surgeries. 
We used our I8’ Cargo Trailer, set up to hold 34 cats comfortably, to hold the cats and to perform the surgery or we did 
them on an RV from a North Conway Shelter. We even used our portable ice house set up as a MASH Unit. Now 
CCOWM hosts a monthly clinic in the town of Bridgton, where we work with a vet from Norway Veterinarian Hospital 
We do feral, semi feral, or strays, and many owned cats (some families have traveled from Bethel, Rumford, Mexico, So 
Paris, Norway, Oxford, Fryeburg, Phippsburg, Denmark, Porter, Lovell, Stoneham, Waterford and all-over Western 
Maine) 
Our organization would like to see the Helpﬁxme Program Continue as the main source for S/N for many folks, larger 
clinics, and smaller clinics like ours. To require veterinarians to ﬁll out paperwork, get paid before the clinics and make 
up any difference over or under on the other end, would only bring more work for veterinarians who don’t want to work 
with Helpﬁxrne to begin with because of the overlong time receiving payment. At our smaller clinic we do all the 
scheduling not our vet. We incur all the overhead not our vet, we do all the paperwork, not our vet and when we schedule 
our clinics, we let the vet know the Friday before our Sunday Clinics how many total cats and number of females and 
males. Sometimes we schedule for 20-23, but only get l5 that show up. Basically, we have no idea until clinic day just 
how many will be neutered. 
The minute our vet walks into our clinic, we have weighed the cats, the carriers have been noted as M or F, Feral, Scared, 
or Friendly and rabies certiﬁcates ﬁlled out. All our vet needs to do is walk in, give the Kitty Juice, and we are preparing 
kitties to be ﬁxed. We want our vet to enjoy doing what they do best with the least amount of stress as possible so they 
will want to keep coming back. We do as much of the paperwork and organizing of the clinic so as not to make things 
complicated for our vet or us at our clinics that are helping our community get cats S/N. 
After all, if S/N was more accessible there would not be so many unwanted strays, ferals, community or cats left behind 
by bad owners to breed. I truly believe people try to do the right thing here, but many do not have transportation to clinics 
that are not nearby. It would be easier for some people if the vouchers were available directly to them so they can use 
them at their own vet. But the HelpFixMe program needs to get more veterinarians on board by paying faster. We havea 
small clinic, but we also do 15-22 cats at each clinic and we need to keep all clinics. 
The clinics like ours helps Westem Maine try to keep the feral community cat population down. As you all know, Maine, 
like every state in America has a huge feral population problem. There is no one town in Maine that does not havea 
higher percentage population than the next town over, and I know this from being the boots on the ground for the past l3 
years, so PLEASE consider keeping the helpﬁxme program as it is, but also allow a Rescue to run this instead of the 
Maine Animal Welfare Program. It would spread out the vouchers more evenly amongst all clinics in Northern Maine as 
well as in Southern Maine, Western Maine and in between. 
Thank you for your time 
Stephanie Mains 
President 
Cat Coalition of Western Maine
