TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  - IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 595 
"An Act to Require Major Substantive Rulemaking for the Companion Animal Sterilization Fund ” 
Committee On Agricultur e, Conservation and Forestry  
February 27, 202 3 
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative  Pluecker , and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony in support  of L.D. 595 " An Act to Require Major Substantive Rulemaking for the 
Companion Animal Sterilization Fund .”   
 
A year ago , this committee  voted unanimously to pass  L.D. 1828 , "An Act Requiring a Contract for the Administration of the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry's Low -cost Spaying and Neutering Program ."  The bill require d the 
Department to “issue a request for proposals no later than August 1, 2022,  from animal welfare organizations to administer 
the Companion Animal Sterilization Fund ” (aka Help Fix ME).   It is now almost March 2023, but no  RFP has been issued. 
 
Instead , in December 2022, the Animal Welfare Program  introduced  a draft  routine  technical  rule proposal that  as written,  
would : 
1) make major and substan tive changes to the  Help Fix ME  program ’s operati onal design  – a design that would result  in 
reduced access to low cost spay/neuter services  for our most vulnerable citizens  in rural Maine.  
2) increase  the administrative burden on overextended  veterinary clinics , thus discourag ing veterinar ian participation  in the 
progr am. 
3) disqualify  every  relevant  state -based organization  from applying to operat e the program due to untenable qualification s 
and operational requirements , thus leaving the Animal Welfare Prog ram as the only eligible  party to administer the 
program.  
(I have included with my written testimony , my detailed response to  the AWP rule proposal  language submitted during 
the public co mment period .) 
 
While I cannot imagine that the Department would intentionally misuse the rulemaking process to subvert the legislative 
directive put forth by L.D. 1828  -- that is the result  of this proposal . Unfortunately,  because of  this misstep , it is now  
necessary to req uest legislative oversight for all rulemaking proposals  specific to the Help Fix ME program.   
 
Before  making  any operational changes to the Help Fix ME program , the Department should focus its efforts on  creating a  
reasonable, accessible  RFP to  find a qualified  Maine organization to  take over the program administration.  Once a n 
appropriate candidate is found,  only then does it make  sense for th e department to work  in partnership with the chose n 
administrator , and M aine stakeholders , to identify any areas  of improvement for the  Help Fix ME program . 
 
As established during the public hearing for L .D. 1828, the  Help Fix ME program is already well -designed to meet the 
spay/neuter needs of Maine’s unique,  widely -dispersed, low -income demographic – it only needs efficien t administration  
and possibly a management  software upgrade  to be fully successful. While it is apparent that a good deal of thought has 
gone into the proposed rule changes and the HFM program’s redesign, if these rules pass as written, the result could be 
disastrous from client accessibility, provider pa rticipation and administrator recruitment perspectives.  
 
Even under the new administ ration, the Help Fix ME program continues to operate below full capacity.  Currently,  vouchers 
are being issued  solely  for large spay/ neuter  events , leaving individuals  who do not have access to these events  with 
unaltered pets.   As a result, w e need to move th e program administration  transition for ward as soon as possible.   
 
It is up setting that this bill is necessary .  I hope th is committee will resolve this  issue  and allow us  all to get  back to our 
shared goal of helping animals and the humans that love them .  Thank you for your unwavering  support of Maine ’s critical  
low cost spay neuter progra m.  Please  vote “Ought to pass ” on L.D. 595.  
 
Susanna Richer  - Portland, ME   
2 | LD 595 Testimony ( S. Richer)  Comments from Susanna Richer  
Proposed rule changes for Chapter 702: Rules for the Low Income Spay/Neuter Program  
January 28, 2023  
 
 
 
Dear Director Steciuk,  
 
Thank you for considering my comments regarding the proposed rule changes for Chapter 702: Rules for the Low Income 
Spay/Neuter Program. This public program is intended to be accessible to our most vulnerable popula tions which means it 
should have as few barriers as possible. From my perspective, the original program model accomplished this goal in theory, 
but was not efficient due to poor administration. As a result, I believe the focus of the Department should be o n finding an 
appropriate administrator, not making significant changes to how the program operates.  
 
The proposed rule changes raise some red flags for me. My overall concerns regarding the proposed language changes are 
as follows:  
 
1) the proposed languag e creates unnecessary barriers for the public to access the program due to the transition to an 
event -based spay/neuter model and away from an individual, appointment -based voucher system.  
 
2) the proposed language would make it impossible to find an eligi ble state -based non -profit organization to operate the 
program due to untenable qualification and operational requirements.  
 
I have included my detailed language concerns below.  
 
Section 2 – Eligibility  
 
A.4 – “Make a co -payment determined on an annual basis by the Commissioner. The requirement for a co -payment may be 
waived if the Director of the Animal Welfare Program and/or the Administrator determines that its payment by the owner or 
keeper of the animal would create a  financial hardship…  
”  
It does not make sense to remove the program administrator’s ability to waive the co -payment given that the intent of L.D. 
1828 was to remove the administration of the program from AWP. If any change is made to this subsection, the d ecision -
making regarding the co -pay should be left up to the administrator - not assigned to the Director of AWP.  
 
C. “Dogs and cats imported or transferred from out of state to a licensed or unlicensed shelter or rescue organization are 
not eligible for p articipation in the program.”  
 
By adding language specific to barring animals from licensed or unlicensed shelters and rescue organizations from using 
the program, the proposed language inadvertently allows dogs/cats privately purchased from out of state ( online, from a 
breeder, pet shop, or individual) to be eligible for the low cost spay / neuter program. I am not sure why this change was 
made as the original/unamended language for this section accomplishes the goal of excluding from the HFM program all p et 
dogs and cats imported into the state including, but not limited to, companion animals imported for adoption by Maine 
shelters and rescue organizations.  
3 | LD 595 Testimony ( S. Richer)  Section 3 - Veterinarian Participation  
 
It appears that the annual application, quarterly reporting  and co -pay collection requirements outlined in this section will 
prove burdensome to already overextended, understaffed veterinary hospitals, possibly leading to less participation - not 
more - even with advanced payment and higher rates of pay,  
 
Addition ally, this section reinforces the intentional move towards an event -based spay/neuter program and away from 
issuing individual vouchers to Maine low -income pet parents for timely use at their local veterinarian.  
 
Although large spay/neuter events are an ex cellent way to help control unwanted litters and support healthy pet populations, 
these events are not always timely, convenient, or accessible to many of our low -income families, especially in the more 
rural parts of the state. BOTH options are needed in Maine – spay/neuter events and individual vouchers for use by 
appointment at a local vet clinic. The existing Help Fix ME Program currently allows for both options, thus, when properly 
administered, supporting low barrier and timely intervention. I have co ncerns that the proposed changes to this section will 
make the Help Fix ME program unavailable to many families that need close and quick access to these services,  
 
Section 4 - Program Administration  
 
A. This section of the proposed rules requires the orga nization that administers the program have “experience managing 
programs of similar funding on a state -wide basis.” This language essentially disqualifies every possible Maine -based non -
profit as a program administrator. We are fortunate to have multiple d edicated and experienced spay/neuter organizations in 
Maine that would be excellent choices to run this program, but this language excludes them all…leaving AWP (or perhaps 
an out -of-state organization?) as the only qualifying party to administer the progr am. This language seems to go against the 
intent of L.D. 1828.  
 
C.. “In avoidance of any conflict of interest, Tthe administrator of the program shall not be eligible to receive payments or 
vouchers from the fund, with the exception of the administration f ee not to exceed 15%.”  
 
Although, I understand that oversight of fund dispersal is necessary to maintain transparency and avoid misappropriation, 
the updated language in this section that prohibits the program administrator from receiving vouchers and part icipating in 
the program works against the intended goal of low -barrier statewide accessibility as it will prevent qualified veterinary 
organizations, such as the Community Low Cost Spay Neuter Clinic  in Topsham, or a Maine shelter with an existing 
spay/ne uter clinic, from applying to administer the program.  
 
The bottom line is that this program is already well -designed to meet the spay/neuter needs of Maine’s unique, widely -
dispersed, low -income demographic – it only needs efficient administration to be fu lly successful. While it is apparent that a 
good deal of thought has gone into the proposed changes and the HFM program’s redesign, if these rules pass as written, 
the result may be disastrous from client accessibility, provider participation and administr ator recruitment perspectives.  
 
Thank you for your consideration and for the incredible work you do on behalf of Maine animals.  
 
Susanna Richer  
Portland, Maine  
Susanna Richer
Portland, ME
LD 595
Thank you for considering my testimony in support of L.D. 595 " An Act to Require 
Major Substantive Rulemaking for the Companion Animal Sterilization Fund.”  
