Wednesday, April 5, 23  1 
 Testimony in Support of LD 814, An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyotes; 
Submitted via E-filing, 4/5/23 
 
Submitted by:   Dr. Albert M. Manville, Ph.D., C.W.B., and Adjunct Wildlife Professor, JHU; 
  Greenville Jct., ME 04442 residence 
 
Senator LaFountain, Rep. Landry, and Members of the IF&W Committee: 
 
 
     By way of a very brief introduction, I am a Ph.D. Certified Wildlife Biologist (certified by The 
Wildlife Society), a retired Federal Supervisory/Senior Wildlife Biologist for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service, and a part-time Senior Lecturer and Adjunct Wildlife Professor for the Advanced Academic 
Programs, Environmental Sciences and Policy Division, Johns Hopkins University.  I also am a 
permanent resident of Maine.  I served as Big Game Records Coordinator for the Boone and Crockett 
Club (B&CC) for several years, and was also an Official Measurer for the Club for more than a decade.  I 
have studied predator-prey and human-predator interactions for decades, publishing extensively on the 
subjects, and have conducted field research on Alaska wolves and brown bears; MT and Alberta 
wolverines; MT grizzly bears; ME, MI, MT, WI, and LA black bears; and closely watched coyotes, 
coywolves and fishers around the Moosehead Lake Region for more than 3 decades.  To help better 
understand and study carnivore behavior and dynamics, I’ve also immobilized and handled over 100 
black bears, fitting a number of them with radio transmitting collars, and have helped immobilize and 
handle several grizzly bears.  
 
     LD 814 will not fully address Maine’s outdated and archaic predator control program — still allowing 
the continued use of jacklighting and electronic predator calling devices, both of which some of us view 
as unethical hunting practices, which do not subscribe to the tenets of “fair chase” (B&CC).  However, 
based on the time and date seasonal restrictions, and other limitations, LD 814 is a step in the right 
direction.  On the other hand, LD 604 (An Act to Extend the Night Hunting Season for Coyotes), would 
only expand the State’s flawed predator control program, whose purpose is to ostensibly provide more 
whitetail deer and moose for hunter harvest.  I have heard this misguided, ill-informed, and unfounded 
argument raised by some in the hunting community for decades.  IF&W does not support LD 604.  
 
     Similar to the effects of a bounty system on predators which generally do not work, the scientific 
evidence from coyote killing bills such as LD 604 has illustrated that such predator control programs 
don’t result in prey population increases, except where all the predators have been eliminated (e.g., the 
extirpation of gray wolves in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem in the early 1900s, until their 
repopulation in the 1990s, resulting in huge increases in elk before the wolves were reintroduced).  In 
some instances, the results of predator control programs are the opposite of what has been intended:  
disruptions to coyote population dynamics and family group structure have resulted in more breeding, pup 
production, and increased canid recruitment and survival, not less.  Disruptions have also resulted in more 
coyote-human interactions (e.g., coyotes killing sheep), resulting in the use of the pesticide 1080, more 
coyote control, “denning,” body snaring, leg-hold trapping, and other “tools.”   Studies continue today on 
the impacts of coywolf predator control. 
 
     Coyotes and coywolves have become the ecological replacements for timber wolves, the latter 
extirpated from Maine and New England in the early 1900s.  However, both coyotes and coywolves 
provide important ecological services and critical habitat functions which seem to be conveniently 
dismissed or ignored by canid detractors.  E.g., (1) coyotes and coywolves reduce rodent populations 
which can be carriers of deer and winter ticks (in turn serving as vectors for West Nile, Zika, parvo, 
Lyme, junta, distemper, and other viral and bacterial diseases, all which can affect humans and our pets).  
(2) Mice, rats, squirrels, raccoons, groundhogs, and other wildlife can cause extensive damage to our 
Wednesday, April 5, 23  2 
 gardens, residential and commercial crops.  Both canids help control these pests.  (3) Coyotes and 
coywolves are part of nature’s sanitation services, consuming carrion, some of which may be infected 
with TB, chronic wasting disease, rabies, and other parasites and diseases.  (4) Winter ticks are hugely 
negatively impacting Maine’s population of moose.  Coyotes and coywolves will help control the rodent 
reservoir hosts which carry these ticks.  Both canids can help control populations of snowshoe hares 
especially when at peak numbers.  (5) The argument that coyotes control populations of deer and moose is 
also flawed since coyotes are generally incapable of killing adult deer and moose, except in deep snow 
and very cold winter conditions such as in deer yards when the cervids are stressed.  Arguably, deer fawns 
can be vulnerable to coyote predation, especially immediately after birth, and moose calves may be 
susceptible to canid predation, especially if they are stressed by heavy loads of winter ticks, and heat 
stress from the warming effects of climate change.  The food habits and hunting dynamics of coywolves 
in Maine are currently being more thoroughly investigated.       
 
     With these issues in mind, please Vote Ought to Pass on LD 814.  Thank you for the opportunity to 
comment on this bill.  Kindly submit my testimony for the administrative record.  Respectfully submitted, 
 
Dr. Albert M. Manville, C.W.B.  
Albert Manville
Greenville Junction, ME
LD 814
Testimony in Support of LD 814, An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime 
Killing of Coyotes;
Submitted via E-filing, 4/5/23
Submitted by:  Dr. Albert M. Manville, Ph.D., C.W.B., and Adjunct Wildlife 
Professor, JHU;
Greenville Jct., ME 04442 residence
Senator LaFountain, Rep. Landry, and Members of the IF&W Committee:
     By way of a very brief introduction, I am a Ph.D. Certified Wildlife Biologist 
(certified by The Wildlife Society), a retired Federal Supervisory/Senior Wildlife 
Biologist for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and a part-time Senior Lecturer and 
Adjunct Wildlife Professor for the Advanced Academic Programs, Environmental 
Sciences and Policy Division, Johns Hopkins University.  I also am a permanent 
resident of Maine.  I served as Big Game Records Coordinator for the Boone and 
Crockett Club (B&CC) for several years, and was also an Official Measurer for the 
Club for more than a decade.  I have studied predator-prey and human-predator 
interactions for decades, publishing extensively on the subjects, and have conducted 
field research on Alaska wolves and brown bears; MT and Alberta wolverines; MT 
grizzly bears; ME, MI, MT, WI, and LA black bears; and closely watched coyotes, 
coywolves and fishers around the Moosehead Lake Region for more than 3 decades.  
To help better understand and study carnivore behavior and dynamics, I’ve also 
immobilized and handled over 100 black bears, fitting a number of them with radio 
transmitting collars, and have helped immobilize and handle several grizzly bears. 
     LD 814 will not fully address Maine’s outdated and archaic predator control 
program — still allowing the continued use of jacklighting and electronic predator 
calling devices, both of which some of us view as unethical hunting practices, which 
do not subscribe to the tenets of “fair chase” (B&CC).  However, based on the time 
and date seasonal restrictions, and other limitations, LD 814 is a step in the right 
direction.  On the other hand, LD 604 (An Act to Extend the Night Hunting Season 
for Coyotes), would only expand the State’s flawed predator control program, whose 
purpose is to ostensibly provide more whitetail deer and moose for hunter harvest.  I 
have heard this misguided, ill-informed, and unfounded argument raised by some in 
the hunting community for decades.  IF&W does not support LD 604. 
     Similar to the effects of a bounty system on predators which generally do not 
work, the scientific evidence from coyote killing bills such as LD 604 has illustrated 
that such predator control programs don’t result in prey population increases, except 
where all the predators have been eliminated (e.g., the extirpation of gray wolves in 
the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem in the early 1900s, until their repopulation in the 
1990s, resulting in huge increases in elk before the wolves were reintroduced).  In 
some instances, the results of predator control programs are the opposite of what has 
been intended:  disruptions to coyote population dynamics and family group structure 
have resulted in more breeding, pup production, and increased canid recruitment and 
survival, not less.  Disruptions have also resulted in more coyote-human interactions 
(e.g., coyotes killing sheep), resulting in the use of the pesticide 1080, more coyote 
control, “denning,” body snaring, leg-hold trapping, and other “tools.”   Studies 
continue today on the impacts of coywolf predator control.
     Coyotes and coywolves have become the ecological replacements for timber 
wolves, the latter extirpated from Maine and New England in the early 1900s.  
However, both coyotes and coywolves provide important ecological services and 
critical habitat functions which seem to be conveniently dismissed or ignored by 
canid detractors.  E.g., (1) coyotes and coywolves reduce rodent populations which 
can be carriers of deer and winter ticks (in turn serving as vectors for West Nile, Zika,
parvo, Lyme, junta, distemper, and other viral and bacterial diseases, all which can 
affect humans and our pets).  (2) Mice, rats, squirrels, raccoons, groundhogs, and 
other wildlife can cause extensive damage to our gardens, residential and commercial 
crops.  Both canids help control these pests.  (3) Coyotes and coywolves are part of 
nature’s sanitation services, consuming carrion, some of which may be infected with 
TB, chronic wasting disease, rabies, and other parasites and diseases.  (4) Winter ticks
are hugely negatively impacting Maine’s population of moose.  Coyotes and 
coywolves will help control the rodent reservoir hosts which carry these ticks.  Both 
canids can help control populations of snowshoe hares especially when at peak 
numbers.  (5) The argument that coyotes control populations of deer and moose is 
also flawed since coyotes are generally incapable of killing adult deer and moose, 
except in deep snow and very cold winter conditions such as in deer yards when the 
cervids are stressed.  Arguably, deer fawns can be vulnerable to coyote predation, 
especially immediately after birth, and moose calves may be susceptible to canid 
predation, especially if they are stressed by heavy loads of winter ticks, and heat 
stress from the warming effects of climate change.  The food habits and hunting 
dynamics of coywolves in Maine are currently being more thoroughly investigated.    
     With these issues in mind, please Vote Ought to Pass on LD 814.  Thank you for 
the opportunity to comment on this bill.  Kindly submit my testimony for the 
administrative record.  Respectfully submitted,
Dr. Albert M. Manville, C.W.B. 
