 D. Gordon Mott, Forester
 42 Damon Pasture Ln.
 Lakeville, ME, 04487
April 3, 2023
Testimony Nether For Nor Against LD 814 to Restrict Killing of Coyotes
Honorable Members of the IF&W Committee, Chairs Senator LaFountain and Representative 
Landry. My name is D. Gordon Mott. I am a private landowner in Lakeville, Penobscot County.
As a Maine licensed Forester in private practice I have assisted Maine forest landowners for the
past 41 years. Together with my wife Virginia, we raised three coyotes in captivity beginning in
1979 at the request of US Fish and Wildlife Service for 17 years – and we kept sheep.  We have
some approximate objective knowledge of Maine coyotes and landowners’ interests. I am 
testifying neither for nor against LD 814.
On the one hand, I find this proposal to be one of the most rational and appropriate 
proposals to come along in the last forty years. The excessive permission that allows intrusion 
night and day by armed hunters on private property for nearly 9 months of the year for $4.00 
that was put in place in the beginning when coyotes in Maine were viewed with alarm and fear,
has permitted unacceptable intrusions around private residences and camps throughout the 
State in all of this time. It is still going on. Our camps and residences can be approached night 
and day by hunters where hunting is allowed unless posted. Coyote hunters probably have more
generous and liberal rights to prowl armed on private property than law enforcement which 
needs reasons to be dealing with crime.
We have come to value coyote as a predator where deer damage our private and 
commercial vegetable crops, where mice harbor ticks with Lyme and other human health 
organisms and coyotes join with foxes, hawks and other predators to reduce mouse populations,
and where coyotes help keep feral cats under control, for examples. We have also learned that 
coyote hunting has no impact on either coyote numbers or deer populations. Habitat and winter 
conditions are the principal determinants that define deer abundance. Coyote litters expand to 
respond to low populations.
There are problems when individuals have the unchecked right to enter private property 
at night and when hunting can go on daytime all spring and summer season. I know of thefts in 
the night on private property where the armed intrusion took place under the guise of the $4.00 
permit. I know of intrusions by camera through the bathroom and bedroom windows at a 
residence under the guise of being there night hunting. I had a pack of coyote dogs let loose on 
the public road along our property in fawning and general wildlife reproduction season that 
went in and disturbed everything on the private land. 
The only recourse available to the landowner who does not want hunter intrusions night 
and day for 9 months of the year is to post the property. It costs landowners in time and money 
for signs and paint far more than it costs the hunter for the licenses. And when posted, all other 
hunters are barred for all seasons, including normal bird and game seasons, from using the 
posted land in daytime. So are the hikers, birdwatchers, travelers to the Great Ponds,

 - persons and groups who are welcome to come and enjoy the natural private forested 
landscape. There is no partial posting available – it is all or none.
And then, there really is the other side. On some lands coyotes will always be an 
undesirable animal in the same way porcupines and raccoons are for some. Owners suffer real 
emotional loss when coyotes kill pet dogs and cats in their yards. Landowners don’t want 
coyotes mating with their female dogs in heat – as they will. Landowners treasure the young 
vulnerable fawns that we enjoy watching grow . Some landowners want to protect them for both
viewing and in order to support increasing deer populations for their hunting.  Feral barn cats 
are treasured to keep mice away from stored feed. Chickens and ducks require protection. 
Shepherds and landowners who have sheep that are not protected by a guard animal need to be 
able to kill predators including coyotes and bears all year. And some people simply do not want
the animal to be on their property without the right to kill them.
I am sure you well understand there are these two sides of the situation as I do. This 
wildlife law now heavily favors the hunting side and burdens the privacy of landowners for 
increasingly doubtful biological management reasons. 
I urge that you take this opportunity to protect the interests of all landowners. The 
current one-sided interest of the hunters to be able to go wherever they wish armed, night and 
day on unposted private property for 9 months of the year needs to be righted. We all own all 
the wildlife, not just the hunting minority in our population. Many of us own and pay for most 
of the land that grows the wildlife and provides the opportunity for hunting. Wildlife is our 
public resource and private landowners deserve respect and regard for their contributions to the
wildlife economy. And an end to the current policy of wholesale intrusion by hunters on private
land for no good biological reason other than to satisfy the appetite of those who want to kill 
coyotes, in my opinion.
I know well that I am pushing string by asking you to please take this opportunity to 
finally bring fairness for both sides. If you would simply require that those who want to enter 
private property night and day for three quarters of the year to hunt, must ask the owners of the 
private land to give them permission to use their property, there will be no need for posting. 
Ordinary hunting can go forward freely in season, landowners will be granted the privacy and 
security in ordinary seasons that is their absolute right, and landowners who want or need to 
kill coyotes on their own land or where they are given permission will be free to do so as they 
now can.
Please simply and fairly require that coyote hunters must ask landowner 
permission to hunt on private property for 9 months of the year..
This bill can be simply amended as follows:
1  .   Day season.     There is an open season for hunting coyotes 30 minutes before   
sunrise   to 30 minutes after sunset in all counties of the State   only on land where written   
permission has been obtained   from October 1st to   September 30  th  .     March 31st.     A   person   
may not hunt, chase, pursue or kill a coyote by any means 30 minutes before sunrise   to   
30 minutes after sunset from April 1st to September 30th.
And:
2  .   Night season.     Notwithstanding the prohibitions in section 11206, there is an open   
season for hunting coyotes 30 minutes after sunset to 30 minutes before sunrise the   
following day in all counties of the State   only on land where landowner’s written   
permission has been obtained, i  n each wildlife     management district from the first Monday   
following the end of the     muzzle-loading-only deer hunting season established under   
section 11404 in the respective     wildlife management district to August 31st     from   
December 16th to March 31st.     A person may   not hunt, chase, pursue or kill a coyote by   
any means 30 minutes after sunset to 30 minutes   before sunrise the following day from   
April 1st to December 15th.
That is, things remain the same except that rights are extended to landowners to manage 
hunting on their lands in any fashion including the proposals in LD 814 simply by requiring
that permission must be asked for this kind of hunting on private property.
With appreciation for your attention. 
If there will be no change, I urge concerned private property owners who might be 
reading this to take back their land rights by posting it.
Thank you for your consideration,
D. Gordon Mott
One of our two sets of twins

