March 29, 2023 
 
Greetings, 
My name is David Person.  I am commenting on LD 814.  I am a retired wildlife biologist 
with over 30 years experience with wildlife management and research.  I graduated with 
a BS degree in wildlife management from the University of Maine at Orono in 1977. I 
was the assistant deer project leader for the state of New Jersey during 1980-1984, then 
moved on to Vermont to get a MS degree in wildlife ecology from the University of 
Vermont.  My thesis work involved the first comprehensive study of coyote ecology in 
Vermont.  I trained in mathematics and statistics and worked for the Vermont Department 
of Health as a statistician and analyst from 1988-1991.  I left Vermont for Alaska in 1991 
to take a PhD. graduate fellowship at the University of Alaska Fairbanks.  I studied wolf 
ecology and predator-prey dynamics among the islands of Southeast Alaska and after 
obtaining my doctorate, went on to work for the Alaska Department of Fish and Game as 
their predator-prey research scientist for Southeast Alaska. All told, I spent 22 years 
studying wolves and deer in Alaska.  I retired in 2013 and moved to Vermont that same 
year.  I continue to do consulting work and am still publishing papers in peer-reviewed 
scientific journals as recently as 2022.  I am an author on about 40 peer-reviewed papers, 
book chapters, and technical reports with most focusing on predator ecology, modeling 
ecological communities, and predator-prey dynamics. I recently served as a scientific 
advisor to the Maine furbearer advisory committee convened to review management 
plans for foxes and coyotes.  Unfortunately, illness during summer 2022 prevented me 
from continuing that process further.   
 
I support LD 814 because it elevates coyotes to the same status as all other big game and 
furbearers in Maine, something long overdue. Some might argue there are no concerns 
about depleting coyote populations in the state and so a closed season is not necessary.  
Well by that same logic, I suggest you remove closed deer seasons for many of your 
southern wildlife management units as those abundant deer populations seem impervious 
to the state's regulatory regimes.  The reason why coyotes have no closed season is 
because an influential segment of Maine's hunting population views coyotes as invasive, 
vermin, and pests. In contrast, there are many in Maine who disagree with that opinion. A 
closed season is the first step to establishing a viable, scientifically credible, and flexible 
management regime for coyotes.  Closing the season during spring and summer allows 
coyotes some months reprieve from legal persecution when they are denning and raising 
young. Of course there are some folks who think killing coyotes during pup  rearing is 
good idea because if the breeding female is killed, the pups will probably starve so you've 
removed 4-5 coyotes in one shot.  I suppose they would be willing to apply that same 
logic to overabundant deer in the southern tier?  Why not kill does in June and July so 
their fawns starve as a way to efficiently reduce deer numbers?  They value deer but not 
coyotes.  During our meetings of the Maine furbearer advisory group, the state nor 
anyone else could supply any compelling or unambiguous evidence that the open season 
and other efforts to reduce coyotes has increased harvest of deer.  Evidence that coyotes 
kill deer is not sufficient to determine the effect of predation on deer populations.  There 
are much more data needed on both coyote feeding ecology and deer reproduction.  The 
coyote control program is a drunk driver with no scientific guardrails.  You need to 
determine whether deer are regulated or limited by predation.  Under regulation coyote 
predation limits the extremes of deer population growth .  Under limitation, predation 
acts as a cap on the deer population through which they cannot grow beyond without the 
cap being removed.  The state of Maine has never indentified those processes at work in 
Maine and even if some segments of a deer population were limited by predation, it is 
absurd to think that would apply statewide.   
 
I think it unlikely if LD 814 is passed, there will be any detectable changes in deer 
harvesting in the state and if there is, and a scientifically sound case can be made that a 
population of deer in a specific region are limited by predation, then allow an open 
season as an exception in that region but not others in the state.  Manage coyotes like 
other species with seasons and bag limits tailored to local conditions rather than a pest to 
be destroyed.  Coyote predation has tremendous benefits with respect to regulation and 
control of small mammal populations.  After almost 80 years, they have become an 
integral part of Maine's ecosystems.  They have not simply replaced wolves.  Their roles 
are a bit different with less obligation to subsist on large mammals.  Like foxes and 
raccoons, they can do damage to property, pets, and livestock but a bulldozer approach 
like open seasons has never solved those problems.  They require specific targeted 
actions all of which can be written into enlightened regulations.  I urge you to pass LD 
814.   
 
Sincerely, 
 
David Person PhD 
482 Murphy Road 
Braintree, Vermont 05060 
                     
