My name is Deanna Arute. I live in Rockwood, Maine. I am in support of 
bill LD 814.
I will start by asking… How is there unopposed culling of coyote with little to no restrictions 
and no enforcement 
of cruelty?
What makes it so egregious is its needless, wanton killing ~ 
ESPECIALLY DURING PUP SEASON! 
I’ll give you a few examples of horrible abuses right here in Maine. 
Coyote pups as young as several weeks old, used as target practice 
while mousing in a “fresh cut field” .
I’ll quote…”sure makes for some good predator action !”
(picture attached)

Coyotes in Maine being chased for many miles 
by multiple hounds, succumbing to exhaustion…
then finally being mauled to death - the owners then smiling for 
a picture amongst the mangled body. (Picture attached)

Traditional hunting is about respect for the life one is about to take.
THIS IS NOT HUNING, THIS IS KILLING!THIS is how unethical, violent humans can be 
if limits are not set on those who need those limits set....
I support our responsible and ethical hunters. They know better 
than to kill coyote parents at this time of pup season anyway,which is one of the most inhumane times to do so…because their pups LITERALLY starve to death in their dens. 
There is something so deep and ugly when a person can have no 
conscience in the killing of innocent babies or leaving them to starve.
Also, there’s a metric ton of misinformation and this works to disguise Some videotape the entire killing and then brag about it on social media. 
Video attached below - press play icon to view video)
If video does not play link is provided below.
https://share.icloud.com/photos/091HmJwRHpAhXmaIlEm8y72fA
the sadism of these
bloodthirsty, morally bankrupt killers, labeled as “conservationists," making it all too easy to justify the madness by vilifying coyotes. 
I’m an informed citizen and have been educated by experts in the field 
on Carnivore Ecology.
Worse, I believe state wildlife officials are contributing to the madness 
by doing nothing to counter myths, allowing this killing during pup season, the morbid events with dogs shredding these helpless animals apart and then boastfully rubbing it in on how many they kill and how many pups they leave abandoned to die or be killed, often by their dogs. 
This isn't conservation, It's psychopathy at-large and those who are 
supposed to be curbing the madness are in no way doing this. We need your help ! 
Its being indoctrinated into the heads our children who are being conditioned to kill with unhinged, unmitigated hate towards Coyotes, labeled “vermin” .
We must all realize that this is a NATIVE, KEYSTONE carnivore that we 
are doing this tothat has amazing ecological value! 
So…beware of the lobbyists bound by corruption and bound by the 
lobbying system telling you otherwise for the benefit of their own private business.
And, a message to the victims in all of this… COYOTE ~I’m sorry that you were born into a world, 
where you had to be saved from the world. 
ITS TIME FOR CHANGE!Thank you. 
