Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.  Please forgive  me for not being able to attend in person today.  
My name is Don Kleiner and I live in Union. I’m a working Guide and Maine Outdoors (my 
company) has been in existence for 37 years offering Outdoor  experiences in the mid coast 
specializing in families and beginners  I offer fishing on fresh and saltwater; recently retired from 
offering short canoe trips and upland bird hunting over trained dogs (for the last 2 0 years at 
Libby camps in T8R9) . 
I am currently on the steering committee for the furbearer planning  effort. I expect that you 
have not had time to read th e results of th at work  but I encourage you to. I think it is  the best 
example  to date of a public ly driven effort . I have  been involved in many over the years  on 
waterfowl , turkey, big game and fisheries are th e one s that I remember . The la test version of 
the furbearer plan is currently available online for comment at 
https://www.maine.gov/ifw/docs/21 -MDIFW -7-Furbearer -Plan.pdf  I encourage you to t ake a 
look.  
As I am sure you might  expect th e issue before you in LD 814 came  up in both the s pecies 
subcommittee  and at the steering committee. I cannot describe the subcommittee discussions 
as I was not in that group  but at the steering committee it was discussed and during that 
discussion I asked the questio n: Is the current season structure or method s negatively  
impacting th e coyote population in our state. T he answer was no.   
A different cons ideration in this issue is what i mpact current coyote population  levels are 
having on other species. I am very sure that red fox populations are negatively impacted by 
coyote densit y. In some  areas the deer population is negatively impacted by coyote numbers  as 
well. Deer a re certainly numerous in much of the state  and this impact i s insignificant there. I n 
the more remote areas with lower populations of deer the impact is noticeable . I might remind 
the committee  that o ver the cou rse of my career we lost the segment of gui ding th at focused 
on deer  as a result of declining populations. Certainly not due entirely to coyotes but at l east in 
part . 
I am also sure that you would be hard pressed to find a livestock producer in  our state who 
thinks that coyote populations are not high enough . As I mentioned when we talked at the 
beginning of the session our wildlife lives on someone else’s  land and we should  be mindful of 
their needs  as well as our own . 
In conclusion  I encourage you to vote ought not to pass on  LD 814 , give n that the idea has 
already had a thorough discussion , and it may have negative impa cts in  other areas  your 
support is s imply not justified .  
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
