Dr. Tammy Cloutier
Kennebunk
LD 814
As a conservation ethologist, I can offer ecological reasons why coyotes are important
and why I believe LD 814 An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of 
Coyotes should be supported. However, instead of presenting a list of facts, I first 
want to share how coyotes are described on the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries
and Wildlife’s (MDIFW) website: “Maine was once occupied by large predators such 
as wolves and mountain lions . . . over time, those species were extirpated from Maine
[via indiscriminate and unwarranted killing], opening an ecological niche for a new 
predator . . . Coyotes are . . . highly intelligent and provide several valuable services 
to Maine’s wildlife. Coyotes now fill a critical role in Maine as predators, assisting in 
the maintenance of a healthy ecosystem. Coyotes prey on a wide variety of species 
including small mammals, snowshoe hare, turkeys, and deer . . . [and] . . . fruits and 
berries when they are in season.” MDIFW portrays coyotes as an important species 
here in Maine, yet management of coyotes dictates otherwise.
 
Humans are complex, and we tend to hold to our values and beliefs despite evidence 
that contradicts what we have been taught. This is certainly the case when it comes to 
the historical and current perspectives and treatment of species such as wolves, 
mountain lions, and coyotes. So rather than focusing on the science, I appeal to your 
sense of reason and ethical and moral obligations as representatives of Maine’s 
citizens and its wildlife. If MDIFW considers coyotes “highly intelligent” and filling 
“a critical role in Maine as predators,” why are they still subjected to unlimited 
year-round persecution that includes both day and night hunting, as well as targets for 
wildlife killing contests? Why are they not treated in a manner similar to bear and 
deer, both of which have more limited hunting seasons? 
There is little published research about Maine’s coyote population, hence, our 
perception that the coyote population is too high, decimating Maine’s deer, and/or 
posing a threat to people is skewed because it is based on information put forth by a 
few rather than actual events. In fact, in Maine’s 2020-2030 furbearer management 
plan, it was noted that coyotes do not have a negative impact on Maine’s deer 
population and out of 368 animal complaints in 2019 and 2020, only 3 were verified 
to involve coyote conflicts.
While Maine’s hunting tradition is a source of pride for some, many citizens prefer to 
coexist with wildlife rather than hunt it. LD 814 does not take away the privilege of 
coyote hunting. It simply establishes a shorter season and implements a fine and 
hunting license revocation for those hunting outside of the season, all of which are 
reasonable and coincide with current hunting regulations for other species.
There is no justification for the current excessive, year-round killing of coyotes, a 
practice that is based on the fears and perceptions of previous generations. Times 
have changed, as have society’s views and perceptions of coexistence with, and 
treatment of, our wildlife. LD 814 is one important step toward aligning with those 
changes, and my hope is that you will support it.
Thank you for your time and consideration.

