 
P.O. Box 233, Richmond, ME 04357 www.fomb.org  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 814 (IF&W)  
An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyotes  
Ed Friedman, Chair, Friends of Merrymeeting Bay (FOMB) via E -Filing 4/1/23  
 
 Senator  LaFountain, Representative Landry & members of the IF&W Committee,  
 Perhaps no other wild animal has endured the wrath of humans while evoking such genuine heartfelt admiration than the coyote. Some livestock owners curse her existence, many Native Americans consider her the smartest animal on Earth, and others experience joy in seeing or hearing this vocal Song Dog.  
 Maine has a natural predator problem; we don’t have enough of them! In the absence of a successful reintroduction program for cougar and wolves which we should have, our last and best hope is coyote. Problems from the loss of these three apex predators are well known and include overgrazing and agricultural damage by herbivores, proliferation of disease -carrying and crop eati ng rodents, the spread of herbivore -resistant invasive 
plant species as native plants are browsed  and the massive spread of ticks and tick -borne diseases. Benefits
 are 
lesser known.  
 Historically and presently Maine has and does treat predators like vermin , with little understandin g of the 
benefits they bring. LD 814 gives coyote  a little bit more of a chance. By limiting hunting during and after the 
period pups are “fledged ,” and at night, coyote young are given a chance to learn the skills necessary to survive 
in the wild, becoming proficient hunter/gatherers. This and preservation of the ir family units  (both parents still 
alive)  at a formative time , goes a long way to minimizing problematic interactions with humans and domestic 
livestock because coyotes get a fair chance to do what they are supposed to do- hunt and gather wild foods while 
maintaining their necessary complex social units. The alternative, killing of coyote parents, creates community and family chaos and this, when their family structure has been destroyed, is when co yotes are most driven on a 
destructive path towards  human society  and easier pickings. This is often d estructive to both parties. The loss of 
apex predators particularly exacerbates deer/human problems. The presence of predators keeps deer alert and moving  and less likely to do the often severe crop damage they are capable of. Deer on the move also 
minimizes some of the other various problems mentioned in paragraph two.  Coyote provides myriad benefits to our communities, both urban and rural. She offer s free rodent control 
(preying on mice, rats and gophers), works sanitation (cleaning up dead animal carcasses and reducing the spread of rodent -borne diseases), and protects gardens and crops by controlling populations of rabbits, raccoons, 
and other anim als. Nowadays we call these “ ecosystem  services
’, benefits to us that typically are often 
unrecognized, undervalued and missing from the balance sheet when we make decisions regarding our environment. 
 Despite all her charms, the coyote is much maligned. Stereotypes and fallacies follow her wherever she goes. Her ability to adjust to changing conditions and diverse environments makes it difficult to pigeonhole her, perhaps further contributing to people’s fear and misunderstanding. She is the flagship spec ies for all 
misunderstood and exploited carnivores. Poisoned, trapped, gunned down from the air and shot for prizes
, an 
estimated half a million coyotes are killed every year in the United States —roughly one per minute. 
Yet coyote is a vital part of Americ a’s fabric, both historically in the lessons she’s taught us and in the valuable 
role she plays in our urban and rural communities. She’s a delight to those who truly understand her.  Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 814 and give this wonderful and helpful partner of ours a better chance.  
 Thank you.  

 
 
 
Photo: Ed Friedman  
 
Friends of Merrymeeting Bay utilizes research, education, advocacy, and land conservation to preserve, protect, and improve t he 
unique ecosystems of Merrymeeting Bay and Gulf of Maine.  

Ed Friedman
Friends of Merrymeeting Bay
LD 814
Please see attached FOMB testimony in support of LD 814. Thank you.
