 
  
I am testifying in support of LD 814 - An Act to Restrict the 
Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyotes. 
 
Coyotes must receive at least the same protections as is provided 
to other animals in Maine, recognizing the critical role that they 
play in the ecosystem.  
 
The period covered by this bill is when the coyote pups are ready 
to leave the protection of the den, and the parents teach them 
how to exist. A stable coyote population is essential in 
maintaining a healthy balance in nature - their main prey being 
rodents spread Lyme’s disease.  
 
To hunt for food with respect to the animal’s life is one thing. 
Killing of coyotes out of an ingrained attitude that they are 
“varmints” and do not deserve to live is a very different thing. 
 
 I have heard that belief stated emphatically by people who have 
no idea of the importance of carnivores in our environment. Just 
“google” coyote hunting in Maine to see the unthinking cruelty 
that is presently permitted. 
 
I am so proud to live in Maine, and I hope that this bill will be 
passed so that I can continue to have pride in our state. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Evelyn Dunphy
West Bath
LD 814
I am testifying in support of LD 814 - An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime 
Killing of Coyotes.
Coyotes must receive at least the same protections as is provided to other animals in 
Maine, recognizing the critical role that they play in the ecosystem. 
The period covered by this bill is when the coyote pups are ready to leave the 
protection of the den, and the parents teach them how to exist. A stable coyote 
population is essential in maintaining a healthy balance in nature - their main prey 
being rodents spread Lyme’s disease. 
To hunt for food with respect to the animal’s life is one thing. Killing of coyotes out 
of an ingrained attitude that they are “varmints” and do not deserve to live is a very 
different thing.
 I have heard that belief stated emphatically by people who have no idea of the 
importance of carnivores in our environment. Just “google” coyote hunting in Maine 
to see the unthinking cruelty that is presently permitted.
I am so proud to live in Maine, and I hope that this bill will be passed so that I can 
continue to have pride in our state.

