Jane Schiff-Verre
So Portland
LD 814
Senators and Representatives of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee:
 
My name is Jane Schiff-Verre.  I am a Maine resident and grateful for the opportunity
to speak my strong support for LD 814, 
An Act that restricts the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyotes.  
The passage of LD814 will make it illegal to kill Coyotes from April to September 
30th, a time when Coyote parents are teaching their pups vital survival skills just as 
we teach our offspring how to one day care for themselves.  This is important time for
the Coyote family.
What is essential to understand is when one or both Coyote parents are killed their 
family structure becomes torn apart creating extensive chaos and even death of the 
helpless pups.  As a coyote family’s social structure deteriorates this leads devastating
repercussions on our Maine farmers whose livestock become unfortunate prey.  
Starvation leads to desperate measures.
The passage of this historic bill also has a personal meaning for me. It relates to the 
rapidly increasing epidemic of Lyme disease and the positive role our Maine Coyote 
plays in the intricate balance of our miraculous ecosystem.
I write to you today as a twenty-five year survivor of Lyme disease.  By the time the 
infection was a confirmed positive, the bacteria had become deeply embedded in my 
joints, organs and brain affecting my ability to carry on full time work due to residual 
physical and cerebral impairment.  Activities that once brought vibrancy, stability and
joy into my life were replaced by chronic fatigue and depression. For those of you 
who know someone who has experienced late stages of Lyme disease, you understand
how this disease can cause physical and mental distress due in part to extreme 
isolation. 
It is a known fact that Lyme disease, as well as other tick born diseases, is on the rise 
in Maine.  Where once our woodlands, backyards and parks were safe places to visit 
they have now become breeding grounds for many kinds of ticks causing serious 
illnesses and even death.
The very animal that can help to reverse the Lyme epidemic is the one that is being 
systematically exploited.   There is hope for reducing the spread of tick born diseases 
and for the balance of our beautiful Maine landscape.  It lies with you today with the 
passage of this bill.
They need our protection.  Please vote in support of LD 814.
Respectfully yours,
Jane Schiff-Verre
68 Elsmere Ave
So Portland, ME 04106 
 
