Jen Farnsworth
Sedona and Skowhegan
LD 814
Maine - the way life should be or so the slogan goes. I was born and grew up in 
Maine and still have property here. Unfortunately, over the course of my life, this 
slogan has not been the reality in terms of the compassion, care and stewardship of 
Maine’s spectacular and diverse wildlife. 
You have an opportunity to begin to change that with this important bill, LD814. 
There may be no more persecuted, misunderstood and cruelly slaughtered being than 
the coyote. Beautiful, intelligent, loyal and fiercely family oriented, the coyote 
partners for life. In fact, wildlife biologists have confirmed that coyotes remain 
completely faithful to their mate for the duration of their life never straying, ever. 
This behavior has not been observed in any other canid. In fact, it is rarely observed 
in humans. And what do we call this behavior in humans? Usually we call it love and 
devotion.
The spring pupping season is a very important time for coyote clans. Typically only 
one female in an extended family group will have pups. By ending the killing of 
coyotes from April through September, LD814 recognizes the critical role both 
coyote parents play in raising their young and the importance of maintaining the 
coyote social and family structure. Without both parents, coyote pups have slim 
chances of survival. Left vulnerable or on their own if one or both parents are killed, 
the chances of human interaction increases as pups make a desperate search for food. 
Killing coyotes during this time period simply amounts to wildlife abuse.  
Coyotes are Maine’s keystone predator and they play a pivotal role in maintaining a 
healthy ecosystem. Of course, the greatest threat to wildlife maintaining a stable 
ecosystem is persecution and exploitation by humans. In a stable ecosystem, coyotes 
practice strict reproduction, they protect their territory from other predators, they hunt
diverse prey and they play an important role in rodent control. Forward thinking 
farmers in states including Oregon have also learned how coyotes can play an 
important role in not only keeping predators away from farms but also in managing 
deer behavior. 
Across then nation, communities are learning how to successfully co-exist with 
coyotes as the coyotes adapt to rapid habitat loss due to human's continued expansion 
into all wild areas. Urban coyotes now live in all 50 states. Stewardship, education 
and appropriate interaction is the key to successful co-existence. The killing and 
slaughter of coyotes has only resulted in an ecosystem out of balance and the horrific 
suffering and abuse of wildlife. It is time for Maine to step up and pass LD814. Thank
you. 
