Testimony in Support of L.D. 814-An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyotes 
John M. Glowa, Sr. 
April 3, 2023 
My name is John M. Glowa, Sr. I live in China, Maine.  I am president and founder of The Maine Wolf Coalition, Inc. 
(MWC).  MWC was founded in 1994.  Our mission is wolf recovery in Maine through research, education, and protection.  
We do not, nor have we ever supported bringing wolves into Maine for purposes of reintroduction. 
MAINE HAS NO COYOTES.  MAINE HAS NO COYOTES.  MAINE HAS NO COYOTES. 
Maine has coyote/wolf hybrids.  Maine has wolf/coyote hybrids.  Maine has wolves. 
When I told this committee several years ago that Maine has no coyotes, I was met with blank stares and silent derision.  
The scientific name for the coyote is Canis latrans.  The State of Maine has no legal definition of the hybrid animal that it 
wrongly calls a coyote.  This animal was deliberately mis-named “coyote” by those who enjoy killing it and by a state 
government that panders to those who enjoy killing it.  Because Maine has NO coyotes, and because an animal can 
legally be hunted only if permitted in statute or rule, this hybrid animal wrongly referred to as a coyote CANNOT BE 
LEGALLY HUNTED. 
I would ask this committee to amend this bill and include a legal definition that accurately reflects the identity of the 
animal that the State of Maine wrongly calls a “coyote”.  From here on, I will refer to these animals as coywolves. 
ALL coywolves in Maine have a significant percentage of wolf DNA.  A recently completed study in Pennsylvania and an 
earlier study completed in Massachusetts found that coywolves in the northeast averaged approximately one-third wolf 
DNA.  In other words, so-called “coyotes” in Maine, are not coyotes at all.  This has been scientifically proven. 
The Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife panders to the radical extremist consumptive users, such as those 
associated with the Sportsman’s Alliance of Maine.  The misinformation disseminated by that organization should be 
ignored by this committee and by the people of Maine.  Historically speaking, the radical extremists have controlled fish 
and wildlife management in Maine from the governor on down to the legislature.  This committee has pandered to the 
radical extremist consumptive users for the nearly forty years that I have been testifying before it.  Hunters comprise 
about ten percent of Maine’s population and the radical extremists comprise a small fraction of that ten percent. 
In accordance with the Public Trust Doctrine, Maine’s wildlife are held in trust by the State for ALL people, not just those 
who purchase licenses. 
 The Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife refuses to fulfill its statutory requirement of preserving, protecting, 
and enhancing Maine’s fish and wildlife resources.  Maine has wolves.  www.mainewolfcoalition.org   
https://www.facebook.com/people/Maine-Wolf-Coalition/100064282555895/   MWC documented the first known live 
Eastern/Algonquin wolf in the northeast U.S. by collecting its scat in northern Maine in 2019.  It was not a needle in a 
haystack as it was collected on my first day in the field.  We presently have more than 170 canid scats awaiting DNA 
analysis at Michigan Technological University.  
 The Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife refuses to fulfill its statutory requirement of preserving, protecting, 
and enhancing Maine’s fish and wildlife resources.  In 2015, the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife completely 
excluded the wolf from its State Wildlife Action Plan despite the facts that wolves live just seventy-five miles from 
Maine, at least two wolves have been documented killed in Maine,  Maine has thousands of square miles of suitable 
wolf habitat, Maine has ample prey to support a significant wolf population, wolves have been documented to travel 
more than 1,000 miles during dispersal, and no less than twelve wolves have been documented killed south of the St. 
Lawrence River since 1993-in Quebec, New York, Vermont, Massachusetts, Maine and New Brunswick.    
The Eastern/Algonquin wolf is a globally endangered species.  In the U.S., the federal government considers the 
Eastern/Algonquin wolf to be a gray wolf which is an endangered species in the U.S. including Maine.  Perhaps no more 
than a few hundred live in southern Canada as close as sixty miles from New York and seventy five miles from Maine.  It 
is a smaller wolf species weighing on average from 45 pounds to 65 pounds.  It can easily be mistaken for Maine’s 
coywolves.  We have no doubt that wolves are being killed in Maine and not reported, given the fact that there is a 
weight overlap between the largest coywolves and the smallest wolves.  MAINE’S GOVERNMENT ENCOURAGES 
HUNTERS AND TRAPPERS TO VIOLATE THE FEDERAL ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT BY ENCOURAGING THE KILLING OF 
COYWOLVES. 
L.D. 814 is a small step in the right direction.  Hopefully, it will save some wolves.  What is really needed is research by 
the State and Federal governments into the status of wolves in Maine and the rest of the northeast.  What else is 
needed is to simply give wolves the protection that they are legally entitled to.  It is impossible to tell a wolf from a 
coywolf in the daytime, let alone while shooting them at night.  
Please support L.D. 814 as the beginning of righting a longstanding wrong in Maine-killing wolves. 
Thank you. 
  
