LD 814 An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyotes. 
 
To: Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
 
From: Jude Dickerson 
 
My name is Jude Dickerson, I am a Registered Maine Guide and have worked a number of 
wildlife biology jobs across the country, including for the Maine 30-year bird study, which 
looked at the diversity and abundance of songbirds in Maine’s Northwoods and the area around 
Greenville, Maine.  
 
It’s hard to see a global treasure when it’s in your backyard. You get used to the diversity of 
birds and amphibians and plants. But Maine is home to one of the last largest remaining stands of 
temperate and mixed-boreal forests left in the world and is home to the United States’ largest 
Globally Important Bird Area.  
 
The protection of biodiversity in the face of a rapidly changing climate would be helpful to 
future generations of humans. High levels of biodiversity and intact ecosystems contribute to 
clean water and fertile land. LD 814 or the Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of 
Coyotes to a range outside of their breeding and pup-rearing season, would help coyotes in 
Maine play their role as a keystone predator in the globally significant temperate and mixed-
boreal forests of Maine. Pups raised during the spring and summer are taught how to hunt wild 
game, rather than needing to attempt to hunt domestic animals. Coyotes eat rodents and keep 
deer from over-browsing forests and farmlands, because their presence on a landscape keeps deer 
on-the-move. This act is a great step to pass on a better cared for ecosystem for our 
grandchildren and their grandchildren after them by beginning to heal our culture’s relationship 
to wild creatures and places.  
 
 
.  
 
 
  
 
Jude  Dickerson
LD 814
LD 814 An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyotes.
To: Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
From: Jude Dickerson
My name is Jude Dickerson, I am a Registered Maine Guide and have worked a 
number of wildlife biology jobs across the country, including for the Maine 30-year 
bird study, which looked at the diversity and abundance of songbirds in Maine’s 
Northwoods and the area around Greenville, Maine. 
It’s hard to see a global treasure when it’s in your backyard. You get used to the 
diversity of birds and amphibians and plants. But Maine is home to one of the last 
largest remaining stands of temperate and mixed-boreal forests left in the world and is
home to the United States’ largest Globally Important Bird Area. 
The protection of biodiversity in the face of a rapidly changing climate would be 
helpful to future generations of humans. High levels of biodiversity and intact 
ecosystems contribute to clean water and fertile land. LD 814 or the Act to Restrict 
the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyotes to a range outside of their breeding and
pup-rearing season, would help coyotes in Maine play their role as a keystone 
predator in the globally significant temperate and mixed-boreal forests of Maine. Pups
raised during the spring and summer are taught how to hunt wild game, rather than 
needing to attempt to hunt domestic animals. Coyotes eat rodents and keep deer from 
over-browsing forests and farmlands, because their presence on a landscape keeps 
deer on-the-move. This act is a great step to pass on a better cared-for ecosystem for 
our grandchildren and their grandchildren after them, by beginning to heal our 
culture’s relationship to wild creatures and places. 

