 
 
Testimony  in Support of  LD 814 
An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyotes  
Committ ee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  
April  3, 2023 
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry  and members of the Committee on Inland Fisheries & 
Wildlife: 
 
My name is Katie Hansberry and I am the Maine State Director of The Humane Society of the 
United States. On behalf of the Humane Society of the United States and our Maine supporters, 
thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony sharing our strong support  of LD 814, which 
would put in place some much needed restrictions  on coyote hunting. Indiscrimin ate coyote  hunting 
and trapping is not supported by the best available science, is ineffective at mitigating conflicts, 
does not increase game species numbers, and can lead to an increase in coyote numbers.  
  
The indiscriminate killing of coyotes will n ot control their populations.  The evidence is clear: 
more than 100 years of coyote exploitation has not reduced their populations. In fact, since 1850 
when mass killings of coyotes began, coyotes’ range has tripled in the United States.i As the 
University  of Illinois points out, “…coyote population reduction (removing some or all of the 
coyotes in an area) is usually unrealistic and always temporary.”ii 
 
The indiscriminate killing of coyotes reaps only short -term population reductions and stimulates 
pup re cruitment and immigration. Persecution of coyotes disrupts their social structure, which, 
ironically, encourages more breeding and migration, and ultimately results in more coyotes.iii  
The alpha pair, often the parents of different aged offspring, are the pack’s only reproducers. When 
one or both members of the alpha pair are killed, the survivor will find a new mate, and the 
remaining members of the pack, who had been behaviorally sterile, will now also mate, increasing 
the number of breeding pairs. At the  same time, lone coyotes will move in to mate, young coyotes 
will start having offspring sooner, and litter sizes will grow.iv  
 
Removal of coyotes harms sensitive ecosystems.  Coyotes are an integral part of healthy 
ecosystems and provide a number of free,  natural ecological services. For example, coyotes help to 
control disease transmission, keep rodent populations in check (curtailing hantavirus, a rodent -borne 
illness that kills humans), clean up carrion, increase biodiversity, remove sick animals from t he 
gene pool, and protect crops. Coyotes balance their ecosystems and have trophic -cascade effects 
such as indirectly protecting ground -nesting birds from smaller carnivores and increasing the 
biological diversity of plant and wildlife communities.v 
 
The indiscriminate killing of coyotes will not reduce conflicts —and by d isrupting the coyote 
family structure, it may actually increase them.  Exploited coyote populations tend to have 
younger, less experienced coyotes, increased numbers of yearlings reprod ucing, and larger litters. 
Feeding pups is a significant motivation for coyotes to switch from killing small and medium -sized 
prey to pursuing livestock animals.vi 
 
Open hunts and killing contests do not target specific, problem -causing coyotes.vii Instead,  they 
target coyotes in woodlands and grasslands who are keeping to themselves —not those who have 
become habituated to human food sources such as unsecured garbage, pet food, or livestock 
carcasses left by humans.  
Prevention —not lethal control —is the bes t method for minimizing conflicts with coyotes. 
Eliminating access to easy food sources, such as pet food and garbage, supervising pets while 
outside, and keeping cats indoors reduces conflicts with pets and humans. Practicing good animal 
husbandry and usi ng strategic nonlethal predator control methods to protect livestock (such as 
electric fences, guard animals, and prompt removal of dead livestock) are more effective.viii 
 
The indiscriminate killing of coyotes will not increase game populations . The best av ailable 
science demonstrates that killing wild carnivores to increase ungulate populations, such as deer, is 
unlikely to produce positive results because the key to ungulate survival is protecting breeding 
females and ensuring herds have access to adequate  nutrition, not predation.ix 
 
Comprehensive studies, including those conducted in Coloradox and Idaho,xi show that killing 
native carnivores fails to grow deer herds. In recent studies that involved predator removal, those 
removals had no beneficial effect for mule deer.xii  
 
In response to hunters’ concerns about the effects of species like coyotes on game a nimals, the 
Pennsylvania Game Commission made the following statements in 2016:xiii 
 
• During the late 1800s and early 1900s, the Game Commission focused much of its energy 
and resources into predator control efforts. During this period, we did not understand the 
relationship between predators and prey. After decades of using predator control (such as 
paying bounties) with no effect, and the emergence of wildlife management as a science, the 
agency finally accepted the reality that predator control d oes not work .” 
• “[Predators] don’t compete with our hunters for game. The limiting factor is habitat —we 
must focus our efforts on habitat .” 
• “The Commission called it a “false prophecy” to “pretend that predator control can return 
small game hunting to the st ate[.]” Further, it stated that the focus must be based on 
“…science, not anecdotal comments stemming from theory or supposition.”  
 
Further, in recommending against a year -round hunting season on coyotes, the New York State 
Department of Environmental Cons ervation based their decision in part on the fact that “…random 
removal of coyotes resulting from a year -round hunting season will not: (a) control or reduce coyote 
populations; (b) reduce or eliminate predation on livestock; or (c) result in an increase i n deer 
densities.”xiv  
 
In a North Carolina  study  researchers evaluated deer harvest numbers in South Carolina, North 
Carolina, Ohio, Florida, New Jersey, and New York and found that coyotes are not limiting deer 
numbers in those states, and  that coyote removal programs will do little to increase regional deer 
numbers.xv And the new North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission’s Coyote Management 
Plan adds, “Bounties and harvest incentive programs are prone to corruption, expensive, do not 
increase harvest, and do not target problem animals…these methods are ineffective at reducing 
conflicts with coyotes or impacting coyote populations.”xvi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the above stated reasons, we ask you vote ough t to pass on  LD 814 to make important changes 
to the laws regarding the hunting of coyotes. Thank you for your time and consideratio n. 
 
Katie Hansberry  
Maine State Director  
khansberry@humanesociety.org  
207-999-2323  
 

 

