Pamela Vose
UNION
LD 814
April 3, 2023
TO: Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
My name is Pamela Vose and I am a lifelong Mainer. landowner and resident of 
Union since 1984.  
I am testifying in favor of LD-814 An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime 
Killing of Coyotes.
I would like to start out by saying that I am not anti-hunting and appreciate the strong 
hunting traditions enjoyed by generations of my family.  I also appreciate and enjoy 
all of our wildlife and the balance that occurs when nature is allowed to function as 
intended.   Each individual species must be evaluated and managed by scientific 
methods that actually have a chance to accomplish the desired outcome.  It is also 
good to remember that although they often accomplish a lot of good in other areas, 
well financed special interest groups may, at times, have agendas that are at odds with
the goal of producing a stable and controlled coyote population. 
During the early years on our farm when my husband and I began raising registered 
Morgan horses, our animals coexisted with a stable coyote population.  We never had 
any issues with them and came to understand that they had learned to keep a distance 
from our animals large and small.  At that time the rodent population was under 
control in our barn which we learned later was largely due to our coyote population.  
Over time, the evening voices of the coyote pack turned into gunshots in the night and
the occasional glimpse of a coyote going about their daily business was replaced by a 
large pack of dogs let loose on our property against our wishes by their smirking 
owner.  The dogs were only called back to him when my husband advised that any 
dog menacing or frightening our horses would be shot as a nuisance.  During this time
the small rodent population increased to the point that even with the increase in hawks
and eagles, human intervention was required to keep them under control in our barn.  
I know now that these changes were not a coincidence, but the result of human 
intervention in a misguided attempt to “control” one species to the detriment of 
another.   
I feel strongly that those who take the responsibility for determining the best practices
in managing our natural resources must do so with a strong emphasis on using the 
most current science available to achieve the desired outcome.   Providing a closed 
season for coyote will enable the population to stabilize and stop over populating as a 
result of nonstop killing .  This will benefit the deer herd overall and also allow the 
young members of the pack to learn the proper “rules” of existing in an ever more 
populated habitat.   This has the benefit of decreasing their interaction with humans 
and helping to eliminate the “nuisance coyote” factor which is largely man made.  
Thank you for the opportunity to speak on this important issue.   I strongly encourage 
you to vote “Ought to Pass” on this bill.
