1 
 WRITTEN SUPPLEMENTAL TESTIMONY OF PAUL R. CAMPING  
REPRESENTING  
THE AROOS TOOK COUNTY CONSERVATION ASSOCIATION  
In Opposition to LD -814 
An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyotes  
Submitted to the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries 
& Wildlife  
March  24, 2023 
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry , and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife , greetings. My 
name is Paul R. Camping and I reside in Caribou, Maine. I am on the 
Board of Directors of  the Aroostook County Conservation Association 
(A.C.C.A.) , hereinafter referred to as the Association, and I am 
submitting the following written testimony on its behalf in steadfast  
opposition to LD -814.  
BACKGROUND INFORMATION  
The Association was founded 15 years ago in an effort to help the decimated White-tail Deer population make a recovery  from an all -
time low which was the direct result of  harsh winter weather and 
predation from Black Bears and Coyotes. Our  conservation  strategy 
involves 3  critical  programs; habitat improvement, supplemental 
winter feeding and predator management . We strongly encourage our 
members to hunt and trap coyotes and bears.  
Our Coyote Control Management Program  is not an attempt to 
eliminate  or erad icate all coyotes from the County. It is an effort to 
suppress their population and bring into balance the predator –prey 
relationship that exists  between deer and coyotes  which is, and has 
been for some time, disproportionately in favor of the coyotes. The 
program begins in October with the trapping season and ends in  
 
2 
 Mid-March . It is an organized effort to remov e as many coyotes as 
possible during the  fall-winter  period of time in which the deer 
population is the most vulnerable  and to interrupt the breeding 
season of bonded coyote pairs. Our goal is to reduce the number of 
potential litters that would otherwise exist if there was no hunting 
pressure.   
 
 
The above photo depicts a white -tail buck being attacked by 3 hungry coyotes who are 
eating i t alive during the breading season for deer.  
 
Our program  is not a “ killing contest ” and there is no “ prize money ” 
awarded. Participants who do harvest a coyote are reimbursed for 
their time and expenses at the modest rate of $25.00 for each coyote 
tagged. We are pleased to report that we removed 150 coyotes during the most recent  operation of this  program costing the Association 
$3,750.00. This is a small amount of money when compared to the 

3 
 actual expenses incurred  by hunters and trappers  for the cost of their  
bait, license fees, firearms and ammunition, traps, trail cameras, 
batteries  and gasoline!  
 
THE REASONS FOR OUR OPPOSITION  
LD-814 is not based on sou nd scientific principles and there is  
no factual  or rational  basis to justify  its passage.  Rather, it 
appears to be nothing more than a n emotional solution searching  for a 
problem . Scientific studies have conclusively shown that Coyotes do 
not need protection from hunting at any time during the year. Wildlife 
Biologists universally agree that coyotes are one of the most adaptable 
omnivores that walk the earth and can thrive in most every 
environment found in North America. 
It is important to note that even though our program ended in March, 
many hunters are still hunting coyotes to keep the pressure on them 
during the deer fawning season  and throughout  the summer . In 
northern Maine, d eer population dynamics are influenced by many 
factors. Chief among them is the fact that suitable winter habitat has 
been severely compromised and winter weather has been long-lasting 
and harsh. When these conditions exist, deer struggle to survive and 
predation by coyotes has been , and continues to be, a limiting factor.  
“Coyote pu ps emerge from the den in two to three weeks and begin to 
eat regurgitated food. Conflicts between humans and coyotes may 
occur at this time because the need for food increases 
dramatically. ” (MDIFW website) . The Association has a supplemental 
feeding program which is int ended to keep deer strong, healthy , and 
more resistant to predation . We know that deer fecundity (birth rate) 
and fawn recruitment  into the herd  could be much higher  in Maine i f it 
were not for coyote predation which happens throughout the year . 
“A recent MDIFW study to determine cause -specific mortality for 
wintering deer suggests that more deer mortalities are directly 
attributed to coyotes in the northern Maine study sites (WMDs 1, 5 and6) vs. the central Mai ne study site (WMD 17), most of which 
occurred when there was deep snowpack(MDIFW unpublished data). This suggests coyote predation is not a significant source of mortality 
4 
 in central and southern Maine; but in northern Maine where habitat is 
compromised a nd winters are more severe, it can sometimes be a 
significant source .” (MDIFW 2020 -2030 Furbearer Management Plan).  
 
 
 
 
The photo above depicts a coyote in an urban/suburban setting carrying a freshly killed 
fawn.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

5 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The photo above depicts a  coyote in a wooded setting with a freshly killed fawn.  
 
 
 

6 
   
 
 
This photo was taken by a trail camera after the deer breeding season and  the doe  is likely  
to be pregnant with twin fawns.  
When a pregnant doe is chased and killed by a coyote, the herd has 
likely lost 3 deer, not just 1!  
LD-814 takes a one size fits all approach to limiting coyote 
hunting. The MDIFW mortality  study cited above  illustrates  that 
coyote predation already has a limiting effect on deer in northern 
Maine. Allowing coyote  populations to increase would be devastat ing to 
the deer in Aroostook County, while southern and central Maine would 
also see a significant increase in deer mortality. Even if the text of the  
 
 

7 
  
bill was rewritten to exclude northern Maine, it is very likely that the 
Aroostook  coyote population would eventually increase as well due to 
coyotes dispersing northward. “ Dispersal is the movement an animal 
makes from its birth place to where it reproduces, and is the primary 
mechanism by which animals f ind and inhabit new areas and avoid 
inbreeding (Caughley and Sinclair 1994). It is also a time of high mortality as animals move through unfamiliar territory. Maine’s 
coyotes begin dispersing at about five months of age, in late 
September (Harrison 1992b). Dispersal peaks during October and 
November and again in February and March. In Harrison’s study, 86% 
of the pups dispersed during their first year, with 53%, 33%, and 14% 
of the juvenile coyotes emigrating during autumn, late winter, and 
after the first winter, respectively. All pups in this study dispersed by 
the time they reached 1.5 years of age.” (MDIFW 2020 -2030 
Furbearer Management Plan).  
Allowing the population of coyotes to increase anywhere in the state is simply a very bad idea!  
LD-814 is poorly written and technically deficient in that it 
causes  direct  conflicts with other statutes in Title 12 M.R.S.A.  
The Bill states, in pertinent part, “A person may not hunt, chase , 
pursue or kill  a coyote by any means…… from April 1
st to September 
30th”. The conflicts are as follows:  
• §12401. Attacking domestic animals or destroying 
property  
Except as provided in sections 12402 and 12404, a person may 
lawfully kill, or cause to be killed, any wild animal or wild turkey, 
night or day, found in the act of a ttacking, worrying or wounding 
that person's domestic animals or domestic birds or destroying that person's property. A person who kills a wild animal or wild turkey by 
authority of this section shall report the incident to the Maine Warden Service as prov ided in section 12402, subsections 3 and 4.   
[PL 2003, c. 414, Pt. A, §2 (NEW); PL 2003, c. 614, §9 (AFF).]  
8 
 • §12404. “Specific animals. 4.  Coyotes .  The commissioner 
may cause department personnel to take coyotes at any time 
and in any manner that the commissioner may prescribe.”    
[PL 2003, c. 414, Pt. A, §2 (NEW); PL 2003, c. 614, §9 (AFF).]  
LD-814 impedes the population recovery of the threatened New 
England Cottontail rabbit . The coyote diet includes virtually 
every thing that lives in Maine, from vo les to Moose Calves. If they can 
catch it and kill it, they eat it!  The New England Cottontail is no 
exception. This bill is making a mockery of the IF&W’s Furbearer 
Management Plan by completely ignoring Chapter 8.6 -  Coyote 
Management Goals & Strategies for 2020- 2030 (pg.94).  
“Goal #6. Conservation of other species;  
• Continue trapper education and promote outreach materials on how to minimize incidental capture of lynx during the early canid trapping 
season. (Ongoing; High Priority)  
• Keep working with USDA WS to manage coyote predation on New 
England Cottontails  and rare  shorebirds. (Ongoing; Moderate 
Priority)  
• Compile all available data sources, develop metrics, and identify data 
gaps to improve the Predator  Management Program. (N ew; High 
Priority) ”.   
Ironically, some of the Representatives who cosponsored this bill 
reside in the same geographical area as the New England Cottontail. Perhaps they should rename t his bill as An Act To Increase the 
Coyote Population in Maine to the De triment of All Other 
Species ! 
LD-814 indirectly infringes on our Constitutional Right to Food . 
Living off the land is not as far -fetched as it sounds. Many people in 
rural Maine are part of the “Homesteaders Movement ”. They hunt, 
farm, and raise livestock for their own food and avoid the grocery 
store whenever possible. Deer hunting puts mea t in the freezer which 
helps many families get through the winter months when they can’t 
hunt deer. But Coyotes can……and they do! They pose a threat to deer 
9 
 12 months of  the year; eating our fawns in the spring  and adult deer 
whenever they can! It is estimated that coyotes currently number 
about 12,000. This bill will allow their population to grow quickly and 
as their numbers swell, the deer population will decline! When the deer 
are all gone are we supposed to eat the coyotes? Do they have a right 
to food or was that amendment  intended for us?  
LD-814 eliminates the ability of the Department of Inland 
Fisheries & Wildlife to use lawful hunting of Coyotes as a 
legitimate M anagement tool!  
Since 1 971, nearly every Legislature prior to the 131st (with some 
exceptions) has enacted laws intended to optimize coyote  hunting and 
trapping opportunities for sportsmen in an attempt to manage their 
population. The MDIFW has meticulously followed the principles set 
forth in the  North American Model of Wildlife Conservation. This bill is 
a slap in the face of Commissioner Judith Camuso and her many talented and dedicated employees. Suddenly, and without explanati on, 
this bill tells the IF&W that everything they  thought  they knew about 
coyotes is incorrect and coyotes need protection from hunting for a 
minimum of six months of the year! If this bill were to pass, what’s 
next? Perhaps we will see a bill to defund th e Warden Service!  
CONCLUSION S: 
In consideration of the foregoing, even the most casual observer must  
be wonder ing, why was this bill proposed?  What wrong is it trying to 
make right? We choose not t o make this a political argument , but 
certain questions ought to be answered. For example , why are there 
only Democrats sponsoring LD -814? And why are 7 of the 8 
Representatives women? And why are they all from Southern Maine?  
There are no Republicans or Independents backing this bill and there is no Representative from either party who calls northern Maine home!  
In the absence of  any stated intentions regarding the need and 
purpose of  this bill , the only logical inference that can be dr awn from 
these facts is that this proposed bill was proffered as an 
accommodation for a constituent.  
But who would want to enact such a horrible law to give unneeded 
protection to the outlaws of the animal kingdom? To us, LD-814 reeks 
10 
 of a being a thinly  veiled first step to  incrementally  eliminate hunting 
by the PETA or HSUS crowd.  Referendums are to o costly and time 
consuming, so apparently, their new strategy is to get the Maine 
Legislature to do their dirty work for them!  If enacted, this bill steals 
50% of our present daytime hunting opportunities (183 days) and 
70% of our nighttime opportunities (259 days)! The Coyote population 
will be out of control!  
In any event, we beg the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife to help us stop this extreme cruelty . 
 
 
This photo shows a buck , who was being savagely attacked and eaten alive by Coyotes, 
escaping to the water in an attempt to save his life. Sadly, after 36 hours of suffering, he 
succumbed to his wounds and was devoured.  
 
LD-814 OUGHT NOT TO PASS!  

