Richard Bard
East Machias
LD 814
Good afternoon members of the committee. My name is Richard Bard and I live in 
East Machias. I spent about 11 years as a wildlife biologist with the Maine 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife based in Jonesboro and I am pleased to 
testify in support of LD 814. This is a bill that offers common-sense reforms to coyote
hunting that will benefit the people and wildlife of Maine. 
Coyotes have the most liberal hunting provisions of any species in the state. Only 
woodchuck, porcupine, and red squirrel may also be hunted year-round but coyotes 
also have the additional pressure of 8 and ½ months of night hunting. Why is this? I 
believe this is an outdated holdover from the days when coyotes were new to the State
of Maine and hunters were afraid that coyotes would decimate the deer population. In 
fact, I found an article by Jerome B. Robinson from IF&W’s own department 
magazine, called Maine Fish and Wildlife, published in 1979. It states, in part, “And 
there is a natural fear that the coyote may, in taking his rightful share of wild meat, 
leave less than enough for the man with the gun…Men will hunt coyotes relentlessly 
and believe that in doing so they are saving deer. Game managers, aware of the strong
sentiment of those who oppose predators, will leave the coyote to fend for himself 
without benefits of closed seasons or bag limits… Eventually hunters in the Northeast
will come to realize that the coyote, with all his intelligence and craftiness, is a 
challenge to hunt, a game animal in his own right.” 
Are we there yet? Can we evolve from the mindset of “the only good coyote is a dead 
coyote” to seeing them as part of our landscape and managing them like every other 
game or fur-bearing species in the state? We know very well that we are not going to 
extirpate coyotes and that coyotes are not going to extirpate deer and other game 
animals, so I won’t dwell on the overall impact this change would have on wildlife 
populations.
The core feature of this bill is to provide a closed season while coyote families raise 
their young. Science has shown again and again, in coyotes and wolves, that family 
units that are broken up by the loss of one or more adults during pup-rearing are much
more likely to depredate on livestock or otherwise become a nuisance. This only 
makes sense when you consider that a single coyote raising a pack of young pups will
be driven to pursue the easiest and most available prey which may often be sheep, 
chickens, or even calves rather than wild game. And what lesson does this teach the 
pups who are learning life lessons from their parents during that critical time of life? 
The cycle continues as these depredating coyotes teach their young to target farm 
animals leading to generations of disfunctional coyote packs. 
On the other hand, stable packs that rely on natural prey are assets to farmers as they 
help control rodents and other agricultural pests. There are many farmers who have 
known generations of coyotes living alongside their flocks or herds. 
And make no mistake. This bill does nothing to limit the ability of anyone in the state 
to kill a coyote that is causing property damage. This bill will not lead to a crash in 
deer populations. This bill will not lead to a significant increase in livestock or pet 
depredation. This bill will not impact public safety. And this bill will not cost the 
government money to implement. 
What this bill will do is provide a means for coyotes to raise their young naturally. It 
will also bring our management of coyote populations a step closer to modern, 
humane wildlife management practices enjoyed by every other species in the state. 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer this testimony. I would be happy to answer any
questions you may have. 

