 
 Testimony in Support of LD 814, An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyotes; 
Submitted via E-filing, 4/6/23 
 
Submitted by:   Sandra Scholar, Esq. 
  Greenville Junction 04442 
 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Rep. Landry, and Members of the IF&W Committee: 
 
 
I write in support of LD 814.  I am a full time Maine resident.  I strongly believe that our laws affecting 
Maine’s wildlife should be based on sound science, not on fear or hatred of, or prejudice against, certain 
species such as coyotes.  When we know better, we should do better, even if that means challenging long 
held but scientifically unfounded predator control practices.  LD 814, while not perfect, is a significant 
improvement over the current situation.   
 
Coyotes are an important part of the ecosystem.  They are one of the few large predators remaining in 
Maine, the others having been hunted to extirpation.  Coyotes provide important ecological services, 
including rodent control, thus benefiting the agricultural sector of Maine’s economy.  Tourists love to 
hear and see them, and so they also benefit Maine’s tourism industry.  Coyotes generally don’t hunt deer, 
but their presence alone may be enough to keep deer moving, thus preventing deer from over-browsing 
and degrading environments, which in turn leads to a healthier ecosystem.  A healthier ecosystem can 
support numerous other wildlife species, also benefitting Maine’s tourism industry.  Yellowstone’s 
experience with wolves showed that by keeping elk moving, the presence of predators allowed the 
ecosystem to recover from the elk over-browsing, benefitting numerous other species, including many 
birds, mammals, fish, and native plants.  “Close to 95% of the total biomass (living weight) of all the 
mammals on Earth’s land surface now consists solely of humans and their livestock” (Douglas Chadwick, 
2021, Four Fifths a Grizzly, Patagonia: 47).  This means that wildlife comprises only 5% of the biomass 
of mammals on earth.  We should at least give these wild animals some breathing room.  
 
I request that you Vote Ought to Pass on LD 814.  Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this bill.  
Please submit my testimony for the administrative record.  Respectfully submitted, 
 
Sandra Scholar 
 
   
Sandra Scholar
Greenville Junction, ME
LD 814
Testimony in Support of LD 814, An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime 
Killing of Coyotes;
Submitted via E-filing, 4/6/23
Submitted by:  Sandra Scholar, Esq.
Greenville Junction 04442
Dear Senator LaFountain, Rep. Landry, and Members of the IF&W Committee:
I write in support of LD 814.  I am a full time Maine resident.  I strongly believe that 
our laws affecting Maine’s wildlife should be based on sound science, not on fear or 
hatred of, or prejudice against, certain species such as coyotes.  When we know 
better, we should do better, even if that means challenging long held but scientifically 
unfounded predator control practices.  LD 814, while not perfect, is a significant 
improvement over the current situation.  
Coyotes are an important part of the ecosystem.  They are one of the few large 
predators remaining in Maine, the others having been hunted to extirpation.  Coyotes 
provide important ecological services, including rodent control, thus benefiting the 
agricultural sector of Maine’s economy.  Tourists love to hear and see them, and so 
they also benefit Maine’s tourism industry.  Coyotes generally don’t hunt deer, but 
their presence alone may be enough to keep deer moving, thus preventing deer from 
over-browsing and degrading environments, which in turn leads to a healthier 
ecosystem.  A healthier ecosystem can support numerous other wildlife species, also 
benefitting Maine’s tourism industry.  Yellowstone’s experience with wolves showed 
that by keeping elk moving, the presence of predators allowed the ecosystem to 
recover from the elk over-browsing, benefitting numerous other species, including 
many birds, mammals, fish, and native plants.  “Close to 95% of the total biomass 
(living weight) of all the mammals on Earth’s land surface now consists solely of 
humans and their livestock” (Douglas Chadwick, 2021, Four Fifths a Grizzly, 
Patagonia: 47).  This means that wildlife comprises only 5% of the biomass of 
mammals on earth.  We should at least give these wild animals some breathing room. 
I request that you Vote Ought to Pass on LD 814.  Thank you for the opportunity to 
comment on this bill.  Please submit my testimony for the administrative record.  
Respectfully submitted,
Sandra Scholar
