TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 814 "An Act to Restrict the Daytime and Nighttime Killing of Coyote."  
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  
April 3, 202 3 
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry,  and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony in support of L.D. 814.   The proposed legislation would implement re asonable  day 
and night  hunting  seasons for Eastern coyotes, as is already done for all other game species  in Maine.  This  reform is 
scientifically necessary and is long over due. 
 
A recent poll in the Bangor Daily News  asked res idents : “Can Mainers liv e in harmony with coyotes,  or do you view them as 
a problem? ”  78 percent of respondents  said coyotes are not a problem in Maine .  38 percent of those respondent s were 
hunters.   One reply from Orono resident, Greg Kornelis , present s the issue before  us today beautifully .  He stat es: 
 
“All predators are an integral part of our ecosystems .  They keep populations of prey sustainable and genetically 
fit. This in turn protects p lant populations and reshapes natural landscapes. Reduction of prey populations can 
even keep disease vectors under control. The state should protect our ecosystems by imposing limits on harvests 
of all our shared natural resources including coyotes. Susta inability and ecological health are keys to our 
survival.”  
 
In February, I attended a Maine Furb earer Management Planning Steering Committee meeting.   At this meeting, I was 
thrilled to learn that 4 out of 5 biologists  on the Canid Management  Planning sub-committee voted in favor of 
implementing  a closed season for coyotes in  our state . Read that again - 4 out of 5 biologists – two of which specialize 
in carnivores  - in support of a cl osed season .  Yet , this recommendation was excluded from  the updated  Furbearer 
Management Plan .  I remember  years ago a campaign from the Maine Depa rtment of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife that  
included the slogan : “Trust our biologist s.” Let’s abide by that concept  and uphold the recommendations  made by the 
majority  of biologists who volunteer ed their expertise  on the canid management sub-committee.  
 
Many will spea k today of coyote pups being orphaned and left to starve in their dens due to the current unrestricted hunting 
seasons.  While that likely occurs , equally as disturbing  is that some  of these pups are killed right alongside  their parents 
through a form of hunting ca lled denning which involves killing the whole family in or around the den.   
 
The coyote  is the only game species in Maine that is excluded from th e Wanton Waste statu te. 
 
How we “manage” coyotes in this state is wasteful, unproductive, and destructive. These critical predators are hunted 
indiscriminately; trapped, killed over bait piles, ripped apart alive by hounds, pursued during the day, during the night, in  
their dens, while raising pups, all year round . This is not sustenance hunting.  It is not fair chase  hunting.  It is legalized 
aggravated animal cruelty  and ecological  destruction disguised as a predator management program.  The program  does not 
work , and worse, it is  disruptive to our citizens,  damaging to our ecosystem s and risks the health of our wildlife  populations .   
 
It is time to make a change.  
 
In closing, supporting the refor ms proposed by L.D. 814 would give some needed relief to our landowners and coyotes, thus 
restoring some ethics,  ecological health , and fairness to our predator “management” program.  As a result, I hope this 
committee will vote “ought to pass”.  Thank you for your c onsideration.  
 
Susanna Richer  
 
(Attachments   & source s on following pages )  
2 | P a g e  (Testimony,LD 814 S.Richer)   
 Why unregulated predator killing is damaging and ineffective “management ” strategy . 
 
• Indiscriminate killing of coyote as practiced in Maine is scientifically proven to be an ineffective means of population 
control.  Many studies have shown when there are unregulated and ongoing attempts at killing coyotes, they respond 
with “ compensatory reproduction .”  This means that when there are attempts to reduce a stable population, coyotes  
respond by increasing the number and size of their litters.    However, if left alone, to develop stable, healthy packs, 
coyotes will self -regulate their population to lower numbers . Stable, healthy coyote packs also tend to stay away from 
humans and only hunt intended prey, such as  rodents.  
 
• New coyotes will quickly replace coyotes removed from an area. Coyote pairs hold territories, which leave single 
coyotes (“floaters”) constantly looking for new places to call home .   
 
• Coyotes play an important role in maintain ing healthy ecosystems and species diversity.  Through the predator/prey 
relationship, coyotes are critical to controlling disease transmission such as tick -borne illness  and rabies.  By killing 
these predators  without restriction, we destroy ecosystems and encourage the spread of disease.  Coyotes  help reduce  
the numbers of tick -carrying rodents , leading to healthier deer and humans , and manage  rabies vector animal 
populations (skunks, raccoons, and foxes) . They also  consume animal carcasses, increase biodiversity, remove sick 
animals from the gene pool, and protect crops.  Through relentless slaughter of coyotes , we negatively impact our own 
health and the well -being of our wildlife population s. We are our own worst enemy.    
 
• There is no peer reviewed biological evidence of any kind to support that aggressive efforts for decades to control 
coyotes in Maine has any effect in restoring the deer h erd.  None.  Deer  thrive in areas where the weather and habitat 
support their survival.  They do not thrive in areas where the winters are  exceptionally  harsh and that do not have 
suitable overwintering habitat.  Period.   
 
• If the mission is to reduce confli cts with coyotes, there are many  more  effective humane methods  available. Some of  
include removal of food attractants  (e.g., bait piles)  that lure coyotes into communities and hazing practices which 
change the behavior of problem coyotes by teaching them to avoid people and pets.  
 

3 | P a g e  (Testimony,LD 814 S.Richer)   
  
 
Sources:  
 
Understanding the compensatory reproduction response to killing coyotes  
http://www.projectcoyote.org/mediaroom/videos/understanding -the-compensatory -reproduction -response -to-killing -coyotes/   
 
SOLUTIONS for Coyote Conflicts: Why Killing Doesn’t Solve Conflicts with Coyotes  
https://www.animalsheltering.org/sites/default/files/content/coyote_conflict_solutions.pdf   
 
Loved, hated and overrated: Here’s what you had to say about coyotes in Maine  
by Pete Warner February 1, 2023  
https://www.bangordailynews.com/2023/02/01/outdoors/what -you-had-to-say-coyotes -in-maine / 
 
