Comments presented to the ACF Committee on LD8 
An Act to increase support for the modernization of the Board of 
Pesticides Control by increasing annual product registration fees 
January 25, 2023 
By: David Adams, Member of Board and Current Chair, MBPC 
Thank you to the members of this committee for providing me an opportunity to 
speak before you today. My name is David Adams. I am a resident of Mapleton 
and I work for an agricultural and silvicultural service and supply company called 
Dasco Inc. in Presque Isle. I have been on the board since 2018 and was elected 
chair at the end of 2021. 
I have been managing a business for more than 25 years. In this position, among 
other things, I am responsible for the fiscal budgets for income and expenses. 
Over the years, I have learned the importance of understanding budgets and how 
they can be used to insure the health of a business. The past few years, I have 
been part of this same process as a member of the board and have been asked to 
help create and live up to budgets. Our Director has just informed you aboutjust 
how critical things are starting to get with the BPC's 2024 budget. WhileI 
understand that LD 8 appears to have been proposed to assist the BPC with 
continuing to improve its IT systems for record keeping and data collection, the 
reality ofthe situation is that the BPC is dealing with a budget shortfall that we 
had before the addition of any new technology and the additional staff needed to 
deal with an increased demand for managing surfactant and additive product 
registrations. I looked back just in my 5 years and there were 22 pieces of 
legislation introduced that were either directed wholly or partially at the BPC. 
Some didn't make it but of the ones that did, the BPC Director had delivered a 
response to each piece of legislation that included the fiscal impact on the Board 
that came to you in the form of a fiscal note. As of today, I have no knowledge of 
any other consideration or response to our submission through those fiscal notes, 
other than LD 8. In spite of that, we have responded to every request that was 
delivered through legislation or department direction. We are funding more
outside departments and programs outside of our own operations than ever 
before, including Mosquito Monitoring, Maine Mobile Health, Water Testing, 
Pesticide Residue sampling in forestry and ag setting, Extension Service Funding 
for IPM and Manual Creation, Maine State Apiarist, Obsolete Pesticide Disposal 
and many other focused trainings and education. 
Lastly, lam certain that everyone in this room is getting more familiar with the 
acronym PFAS, AKA ”forever Chemicals" . We need only look at the primary 
challenge brought on by the widened net that has been cast by the State's current 
definition of PFAS. While it's apparent that our colleagues at DEP have initiated 
the process of sifting through all consumer and industrial products, we focus on 
pesticides. The large number of products that are now in line for elimination 
unless something changes, represents an enormous portion of our income stream 
from product registrations. We have already seen a drop off in registration 
renewals that could become a potentially large number affecting the 2023 income 
and we have heard from at least one manufacturer that has taken a position that 
Maine is not a state they will continue to do business in because of our definition 
of PFAS. While the Board does not want to suggest that the State should weaken 
its definition of PFAS, we must stress that the impact will be significant if the 
registrations drop off as predicted. The BPC can provide this group with a list that 
will help illustrate this and how it translates into income loss. 
Our staff is working harder than ever and we are very proud of them for their 
efforts. In spite of this, we have backlogged work, we have positions not filled, 
we have staff that is partially funded by grants that we cannot count on being 
certain in the future. We must have additional positions created and funded to 
work on reinforcing some of our most important areas of enforcement, 
complaint investigations and testing. The Board and Staff are committed to 
pursuing additional opportunities to teach the public about alternative ways to 
manage pests and to control things like weeds in playgrounds and school yards, 
but we simply have too much on our plates now. 
I would like to strongly encourage this committee to look at amending LD 8 to an 
annual registration fee of $85 per product. Additionally, we feel you need to look 
at going further and begin the process to look at other ways to support the BPC. 
You would have to go clear back to 1989 to find the last time General Funds
supported the BPC and l understand that was $100,000. Maybe the time has 
come to look at that as an option. An area of expense that the Board is looking at 
now is the cost of investigating complaints and violations. lt would take 
legislation to increase the penalties and fines assessed but at the same time finda 
way that these ﬁnes could be applied to the cost of the investigation. We 
currently do not receive funds that are collected as fines even though we incur 
100% of the cost. We will also be studying our exam and licensing fees to see if 
those need to change. We do recognize that our fiscal challenge is not just for this 
committee to work on. 
Please consider this information and give us the opportunity to continue our 
programs and support of vital public education by way of a clear path to funding 
that will help us balance our budget. We hope we are not forced to begin the 
hard job of cancelling programs and grants covering things outside our 
department.
