Testimony of Pat Ianni, Falmouth, Maine IN SUPPORT OF LD8 
An Act to Increase Support for the Modernization of the Board of Pesticides Control 
by Increasing the Annual Pesticide Registration Fee 
Before the Committee of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
January 25, 2023 
Thank you for this opportunity to offer testimony In Support of LD 8. |\/ly name is Pat lanni 
and I am a resident of Falmouth, Maine. I currently serve on the Maine Board of Pesticides 
Control (BPC) and have since February 2022. 
As I am sure you are aware, as required by statute, the Board must consist of seven members 
appointed by the Governor, subject to approval by this Joint Standing Committee, with the 
intent that, collectively, the Board will embody ”the know/edge and experience necessary for 
carrying out the duties of the board." Specifically, the Board must include members who 
provide a varied range of technical expertise including: one member with experience in the 
use of chemicals in forest management and one in the agricultural field, a commercial 
pesticide applicator, a medical professional, and a scientist from the University of Maine 
specializing in agronomy, entomology, or plant pathology. Additionally, two persons are 
appointed to the Board who ”represent the pubIic" , ”have a demonstrated interest in 
environmental protection" , and who do not have ”a financial interest in activities regulated 
by the board” and who have not been previously or currently ”Iicensed, certified or givena 
permit in Maine or any other state for activities regulated by the Board" . 22 MRSA §1471- 
B(1). 
Last year, I was appointed to fill one of these two ”public" Board positions. I am a retired 
environmental scientist; I care deeply for the protection of the environment and I have spent 
my career working toward that goal. For over 38 years, I worked as a scientist conducting 
hazardous waste investigations and remediation for a consulting firm, as an environmental 
regulatory specialist for a law firm, and as an environmental due diligence officer fora 
financial institution. I previously served on Maine's Integrated Pest Management Council for 
six years. Additionally, in my role as a long time Master Gardener volunteer, I have given 
dozens of ”Yardscaping" presentations around the state advocating for less reliance on 
pesticides. 
One of the many duties the BPC agency performs is to require that anyone who wishes to 
"distribute pesticides" (“i.e., offer for sale, hold for sale, sell, barter, ship, deliver for shipment or 
receive and, having so received, deliver or offer to deliver pesticides in this State") must annually 
register any pesticide product to be sold and used in the state and to ensure compliance with
both state and federal law. 7 MRSA §604(9). As you know, LD 8 proposes one small 
amendment to the current state statutory provision which governs the amount of the annual 
registration fee which a pesticide registrant must pay to be allowed to distribute (for sale or 
use) a pesticide in the State. Specifically, LD 8 proposes to raise the annual registration fee per 
pesticide by $40 (i.e., from S160 to S200). During our May 2022 BPC meeting, Megan 
Patterson, Director of the BPC, reviewed the agency's annual budget for the year (July 1, 2021 
—June 30, 2022) with the board members. At our recent January 2023 meeting, Director 
Patterson informed the Board that the number of Pesticide Registrations may be down this 
year and the agency's budget is dependent on the registration fees as a revenue source to 
cover a significant portion of their annual expenses. 
As a relatively new member of the Board, I am still learning much about the responsibilities of 
the Staff of the Maine Board of Pesticides Control; however, I have quickly come to respect the 
many important roles this agency fulfills in our state. The BPC Staff is responsible for ensuring 
compliance with the many statutory and regulatory requirements governing the sales and use 
of pesticides in our state. Consequently, they are tasked with safeguarding the environment 
and the natural resources of the State in conjunction with the use of pesticides (e.g., by 
conducting water quality testing near areas of pesticide application when warranted) and 
protecting human health, safety and welfare (e.g., by closely reviewing the application of 
pesticides on school grounds). 22 MRSA §1471-A. They promote the principles of Integrated 
Pest Management (IPM) to encourage the use of alternative methods of pest control in lieu of 
pesticide chemicals. They also strive to implement the State policy of "Think ﬁrst, Spray last” 
to minimize reliance on pesticides and promote the use of the minimum amount of pesticides 
needed to effectively control targeted pests in all areas of application. The staff are also 
directed by statute to work, in cooperation with private interest groups, to educate pesticide 
users and the general public in the proper use of pesticides. 22 MRSA §1471-X. Additionally, 
in the wake of the newly discovered presence of ”forever chemicals ” (i.e., PFAS) in our soil, 
water, wildlife, agricultural crops and farm animals, the staff of the BPC have recently been 
tasked with looking into the multiple ways PFAS may be potentially associated with pesticides 
including — as integral components of pesticides, as adjuvants (e.g., surfactants, crop oils, anti- 
foaming materials, buffering agents, etc. which may be added to pesticides), and as 
unintentional contaminants leaching from fluorinated pesticide containers. 
It is because of these environmentally beneficial principles and practices implemented by the 
dedicated staff of the BPC that I choose to serve as a Board member. Thus, I hope you will 
support the passage of LD 8 which will provide some of the much-needed funding to ensure 
the staff can effectively continue to carry out their important role as a regulator of pesticide 
use in our State.
2
