April 4, 2023  
 
LD 1169 –  An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the F oreign 
Credentialing and Skills R ecognition Revolving Loan Program  
 
Senator Curry, Rep.  Roberts, Members of the  Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advan cement and Business my name is S ally 
Sutton. I am  the Program Coordinator of the New Mainers Resource 
Center at Portland Adult Education, and I am pleased to be speaking in support of  LD 
1169 – An Act to Amend the  Laws Governing the Foreign Credentialing and Skills 
Recognition Revolving Loan Program .  In my role as Program Coordinator, I have an 
oppor tunity on a daily basis to work with foreign -trained  professionals who are seeking 
to re -start their lives  here in Maine, and each year I advise several hundred  people 
about the steps they need to take t o move forward with their  careers.   
When peop le first contact me for an appointment the primary reason they give for 
meeting is that  they want help doing  an equivalency of their  degree, i.e. ho w does their 
degree from their country compare to a degree in the United States.  Helping people to 
understand when, how and where to have an evaluation  of their  degree done is a 
complicated  and costly process  and is an integral part of the advising we provide to new 
Mainers . Depending on why they want an evaluation  done, wh ether for employment, 
school or licensing  the answers to those questions , and costs,  can be different.  The costs 
related to an evaluation  of a degree include not just  the cost of the application f or the 
evaluation , which  for so me could be over $500, but also the  translation of a person ’s 
transcripts and diplomas , which averages about $50/page, and can get very expensive 
depending on  how many years someone has gone to school.  
I have been in my position with NMRC since 2013 and in all those year s there has not  
been a steady sour ce of funding for  credential evaluations .  Each year we  have had to 
look for funds. To the extent possible, we t ry to build t hese costs into the program costs 
covered by some grants. For example, if we happen to have a grant related to 
healthcare one year, then maybe we can cover the costs of evaluations  for som e health 
professionals . We get limited support from small non -profits such as Scholarship for 
Maine Imm igrants, or Friends of Portland A dult Education  that is not restr icted , and we 
have b een very grateful for that  support , but it is not enough . If a person falls outside of 
the funding  we have available at that particular time;  we are not able to provide 
services fo r them . Also always having to keep these limitations  in mind , we are hesitant 

to promote our program and these services  very widely as we would not be able to 
meet the demand . In recent years,  we have been receiving  more referrals from the 
CareerCenters, other adult education  programs , and both USM and SMCC to help cover 
the costs of credential evaluations for the people that are receiving their services or 
planning  to attend school. This is also an indication  of the need for  a much broader and  
consistent funding support for these services  that is available statewide.   
I have been very appreciative of  the intent behind the establishment of the  Revolving 
Loan Program and FAME ’s efforts  to try to meet this nee d. However , I could not  in good 
conscious  refer people, who were still struggling  to mee t basic need s, to a  loan  program .    
I am very pleased to be speaking in support of LD 1169, which  would not  only turn the 
Revolving Loan Program into a grant but also increase the amount from $700 to $1000, 
which  would help ensur e that most people would have the  full cost of their translations 
and evaluations  covered .   
I want to thank Representative Cloutier for introducing LD  1169 as well as  the 
cosponsor s of the bill for their support  of this important initiative.  The New Mainers 
Resource  Center also looks forward to working  with FAME  and our partners on making 
sure eligible new Mainers ar e aware  of this program and understand how take 
advan tage of what will be a very  important resource .  I urge this committee to vote 
Ought to Pass.  Thank you for your consideration of my testimony.  
 
Sally Sutton  
Program Coordinator  
New Mainers Resource Center, Portland Adult Education  
suttos@portlandschools.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
