1 
 Written Testimony on 
L.D. 1745, “An Act to Support Public Health by Prot ecting Certain Activities Conducted 
Under Comprehensive Drug Checking Initiatives” 
Presented by 
Deputy Chief Christopher M. Martin 
Brewer Police Department 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
May 30, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and disting uished members of the Committee 
on Health and Human Services: 
I am submitting testimony in opposition of the pass age of LD 1745,” An Act to Support 
Public Health by Protecting Certain Activities Cond ucted Under Comprehensive 
Community Drug Checking Initiatives”.   
This bill would remove criminal liability for a per son who trafficks, furnishes or possesses a 
scheduled drug (such as fentanyl) when a person is selling, providing, or possessing the 
drugs for the purpose of delivering to a drug check ing and analysis program.  It would 
create a decriminalization of drug offenses with a loophole allowing for anyone 
engaged in these activities to say they are in the process of having the drugs checked. 
This could mean that the person and drugs are in tr ansit with a claim of traveling to a 
drug testing and analysis site. 
Presumably, this bill is focused on testing of drug s for the presence of fentanyl with a 
stated purpose of reducing the likelihood unintenti onal consumption of the same.  
Syringe service programs/Syringe access programs in  Maine have been providing harm 
reduction supplies such as sterile syringes, inject ion equipment, naloxone, and fentanyl 
test strips.  Fentanyl test strips are widely avail able and distributed across the country, 
and in Maine, to allow users of drugs to test their  supply.  According to the Maine Drug 
Data Hub on the area of Maine Syringe Access Progra ms, in 2021 there were 2,375,193 
syringes distributed with harm reduction supplies.  2021 was a significant increase from 
2020 (1,666,280) and 2019 (879,853).  Despite havin g greater access to harm reduction 
supplies, including fentanyl testing strips, overdo ses in Maine have continued to climb. 
Since 2019, there has been a concerted effort to de criminalize the possession of illicit 
drugs. The Maine Center for Sensible Drug Control P olicy released a report outlining 
legislative priorities in 2019, and since that time  nearly all of the social justice reform 
measures have been introduced as legislation.  Safe  injection sites were one of those 
priorities, and as proposed would need to create an  area of de facto decriminalization 
for them to function.  LD 1745 furthers this push t owards achieving the decriminalization 
of drugs. 
2 
 We must recognize that illicit drug consumption is a money-making venture, one that 
organized crime is the profiteer.  The Mexican Cart els control every major distribution 
hub in the United States with no other criminal org anization posed to challenge their 
dominance.  All of the fentanyl, methamphetamine, a nd cocaine that we have here in 
our state came from the distribution of the Mexican  Cartels, which has an identified 
presence in New England states.  From there it goes  to other levels of organized crime, 
gangs, and is further distributed at the street lev el.   
We are seeing wholesale quantity seizures of fentan yl and methamphetamine by patrol 
officers in my area.  Pounds and kilograms are read ily available, this is a significant 
change from years past. 
Our demand is at an all time high, as illustrated b y record numbers of overdoses and 
overdose deaths.  This increase in demand is in spi te of significant efforts made in 
access to harm reduction supplies, and increased ac cess to treatment and recovery. 
Supply sources, gangs, are now coming to my area to  distribute drugs to meet the 
demand.  A stark contrast from years past when our consumers travelled to 
Massachusetts to procure drugs for use and sale.  T hese gang members come from 
New York, Connecticut, and Massachusetts.  Gun invo lvements and violence are 
becoming more common place.  The underlying reason is because its about money, 
making money.  Criminal organizations profit while our citizenry is at risk. 
In closing, I implore you to consider what the like ly results will be.  How will creating drug 
checking and analysis sites paired with decriminali zation do more to prevent people 
from consuming fentanyl than what is already in pla ce with distributed naloxone, 
injection equipment, and fentanyl testing strips?  What loopholes will be exploited if this 
bill is passed?  What would be the most impactful p ublic policy to impact demand and 
supply?  We can learn much from Vancouver and Orego n, and predictable is 
preventable. 
For more information on trends and why fentanyl has  replaced heroin: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fuy895DmVWo&t=38s  
 
 
