Dear whom it May Concern, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety, 
 
My name is Francesca Piccolo, and I live in Boston, Massachusetts. I work at MaineHealth Institute for 
Research, and I am a Program Coordinator within the Center for Interdisciplinary Population Health and 
Research. I work with Dr. Kinna Thakarar on a project called DHARMA (Distribution of Harm Reduction 
Access in Rural Maine Areas) that overall aims to deliver education, resources, and empowerment for 
people who use drugs. I am testifying on LD 1745 “An Act to Support Public Health by Protecting Certain 
Activities Conducted Under Comprehensive Community Drug Checking Initiatives” because I believe that 
the work our harm reduction outreach specialists and community partners have a true, positive impact 
on communities that struggle the most with substances. I am fully in favor for this bill and my reasoning 
is as follows: Drug epidemics are a serious public health issue across the globe, among all types of 
people, genders, backgrounds, races/ethnicities, etc. People in the community who are working to test 
the drugs that are on certain paraphernalia should not be held accountable under legal action because 
the work they are doing is to protect people and inform users and medical professionals on how to 
assist. 
Those who traffic, furnishes or possesses a small amount of a drug (listed in the LD 1745 bill language) 
should not be held criminally liable for this action because the transport and usage for testing is to help 
the outreach specialists and the people who used drugs. It is for the purpose of drug checking and 
analysis program in which professionals handle the substances in the utmost careful manner in a 
controlled setting. It is for the informed decision-making for researchers and clinicians who are trying to 
help people who use drugs. If community partners, academics, and researchers are not allowed to do 
this, this not only takes away educational opportunities for these individuals, but it also may restrict an 
important connection between people who use drugs and outreach workers who are working to help 
these individual’s. Incarceration for these individuals who are simply working to check the drug supply 
on paraphernalia is not right as they are learning and helping people understand what is truly in the 
drug supply. There is no other use when it comes into the hands of academics and community partner 
organizations other than to simply perform a drug checking analysis. It is far more important to provide 
treatment, especially when we know what is in the drug supply than to incarcerate people who are 
checking that supply.  
While I am not a person who has used drugs before, I advocate for the community of focus. Working as 
the program coordinator for Project DHARMA and seeing connections being made between a team of 
people who want to help those who are struggling and those who use drugs have taught me that small 
efforts make a difference. There are passionate people in these organizations who strongly advocate for 
bringing assistance to people who use drugs every day, and work in the field non-stop to bring a helping 
hand, resources, medical care, and a warm smile. I have heard cases from our outreach specialists who 
report that the work they do on the ground makes a difference. The drug checking aspect of this 
program from Project DHARMA will help inform our project, its outcomes, the people we are collecting 
samples from, and overall research in the substance use field.  
I appreciate the voices from other individuals here today, especially those who are not here today due 
to the drug epidemic but are here with us as we continue to advocate for people who use drugs or are in 
recovery. Providing people with treatment for substances is the main goal of our public health efforts in 
the substance use field. We acknowledge that this is a difficult and sensitive topic area to discuss, but 
for people who truly matter in our lives, we owe it to them to stand and support positive actions in this 
area. I fully am in favor for LD 1745 “An Act to Support Public Health by Protecting Certain Activities 
Conducted Under Comprehensive Community Drug Checking Initiatives” for the people who are not 
here today due to the epidemic and those who are here to advocate for people who use drugs and/or 
are in recovery. I thank you for taking the time to read my testimony and hope you will strongly consider 
supporting this bill. 
 
Sincerely,  
Francesca Piccolo, MS, MPH 
Research Program Coordinator, Project DHARMA 
MaineHealth Institute for Research, Center for Interdisciplinary Population Health and Research  
