 
 
Testimony of Dr. Kinna Thakarar 
Maine Medical Center 
In Support of LD 1745 
“An Act to Support Public Health by Protecting Certain Activities Conducted 
Under Comprehensive Community Drug Checking Initiatives” 
May 2, 2023 
 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice, my name is Kinna Thakarar, and I am here to support LD 
1745. 
I am an infectious disease and addiction medicine physician researcher at MaineHealth, 
and I am here on behalf of MaineHealth and the Maine Medical Association. I also serve 
on the Infectious Disease Society of America’s (ISDA) national task force for substance 
use and have presented nationally and internationally on harm reduction. Currently, I 
am co-director and principal investigator of a federally funded harm reduction grant 
based here in Maine, called Project DHARMA (Distribution of Harm Reduction Access 
in Rural Maine Areas), which is the main reason I am here today. We are respectfully 
asking your support for LD 1745 so the Project DHARMA team can implement the 
public health initiative known as drug checking.  
 
What is drug checking? In addition to fatal overdoses, infections from unsafe injection 
practices in Maine are rising. Drug checking is the practice of chemically analyzing 
street drug residue to understand what is actually in the local drug supply. This tool 
allows people who use drugs to reduce the harms of drug use, and it enables providers 
to offer better, more appropriate care that is tailored to the drugs being used.  
 
Drug checking also provides public health leaders with critical information  that helps 
them issue warnings and to direct financial and human resources to address the issues 
(1).  Drug checking also provides people who use drugs with information they 
need to make safer decisions (2).  Research shows that people who use drugs are 
more likely to throw away drugs and avoid risky ones if they learn that what is in them is 
unsafe or unexpected (3). Alerts by public health authorities about chemicals commonly 
found in an area’s drug supply can also help health clinics and emergency departments 
know what to look for and treat patients more quickly. 
 
In Maine, interventions to reduce drug overdose deaths have typically focused on 
overdose prevention and exclusively, fentanyl contamination. However, clinicians such 
as myself, are seeing alarming rates of infective endocarditis and other serious, costly 
infections that have impacted the health of our statewide community. The rise of 
fentanyl analogues and other contaminants calls for a broader response to the overdose 
crisis and adaption to the changing drug supply.  
 
For example, Xylazine, a veterinary tranquilizer now designated an emerging threat 
by the White House (4), is also a concern in Maine. Xylazine causes serious wounds (5) 
that clinicians may misdiagnose, leading to unnecessary procedures and expensive 
hospitalizations. The information obtained from other drug checking programs has 
helped patients, harm reduction outreach specialists, and clinicians to recognize 
xylazine wounds and know how to treat the results of exposure, and avoid amputation in 
some cases.  
 
MaineHealth received the federal DHARMA grant last year. The grant’s goals include: 
 
1) Create policies and procedures for drug checking, expand the capacity of syringe 
service programs to provide overdose prevention and wound care  
2) Expand SSP capacity to screen for HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C  
3) Promote awareness of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV prevention in 
persons who use substances  
4) Integrate harm reduction outreach specialists to increase linkage and coordination 
necessary for people to obtain HIV, viral hepatitis, wound care, and substance use 
services  
5) Provide inter-professional harm reduction trainings 
 
To achieve Goal #1 above, our Project DHARMA team plans to create policies and 
procedures, in collaboration with Colby College and community partners for community 
drug checking and to expand spectrometry-based testing for fentanyl and non-opioid 
substances. We will work closely with a harm reduction advisory panel, which includes 
people with lived experience, representatives from public safety, and other relevant 
partners, to review these policies and procedures. We are also receiving technical 
advice from Brandeis University, which has been leading drug-checking initiatives in 
Massachusetts for several years (5).  
 
This bill will facilitate our work by ensuring that we are able to accomplish the drug-
checking goal. By supporting this bill, you will provide our team with the ability to: 
 
1) Develop a database of community drug checking results to inform overdose 
prevention education trainings  
2) Implement protocols for community drug checking and communicate 
aggregate results to Maine’s Overdose Accidental Review Panel  
3) Perform community drug checking on approximately 1,000 total samples 
for presence of other non-opioid substances. Our Project DHARMA team is also 
working with the Office of Behavioral Health to secure funding to purchase additional 
drug checking equipment for our community partners to ensure drug checking will be 
sustainable in Maine for the long term.  
 
I cannot emphasize enough the importance of supporting LD 1745, as our Project 
DHARMA team needs to be able to safely carry out this federally-funded, evidence-
based public health initiative.  
 
I’m available if any of you have any questions for the work session. Thank you for all the 
work that you do.  
        
Sincerely, 
Dr. Kinna Thakarar 
Principal Investigator and Co-director, Project DHARMA 
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine 
Maine Medical Center Infectious Disease & Addiction Medicine 
 
References 
1 . Nabarun Dasgupta, Mary C Figgatt, Invited Commentary: Drug Checking for Novel 
Insights Into the Unregulated Drug Supply, American Journal of Epidemiology, Volume 
191, Issue 2, February 2022, Pages 248–252, https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwab233  
  
2. Reyes, E.A., They’re not trying to die’: How drug checking aims to protect users in a 
messy market, in Los Angeles Times 2022. Available at: 
https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2022-05-22/overdoses-drug-checking-aims-to-
protect-users . Accessed April 26, 2023.  
 
3. Maghsoudi N, Tanguay J, Scarfone K, Rammohan I, Ziegler C, Werb D, Scheim AI. 
Drug checking services for people who use drugs: a systematic review. Addiction. 2022 
Mar;117(3):532-544. doi: 10.1111/add.15734. Epub 2021 Dec 12. PMID: 34729849; 
PMCID: PMC9299873. 
4. The White House., Biden- ⁠Harris Administration Designates Fentanyl Combined with 
Xylazine as an Emerging Threat to the United States, O.o.N.D.C. Policy, Editor. 2023. 
5. Malayala SV, Papudesi BN, Bobb R, Wimbush A. Xylazine-Induced Skin Ulcers in a Person 
Who Injects Drugs in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Cureus. 2022 Aug 19;14(8):e28160. 
doi: 10.7759/cureus.28160. PMID: 36148197; PMCID: PMC9482722. 
 
6. Green TC, Olson R, Jarczyk C, Erowid E, Erowid F, Thyssen S, Wightman R, Del 
Pozo B, Michelson L, Consigli A, Reilly B, Ruiz S. Implementation and Uptake of the 
Massachusetts Drug Supply Data Stream: A Statewide Public Health-Public Safety 
Partnership Drug Checking Program. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2022 Nov-Dec 
01;28(Suppl 6):S347-S354. doi: 10.1097/PHH.0000000000001581. PMID: 36194805; 
PMCID: PMC9531987. 
 
