. HOUSE OE REPRESENTATIVES 
3; H 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Raegan LaR0che"e TTYI l\/IAINE RELAY 7ll 
102 Hemlock Terrace 
Augusta, ME 04330 
Phone: (207) 624-2668 
Raegan.lsalloclielle1 ’k£:legisla1u1"c.maincgoy 
May 2, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Raegan LaRochelIe presenting 
LD 17 45, An Act to Support Public Health by Protecting Certain Activities Conducted Under 
Comprehensive Community Drug Checking Initiatives 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and esteemed members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Raegan LaRochelle and I represent House District 59, which is part of 
Augusta. l’m here to propose an amendment to LD 1745, An Act to Support Public Health by Protecting 
Certain Activities Conducted Under Comprehensive Drug Checking Initiatives. 
The version of this bill that came out of the Revisor’s Office was not correct and I did not catch the error in 
time. I sincerely apologize to the committee for the confusion. 
For the purposes of analyzing and determining the chemical composition of the substance and disseminating 
the analysis to the provider of the substance, this bill will allow for certain individuals to have the ability to 
possess, receive, transport, or store nominal amounts of scheduled or prescription drugs or controlled 
substances for the purposes of drug-checking or testing substances. 
LD 1745 is a harm reduction bill. This legislation is critical to ensure that the Project DHARMA 
(Distribution of Harm Reduction Access in Rural Maine Areas) team and other partners are safe from legal 
repercussions in carrying out an evidence-based health initiative for drug checking. Drug checking is the 
practice of chemically analyzing street drug residue to determine what is in the local drug supply. Drug 
checking provides public health leaders with critical information that helps them issue warnings and direct 
ﬁnancial and human resources. Research shows that people who use drugs are more likely to dispose of 
drugs and avoid risky ones if they learn what is in them is unexpected. Information about chemicals 
commonly found in an area’s drug supply can also help health clinics and emergency departments be 
prepared to identify and treat patients more quickly. 
Project DHARMA is already funded but is awaiting this bill to be passed into law before this important work 
begins. There are people testifying after me who are a part of this initiative and can provide additional 
information about the need for this bill to be passed and the important work that it will allow for. 
Thank you for listening and I am happy to answer any questions. 
District 59: Augusta (part)l
l 
ti 
,, 
.4 
lt
K 
it 
fl
i 
ii 
#22 
KL 
it 
it 
ya
Y
