TESTIMONY OF THE , 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDL[IFE 
V
1
I 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 613I 
”An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Antlerless Deer Permit Process" 
SPONSORED BY: Representative FOSTER of Dexter .
'
i 
C0-SPONSORED BY: Senator BLACK of Franklin, Representative CARMICHAEL of 
Greenbush, Representative HAGGAN of Hampden, Representative JAVNER of Chester, 
Representative SCHMERSAL-BURGESS of Mexico, Representative THOR_NE of Carmel, 
Representative WHITE of Guilford, Representative WOODSOME of Watlerboro 
DATE OF HEARING: March 13, 2023' 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. l am Nate Webb, Wildlife Division Director at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department in 
opposition to L.D. 613. E 
This bill provides that the fee for an antlerless deer permit must be paid. at the time of 
registration of the antlerless deer.-
_ 
The Department charges fees for permits to hunt wildlife for several reasons. All permit 
fees must be paid up front, authorizing the permit holder to participate in the 
corresponding activity but not guaranteeing success. This generates funding for 
conservation and in many cases is used to match federal grant funds (typically at a 3:1 
ratio). In 2022, we introduced a suite of changes to the way we regulate the harvest of 
antlerless deer. These changes were designed to improve our ability tol meet doe 
harvest objectives by making the harvest of antlerless deer a more attractive option and 
by trying to get permits into the hands of hunters that are more likely to use them. One 
change made during this process was to charge a $12 fee for antlerless? deer permits. 
This change placed an appropriate value on the opportunity to take an additional deer, 
generated revenue for deer wintering area acquisition and management, and increased 
the likelihood that hunters applying for permits would be motivated tol use their
permits. Getting permits into the hands of hunters that are likely to use them is critical 
to achieving Department harvest objectives. 
This bill would result in a fiscal impact of "$800,000 annually to the deer management 
fund, plus aicorresponding '?'$2,400,000 reduction in federal grant funds. The deer 
management fund is specifically earmarked for the acquisition and management of deer 
habitat. In addition to significant fiscal impacts, this bill may also lead to future efforts to 
require payment of fees for other permit types only upon successful harvest of an 
animal.- 
Two of the core tenets of the North American Model of Wildlife Conservation are the 
elimination ‘of markets for game and the treatment of wildlife as a public trust resource. 
Requiring hunters to pay a permit fee after successfully harvesting an animal very 
closely resembles a hunter paying for the animal rather than for the opportunity to hunt 
that animall Furthermore, if the hunter is paying for the animal, that payment is to the 
State, which is not positioned to sell this public trust resource. While the North 
American Model should not be considered infallible, it has provided a guiding light for 
wildlife marlagers for many years, and this bill violates the Model’s core tenets. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
