Tyler Brown
Vassalboro
LD 613
Members of the Legislative Committee for Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, my name is Tyler 
Brown and I am submitting testimony in opposition to LD613   
"An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Antlerless Deer Permit Process" which would 
provide that the fee for an antlerless deer permit must be paid at the time of registration of the
antlerless deer.
Last year, the 130th Legislature passed LD 116 "An Act Relating to the Hunting of 
Antlerless Deer". This landmark legislation changed the distribution of antlerless deer
permits from a single lottery awarding "Any-Deer Permits" that provided hunters the 
opportunity to harvest either an antlerless deer in a designated WMD, "or" an antlered
deer statewide along with "Bonus Permits" for the harvest of both an antlered and an 
antlerless deer. This system repeatedly failed to meet annual antlerless deer harvest 
quotas set by Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife in order to 
effectively manage Maine's whitetail deer herd.
This new system awarded all lottery recipients an "Antlerless Permit" which provided
the opportunity to harvest an antlerless deer while also being able to harvest an 
antlered deer statewide, acting similarly to the "bonus permits" of the previous 
system. This system also debuted the opportunity to purchase Antlerless Permits for 
Wildlife Management Districts where the supply of permits exceeded applicants in 
the lottery. A twelve dollar fee was added to all Antlerless Permits upon claiming a 
drawn permit and purchasing one, the same cost and time of purchase for additional 
Antlerless Permits for Expanded Archery Zones.
Unlike Expanded Archery Permits however, this fee for Antlerless Permits was to be 
dedicated to the Maine Deer Management Fund, which by law only allows 
withdrawals for two purposes, as outlined by MRS Chapter 12 Section 10264; " to 
fund or assist in funding predator control and to acquire or enhance deer habitat" 
while also allowing the fund to accept donations and be matched in a three to one 
ratio with federal conservation funding from the Pittman Robertson Act".
This new funding source for the Maine Deer Management Fund was worked on by a 
coalition of legislators, MEDIFW personnel, numerous sporting organizations and 
hunters. This coalition's valuable work has the potential to make significant beneficial
impacts on wildlife conservation efforts for generations to come. The current 
initiative is to preserve and restore deer wintering yards in the north woods of Maine. 
This vital habitat for deer survival during Maine's harsh winters has seen significant 
timber harvesting operations for the past few decades, resulting in increased deer 
mortality rates decimating the once large populations in the north. All of the lands 
purchased by this initiative will be publicly owned, managed and available to the 
public for outdoor recreational opportunities. Though this is the current and most vital
initiative, the Maine Deer Management Fund can be utilized statewide for the 
improvement of habitat that benefits all wildlife and future generations of outdoor 
enthusiasts.
LD 613 seeks to cut a significant amount of funding for the Maine Deer Management 
Fund, changing the fee to time of registering a harvested antlerless deer. Where only a
portion of hunters are successful in harvesting a deer, only a portion of the potential 
funding for the Maine Deer Management would be available, limiting the fund's 
capabilities in preserving vital wildlife habitat. The current fee is paid at time of 
purchase, regardless if the hunter is successful in harvesting an antlerless deer, the 
exact same process as additional permits for Expanded Archery Zones.
Changing the time of purchase for Antlerless Permits to after creates a double 
standard for the same process of harvesting additional antlerless deer while cutting 
funding for the Maine Deer Management Fund. This loss of funding will have 
significant detrimental ramifications for the Maine Deer Management Fund's abilities 
to preserve vital habitat, manage predator populations and create public outdoor 
recreational opportunities.
I request you vote "Ought Not to Pass" on LD 613 to preserve the funding for the 
Maine Deer Management Fund that a coalition of outdoor enthusiasts voluntarily 
created to preserve Maine's wildlife and outdoors traditions for generations to come. 
Thank you very much for your time in considering my testimony and your service to 
our state.
Tyler Brown
