 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  
 
March 1 5, 2023    
 
Senator Anne Carney , Chair  
Representative Matt Moonen, Chair  
Committee on the Judiciary  
State House , Room 43 8 
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: L.D. 868, An Act to Extend the Protections of the Maine Civil Rights Act to Actions That 
Cause Emotional Distress or Fear of Violence  
 
Chairs Senator Carney, Representative Salisbury, and Honorable Members of the Committee on 
the Judiciary:  
My name is Mary Bonauto and I am the Senior Director of Civil Rights at GLBTQ Legal 
Advocates & Defenders  (GLAD) , a litigation and policy organization addressing issues affecting  
LGBTQ people across communities.  I reside in Portland.  Thank you for the opportunity to 
provide testimony in support of LD 868.  
This bill is an important update to the  Maine Civil Rights Act, 5 MRS §4681 et seq. and 
define s the “c ivil rights ” protected from both private and public actors to include “engaging in 
any course of conduct that would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress or to fea r 
death or bodily injury to that person or a close relation.”  (see §4, defining scope of “civil 
rights”).   
Through GLAD’s intake line, I am aware of a number of situations in Maine where 
repeated , clearly intentional , actions of one or more people has dri ven individuals to avoid being 
in their front yards, to leave their homes entirely, or to avoid public meetings which they would 
otherwise attend.   
This enhanceme nt would not change the legal and equitable relief the Attorney General 
could seek  in such si tuations, but would provide a basis to address courses of conduct targeted at 
individuals that are reasonably understood to cause emotonal distress or fear of bodily injury or 
death for themselves or a loved one.  This is a high bar for action, but also an  appropriate basis 
for intervention  (§1 of bill).  Likewise, an individual would have the right to maintain a civil 
action for legal and equitable relief , as they do now, in these circumstances  as well  (§§ 2 -3 of 
bill). 
 
 
2 
 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  We urge the Committee to vote ought to pass and amend the Civil Rights Act as proposed 
in this bill.  
Sincerely,  
Mary Bonauto, Sr. Director Civil Rights  
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders  
257 Deering Ave., #203  
Portland ME 04102  
 
 
 
                           
 
