.1 Z,A 
. P0 Box 7860
A 
. fl . e 
(207) 774-5444 Portland, ME 04112 
1 ’' 
~ ' 
www.ac|umaine.org 
AMERICAN GWIL UBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
- 
LD 868 - Ought To Pass _ 
An Act to Extend the Protections of the Maine Civil Rights Act to Actions 4 
V 
That Cause Emotional Distress or Fear of Violence 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
A 
March 15, 2023 . . 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, and I am 
policy director for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving-civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to support 
LD 868, legislation that expands the Maine Civil Rights Act so that it addresses 
threats to civil rights that do not involve force. 
As written, the Maine Civil Rights Act only prohibits interference with a person’s 
constitutional rights if that interference involves actual or threatened physical 
force, property destruction, or trespass. This bill expands the Act to encompass civil 
rights violations accomplished by conduct that could reasonably cause emotional 
distress or fear of death or bodily injury, even if no physical force is involved. This 
aligns the Act more closely with its federal equivalent (42 U.S.C. § 1983), which 
broadly prohibits deprivations of individual ’s constitutional and civil rights, 
regardless of whether the deprivation involves physical force or property 
destruction. . 
This bill acknowledges the reality that a wide range of threatening actions—n0t» 
only those that involve physical force or property destruction —can interfere witha 
person’s civil rights and deter them from exercising their constitutional guarantees. 
For example, a government employee who is fired for writing an op-ed about 
questionable government practices would likely be discouraged from publicly 
' 
speaking out about his government in the future. But the employee would have no 
recourse against their employer under the current Act—even though they were 
discouraged from exercise their constitutional right to free speech—because the 
firing did not involve physical force or property damage. This bill would change that 
and properly recognize that interference with our constitutional rights should be 
prohibited, period—not just when the interference is accomplished by physical force 
or property destruction. We urge you to vote ought to pass.
