Laura Supica
34 Highland Avenue
Bangor, ME 04401
(207) 717-5702
Laura.Supica@legislature.maine.govHOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002
(207) 287-1400
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
District 22 Bangor (part)February 6, 2023
Representative Laura Supica Introducing
LD 233, An Act to Ensure Efficiency in Petitions Reviewed by the Secretary of State by Clarifying 
Deadlines Related to Those Petitions
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
Sen. Hickman and esteemed members of the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, I am 
Representative Laura Supica and I am honored to represent part of Bangor here in the Maine Legislature.  
Today, I present to you LD 233, An Act to Ensure Efficiency in Petitions Reviewed by the Secretary of 
State by Clarifying Deadlines Related to Those Petitions.
I was asked by the Department of the Secretary of State to submit this bill on their behalf and as a 
former staff member of the department, with firsthand knowledge of all the work that happens behind 
the scenes, I was willing and proud to do so.
I am passionate about election integrity and our democracy.  The citizen-initiated petition process is 
an important way for Mainers to have their voices and votes heard. However, the integrity of that 
process depends upon ensuring that the state workers who review those petitions have the time and 
ability to do so carefully while performing all of their other constitutionally required duties.
I know from my time in the department and in speaking with Secretary Bellows that the current law 
under which petitions must be processed is not workable. What’s most concerning is what happened 
this fall when election staff were required to certify two petitions while administering the election 
and recounts.  Secretary Bellows can provide more detail.  I am also deeply concerned by the number 
of overtime hours (more than 2,600 hours combined) worked by state election workers in 2022.  
This bill would reduce overtime hours, save the state money and increase election integrity. This 
proposal, which also has a constitutional amendment companion that I have submitted separately and 
that is still being drafted, would change the constitutional deadline to verify petitions from 30 
calendar days to 30 business days. Under this bill, there is no change in the process for petitioners or 
clerks and instead this bill would ease workflow demands for the elections division staff. 
You will hear more from Secretary Bellows about this bill, the current process of validating petitions 
and the issues her staff is facing. I hope you all join me in voting ought to pass.
Thank you for your time and I’m happy to take any questions you may have.
