Nicole Grohoski
Senator, District 7
THE MAINE SENATE
131st Legislature
P.O. Box 1732
Ellsworth, ME 04605
Testimony of Senator Nicole Grohoski 
In Support of LD 233,
An Act to Ensure Efficiency
in Petitions Reviewed by the Secretary of State by 
Clarifying Deadlines Related to Those Petitions
Before the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
6 February 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on
Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Nicole Grohoski and I represent Senate District 7, which
is most of Hancock County . I am speaking today in strong support of LD 233, "An Act to Ensure
Efficiency in Petitions Reviewed by the Secretary of State by Clarifying Deadlines Related to
Those Petitions.”
As many of you know , I am a strong believer in every Maine citizen’ s right to the petition
procedure regarding people’ s veto referendums and direct initiatives as provided for in the Maine
Constitution. In fact, I have been actively involved in seven citizen-initiated campaigns in the
past.
I fully support this bill because, as Secretary Bellows will explain, it does not negatively impact
a petitioner ’s ability to gather signatures or have them properly verified. Instead, it gives the
Secretary of State’ s office breathing room when verifying petitions. I have a great deal of respect
for our elections division staf f, who work very hard to review tens of thousands of signatures in a
timely manner . Last fall, they were placed in the unprecedented position of processing petitions
from two campaigns while also carrying out their duties before and after Election Day . This
resulted in time and resource constraints, and the timing was further complicated by the Veterans
Day and Thanksgiving holidays, which should not be considered working days.
This bill has no material impact on petitioners and their Constitutional rights, and would help our
hardworking elections staf f. Thank you for listening to my testimony in support of LD 233. I
would be happy to answer questions.
3 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333
State House (207) 287-1515 * Fax (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711
Nicole.Grohoski@legislature.maine.gov
* legislature.maine.gov/senate

