Testimony in Support of LD 995 
Charlotte A. Paolini, D.O. 
American Association of Medical Ethics 
May 8, 2023 
 
Honorable Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee: 
 
My name is Dr. Charlotte Paolini.  I am a physician trained in family medicine and geriatrics. I am a 
resident of the state of Maine and reside in the town of Biddeford.  I represent the American Association 
of Medical Ethics. I am writing this testimony in support of LD995. 
 
The majority of my medical training and practice have been done in Maine, which I consider my home.  
As a primary care physician for the citizens of this state, I considerate it a privilege and an obligation to 
provide care that is safe and in the best interest of my patients. For these reasons, I support LD995 
which will require a health insurance carrier to provide coverage for the costs of a second opinion and 
any additional testing by any provider of the enrollee’s choice after the enrollee’s provider has 
recommended an abortion due to the health or safety of the enrollee or fetus. Typically, this is 
considered to be the normal standard of care when a person’s PCP is recommending a procedure or 
making a decision regarding a diagnosis.  I offer and encourage my patients to obtain a second opinion 
prior to moving forward with costly and invasive testing, major or minor surgical procedures, and 
clarification of a difficult/serious diagnosis. In all of these cases, it is the patient’s right to exercise this 
option and my duty to notify them of this right.  This bill would codify that the insurance coverage for a 
second opinion would be available when it comes to the life of an unborn baby. 
 
Therefore, I urge the Committee to vote ought to pass on LD995. This will insure that pregnant women 
faced with a difficult decision regarding their unborn child, will have the deserved benefit of a second 
opinion before making this life altering, life changing determination.  
 
Thank you for your kind time and consideration of this important matter. 
 
Respectfully, 
Charlotte A. Paolini, D.O. 
May 8, 2023 
