NIAINE z§§S}St£>t31AT1oN 
‘PLANS 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt 5/8/23 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
In Opposition to LD 995 
An Act to Provide Insurance Coverage for a Second Opinion Ifa 
Health Care Provider Recommends an Abortion for Health or Safety Reasons 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. Our private 
and non~proﬁt insurance carriers provide or administer health insurance coverage to about 
600,000 Maine people. Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people 
by promoting affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
Maine law requires that private health insurance provide coverage for abortion services. Second 
surgical opinions are also covered, including second opinions related to the need for an abortion 
for health or safety reasons for the pregnant person or fetus. 
Second opinions are a long-standing and accepted practice of a second medical expert reviewing 
medical records to conﬁrm a diagnosis and treatment plan, provide more information, and offer 
other treatment options. ‘ 
Currently, a second opinion may be subject to a cost share, and an em'ollee ’s out-of-pocket costs 
for a second opinion would depend on the type of plan, the type of visit, and plan-year utilization 
related to deductibles or out-of-pocket maximums. 
For example, a Silver $3,000 Plan enrollee in the 2024 plan year can expect to pay $40 to visita 
primary care provider and $80 to visit a specialist if they have not yet met their out-of-pocket 
maximum. 2 These copayments and other cost-shares help to keep premiums affordable. 
L.D. 995 would prohibit cost-sharing such as deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance that 
apply to most non-preventative services and treatments health care providers deliver. It would 
extend “ﬁrst dollar” coverage to second opinions related to abortion services and make health 
insurance more expensive for everyone. 
1 https://www.cancer.gov[pub|ications/dictionaries/cancer-terms/def/second-opinion 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
We would also note that L.D. 995 would also constitute a new mandate that should be sent to the 
Bureau of Insurance for a mandated beneﬁt review. 
For these reasons, we urge a vote of Ought-Not~To-Pass on LD 995. 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
