 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Written Testimony of Danielle Pimentel, J.D.  
Policy Counsel, Americans United for Life  
In Support of L.D. 995 
Submitted to the Joint Committee on Health Coverage,  
Insurance and Financial Services  
May 8, 2023  
Dear Chair Bailey,  Chair Perry , and Members of the Committee:  
My Name is Danielle Pimentel, and I serve as Policy Counsel at Americans United for 
Life (“AUL”). Established in 1971, AUL is a national law and policy nonprofit organization 
with a specialization in abortion, end -of-life issues, and bioethics law. AUL publishes pro -life 
model legislation and policy guides,1 tracks state bioethics legislation,2 and regularly testifies 
on pro -life legislation in Congress and the States. Our vision at  AUL is to strive for a world 
where everyone is welcomed in life and protected in law. As Policy Counsel, I specialize in 
life-related legislation, constitutional law, and abortion jurisprudence.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 995 (“LD 995 ” or “bill ”), 
which requires abortion provider s to inform pregnant wom en of their  right to a second 
opinion and “ the availability of health insurance coverage for that second opinion, including 
the waiver of any cost -sharing requirements” after the abortion provider recommends an 
abortion due  to “the health or safety of the pregnant person or fetus .”3 Further, at a pregnant 
woman’s request, LD 995 requires health insurance carriers to provide coverage for the 
costs of a second opinion and any additional testing.4 Health plans may not impose any 
 
1 Pro-Life Model Legislation and Guides , AMS. UNITED  FOR  LIFE, https://aul.org/law -and-policy/  (last visited May 
4, 2023). AUL is the original drafter of many of the hundreds of pro -life bills enacted in the States in recent 
years.  See Olga Khazan, Planning the End of Abortion , ATLANTIC  (July 16, 2020), 
www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/07/what -pro-life-activists -really -want/398297/  (“State 
legislatures have enacted a slew of abortion restrictions in recent years. Americans United for Life wrote most 
of them.”) ; see also Anne Ryman & Matt Wynn, For Anti -Abortion Activists, Success of ‘Heartbeat’ Bills was 10 
Years in the Making , CTR. FOR PUB. INTEGRITY  (Jun. 20, 2019) , https://publicintegrity.org/politics/state -
politics/copy -paste -legislate/for -anti-abortion -activists -success -of-heartbeat -bills -was -10-years -in-the-
making/ (“The  USA TODAY/Arizona Republic  analysis found Americans United for Life was behind the bulk of 
the more than 400 copycat [anti -]abortion bills introduced in 41 states.”).  
2 Defending Life: State Legislation Tracker , AMS. UNITED FOR LIFE, https://aul.org/law -and-policy/state -
legislation -tracker/  (last visited May 4, 2023).  
3 LD 995, § 1599 -A (3), 2023 Leg., 131st Sess. (Me. 2023).  
4 Id. at § 4320 -M (1 -A). 
Page 2 
 
 deductible, copayment, coinsurance, or other cost -sharing requirement fo r the costs of the 
second opinion.5 
 I have thoroughly reviewed LD 995 , and it is in my opinio n that the bill furthers the 
state’s legitimate interest in protect ing maternal and prenatal life,  ensures that pregnant 
women have the information necessary to make an informed, voluntary choice reg arding 
their pregnanc ies, and ensures that pregnant women  have access to  compassionate care and 
treatment for fetal disabilities . For th ese reason s, I urge this Committee to vote in favor of 
LD 995.  
I. Maine has Robust Powers to Safeguard the Informed Consent of Women and 
Protect Life  
Maine has authority  to enact laws that  protect  materna l and prenatal life. In Dobbs v.  
Jackson Women’s Health Organization , the United States Supreme Court overruled Roe v. 
Wade  and Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey  and returned the 
abortion issue to the democratic process.6  This means that “ States may regulate abor tion for 
legitimate reasons, and when such regulations are challenged under the Constitution, courts 
cannot ‘substitute their social and economic beliefs for the judgment of legislative bodies.’”7 
The Court acknowledged  that “[t] hese legitimate interests include respect for and 
preservation of prenatal life at all stages of development  . . . the protection of maternal health 
and safety  . . . [and] the preservation of the integrity of the medical profession.”8 
Even with Maine’s statutory protections for ab ortion,9 the standard principles of the 
practice of medicine must be followed. I nformed consent , a foundational principle of modern 
medicine,  “is a process by which the treating health care provider discloses appropriate 
information to a competent patient so that the patient may make a voluntary choice to accept 
or refuse treatment.”10 A woman cannot agree to medical treatment unless she is 
“competent, adequately informed and not coerced” in giving informed consent.11 If abortion 
is “medicine,” then healthcare professionals must receive a woman’s voluntary, informed 
consent before performing  an abortion.  Dobbs  emphasized that the states have a l egitimate 
interest in “the protection of maternal health and safety.”12  
LD 995 acknowledges that that the choice to have an abortion is a life -altering 
decision. Allowing a pregnant woman to seek the expertise from more than just one doctor 
after receivin g a potentially life -threatening diagnosis ensures that she has information 
necessary to make an informed, voluntary choice. Seeking a second opinion  may lead to a 
pregnant woman receiving an entirely different , but accurate , diagnosis or even an  
 
5 Id. at § 4320 -M (2).  
6 Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Org., 142 S. Ct. 2228, 2242 –2243 (2022).  
7 Id. at 2283 –2284 (citations omitted).  
8 Id. at 2284.  
9 Me. Stat. tit. 22 § 1598 . 
10 Christine S. Cocanour, Informed Consent —It’s More Than a Signature on a Piece of Paper , 214 AM. J. SURGERY  
993, 993 (2017).  
11 Id. 
12 Dobbs , 142 S. Ct. at 2284 .  
Page 3 
 
 alternati ve treatment plan that does not require an abortion. Thus, by informing pregnant 
women of their right to a second opinion and that their insurance will cover the associated 
costs, LD 995 furthers Maine’s legitimate interest to protect life because some wom en may 
ultimately decide to not have an abortion and instead choose medical  alternatives that allow 
them to safely carry their child to term.  
II. LD 995 Ensures that Pregnant Women Are Fully Informed  of a Medical Diagnosis and 
Receive Appropriate Medical Treatment  
For a  pregnant  woman to have authentic choice, it is important  for her to be fully 
informed of all available medical treatments and options after receiving a diagnosis that 
threatens  her life  or the life of her unborn child. One way a woman can ensure that she knows  
all of her  options  is by  obtaining a second opinion  from another medical professional . 
According to the Mayo Clinic, “[g]etting a second opinion can help  you feel more confident 
about your  diagnosis and treatment plan.”13 “[T] aking  the time to learn about your condition, 
and getting a second or third opinion is a reasonable approach. ”14 It is  therefore 
recommended that patients “[m]ake decisions regarding [their] health after [they] have been 
thoroughly informed about [their] diagno sis, prognosis and available treatment options.”15 
Obtaining a second opinion is vital given that  different  doctors may have varying  
opinions on diagnoses  and treatments  based on their experience and expertise.16 In a 2017 
study, as many as 88% of patients who sought a second opinion or diagnosis confirmation 
for a complex condition reported being given a new or refined diagnosis from a second 
medical professional.17 Twenty -one percent of patients received final diagnoses that were 
distinctly different than their first diagnosis  from their original doctor .18  
Additionally, a second opinion may be necessary in order to fully understand the 
medical nature of the abortion procedure . Many wo men have reported that their abortion 
provider failed to adequately inform them about the abortion procedure , the risks associated 
with abortion, and the alternatives to abortion.  In fact, one provider of post -abortive 
counseling reported  that, in any give n year, 75% -85% of women who received counseling 
after an abortion reported that “they felt they were misled by the abortion clinics and that 
their decision were uninformed.”19 These women reported that abortion providers did not 
fully disclose how the abortion was going to be performed and did “not disclose the direct 
injury to the child that leads to its death” or “the psychological and physical risks to the 
mother.”20 Furthermore , many women reported that abortion providers did not fully inform 
them o f the risks that the abortion procedure would have on their own health, the dangers 
 
13 Advice on Second Opinions , MAYO CLINIC : CONNECT , https://connect.mayoclinic.org/champions/advice -on-
second -opinions/ (last visited May 7, 2023).  
14 Id.  
15 Id.  
16 Id. 
17 Thomas Beckman et al., Extent of Diagnostic Agreement Among Medical Referrals , 23 J. EVALUATION CLINICAL 
PRACTICE 870, 871 (Feb. 28, 2017).   
18 Id.  
19 S.D.  TASK FORCE , REPORT OF THE SOUTH DAKOTA TASK FORCE TO STUDY ABORTION , at 20 –21 (2005).  
20 Id. at 37.  
Page 4 
 
 of the medical procedure, the emotional problems that would arise after the abortion, and 
other after -effects.21 “Even the admissions of Planned Parenthood agents show that  many 
abortion providers make active misrepresentations of fact to pregnant women regarding the 
physical and emotional risks posed by abortion.”22 
Given the lack of information women  receive  before an abortion and the  differences 
between  doctors ’ opinions on diagnos es and  appropriate medical  treatments, it is essential 
for women to  know of their right to  seek a second opinion after receiving a potentially life -
threatening diagnosi s. LD 995  allows  for more  women to  act on this right  by extending 
insurance coverage not only for a second opinion, but also for any testing associated with it. 
In doing so, women will be able to ensure that they have received an accurate diagnosis and 
treatment plan that they are comfortable with . 
III. LD 995 P rotects the Welfare of Pregnant Women  Navigating  Difficult Fetal 
Diagnos es 
 
LD 995 protects the psychological wellbeing of pregnant women by affording them 
the opportunity to seek out alternatives to abortion  and compassionate support  from 
medical professionals . Studies show that aborting a child with a fetal disability or life -
limiting condition can cause women great psychological harm.23 Accordingly, researchers 
have stressed the importance of adequate psychological support and guida nce from the 
mother’s caregiver during the decision -making process.24 When pregnant women receive a 
diagnosis of a fatal fetal disability, most women decide to have an abortion,25 while 
approximately 20% of women decide to continue their pregnancy.26 Howev er, when medical 
professionals present women with perinatal hospice as an option in a supportive 
environment, more than 80% of parents choose the option.27 One article reported that 87% 
of their patients carrying a child diagnosed with a lethal congenital disorder choose to 
 
21 Id. at 40.  
22 Moria Gaul, Protecting Women from Coerced Abortions: The Important Role of Pregnancy Help Centers , 
CHARLOTTE LOZIER INST., 2 (Mar. 2022), https://lozierinstitute.org/wp -content/uploads/2022/03/On -Point -
78_Protecting -Women -from -Coerced -Abortion_2022.pdf.  
23 One study from 2004 revealed that maternal grieving afte r such abortions continued for over six months 
and included pathological anxiety and depression. Anette Kersting et al.,  Grief After Termination of Pregnancy 
Due to Fetal Malformation , 25 J.  PSYCHOSOMATIC OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY  163 (2004).   In 2005, a study 
revealed that a 17.3 percent of the participants showed pathological scores for posttraumatic stress. Marijke 
J. Korenromp et al.,  Long -Term Psychological Consequences of Pregnancy Termination for Fetal Abnormality: A 
Cross Sectional Study , 25 PRENAT AL DIAGNOSIS  253 (Mar. 25, 2005). In 2009, a follow -up to the 2004 study 
revealed that at 14 months post -abortion, 16.7 percent of women were diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder. 
Anette Kersting et al.,  Psychological Impact on Women After Second and Thir d Trimester Termination of 
Pregnancy Due to Fetal Anomalies Versus Women After Preterm Birth: A 14 -Month Follow Up Study , 12 ARCHIVES 
OF WOMEN ’S MENTAL HEALTH  193 (Aug. 2009).   
24 Korenromp,  supra  note 23. 
25 Id. 
26 Michelle D’Almeida et al.,  Perinatal Hospice: Family -Centered Care of the Fetus with a Lethal Condition , 11 J. 
AM. PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS  52 (2006); Byron C. Calhoun & Nathan J. Hoeldtke,  The Perinatal Hospice: Ploughing 
the Field of Natal Sorrow  (2000).  
27 D’Almeida,  supra  note 26.  
Page 5 
 
 continue pregnancy in an environment of care.28 Experts explain that the options presented 
to parents when a life -limiting disability  or condition is diagnosed generally include  abortion 
or simply continuing the pregnancy with routine medical care.29 This “bare presentation” of 
options can leave parents with the perceived choice of helplessly watching their baby die, 
which can be misunderstood as increasing the child’s suffering,  or “actively doing something 
to end this sudden, emotionally -wrenching dilemma.”30  
With the prevalence of prenatal diagnosis, parents need compassionate support for 
children with disabilities much sooner than at birth; thus, the concept of perinatal hospice 
begins with the prenatal diagnosis of a lethal fetal disability  or condition. Unfortunately, 
most women and their families are not presented with the option of perinatal hospice when 
conside ring whether to abort unborn children with life -limiting disabilities  or conditions. It 
is imperative that women considering abortions be given all information about their choices, 
including the choice of supportive perinatal care. LD 995 ensures that  wome n are made 
aware of the option to seek out a second opinion after receiving  a devasting fetal diagnos is. 
This will allow women to obtain  material information about the medical treatment and care 
available to her unborn child , including supportive perinatal care . Not only will this 
information  help guide  a pregnant woman in her decision , but it will also let her know that 
she is not alone and has access to compassionate care and a supportive environment if she 
chooses to continue her pregnancy .  
 
IV. Conclusion  
 
 Pregnant women have the right  to be provided with the information necessary to 
make informed, voluntary decisions regarding their pregnancy. This bill guarantee s that a 
woman knows and understands her option to seek out a second opinion after receiving a life-
changing  diagnosis , and that she does not have to worry about the financial burden of 
seeking out a second opinion  if she chooses to do so . I stron gly encourage this Committee to 
support LD 995 , which ensure s women have authentic choice, are fully informed of the real 
alternatives to abortion , and are able to choose the best medical care and treatment available 
to them and their unborn child.  
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
 
Danielle Pimentel, J.D.  
Policy Counsel  
AMERICANS UNITED FOR LIFE 
 
 
28 Byron C. Calhoun et al.,  Perinatal Hospice: Comprehensive Care for the Family of the Fetus with a Lethal 
Condition , 48 J. REPROD . MED. 343 (May 2003).   
29  D’Almeida,  supra  note 26.  
30 Id. 
