STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL & FINANCIAL REGULATION 
BUREAU OF INSURANCE 
 
 
 
 
 
Office Location: 76 Northern Avenue, Gardiner, Maine 04345 
Mailing Address: 34 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
www.maine.gov/insurance 
Phone: (207) 624-8475  TTY: Please Call Maine Relay 711 Consumer Assistance: 1-800-300-5000 Fax: (207) 624-8599 
 
Janet T. Mills
Governor
Anne L. Head
DPFR Commissioner
Timothy N. Schott
Acting Superintendent
 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  04333-0100 
Re: L.D. 0995, An Act to Provide Insurance Coverage for a Second Opinion If a Health Care 
Provider Recommends an Abortion for Health or Safety Reasons 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee: 
The Bureau of Insurance takes no position on L.D. 995.  The purpose of this letter is to provide 
you with background information.  This bill adds a sub-section to the “Informed consent to 
abortion” statute (22 M.R.S. § 1599-A) to require physicians, PAs, and APRNs to notify 
pregnant women of the right to a second opinion when the provider has recommended an 
abortion because of health or safety reasons.  The bill also amends the Health Plan Improvement 
Act (24-A M.R.S. § 4320-M) to require a health insurance carrier to cover the costs of a second 
opinion and any additional testing by any provider of the enrollee’s choice after the enrollee’s 
provider has recommended an abortion due to the health or safety of the enrollee or fetus. The 
bill also requires health care professionals to inform a patient in writing of the availability of 
health insurance coverage for the costs of that second opinion. 
The Title 22 provision in the bill requires the health care professional to give the enrollee written 
notice of the availability of health insurance coverage for the costs of the second opinion.  
However, it does not provide any guidance on the contents of the notice, how that provision shall 
be enforced, or the consequences for failure to provide the notice. 
This bill would also require carriers to pay for an office visit and any related testing, with no 
cost-share to the member.  A survey of the policy language used in current plans indicates that 
the major carriers already allow for coverage of second opinions when provided by a network 
provider with no practice association with the original provider, but some carriers require the 
copayment/coinsurance typically charged for office visits and testing.  Mandating this coverage 
without cost sharing could result in a small premium impact.  The Committee may also want to 
consider the unintended consequences associated with imposing a requirement to prohibit cost 
sharing that would conflict with or be preempted by federal law as it relates to high deductible 
health plans.   
Title 24-A M.R.S. § 2752 requires a review and evaluation of a mandated benefit proposal by the 
Bureau of Insurance before the bill may be enacted.  These reviews include an evaluation of the 
financial impact, social impact and medical efficacy of the mandate. If a report is requested it 
could cost the Bureau up to $13,500 for outside contract consulting work plus staff time, 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Chair 
May 8, 2023 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
estimated at a cost of $1,600 to collect information, review consultant work, and prepare the final 
report.  We will need eight weeks for each report to ensure a high-quality evaluation.  If the 
Committee wants to have the Bureau study this mandate, it may want to consider changing the 
effective date to January 1, 2025 to allow time for the study and for carriers to then implement 
the changes. We do not believe this bill would require defrayal since it is an expansion of 
existing coverage and a cost-sharing requirement. 
I hope this information is useful to the Committee.  Please let me know if I can provide any 
further assistance. 
Sincerely, 
 
Timothy N. Schott 
Acting Superintendent 
 
Cc: Representative Tracy Quint 
