Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance, and Financial Services Committee... I am Rey Dubois, from Bangor, andI 
am speaking in favor of LDs 995 and 1404. 
LD 995 speciﬁes that insurance companies will pay for a second opinion for pregnant mothers 
who have been told by their provider that they should have an abortion because of the health or 
safety of the baby or the mother. The mother is not forced to request a second opinion. She may 
certainly just follow what her practitioner tells her, without question. This won't restrict elective 
abortions. But, as was described many times during Monday's marathon testimony session in the 
Judiciary Committee, practitioners do make mistakes, many children bom after the "you should 
abort" recommendation live fruitful lives, and their parents are so glad that they chose life for their 
unborn child. This legislation simply requires insurance companies to provide second opinion 
coverage fora mother, like they do for many other surgeries... and I believe that this isa 
particularly crucial case, when the life of a child and the future of a family are at stake. 
Now, you know you will hear, from the pro-abortion speakers, that a second opinion is not needed, 
that their abortion providers don't need second opinions, that they are always accurate when they 
recommend abortions. Well, I don't believe this, and I know you don't either. They might tell you 
that they already have options for second opinions, and they may very well. Then they should, if 
they are truthful, honest and compassionate providers of non-judgemental healthcare services, 
have no problem with prominently listing the availability of second opinions on their consent 
forms. That would seem compassionate and reasonable to me. 
LD 1404 speciﬁes that insurance companies (and I certainly hope that MaineCare is included in 
this) pay for prenatal and a year's worth of post-partum care of a mother, when that mother is 
plamring on giving her child up for adoption. The parents who would be adopting the baby would 
take the mother on their policy. It took me a moment to wrap my mind around this concept, but the 
more I though about it, the more sense it made. This makes a lot of sense. This sets up a win-win- 
win situation in which a mother with an unplanned pregnancy, her unborn child, and the adoptive 
parents all beneﬁt. The insurance companies will ﬁgure out how to work their magic, so that they 
will distribute costs, or add a "rider policy" cost. 
Expect that the Pro-abortion speakers will tell you that coverage for a mother who plans on giving 
up her child for adoption is a bad idea. Well, it certainly has the potential to cut into their bottom 
line, as does LD 995. VVhen they speak, they will tell you that they are all about women's rights, 
providing compassionate, non-judgemental care, etcetera. I would love to hear them testify in 
favor of these 2 bills, that both seek to provide better, non-judgemental care for a mother with an 
unplanned pregnancy or who is seeking to give her child up for adoption. To hear them testify in 
favor of bills that genuinely respect and love women would help restore my faith in people. 
Contrast these bills, that are intended to support a woman and her pregnancy, with one of last 
Monday's bills that selﬁshly seeks 100% insurance coverage to terminate the life of an unborn 
child, when no one else gets that level of coverage for diagnoses that are not a result of their own 
making. 
Committee members, please support women with unplanned pregnancies, so they (and their child) 
will have the beneﬁt of a second opinion and insurance coverage if they make the difficult, self- 
sacriﬁcial decision to give their child up for adoption. Vote "ought to pass" on both of these bills. 
And, I would also like to ask the Pro-Choice people, if you are truly looking to provide 
compassionate support for women, speak in favor of these bills.
