Doug Smith 
Windham Resident for 20 years 
LD 1450 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation 
Committee: 
I testify today in strong support of Senator Bennett’s LD 1450 “An Act to fund the 
Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council” and vote 
OUGHT TO PASS for LD 1450. 
I have been a resident of South Windham for 20 years and live ‘/2 a mile from the 
Mountain Division Trail. As the trail was built and paved, I came to use the trail more 
and more for walking, biking, and X-country skiing in the winter. From Spring until late 
Fall my wife and I are on the trail 3+ times a week. We are not alone. There are many 
other walkers, runners, cyclists, skateboarders, snowmobilers, and families with 
children, baby carriages, and dogs. It is a wonderful asset for Windham, Gorham, and 
the region. It has become a destination for safely exercising and seeing familiar faces. 
I have ridden rail-trails in 6 states and 2 Canadian Provinces. My direct experience has 
taught me about the multiple uses and users of these trails. We encountered many 
locals and tourists recreating and people commuting to/from work onfoot or bike. 
The Lamoille Valley Rail Trail is a prime example of the economic and health benefits of 
converting a rail corridor into a trail. Ironically, before it was called the Lamoille Valley 
Railroad (LVRR) this rail line was part of the Portland and Ogdensburg Railroad. The 
LVRR was the 93-mile section of this route traversing Vermont from St. Johnsbury to 
Swanton. Like the Mountain Division Rail, the LVRR ceased regular passenger in 1956 
and freight service in the early 1970’s. Vermont purchased the LVRR in 1973. 
At 93~miIes in length the LVRT trail until rail is 3x the length of the Mountain Division 
Trail (Standish to Fryeburg section). This spring the construction of the LVRT was 
completed. Like the existing paved portions of the Mountain Division Trail the LVRT is 
used for walking, jogging, hiking, cycling, snowmobiles, and other winter sports. 
Vermont is already experiencing business and tourism growth in the towns through 
which the LVRT passes in addition to offering safe, healthy recreation opportunities for 
Vermonters. In Maine, with the Mountain Division Rail Trail, we have the similar 
opportunity to revitalize and use another section of the Portland and Ogdensburg 
Railroad. 
importantly, one of the key success factors described in the 2022 Lamoille Valley Rail 
Trail Management Plan is the ongoing engagement of the towns along the trail. From 
Westbrook to Fryeburg each of the towns the Mountain Division Rail corridor passes 
through have submitted letters expressing full support for the construction of the Trail 
until Rail. This is a critical first step to make sure Maine realizes the return on the 
investment in the Mountain Division Rail Trail.
LD145O provides funds for the construction of the trail connecting existing sections 
paved in Windham/Gorham/Standish and Fryeburg. l am totally in favor of havinga 
paved, trail until rail for this 31-mile section as authorized by passage of LD404. 
Frankly speaking, it makes sense for many reasons starting with: 
0 The tracks no longer serve a purpose. And, after being studied several times 
over the last 15 years by consultant ’s expert in transportation planning and 
analysis retained by the MaineDOT, show no prospects for being revitalized and 
economically viable in the foreseeable future. 
o This is the most expedient way to build the trail and put this important Maine 
asset to good use. 
o This is by far the least expensive way to build the trail. According to the 
l\/lountain Division RUAC Summary and Recommendations report (May, 2022) 
the cost of constructing a paved Trail until Rail is estimated at $ 20.1 million and 
a rail with a trail was at estimated at $ 145.8 million - over 7x the cost. 
Please vote Ought to Pass for LD1450 so Mainers can utilize this dormant and precious 
resource. 
Sincerely, 
Doug Smith
