OFFICERS 
F. Bruce Sleeper, President 
James Oikle, Treasurer 
William Hunt, Secretary 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
Wayne E. Davis, ME (Chair) 
Robert Hall, NH (Vice Chair) 
Jason Briggs, ME 
Janet Brown, At Large 
Elizabeth Buckley, ME 
John E. Carroll, NH 
Nicholas Catoggio, MA 
Ellen Fogg, ME 
Henry Goode, Jr., NH 
William Hunt, NH 
Andrew Hyland, ME 
Valarie Lamont, ME 
William Lord, ME 
Thomas Mahon, ME 
James Nawrocki, ME 
James Oikle, ME 
Stephen Piper, NH 
Robert Rodman, At Large 
Paula Boyer Rougny, At Large 
Laurence Shaffer At Large 
Frederick Smith, MA 
MEMBERSHIP 
Betsey Buckley 
Michelle Hubbard 
HOST PROGRAM 
James Oikle, Trainmaster 
Wayne Davis 
Robert Rodman 
F. Bruce Sleeper 
Frederick Smith 
Webmaster 
William Lord PO Box 4869, Portland, Maine 04112 (207) 879-7245 (TRY-RAIL) 
May 18, 2023 
Senator Benjamin Chipman, Senate Chair 
Representative Lynne Williams, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
c/0 Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Opposition of TrainRiders Northeast to Passage of LD 209, An 
Act to Authorize an lnterim Use Trail on the Berlin Subdivision 
Rail Corridor LD 404, Resolve, to Direct the Department of 
Transportation to Implement the Recommendations of the 
Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council, and LD 1450, An 
Act to Fund the Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail 
Use Advisory Council 
Dear Senator Chipman and Representative Williams: 
I am the President of TrainRiders Northeast. TrainRiders is the 
grass roots citizens ’ organization that was the driving force behind the 
initiation of the Downeaster passenger rail service between Brunswick 
and Boston and which continues to strongly support that service to this 
day. lt also supports improvements and expansion of passenger rail 
service in Maine and throughout the Northeast where such expansion 
is rationally justifiable given current and potential economic and social 
conditions. TrainRiders Northeast strongly and absolutely ogposes the 
passage of any of the above-captioned bills. 
LD 209 seeks the removal of track and other rail infrastructure 
along the rail line on that part of the "Berlin Subdivision" between 
Portland and Auburn formerly owned by the St. Lawrence & Atlantic 
Railroad and now owned by the State of Maine, with that infrastructure 
to be replaced with a trail. LD 404 seeks the removal of such 
infrastructure on that part of the "Mountain Division" between 
Standish and Fryeburg. LD 1450 seeks the appropriation of $18 million 
for the removal of that infrastructure from the Mountain Division, and 
On the Web: TrainRidersNE.org Facebook: facebook.com/trainridersnortheast
May 18, 2023 
Page2 
its replacement with a trail. Because these bills deal with a common theme and involve 
similar issues, TrainRiders is submitting this one letter in opposition to all three bills as 
follows: 
l. General 
A. 
B. 
C. In 2021, the Maine Legislature passed what became 23 M.R.S. § 75, 
providing for the creation by the Commissioner of Transportation of a rail 
use advisory council (a ”RUAC") upon the petition of one or more 
governmental entities along a state owned rail corridor. Each RUAC is to 
make recommendations regarding the potential uses of the corridor for 
which it was created, including, but not limited to, rail use, trail use, or 
bikeways. Each RUAC is then required to submit a report to the 
Commissioner on its findings and recommendations regarding the use of 
that corridor within nine months of the convening of its first meeting. If that 
report includes a recommendation of track removal or nonrail use of the 
corridor and the Commissioner concurs with that recommendation, then 
the Commissioner is required to submit legislation to be evaluated by this 
Committee prior to track removal or other change in use of the line for 
nonrail purposes. 
In the spring of 2022, the Mountain Division RUAC issued a report 
recommending the removal of rail on that line and its replacement witha 
trail between Standish and Fryeburg. The Commissioner concurred with this 
recommendation and filed what is now LD 404. LD 1450 was submitted to 
fund this removal and replacement of track from the Mountain Division. 
That bill was not submitted by the Commissioner and it appears that MDOT 
will be testifying against its passage. In December 2023, another RUAC 
recommended the removal of the rail on the Berlin Subdivision between 
Portland and Auburn. Although the Commissioner rejected this 
recommendation, LD 209 was submitted to this Legislature seeking the 
removal of this track and its replacement with a trail. It appears that MDOT 
will be testifying in opposition to passage of LD 209. 
TrainRiders does not oppose trails; TrainRiders only opposes removal of 
rails and rail infrastructure from the Mountain Division and the Berlin 
Subdivision and their wholesale replacement by trails. TrainRiders 
encourages the construction and use of properly positioned and fenced 
trails beside rail lines and infrastructure. 
TrainRiders Northeast 
www.trainridersne.org Y 
Facebook: facebook.com/trainridersnortheast 
207-879-7245
May 18, 2023 
Page3 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. As a legal matter, Maine law provides that removal of rail from these lines 
will be "interim" in nature and of the lines will be ”preserved for future rail 
use" . 
5% 23 M.R.S. §§ 75(1), 7107. As a practical matter, however, 
removal of rail infrastructure from these corridors will mean that those 
lines will never again be used for rail. Experience across the country shows 
that reconversion of a line to rail use simply becomes too expensive after 
rail, ballast, and other infrastructure has been ripped away, even where 
future rail use of the line would otherwise have been economically or 
sociallyjustified. Tearing up rails destroys any future economic, social, and 
environmental benefits that rail use of a line could otherwise provide. On 
the other hand, rail with trail allows for current and future trail use, with or 
without rail use, while at the same time preserving future rail use as an 
irreplaceable economic and social asset. 
Whether funded by a bond issue or from general funds money, the State 
explicitly purchased these lines to preserve them for rail use. Therefore, the 
effective ability to continue to use these lines for rail purposes was a basic 
premise of those purchases, and any deviation from this would constitute a 
failure to keep faith with Maine voters and the Maine Legislature. Ripping 
up the rail infrastructure along these lines would constitute such a deviation 
by eliminating any possible future use of the lines for rail purposes. 
The Maine Legislature has determined that "a viable and efficient rail 
transportation system is necessary to the economic well-being of the State" 
and that ”the State must take active steps to protect and promote rail 
transportation in order to further the general welfare" . 23 M.R.S. § 7102. 
The legislation authorizing the creation of RUAC's states that any non-rail 
use of a State-owned rail line must be interim in nature and must preserve 
the corridor for future rail use as provided for in 23 M.R.S. § 75(1), 7107. At 
the very least, this puts a heavy burden on those who advocate for the 
removal of rail, ballast and other infrastructure from a State-owned rail 
corridor to unquestionably demonstrate that this removal will not interfere 
with future rail use of that line. No such demonstration has been for either 
of these lines. 
Maine law currently provides that MDOT may not convert a state-owned 
rail corridor to a nonrail recreational or non-recreational transportation use 
without following the RUAC process. gg 23 M.R.S. § 7107. That same 
TrainRiders Northeast 
www.trainridersne.org 
Facebook: facebook.com/trainridersnortheast 
207-879-7245
May 18, 2023 
Page4 
statute provides that MDOT must also consult with a regional economic 
planning entity and a regional transportation advisory committee to 
determine that removal of a specific length of rail owned by the State will 
"not have a negative impact on a region or on future economic 
opportunities for that region" and must then seek review of any decision to 
dismantle or change this track for a nonrail use by this Committee. l _d. lt 
does not appear that any such consultation has occurred with respect to 
either the Mountain Division or the Berlin Subdivision. Therefore, each of 
these bills is premature. 
ll. Shortcomings of RUAC Reports 
A. 
B. 
C. Both the Mountain Division RUAC and the Berlin Subdivision RUAC 
produced reports; in both instances, these reports were substantially 
flawed. 
The RUAC reports do not provide any estimates for the value to the State of 
freight shipping that would be foregone if rail infrastructure were ripped 
from these lines. At no point was a survey conducted in either corridor as 
to what properties might be available for freight rail use, or what businesses 
along these lines might desire to use this service if it was available. Perhaps 
more importantly, no effort was made to determine how many businesses 
could be attracted to these corridors if they were improved for freight use. 
Conversely, no estimate of the value of the economic benefits that would 
be foregone if such service were not available was ever attempted by either 
RUAC. This is particularly important on the Mountain Division since various 
potential shippers have periodically shown interest in freight rail use of that 
line. Furthermore, Poland Spring has become a large user of rail to transport 
its water products and has a spring source in Fryeburg that might be a future 
source of freight use, particularly if a bottling facility were constructed in 
that locality. V 
The RUAC reports assume that 23% of trail users would be non-local and 
would, on average, each spend about $118 in the local economy around the 
trails. The reports include no additional local spending for rail passengers 
on the Berlin Subdivision and include only a minor amount of on-board 
spending while riders are actually onboard a train on the Mountain Division. 
This assumes that either: (a) rail passengers neither eat, drink, buy 
equipment, nor seek lodging when they reach their destinations; or (b) all 
TrainRiders Northeast 
www.trainridersne.org 
Facebookz facebook.com/trainridersnortheast 
207-879-7245
May 18, 2023 
Page 5~ 
rail passengers are already making the same trip that they would be making 
by train and are spending no more on these items than they now do. The 
former assumption is ludicrous and the latter is unrealistic. Prior to COVID, 
30-35% of riders on the Amtrak Downeaster service between Brunswick and 
Boston were monthly pass holders who were primarily commuters and who 
might otherwise travel along the route even if no rail service were available. 
This percentage has decreased since that time, leaving 70-75% of the 
Downeaster riders as non-pass holders. ln February 2005, MDOT published 
a study (the "Economic Benefits Study") (available at 
https:[/www.main,e.gov[mdot[planning/docs[_portlandnorth/Amtral<%20D 
owneasterlapdfl entitled the Economic Benefits of Amtrak Downeaster 
Service. The Economic Benefits Study found that 22% of visitors to Maine 
who used the Downeaster service would not have made their trips if that 
service were not available. _S __ 6£ Economic Benefits Study at pp. 3, 17, 18, 
Executive Summary at page b. Downeaster riders who resided outside of 
Maine spent an average of $277 in this State for lodging, food, 
entertainment, retail and local transportation purchases on their trips. Si 
Economic Benefits Study at pages 18, 19, 20, Executive Summary at page b. 
The Mountain Division RUAC report does not provide an estimate of 
passenger ridership along that line. However, using these figures, if 20 out- 
of-state non-commuter rail passengers used that line each day, then they 
would collectively spend $5,540 per day, or $2,022,100 per year in Maine. 
Correcting for the 54.55% increase in the Consumer Price Index from 2005 
through 2023 increases these figures to $8,562.07 per day and 
$3,125,155.55 per year. Twenty such riders a day is a minimal estimate, 
particularly for the Mountain Division, which would be bound to include a 
high rate of tourist ridership. The Berlin Subdivision RUAC Report (at page 
37) includes an estimate of between 76,650 to 87,600 passengers annually. 
Using the lower of these figures, and reducing the rate of those who would 
not make their trip in passenger service were not available on this line from 
22% on the Downeaster to 10% on this Subdivision service, results in 7665 
passengers, or an average of 21 per day, who would not have taken their 
trips if rail servicer were not offered. Multiplying this by $277 results in new 
income in Maine of $5,817 per day or $2,123,205 per year. Correcting that 
$277 figure for the CPI growth since 2005 increases these figures to 
$8,990.17 per day or $3,281,413.33 per year. Each RUAC report ignored this 
type of economic benefit for passenger rail use. 
Train Riders Northeast 
www.trainridersne.0rg 
Facebook: facebook.com/trainridersnortheast 
207-879-7245
May 18, 2023 
Page6 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. The RUAC reports include estimates for the health effects of trail use. No 
such analysis was performed for rail use, ignoring the reduction in air 
pollution and resulting health benefits that would result from replacement 
of transportation by car with travel by train. Although trail use could also 
result in such a reduction, this would only be for short-range travel since 
traveling by trail over longer distances would simply not be a viable travel 
option for many people, including most commuters. 
The Mountain Division RUAC report discusses increases in property values, 
but then concludes that property values decrease near abandoned railway 
corridors since any such decrease has already occurred. This, however, 
misses the point, since the report should include the property value 
increases that would result from an active rail line and that would be 
foregone if the rail on that line were to be torn up. 
The Berlin Subdivision RUAC report also projects the development of only 
37-58 new housing units around a proposed station site in Auburn, 17-26 
units at Pineland, and 85-172 units at Yarmouth, would result from 
passenger rail service. This compares to over 400 units developed close to 
the Brunswick station, several hundred in Saco, 250 in Dover, New 
Hampshire, 100 in Durham, and 100 in Exeter after the initiation of the 
Downeaster service. Those numbers do not include a 60 unit residential 
apartment building that has been approved, or an additional 40-50 units for 
which a proposal is now being planned, both of which will involve 
construction within a few hundred feet of the Freeport station. 
Furthermore, the 2018 Lewiston-Auburn Passenger Rail Service Plan Transit 
Propensity Report prepared for NNEPRA and MDOT surveyed other studies, 
at least one of which concluded that by 2030 the extension of the 
Downeaster service north from Portland, through Freeport to Brunswick, 
with seasonal service to Rockland, would result in the construction or 
rehabilitation of over 42,000 housing units. Although many of the 
Downeaster stations support local populations that substantially exceed 
those at some of the past station stops along the Berlin Subdivision, these 
numbers still give a strong indication that the report issued for that RUAC 
has grossly undercounted the number of new housing units that should be 
anticipated as a result of passenger rail service on that line. 
The Berlin RUAC report indicates that it will cost $274 million to upgrade 
the tracks between Portland and Auburn for passenger rail service. A 
TrainRiders Northeast 
www.trainridersne.org . 
Facebook: facebook.com/trainridersnortheast 
207-879-7245
May 18, 2023 
Page7 
lll. H. 
Other 
A. substantial portion of that (perhaps as much as $60 million), however, 
would be for the cost of positive train control along the Berlin Subdivision, 
something that is only required if and when more than 6 passenger rail 
round trips per day utilize that corridor. 
The Conway Scenic Railroad made an informal oral offer to run along the 
Mountain Division down to Portland if the State improved it a class 2 status. 
That Railroad never formalized this offer, but it was not even mentioned as 
a consideration in the report for that line, and there is no indication that 
MDOT has followed up on the informal offer. 
Points 
Membership of the Mountain Division RUAC was severely unbalanced. The 
statute allowing for the creation of RUAC's, 23 M.R.S. § 75(2), provides for 
one trail and one rail advocate to serve as members of each RUAC, along 
with, among others, representatives of various municipalities along the line. 
The Mountain Division RUAC includes David Kinsman, president of the 
Mountain Division Alliance as the designated trail advocate representative. 
Two other members of that RUAC, Terry Egan, representing Brownfield, and 
Dan Hester, representing Hiram, are also Mountain Division Alliance 
trustees. Katie Haley representing Fryeburg, is a community partner with 
the Alliance and Dwight Warrant, representing Baldwin, is a former 
"trailmaster" for the Baldwin Belt Burners, a snowmobile club. The 
following RUAC members also have trail backgrounds and, as far as can be 
determined, no rail related experience: (a) Carolann Ouellette, Director of 
the Maine Office of Outdoor Tourism, who was previously the Executive 
Director of Maine Huts and Trails for 6 years; and (b) Douglas Beck, who is 
the online contact person for the Recreational Trails Program of the Maine 
Bureau of Parks and Lands, and is included in the online posting of the 
Maine Trails Coalition leadership team. The Mountain Division RUAC 
contains no members who represent possible shippers along the line or any 
railroads. Thus, more than half of the members of this RUAC are affiliated 
with trails. Although two members of the Maine Rail Group are listed as 
members of that RUAC, only one, Jack Sutton, actually participated and was 
the lone dissenting member of the RUAC voting against interim trail use and 
for rail with trail. This contrasts with the more evenly balanced membership 
of the Berlin Subdivision RUAC, which resulted in a 7-4 vote in favor of rail 
TrainRiders Northeast 
www.trainridersne.org 
Facebook: facebook.com/trainridersnortheast 
207-879-7245
May 18, 2023 
Page8 
removal and replacement by a trail, with three members abstaining instead 
of the lopsided 12-1 vote by the Mountain Division RUAC. 
B. Rail lines cannot be considered in isolation and parts of such lines far less 
so. Their economic impact and operational requirements mandate study 
on a regional basis, since virtually all lines (including these two) connect to 
other rail. Neither report considered the positive impact of retention of 
future rail service on any area not directly contiguous to that line. 
C. This is not the time to consider ripping up the rails along either of these 
lines, or even rails with trails on those corridors. First, the Legislature has 
also directed MDOT to prepare a separate study of the potential for 
passenger rail use along the Berlin Subdivision. That study will not be 
completed until sometime next year at the earliest and its findings will have 
a substantial impact upon what should happen on that line. Second, COVID 
has changed transportation needs and desires. How this will affect future 
ridership trends is now unknown, so giving any decision about these lines 
the gift of time would enable all interested parties to make a far better 
decision than is now possible. 
For the forgoing reasons, as well as others, TrainRiders would ask this Committee to vote 
out LD 209, LD 404, and LD 1450 as ”Ought not to Pass”. 
TrainRiders appreciates this opportunity to express our views on these bills, and, 
as always, we are available as a resource to assist this Committee with passenger rail 
issues. 
Sincerel 
F. Bruce Sleeper, President 
TrainRiders Northeast 
fbsleeper@trainridersne.org 
TrainRiders Northeast 
www.trainridersne.org 
Facebook: facebook.com/trainridersnortheast 
207-879-7245 
