Michael Shaughnessy
Westbrook
LD 1450
 
Hello,
Senate Chair Chipman and House Chair Williams and all the members of the 
Committee on Transportation. Thank you for taking the time to consider this critical 
and exciting legislation.
My name is Michael Shaughnessy. I live in Westbrook. I am writing in support of LD
1450 to help fund the building of the Mountain Division Trail. 
As a Westbrook resident and City Council Member as well as one active in 
environmental issues and Downtown Westbrook, I strongly support this opportunity.
A trail of this sort will be a profound and exciting addition to the recreational 
portfolio of the communities between the Portland area and Fryeburg and effectively 
the White Mountains. Such a trail would allow a running, walking, biking and hiking 
route with the potential for additional tangential activities such as birding, fishing and 
paddling. This stretch will connect users to multiple trails and preserves and the Saco 
River. 
This will be a cornerstone to the tourism of the area. It will be highly accessible and 
utilized multi-generationally, It will support local businesses and aid in the 
development of new and creative outdoor and tourism based enterprises along the 
entire corridor.
Running, biking, and hiking along with fishing are the 4 most popular outdoor 
recreational activities. This project has the potential to capitalize on all of these, while
being very low impact environmentally. 
(These are links to two articles on outdoor recreation trends.)
https://travelness.com/most-popular-outdoor-activities
https://outdoorindustry.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/2021-Outdoor-Participation-
Trends-Report.pdf
The existing rail line is not being utilized. There is not the critical mass to support a 
commuter line and for freight it must have major restrictions due to running through 
the area of the intake of the Portland Water District. I would expect that given the age 
of the existing tracks it would need to be removed and fully rebuilt if rail transport 
were to return.  None the less this use does not preclude the possibility of an eventual 
conversion to rail. It only allows until when, and if, that may happen for this to be 
used as and gain the benefits from a first rate and beautiful trail. A trail that will be 
unique enough that it will be a major attraction. 
It will no doubt be a benefit in many ways to the health and well-being of the people 
that use it and to the communities it is connected to.
Thank you,
Michael Shaughnessy

