 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                         3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                    Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
Presenting LD 1450, "An Act to Fund the Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail Use 
Advisory Council" 
May 18, 2023 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and esteemed members of the Transportation 
Committee: I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 
communities in Western Maine in the State Senate. I am pleased to sponsor LD 1450, “An Act to 
Fund the Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council.” 
 
As I explained in my earlier testimony, LD 1450 would provide funding to implement the 
recommendations of the Mountain Rail Use Advisory Council. The way this bill is written it 
would provide a one-time $18 million general fund appropriation for the replacement of the 
tracks on the 28 miles of the rail corridor between the towns of Fryeburg and Standish.  The $18 
million figure is the estimate provided by the consultant to the Mountain Division Rail Use 
Advisory Commission. 
 
I am offering a simple amendment to the bill as written. Instead of “28 miles of the rail corridor,” 
it should read “31 miles of the rail corridor.”  
 
I would like to see this amended bill supported by the committee and go to the Appropriations 
Table where it can stay pending any further funding options, probably into next year’s regular 
session. It is important to note that this fiscal note is only an estimate. The actual number will 
depend on the engineering and feasibility and whatever may be available as a funding source, 
including private contributions. Further, I do not expect that this entire amount will ultimately 
appropriated through this bill, but it is critical to have a vehicle through which funding can be 
appropriated. 
 
Thank you for your consideration and I would be happy to answer any questions. 
 
