Maine Rail Transit Coalition: “. . .  to elevate rail transportation to its proper balance in transportation  investments, planning and decision -making.”  
               5/17/2023  
               1 | P a g e    
* Please consider the environment before printing this message . 
 
To:   Maine Legislature Transportation Committee  
From:   Maine Rail Transit Coalition  
Tony Donovan, Director  
Date:    May 17, 2023  
Re: LD 1450 An Act to Fund the Recommendations of the Mountain Division 
Rail Use Advisory Council  – OUGHT NOT TO PASS  
Senator Chipman , Representative Williams , and members of the Transportation Committee,  
 
My name is Tony Donovan, I am a Portland resident and founding Member of the Maine Rail 
Transit Coalition (MRTC). The Maine Rail Transit Coalition (MRTC) is an advocacy group 
engaged for the purpose of expanding passenger rail services as per the  1995 Maine State 
“Passenger Rail Service Act." ,  
 
The MRTC speaks in opposition to this bill and asks you vote “OUGHT NOT TO PASS”  
Sec. 1. Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations and allocations are made  
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION   Multimodal Transportation Fund Z017  GENERAL 
FUND 2023 -24 2024 -25 Capital Expenditures $18,000,000 This bill provides a one -time 
appropriation for the replacement of the tracks on the 28 miles of the rail corridor  
 
Allow me to share the irony of this particular bill.   
 
Based on a 2007 Legislative  Blue Ribbon Committee report on how to fund passenger rail, our 
team of rail advocates,  with support from around the entire state, passed a bill to fund passenger 
train operations and capital investment through shifting the tax on rental cars to a Multi -Modal 
fund at the Department of Transportation.  
 
We considered that one of rail advocates  best successes.  This tax funded the expansion of the 
Downeaster to Brunswick.  It was to be the  source of funding for future passenger rail expansion, 
as it has been used to fund the annual shortfall in operations of the Downeaster.  
 
In fact, this tax gr ew from $2 million annually to over $ 9 million annually.  The State’s Multi -
Modal fund is getting  a lion’s  share of its money from this tax.  
 
But now we find that these funds are proposed  for funding an ACT to tear up Maine state 
railroads ?!!!   
 
No.  we do not support funding for multi modal services, targeted for passenger train 
expansion, being used to remove those same valuable infrastructure assets we funded to 
use.   
 
We also ask that this committee look into  this tax, how it is collected, and how is it used?  And 
why is it not used for its intended legislative resolve for passenger train operations?  
 
Tony Donovan
Maine Rail Transit Coaltion
LD 1450
To:Maine Legislature Transportation Committee
From:Maine Rail Transit Coalition
Tony Donovan, Director
Date: May 17, 2023
Re:LD 1450 An Act to Fund the Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail 
Use Advisory Council – OUGHT NOT TO PASS
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Transportation 
Committee, 
My name is Tony Donovan, I am a Portland resident and founding Member of the 
Maine Rail Transit Coalition (MRTC). The Maine Rail Transit Coalition (MRTC) is 
an advocacy group engaged for the purpose of expanding passenger rail services as 
per the 1995 Maine State “Passenger Rail Service Act.", 
The MRTC speaks in opposition to this bill and asks you vote “OUGHT NOT TO 
PASS”
Sec. 1. Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations and allocations 
are made
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION   Multimodal Transportation Fund Z017  
GENERAL FUND 2023-24 2024-25 Capital Expenditures $18,000,000 This bill 
provides a one-time appropriation for the replacement of the tracks on the 28 miles of 
the rail corridor 
Allow me to share the irony of this particular bill.  
Based on a 2007 Legislative Blue Ribbon Committee report on how to fund passenger
rail, our team of rail advocates, with support from around the entire state, passed a bill
to fund passenger train operations and capital investment through shifting the tax on 
rental cars to a Multi-Modal fund at the Department of Transportation.
We considered that one of rail advocates best successes.  This tax funded the 
expansion of the Downeaster to Brunswick.  It was to be the source of funding for 
future passenger rail expansion, as it has been used to fund the annual shortfall in 
operations of the Downeaster.
In fact, this tax grew from $2 million annually to over $ 9 million annually.  The 
State’s Multi-Modal fund is getting a lion’s share of its money from this tax.
But now we find that these funds are proposed for funding an ACT to tear up Maine 
state railroads?!!!  
No.  we do not support funding for multi modal services, targeted for passenger train 
expansion, being used to remove those same valuable infrastructure assets we funded 
to use.  
We also ask that this committee look into this tax, how it is collected, and how is it 
used?  And why is it not used for its intended legislative resolve for passenger train 
operations?

