ﬁkﬂggmvattfwku
I 
TO: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: Wednesday, April 26, 2023 
RE: LD 1627 An Act to Improve Disclosure of Lobbyist Activities 
Good morning Senator Hickman and Representative Supica and honorable members of the 
Committee on Legal and Veterans Affairs. 
My name is Anna Kellar. l'm a resident of Portland. lam here today as the Executive Director of 
Maine Citizens for Clean Elections. I am testifying neither for nor against LD 1627. 
Maine Citizens for Clean Elections are strong supporters of transparency in the political process, 
including timely public disclosure of lobbying contracts and activities. Who is trying to spend 
money to influence our democracy? Legislators and the public have the right to know. We 
applaud Senator Bennett's efforts to improve reporting on lobbying activities. 
We support Section 1 of the bill, requiring professional lobbyists to file timely reports of new 
contracts, disclosing their employment agreements. 
However, we have questions and reservations about Sections 2 and 3. Currently, lobbyist 
disclosure is required at the end of the month when a lobbyist crosses the threshold of eight 
hours of lobbying during a calendar month. How would this work under a weekly reporting 
scheme? Presumably, the lobbyist would be required to file at the end of the first week when 
the 8-hour threshold is achieved — which would be OK — and every week for the rest of that 
month — maybe not so much OK? 
Here are our reservations with that: namely, that increasing the frequency of lobbyist reporting 
under the existing regime amounts to increasing the administrative burden on both the 
regulating agency and the regulated community without necessarily improving the quality of 
information that is available to interested parties. 
The 8~hour rule means that only the tip of the iceberg is disclosed. A vast amount of 
compensated legislative and executive branch advocacy occurs outside what is required to be 
PO Box 18187, Portland, Maine 04112 | Tel: (207) 831-MCCE (6223) 
www.maineclea11elections.0rg I ini'o({l§7imlin<><:le:1uel¢_scti<>11s.i>r'g
MCCE Action to VLA 2 
LD 1627 April 26, 2023 
reported. At the same time, what is reported is not meaningfully available from the Ethics 
Commissions database, which is increasingly deadlocked in antiquated and inflexible 
technology. 
We would encourage the committee to look holistically at the systems oflobbyist reporting and 
assess what is currently working and what can be improved. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify and I am happy to answer any questions.
