 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                                  Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
LD 1627, "An Act to Improve Disclosure of Lobbyist Activities " 
26 April 2023 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs, I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 communities in 
Western Maine in the State Senate.  I am pleased to present LD 1627, An Act to Improve 
Disclosure of Lobbyist Activities. 
 
All too often we as legislators and the general public learn about who is pushing a certain agenda 
well after that issue has been resolved.  This is because current laws regarding the disclosure of 
lobbyist activities are not sufficient.  Therefore, I have submitted LD 1627, a bill that adds 
reasonable reporting requirements to Maine law for members of the lobby.   
 
First, my bill requires a lobbyist to disclose employment agreements within 48 hours of entering 
into such an agreement.  Second, the bill would require a lobbyist to submit a report no later than 
noon each Friday when the Legislature is in session, detailing each legislative instrument or 
action on which the lobbyist spent any time lobbying.   
 
Under current law, lobbyists must report only after they lobby for 8 hours in a month on behalf 
of a client.  A lobbyist may pick up a client, lobby for that client under the 8-hour limit, and 
members of the Legislature are never aware.  Similarly, if an issue becomes contentious late in 
the session, many lobbyists may be engaged to work on it, and the public may not have 
knowledge on such engagements until weeks after the Legislature is adjourned.  I do not mean to 
infer members of the lobby are disingenuous; this is simply the way our statutes are written.  As 
in all fields there are some who eagerly adopt best practices and others who do not. 
 
Current law was written for a different technological age.  Now, people expect more immediate 
information, and they deserve the transparency.  Filing reports online can take minutes, but is 
paramount when it comes to informing the public about what goes on within this building.   
 
At times, the power of a lobbyist exceeds that of legislators.  With such power comes 
commensurate accountability.  We can do better than current law in transparency and 
accountability. 
 
I thank the committee for your consideration and I would be happy to answer any questions.  
