/\ A Maine State Bar A S S O C I A T I ON C'"imz1c:c*d in I-5'9! 
April 26, 2023 
Sen. Craig Hickman, Chair 
Rep. Laura Supica, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: LD 1627, An Act to Improve Disclosure of Lobbyist Activities 
Dear Sen. Hickman, Rep. Supica, and Members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee: 
On behalf of the Board of Govemors of the Maine State Bar Association, we write in opposition to 
LD 162?, An Act to Improve Disclosure of Lobbyist Activities.
\ 
About us. The Maine State Bar Association is a statewide trade association chartered in 1891 by the 
Maine Legislature. The Association currently represents approximately 3,000 attomeys in the State in 
both public service and private practice. The Association maintains 28 separate sections covering nearly 
every ﬁeld of law practiced in Maine, from Administrative Law to Workers’ Compensation Law. 
What does LD 1627 do? LD l627 requires lobbyists to ﬁle three reports with the Commission on 
Governmental Ethics and Election Practices. 
l. The bill requires that, within 48 hours of entering into an agreement with another person for the 
purpose of lobbying for that person, a lobbyist must ﬁle a report disclosing the employment 
agreement. 
2. By noon each Friday when the Legislature is in session, a lobbyist must ﬁle a report “detailing ” 
each legislative instrument or “action” on which the lobbyist spent any time lobbying, 
3. A lobbyist must also ﬁle a report “detailing ” each issue before a state agency on which the 
lobbyist spent any time lobbying. 
Background. Currently, Maine law requires lobbyists to register themselves and any lobbyist associate 
within 15 business days of the lobbyist engaging in more than eight hours of compensated lobbying on 
behalf of a client in a calendar month. Lobbying is further deﬁned to cover activities before the Maine 
Legislature involving certain “covered officials. ” Additionally, registered lobbyists are required to ﬁle 
monthly reports describing thelobbying activity that the lobbyist engages in during a month, including 
the amount of compensation received during the month, legislative actions that were subject to lobbying 
during the month, other expenses incurred in the course of lobbying, and money or things of value given 
to or on behalf of legislators. Alternatively, a lobbyist must ﬁle a no-activity report if they have not 
engaged in any lobbying or received any compensation for expenses during a particular month. 
Attorney-client communications are privileged. The attomey-client privilege is a long-recognized 
doctrine that keeps conﬁdential communications between an attorney and their client private. Notably, it 
is one of the oldest legal privileges and is considered a foundational legal principle. Such communications
MSBA Comments re LD 1627 
April 26, 2023 
Page2 
are protected to allow clients to be able to communicate openly and freely with their lawyer without fear 
of retribution or reprisal, and this communication is foundational to an individual ’s ability to receive the 
advice of their legal counsel. If such communications are not protected, individuals are not able to receive 
the advice they need to protect their liberty or their property. 
LD 1627 raises important attorney client privilege concerns. Notably, there are many attorneys who 
are required to register as lobbyists under Maine’s lobby disclosure laws. Those attomeys register with 
the Commission on Govermnental Ethics, and they further provide monthly ﬁlings detailing their 
compensation on particular pieces of legislation, broken down by branch of government. These monthly 
ﬁlings reﬂect the actual work undertaken by lobbyists that meets the definition of “lobbying. ” 
LD 1627 goes several steps further by not only requiring registration and disclosure of actual lobbying, 
but also registration of an agreement to lobby that may or may not actually result in disclosable lobbying. 
In many instances, a lobbyist will enter into an agreement with a client indicating that they will be 
monitoring legislation on behalf of a client, and providing advice about such legislation. The agreement 
may or may not result in the lobbyist actually engaging in activities deﬁned as “lobbying ” on behalf of 
such client. Ultimately, it is the client’s choice as to whether they want their lobbyist to actually engage in 
lobbying activities with respect to any particular matter, something that may not arise until well after 
entering into an agreement for lobbying services. With this in mind, when LD 1627 compels the ﬁling of 
an agreement to lobby, it in essence requires lobbyists to disclose the mere potential that they might lobby 
in the future for a client, and the ﬁnancial tenns and strategies related to such legislation or client interest. 
Applied to lobbyists who are lawyers, the disclosure of such client retention agreements essentially 
compels attorneys who are lobbyists to disclose their communications with their clients about the mere 
possibility that they will engage in future reportable lobbying activity, as well as any of the speciﬁc terms 
of engagement agreed upon between attorney and client. Such disclosures are clearly privileged, and 
would not be properly disclosable. 
Equally troubling are the requirements in LD 1627 that lobbyists ﬁle Weekly reports “detailing ” the 
instruments or “actions” they are lobbying on before the Legislature and state agencies. Current law 
already requires lobbyists to report monthly the amount of compensation they receive lobbying on 
legislation, itemized by bill and branch of government. These monthly disclosures are time-consuming to 
prepare and are highly detailed. They reﬂect actual work undertaken by lobbyists that meet the deﬁnition 
of “lobbying. ” The weekly ﬁling requirements in LD 1627 go beyond current law by mandating the 
disclosure of the “details” of the “issues” where a lobbyist has spent any time lobbying. This vague 
language raises serious concerns about the level of detail required, including detail regarding the 
lobbyist ’s strategy, work product, or communications with their clients. As applied to lobbyists inA 
general, such ambiguous standards are intrusive and interfere with the reasonable ability of a lobbyist to 
communicate with their client. As applied to lobbyists who are attorneys, such standards could require the 
disclosure of privileged communications between attorney and client. In such instance, an attorney would 
be compelled to resist such disclosure, creating a risk of legal jeopardy for both attorney and client. 
Given that not all lobbyists are attorneys, applying such standards to all lobbyists also risks the creation of 
a two-tier disclosures system where lobbyists who are attorneys are treated one way, and lobbyists who 
are not attorneys are treated differently. Such an outcome is unfair and represents poor public policy. 
Lastly, to the extent this bill references the disclosure of activities before state agencies, the bill goes well 
beyond what is considered “lobbying ” today — namely, communications with covered ofﬁcials related to
MSBA Comments re LD 1627 
April 26, 2023 
Page3 
legislative matters. Such disclosures arguably would cover adjudicatory matters before state agencies 
such as the Maine Public Utilities Commission, Workers Compensation Commission, Maine Human 
Rights Commission, Maine Revenue Services, and other activities that lawyer lobbyists might engage in 
before state agencies that have nothing to do with lobbying. As LD 1627 is drafted, it appears to seek 
“details” regarding the activities of such lawyer lobbyists on “each issue” before agencies that they may 
have separately lobbied with regard to legislation, even if such matters are adjudications or involve 
conﬁdential matters. To say the least, such disclosures may involved privileged information, conﬁdential 
information, or the disclosure of work product. 
The public does need the assistance of lobbyists before the Maine Legislature. Attomeys in Maine 
provide important services to their clients across a wide range of areas, from criminal defense work, to 
business transactions, to family law disputes, to civil actions before our courts. Attorneys also advise 
clients — who are members of the public -- regarding the activities of the Maine Legislature where laws 
are debated and passed that may signiﬁcantly impact their lives or businesses. These services are 
invaluable for the public because it is extremely difficult for the average citizen to effectively represent 
themselves before the Legislature. The activities of this legislative session provide a good example. 
0 There are potentially in excess of 2000 individual bills under consideration 
1 Many bills are “concept drafts” where language may not be available to the public until hours 
before a public hearing, or worse, at the public hearing itself. 
Q Public hearings are announced at least two weekends in advance, but later in the session, this 
advance notice can be waived and less than 24-hours notice might be provided. 
0 Major changes to a bill can be proposed and voted on at work session without any notice 
0 Many decisions on legislation are discussed by legislative committees in partisan caucuses that 
are not conducted in open public session 
0 When legislation is on the floor of the legislature, ﬂoor amendments may appear with little 
advance notice 
In such a rapidly changing environment with limited public notice, actual engagement by the public is 
extremely challenging for individuals who have work and family commitments. The public is simply not 
able to be physically present for the fast-paced, ever-changing world of the Maine Legislature, 
particularly since action on any given bill could take place at any time over weeks or even months. 
That is why nearly every type of citizen interest has a lobbyist, some of whom are attomeys. Even the 
Maine State Bar Association — a not-for-pro ﬁt association, has a lobbyist who is also an attorney. Without 
such help, it would be nearly impossible for any person to engage, even lawyers. 
Conclusion. Maine already has extremely detailed lobby disclosure requirements. The new disclosure 
requirements proposed in LD 1627 appear to be duplicative at best, and violative of attorney client 
privilege at worst. We therefore urge the committee to reject LD 1627.
MSBA Comments re LD 1627 
April 26, 2023 
Page4 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide this testimony. If you have questions or need additional 
information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Sincerely, 
2-’/_ 
Stacy O. Stitham 
President, Board of Governors 
cc: Angela Armstrong, Executive Director 
Rachel Okun, Chair, MSBA Legislative Committee 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP 
Clara McConnell, Maine Street Solutions
