 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1627, An Act to Improve Disclosure of Lobbyist Activities  
 
April 26, 2023 
 
Chair Hickman, Chair Supica, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my 
name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland 
County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County 
Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee in opposition  
to LD 1627. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  Our Association is a non-profit association formed to represent county commissioners. County 
commissioners are elected officials accountable to the public. We take our jobs very seriously, and our interest is 
to serve the interests of Maine people. 
 
Our Association also engages before the Maine Legislature because there are literally hundreds of bills that 
impact county government and the way we provide services. There are bills that impact county jail operations, 
sheriff operations, registries of deeds, registries of probate, the relationship between county government and its 
employees, and the relationship between county government and its constituents. Any given bill could have 
significant positive or negative impacts on our constituents and the services we provide, and we feel it is our 
responsibility to be active on such bills. 
 
However, as county commissioners from every county in the state, near and far, we simply cannot be physically 
present in Augusta at all times as these many bills are heard, worked, and voted. Likewise, our skillset is county 
government, not state government, and we rely on the advice of legislative experts to help us navigate the 
hallways and committee rooms of the Maine Legislature.  
 
For this reason, the Maine County Commissioners Association has relied on the important services of lobbyists. 
At some points, those services have been provided in-house, and at other points, those services have been 
provided by external consultants. Either way, when we rely on the services of others to help us, and as those 
individuals necessarily get paid, we become a “lobbyist employer” and our advisor(s) become “lobbyists” by 
virtue of state law. We understand that, and we comply through monthly filings with the Maine Commission on 
Governmental Ethics. 
 
Given our important public mission and the lobby disclosures we already make, we find LD 1627 troubling 
because it goes far beyond what is reasonable and will impose unnecessary costs on all Maine people. 
 
First, we already file monthly for our lobbying activities. We provide information to the public about the bills 
we engage on, and whether our activities touch the legislative branch, the executive branch, or constitutional 
officers. This information is available for everyone in the public to see. 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1627 
April 26, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 Second, we have not heard any suggestion that the information we provide is in any way lacking or insufficient. 
In fact, we have never once heard anyone comment on the details we provide every month. This suggests to us 
that the system is not in need of greater detail or frequency of reporting. 
 
Third, as public agencies, imposing new administrative burdens on our consultants or us directly ultimately 
becomes a cost of county government. So, before the Legislature decides to impose more burdens, it is important 
to understand that some of these costs may end up on all Maine people. 
 
Fourth, to the extent we work with attorneys who may also be lobbyists, we are concerned that this bill would 
require our attorneys to make filings or disclosures that would normally be protected by attorney-client 
privilege. Such filings would cover not only the work of our attorneys before the Maine Legislature, but also 
their activities before state agencies that have nothing to do with lobbying. This is a significant and unwarranted 
overreach that will impede our ability to advance the interests of county government and our constituents before 
the Maine Legislature and state agencies. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and we urge the Committee to 
give this bill a unanimous ought not to pass report. If you have questions or need additional information, please 
do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 Commissioner A. Norman Fournier, Vice President, MCCA 
