PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:Commit tee on Ener gy, Utilities and T echnologyFrom:  Marianne Hill, Ph.D .,  Sierr a Club MaineDate:March 15, 2023Re:Testimon y Ag ainst LD 421:An Act t o Ensure UtilityAcquisitions Bene fit Maine P eople -concept draft Senate Chair Mark Lawrence, Representative Chair S. Paige Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilitiesand Technology Committee, I am testifying on behalf of Sierra Club Maine, representing over 22,000supporters and members statewide. Founded in 1892, Sierra Club is one of our nation’s oldest andlargest environmental organizations. We work diligently to amplify the power of our 3.8 million membersnation-wide as we work towards combating climate change and promoting a just and sustainableeconomy. To that end, we oppose LD 421 and urge an “ought not to pass” report on LD 421.
The intent of this bill is not to protect the best interests of the people of Maine, but to place obstacles inthe path of the establishment of a consumer-owned utility in the state in place of CMP and Versant.
A consumer-owned utility, like the proposed Pine Tree Power, is much needed if Maine is to achieve itsenergy goals.  Twenty years ago, a bill stating that "the purchase of a utility company serving over100,000 entities in Maine by a private company chartered outside of the US should be scrutinized by thelegislature”would have made sense.  But, as proposed in the concept draft (the only language availableas of 3 pm on March 15th), this bill would obstruct - not respect - the democratic process that iscurrently underway.
The bill does not specify the kind of entity doing the purchasing of a utility. Surely, an entity that hasbeen subject to study, lengthy public debate, a voter referendum, and in addition would be establishedby the state of Maine has been through process enough.  In addition, as written, the bill has thepotential to pit the PUC against the will of the people and the state legislature. We support aconsumer-owned utility and oppose leaving the fox in the henhouse, with a foreign entity benefiting atthe expense of Maine people. We ask that the democratic process that is currently underway berespected.
We urge you to oppose LD 421 and report “ought not to pass”. Thank you for your time andconsideration.
Sincerely,Marianne Hill, Ph.D.Sierra Club Maine

