PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.aclumaine.org 
AMERICAN GIVIL LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought To Pass - LD 26 
An Act to Provide Postage Prepaid Return Envelopes 
to Voters Who Send Absentee Ballots by Mail 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
February 6, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, good morning. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am Policy Counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine,a 
statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties 
guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge 
you to vote that this bill ought to pass. it W~._~_ 
Voting is the cornerstone of our democracy. It is protected by more constitutional 
amendments than any other civil right. The lst, 14th, 15th, 19th, 24th and 26th 
amendments protect this right because the right to vote is protective of all other 
’i'igl1t§I" ’L;l3:“Z6/'\Tn7ij11l “('1’ further‘strengthen"this central right;iIf"eniacted?tHi*§*Bi1li'wou1d 
provide for postage prepaid return envelopes for voters in the United States sending 
absentee ballots by mail., 
Pre-paid absentee ballot envelopes would make voting more accessible. This is 
-_ _ - -_e.sper:ially true for,.low.-income_v.oters,..anoLvoters..so_..harried..by,their o_tlier.w.0rldly 
duties that obtaining a stamp might pose a significant barrier to voting. A lack of 
money or time to get a stamp should never prevent someone from voting. People in 
rural areas without reliable transportation, people who work inﬂexible day jobs, 
and people with limited mobility — this bill would strengthen their right to vote. 
Maine has long been leader in voting rights. Our motto Dirigo is embodied by our 
comparatively high voter participation rates, no-excuse absentee voting, and same- 
day voter registration. This small but significant change will help Maine maintain 
its status as a leader in preserving and strengthening democracy by increasing 
voter access to the ballot box and ensuring as many people as possible have a voice 
in the policies of our state. We urge you to vote that LD 26 ought to pass.
