 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
Ought  To Pass  – LD 26  
 
An Act to Provide Postage Prepaid Return Envelopes  
to Voters Who Send Absentee Ballots by Mail  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
 
February 6 , 2023 
 
Senator Hickman , Representative Supica , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs , good morning . My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am Policy Counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a 
statewide organization co mmitted to advancing and preserving civil liberties 
guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions . On behalf of our members , I urge 
you to vote that this bill ought to pass.  
 
Voting is the cornerstone of our dem ocracy. It is protected by more constitutional 
amendments than any other civil right. The 1st, 14th, 15th, 19th, 24th and 26th 
amendments protect this right because the right to vote is protective of all other 
rights.  LD 26 would furth er strengthen this central  right . If enacted, this bill would 
provide for postage prepaid return envelopes for voters in  the United States sending 
absentee ballots by mail.   
 
Pre-paid absentee ballot envelopes would make voting more accessible. This is 
especially true for low -income voters, and voters so harried by their other worldly 
duties  that obtaining a stamp might pose a significant barrier to voting. A lack of 
money or time to get a stamp should never prevent someone from voting. P eople in 
rural areas without reliable transportation, people who work inflexible day jobs, 
and people with limited mobility – this bill would strengthen their right to vote.   
 
Maine has long been leader  in voting rights . Our motto Dirigo  is embodied by our 
comparatively high voter participation rates, no -excuse absentee voting, and same -
day voter registration. This smal l but significant change will help Maine maintain 
its status as a leader in preserving and strengthening democracy by increasing 
voter access to the ballot box and ensuring as many people as possible have a voice 
in the policies of our state. W e urge you to vote that LD 26 ought to pass . 
