 
 
 
Testimony of Hilary Schneider, Regional Government Relations Director,  American Cancer Society Cancer 
Action Network , 
Allyson Perron Drag, Government Relations Director, American Heart Association ,  
Lance Boucher, Assistant Vice President, State Public Policy, Eastern Division, American Lung Association , and  
Kevin O’Flaherty, Director of Advocacy - Northeast Region , Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids  
 
In Opposition to Part E of LD 1808  “An Act to Amend the State Tax Laws ” 
May 1 8, 2023  
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and members of the Taxation  Committee , thank you for allowing us to 
provide this testimony on behalf of our organizations. The American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS 
CAN) is  the nonprofit, nonpartisan advocacy affiliate of the American Cancer Society, and supports evidence -
based po licy and legislative solutions designed to eliminate cancer as a major health problem. As the nation’s 
leading advocate for public policies that are helping to defeat cancer, ACS CAN ensures that cancer patients, 
survivors, and their families have a voice in public policy matters at all levels of government.  The American Heart 
Association  (the Association ) is the nation’s oldest and largest voluntary organization dedicated to fighting heart 
disease and stroke, whose mission is to be a relentless force for a  world of longer, healthier lives. The American 
Lung Association  (ALA)  is the leading organization working to save lives by improving lung health and preventing 
lung disease, through research, education and advocacy.  The Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids (CTF K) is the 
leading advocacy organization working to reduce tobacco use and its deadly consequences in the United States 
and around the world. Through strategic communications and policy advocacy campaigns, Tobacco -Free Kids 
works to change public attitudes about tobacco and promote evidence -based policies that are most effective at 
reducing tobacco use and save the most lives.  
I would like to thank you for this opportunity to submit the following testimony  on behalf of ACS CAN, the 
Association , ALA,  and CTFK  in opposition to Part E of LD 1808 . More specifically, we are strongly opposed to the 
provisions in the bill that relate to  remote sales of pipe tobacco  and ask that your committee remove all 
references to pipe tobacco in the bill .  
Our organizations  do not support remote, or Internet, sales of any tobacco product  as allowing for remote sales 
makes enforcement of tobacco retail licensing  and sales laws, including underage sales laws, more challenging. It 
also makes tax collection more cha llenging.  Our organizations  oppose tobacco products being shipped directly to 
consumers.   All tobacco products and all tobacco retailers should be regulated in the same manner, shipments 
directly to consumers should be prohibited and only allowed to in -state brick & mortar licensed retailers.   As 
such, our organizations  oppose any expansion of tobacco products being delivered directly to consumers . 
Tobacco use is a significant problem in Maine and remains the leading preventable risk factor for cancer, heart 
disease, stroke, and lung disease. Maine has the 16th highest rate of adult smoking  in the nation and the 9th 
highest rate of smoking -related ca ncer deaths.i  You may be surprised to learn that Maine’s adult smoking rate is 
higher than that of Georgia, Florida, North Carolina, and Texas. An estimated 2,400 deaths are caused by 
smoking each year in Maine including nearly 34%  of cancer deaths.ii  Smoking is estimated to cost Maine $ 942 
million in direct health care costs, including $281  million in Medicaid costs annually.iii 
 
 Laws preventing the sale of tobacco products to youth and young adults play an essential role in averting a  
lifetime of addiction and tobacco -related disease. Internet retailers have often failed to implement necessary 
controls to avoid illegally selling tobacco products to underage individuals. Illegal sales of tobacco products to 
underage individual s can significantly undermine efforts to protect public health and play a role in increasing 
youth tobacco use. Federal law prohibits the shipment and transport of many types of tobacco products 
including cigarettes, e -cigarettes and their parts and access ories, and smokeless tobacco through the U.S. mail, 
with limited exceptions.iv In Maine, a retail tobacco license is required to sell tobacco products.v Tobacco 
products must be sold in retail settings only in a direct face -to-face exchange with requireme nts for age 
verification, with few exceptions.vi One exception is the sales of premium cigars, which are allowed for sale 
through delivery sales.vii 
Our understanding is that the intent of this bill is to address issues that have arisen with such delivery s ales and 
collection of taxes on those sales.  It is also our understanding that this bill may have  inadvertently included pipe 
tobacco. As mentioned above, our organizations  strongly oppose  allowing for the sale of  tobacco products , 
including  pipe tobacco , through delivery, remote, or internet sale. If there are current issues with online sales of 
premium cigars, our organization recommends removing  the current exemption for premium cigars and include 
them in the prohibition of all other tobacco products  from being sold through delivery sales.  
If this committee is going to make changes to current Maine law  regarding tobacco product sales, it is important 
to ensure that none of the changes will promote increased tobacco sales and that any change ensure s that there 
are strong protect ions against underage sales. It’s also important to note that the HHS  committ ee is considering 
a similar  bill (LD 1 923), which they have vote d to carry over . LD 1923 explicitly allows for the remote sale of pipe 
tobacco. While LD 1808 does not make changes to the section in Title 22 that requires all tobacco sales  (except 
premium cigars) to be sold in a face -to-face t ransaction, the references to pipe tobacco in sections of the bill 
pertaining to remote sales may cause confusion and create conflict in law. As stated above, we recommend 
removing all references to pipe tobacco in the bill, at a minimum.   
LD 1808  changes how remote sales of premium cigars are taxed, with the potential of lowering the tax burden. 
This bill moves from a tax rate of 43% of wholesale sales price to a tax rate of 43% of “ cost price .” Wholesale 
price excludes discounts and other reductions , but cost price does not. According to numerous sources, the 
tobacco industry spend s millions of dollars each year for price discounts  that effectively lower the price of 
products.viii  If the “actual price paid ,” or “cost price ,” includes the pri ce with those discounts, then the price on 
which the tax is calculated, and therefore the tax payment, would be lower.  Our organizations oppose any 
reductions in tobacco tax rates.   
To qualify as a “remote seller” in Section E of LD 1808, a person must ma ke over $100k of remote sales of 
premium cigars in a year to consumers and make over 200 separate remote sale transactions  of premium cigars 
in a year to consumers (p. 9 of the bill) . We assume these thresholds are included as a result of a Supreme Court 
decision in the Wayfair v. South Dakota case , a case that upheld a state’s ability to impose taxes on out -of-state 
sellers. We recommend changing the thresholds in LD 1808 to $100k in sales and 200 separate transactions of 
any goods or services in the state  and not just thresholds for remote sales of premium cigars. We also 
recommend the committee seeking an opinion from the Attorney General’s Office if lower thresholds could be 
included.  
We appreciate your time and consideration of our comments.  If you have questions a bout this testimony, please 
contact Hilary Schneider at hilary.schneider@cancer.org .   
 
i State adult smoking rates from the CDC 2021 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) data available online. Smo king-related 
cancer deaths data from the American Cancer Society.  
 
  
ii Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids.  The Toll of Tobacco in Maine. Updated Feb. 17, 2023,  
https://www.tobaccofreekids. org/facts_issues/toll_us/maine  
iii Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids.  The Toll of Tobacco in Maine. Updated Feb. 17, 2023,  
https://www.tobaccofreekids. org/facts_issues/toll_us/maine  
iv For more details on the federal law, see the pp. 12 -14 of the Public Health Law Center’s May 2022 publication on Online 
Sales of E -cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products, 
https://www.publichealthlawcenter.org/sites/default/files/resources/Online -Sales -E-Cigarettes -Other -Tobacco -
Products.pdf#:~:text=Internet%20sales%20of%20commercial%20tobacco%20products%20to%20underaged,because%20ad
olescent%20brains%20ar e%20more%20sensitive%20to%20nicotine.2   
v Title 22, §1551 -A. 
vi Title 22, §1555 -B. 
vii Title 22, §1555 -C. 
viii Wang TW, Falvey K, Gammon DG, et al. Sales trends in Price -Discounted cigarettes, large Cigars, little Cigars, and 
Cigarillos -United states, 2011 -2016. Nicotine Tob Res  2018;20:1401 –
6.doi:10.1093/ntr/ntx249pmid:http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29253226 ; Reimold AE, Lee JGL, Ribisl KM  Tobacco 
company agreements with tobacco retailers for price discounts and prime placement of products and advertising: a scoping 
review  Tobacco Control Published Online First: 24 January 2022. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol -2021 -057026  
