 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executi ve Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSTION TO  
 
L.D. 703 
 
AN ACT TO CLARIFY THE REQUIREMENTS REGARDING FINGERPRINTING  
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS IN SCHOOLS  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Eileen Ki ng, deputy executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine Schoo l Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association in opposition to L.D. 703.  
 
Fingerprint -based backg round check s help to safeguard our children and strengthen public confidence in the 
integrity of public education , but not all background c hecks prioritize the data that results from fingerprinting 
equally.  
 
Felony convictions are the most relevant part of  determining whether someone is suitable for employment as a 
police officer. Crimes , especially violence or domestic abuse , can be probl ematic but  can be waived by a local 
police department  allowing the individual to move forward as a police officer.  
 
Empl oyees who work with our students are held to the highest standard when it comes to child protection . 
Misdemeanor or felony convictions fo r crimes involving minor victims, includ ing sexual offenses and abuse 
would keep an individual from passing their crimi nal history record check in Maine and would prevent them 
from obtain ing the certification or clearance  to work in our schools. These offenses or crimes would not  be 
waived by the Maine Department of Education.  
 
Our associations feel that all individuals wh o work with our students should be held to a consistent and 
rigorous background check especially as it  pertains to child protection, regardless of whether they have been 
fingerprinted for other employment.  
