3 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
-3 
:1" 3’ . 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 237-1400 
Lydia V ¢I.aftS TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
4 Mills Rd. Box 13 
Newcastle, ME 04553 
Phone: (207) 593-2664 
Lydia.Crafts@legislature.maine. gov 
Testimony of Rep. Lydia Crafts introducing 
LD 703, An Act to Clarify the Requirements Regarding Fingerprinting Law Enforcement 
Officers in Schools 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Good Afternoon Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. I am Representative Lydia 
Crafts and I am here to testify in support of my bill LD 703: ‘An Act to Clarify the 
Requirements Regarding Fingerprinting Law Enforcement Officers in Schools. ’ 
I am pleased to offer this bill after working closely with a constituent from whom you 
will hear today. As previously written, this law created confusion around who and when 
law enforcement officers were exempt from additional background checks in schools. We 
are often most familiar with law enforcement officers serving as School Resource 
Officers, but in many small communities like my own, they also serve as coaches, 
mentors, etc. The previous language Was interpreted as only applying to SROS, resulting 
in duplicative efforts to pay for and complete background checks. My bill aims to clarify 
that any law enforcement officer employed at an agency with jurisdiction over the school 
district may also serve in the school in other capacities without additional background 
checks. 
The Department shared their concerns with me about the possibility of ofﬁcers having 
been hired by law enforcement agencies with waivers for prior convictions. To help 
ensure there are no gaps in records I am proposing that the bill add language to require 
law enforcement officers to submit veriﬁcation from their employer that they have not 
been granted waivers and their record is free from convictions. 
Thank you for considering this bill and I’m happy to answer any questions. 
Lydia Crafts 
State Representative 
District 46 Bristol, Damariscotta, Newcastle, Nobleboro and Monhegan Plantation
