1,/~\ ' 
3 Mame Sheriffs ’ Association 
/ ' “One Team, One Mzssion” 
\ O I ' iv? 
5% #1T 
' I if 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President 
Sheriff Scott Nichols, ls‘ Vice-President, Sheriff William King, 2"“ Vice-President — Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary- 
Sheriff Todd Brackett, Treasurer — Sheriff Troy Morton, Immediate Past President- 
Sheriff Joel Merry, Past President-at-Large - Mary-Anne LaMarre, Executive Director 
March 21 , 2023 
L.D. 703 - An Act to Clarify the Requirements Regarding Fingerprinting 
Law Enforcement Officers in Schools 
Senator Joseph Rafferty, Representative Michael Brennan, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Rand Maker, and I am the 
Chief Deputy Sheriff at the Lincoln County Sheriffs Ofﬁce based in Wiscasset. Today I come 
before you on behalf of the Maine Sheriffs ’ Association to provide testimony in support of L.D. 
703 ~ An Act to Clarify the Requirements Regarding Fingerprinting Law Enforcement Ofﬁcers 
in Schools. 
The need to clarify the ﬁngerprint requirements of Maine law enforcement ofﬁcers working in 
our schools arose late in 2022 when the Department of Education required me to be ﬁngerprinted 
prior to beginning my 23rd year of coaching basketball at Lincoln Academy in Newcastle. 
Maine Sheriffs believe the current law provides certain law enforcement ofﬁcers working in 
schools an exemption from ﬁngerprinting, but the Department of Education has taken the stance 
that this only applies to school resource ofﬁcers. Based on this opinion, and no internal way to 
appeal an interpretation of Maine law, I was faced with the decision of submitting to 
ﬁngerprinting or walking away from a long-time coaching position that I truly enjoy. I was even 
informed that if Lincoln Academy allowed me to coach without submitting to ﬁngerprinting, 
they could risk losing state funding. 
My opposition to the Department of Education ’s interpretation of current law is based on a lack 
of information, and failure to recognize that Maine law enforcement ofﬁcers have strict hiring 
standards, as well as mandated reporting requirements for criminal conduct, that continue even 
after receiving a law enforcement certiﬁcation. Law enforcement ofﬁcers in Maine can be 
excluded from certiﬁcation for conduct that never resulted in a criminal conviction and would 
never be found in a ﬁngerprint check. We are also subjected to both polygraph and 
psychological exams before hiring, a process that is much more stringent than the requirements 
made of employees in our schools. 
Maine sheriffs ask the distinguished members of this committee to recognize that current law 
enforcement ofﬁcer standards are higher than those working in education. We ask that you agree 
that Maine law enforcement ofﬁcers holding an active certiﬁcation should be exempt from the 
ﬁngerprinting requirement to work in our schools. 
The Maine Sheriffs ’ Association supports L.D. 703, and We feel that the clariﬁcation provided in 
this bill will allow law enforcement in Maine to be more consistently treated, could possibly 
encourage others to be involved with schools outside their fulltime employment, and increase 
school safety by placing sworn law enforcement within schools who are willing and trained to 
respond if a crisis arises.
We urge you to vote Ought to Pass on L.D. 703. I thank you for your time and consideration 
today and welcome any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
ﬂ J) WW2»/*---_ 
Chief Deputy Rand Maker 
O/B/O Maine Sheriffs Association
