April 27, 2023 
E: Senator Tipping, Senate Chair; Representative Williams, House Chair; Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Transportation 
Emm: Patrick Norton, 11 Harvey Brook Dr., Freeport, ME 04032; ptnorton2@gmail.com 
Be: Testimony IN FAVOR of LD 598, An Act to Require a Vehicle Operator to Notify an Owner 
or Law Enforcement Officer of an Accident Involving a Dog, a Cat or Livestock 
Good afternoon. My name is Patrick Norton and l am here today to testify IN FAVOR of LD 
598 and to thank Representative Hepler and the co-sponsors of this bill for bringing this issue 
fon/vard today for consideration. 
Last year l accidentally hit and killed a cat at night with my truck. It was a beautiful little 
animal that had obviously been loved and well cared for by somebody. l moved the animal off 
the road and began knocking on doors of nearby houses asking if they owned a white and tan 
cat. When I finally found the family that said they did, one young man walked down the road 
with me and conﬁrmed that it was his family’s cat. He started to cry. He bent down and began to 
pet his dead cat, called it by its name, and quietly talked to it for a moment as if it were still alive. 
l walked with him as he carried his cat, Abigail, back to his house, where l took the opportunity 
to apologize to the family. They were heartbroken, of course, but they thanked me for taking the 
time to ﬁnd them and for letting them know what happened to their cat. 
This story illustrates a couple of points relative to this bill. The ﬁrst is that people love their 
pets, even to the point of often considering them part of their family. They grieve when that 
animal is killed, injured, or lost. Some of you may know that feeling well or know someone who 
does. No matter what the injury, however, they always want to know what happened. The 
second point is that when a dog or cat or livestock is injured or killed by a motor vehicle, l 
believe society places an ethical obligation on the driver of that vehicle to stop, provide any 
assistance they can to the animal, and make all reasonable efforts to ﬁnd the animal’s owners. 
That is what l did last year. It is not hard to do, as I showed. Plus, it is the right thing to do. And if 
you can't ﬁnd the owners, the bill simply requires that you report the incident to a law 
enforcement ofﬁcer as soon as possible. 
I urge each of you to support this bill. Many of you have probably experienced the pain and 
grief we feel when an animal we love is injured or killed by a “hit and run” driver, or when an 
animal we love just never comes home. This bill does not place any undue burden on anybody. 
lt does not require any appropriation and may even generate a small amount of revenue. And 
this bill does something good. lt requires the operator of a motor vehicle to do the right and 
ethically responsible thing if they are involved in an accident with a cat, a dog, or livestock by 
simply informing the animal’s owner or reporting the incident to law enforcement. 
Thank you for this opportunity. l will gladly try to answer any questions you may have. 
cc: TRA Committee Clerk
