TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN SUPPORT  OF 
L.D. 598 “An Act to Require a Vehicle Operator to Notify an Owner or Law  Enforcement Officer  
of an Accident Involving a Dog, a Cat or  Livestock  
Committee on Transportation   
April  27, 202 3 
 
 
Dear Senator Chipman , Representative Williams,  and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony in strong support of L.D. 598 “An Act to Require a Vehicle Operator to Notify an 
Owner or Law  Enforcement Officer of an Accident Involving a Dog, a Cat or  Livestock .” 
 
I spent 11 years as a volunteer for Maine Lost Dog Recovery , during whi ch time I worked with hundreds of dog paren ts to 
recover  their missing pets.  It is incredibly  traumatic  to have an animal companion  missing .  Although most lost pets make it 
home safely, some do not.  In some instances, the animal is never found, and the family is l eft to search and worry without 
answers or closure .   
 
Based on my personal experience, in most cases when an  animal  is injured or dies while  lost, the injur y or death is caused 
by a vehicle -related accident.  If the initial  impact  is survived , the animal , fueled by adrenaline , usually runs away from the 
scene to hide. This instinctual  reaction makes it hard er to find the animal in a timely manner.    
 
Often , people will do the right thing and contact authorities  when they accidentally hit an animal on the road;  however,  many 
do not, which can cause prolonged  unnecessary suffering for both the animal  and the owner . 
 
If passed, this bill would require  an ac t of common decency  – ensuring that a person who hits a dog, cat or livestock while 
driving reports  the accident to law enforcement or the pet owner .  The act of reporting  will not result in any legal penalties  
against the driver that hits the animal but will facilitate a quick response fr om authorities and/or the owner  - a call which may 
save the animal’s li fe. 
 
Ideally,  our pets and livestock should not be allowed to run loose  or unsupervised, but escapes sometimes happen . It is a 
terrible thing to experience losing a n animal only to discover too late that it has been injured or killed by a motor vehicle.  
 
This type of mandatory reporting already exists in Maine for drivers that  collide with  big game, such as moose, deer, or 
turkey.  It only makes sense that we require the same consideration for companion animals and livestock.  
 
Please vote to move this common -sense bill forward .  Not only is it the right thing to do, but it may save  lives as well as 
heartache . 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Susanna Richer  
Portland, ME  
 
 
