MAINE TOURISM 
ASSOCIATION 
Alison Sucy, Chief Operating Officer & Director of Government Affairs 
On Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
In Opposition to 
LD 1445 An Act to Enact a Seasonal Sales T ax to Provide Income Tax Relief to Maine Residents 
April 26, 2023_ 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation: 
My name is Alison Sucy, and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs for 
the Maine Tourism Association. MTA is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses and 
we’ve been promoting Maine and our members for over 100 years. We also operate on behalf of the state 
seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually produce the state’s official 
travel planner, Maine Invites You. I am testifying in opposition to LD 1445. 
We are strongly opposed to any increase in the sales tax. The 7.5% sales tax proposed in this bill is a 36% 
increase in the sales tax rate that Mainers and visitors will have to pay from May through October each 
year. For our retail members, there would be burden of customers returning products when the purchase 
was made during one tax rate period, and the return during the other in addition to customer confusion. 
This tax increase will affect not just retailers but numerous other businesses that have retail components 
such as hotels, restaurants, amusements, museums, theaters, and historical attractions. For example, most 
hotels have gift shops or offer convenience items for sale. Museums and other attractions often have gift 
shops selling logoed hats, t-shirts, and other Maine-made items. So although retail is a small part of their 
business, they would have the burden of this twice-per-year tax rate change. 
Further, we have great concerns about the message that a seasonal sales tax hike sends to Maine’s visitors. 
This will encourage travelers to skip Vacationland and choose tax-free New Hampshire. We certainly 
support lowering Maine’s income tax but, considering Maine’s revenue forecast, we believe that can and 
should be done without raising other taxes. 
Tourism is a tremendous contributor to the Maine economy as evidence by this 2022 data from the 
Maine Office of Tourism: 
O Total economic impact of tourism in Maine - $15.8 billion 
v Tourism supported 151,000 Maine jobs 
I Every l02 visitors support a new job in Maine 
0 Direct tourism expenditures — $8.6 billion 
0 Without tourism, Maine households would have had to pay an additional $2,172 in state and 
local taxes 
A strong tourism industry equals a strong Maine economy. We believe this tax increase will hurt 
Maine residents, visitors, Maine workers, and Maine employers who rely on tourism. I respectfully ask 
that you to vote against LD 1445. Thank you for your consideration. 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourisrn-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA 
members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, 
amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information 
Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933).
