 
19 Community Drive • Augusta, Maine 04330 • (207) 622 -7501 • Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF  REALTORS    
12781773.1  
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1445  
(“An Act to Enact a Seasonal Sales Tax to Provide Income Tax Relief to Maine Residents ”)  
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  
April  26, 2023  
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, 
my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations, and we represent 
the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association  established in 1936 with 
over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. 
Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate 
transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title 
agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the 
National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  
The Maine  Association of REALTORS® opposes LD 1445 because it would  increase Maine’s tax  
burden . The bill would enact a seasonal sales tax of 2% to create and fund a program to reduce 
income tax burdens by increasing the personal exemption. We do not believe this w ould provide an 
overall reduction in Maine’s income tax burden and would therefore ultimately increase the tax burden 
on Maine people. Maine is already one of the highest taxed  states in the country. This bill would 
compound that problem.  Added tax burden could deter people and businesses from settling in Maine 
and would  negatively impact Maine’s economic sustainability.  Additional taxes increase  a household’s 
cost of living  and may discourage needed workforce from choosing to call Maine ho me. Increasing 
taxes overall , at the expense of economic growth is not sustainable for Maine.  
For these reasons, we urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1445 . Thank you for your time and 
consideration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
