I 
TESTIMONY OF 
JOHN SAGASER, TAX POLICY COUNSEL 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: April 26, 2023, at 9:30am 
LD J 445 — “An Act to Enact a Seasonal Sales Tax to Provide Income Tax Relief to 
Maine Res1'a’ents” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good morning, my name is John Sagaser, Tax Policy Counsel in the 
Ofﬁce of Tax Policy at Maine Revenue Services. I am testifying at the request of 
the Administration Against LD 1445, “An Act to Enact a Seasonal Sales Tax to 
Provide Income Tax Relief to Maine Residents. ” 
The bill establishes the non-lapsing Maine Residents Income Tax Relief 
Fund (“Fund”) to be funded by an additional seasonal sales tax of 2% imposed 
annually for sales occurring during the period starting with the last Monday in May 
until the 2nd Monday in October ~ Memorial Day to Indigenous Peoples Day— 
beginning in 2024. The additional tax would apply to items and sen/ices subject to 
the current 5.5% sales tax rate. The Fund would provide income tax relief by 
increasing the Maine personal exemption amount beginning in ﬁscal year 2024-25. 
For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, the bill also increases 
the Sales Tax Fairness Credit (“STFC”) by increasing the base amount of the credit 
from $125 to $185 for single ﬁlers and from $175 to $235 for married taxpayers 
ﬁling jointly and head of household ﬁlers, with additional amounts for taxpayers 
with a qualifying child or dependent. The income amount by which the phase-out 
of the STFC begins is increased from $20,000 to $30,000 for single ﬁlers, from
1
1 
$30,000 to $45,000 for head of household filers, and from $40,000 to $60,000 for 
married taxpayers ﬁling jointly or as a qualifying widow(er). 
This proposal is complex, multifaceted, and does not align with current 
federal income tax law. Turning ﬁrst to the personal exemption amount, it is 
important to note key timing aspects that interact with federal law. The bill 
provides for increases in the Maine personal exemption up to an amount that does 
not exceed the federal personal exemption. However, no increase is possible under 
current law, as the federal personal exemption amount was reduced to zero through 
2025 under the federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Beginning in 2026, the federal 
personal exemption amount is scheduled to return to an amount roughly equal to 
the Maine personal exemption, with small differences due to inﬂation and 
rounding adjustments. The bill authorizes the Taxation Committee to report out 
legislation to use excess amounts in the Fund to provide other tax relief, leaving 
open how these funds will be applied. 
Tying use of the funds to the personal exemption amount is problematic 
because of these timing issues. For tax years 20l3-2017, the Maine personal 
exemption was the same as the federal personal exemption amount. Under the 
federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the federal standard deduction was doubled; 
however, the federal personal exemption amount was reduced to zero for tax years 
2018-2025. In response to this change, a Maine personal exemption amount anda 
dependent exemption credit were enacted, beginning in tax year 2018. For tax 
years beginning in 2023, the Maine personal exemption amount is equal to $4,700 
($8,400 for married taxpayers filing jointly), unless one or both spouses may be 
claimed as dependents on another person’s income tax return. This Committee 
recently reported out OTP-AM LD 7, "An Act to Update References to the United 
States Internal Revenue Code of 1986 Contained in the Maine Revised Statutes,"
2
which would preserve the current Maine tax law treatment of ﬁlers and their 
dependents for personal exemption and dependent exemption tax credit purposes 
for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2026. 
Turning next to the bill’s provisions that address the Maine Sales Tax 
Fairness Credit. For 2023, the refundable STFC is a maximum credit of $255, 
depending on the number of qualifying children and dependents on the Maine 
income tax return. The credit is available if the taxpayer was a Maine resident for 
any part of the tax year, they are not claimed as a dependent on another person’s 
return, and their ﬁling status is single, head of household, married ﬁlingjointly, or 
qualiiying widow(er). The 2023 STFC is subject to maximum income limitations 
of $29,800 for single ﬁlers; $46,950 for heads of households; and $58,600 for 
married ﬁling jointly or qualifying widow(er). The STFC credit amount and 
income limitations are indexed for inflation. 
Next, the application of a seasonal sales tax rate has various complexities. 
The Administration notes this bill would also create a seasonal 2% use tax — as the 
imposition of the seasonal sales tax is under 36 M.R.S. section 1811, the 
imposition of the use tax under 36 M.R.S. section 1861 would include that 
seasonal rate. Also, the seasonal sales tax would apply to all sales and long-term 
leases of motor vehicles. Should this bill pass without excluding such sales from 
the additional sales tax, purchasers would most likely delay purchasing large items 
until the seasonal sales tax period is over. Sales tax collected on motor vehicles 
contributes a signiﬁcant amount of revenue to the General Fund. 
MRS would need to add a new section to the sales tax return that would be 
available during the seasonal sales tax period for retailers to separately report sales 
subject to the additional 2% rate. Adding lines to the return can increase the risk of 
inaccurate reporting. Additionally, some small retailers may not have the ability to
3
7 
easily program multiple tax rates into their current point of sales systems at 
different points throughout the year. 
While the proposal appears to have the effect of transferring a substantial 
part of the burden of the seasonal 2% sales tax to vacation and seasonal visitors 
during the summer season, the bill does not impose the additional seasonal tax on 
sales of prepared food, the rental of lodging or short-term rental of automobiles— 
transactions which are often purchased by nonresidents. 
Taxable services under 36 M.R.S. section l752(l7-B) that are taxed at the 
5.5% rate include the transmission and distribution of electricity; the sale of an 
extended service contract on an automobile or truck; and the sale of prepaid calling 
service. All would be subject to the additional 2% seasonal sales tax. 
The Administration also notes the following technical concerns: 
v MRS recommends that any increase in the personal exemption amount 
apply to taxable years beginning during the following calendar year. An 
increase that applies to the current taxable year will immediately conﬂict 
with already published tax tables, forms, and instructions relied upon by 
taxpayers, practitioners, and software developers. 
0 The bill should be amended to clarify whether the personal exemption 
amount is to be permanently changed once the Fund reaches a sufficient 
level for an increase. 
0 The bill requires the State Tax Assessor to determine any increase in the 
personal exemption amount for the current taxable year ggg the annual 
inﬂation adjustment is calculated. The annual inflation adjustment is 
applied to the amount contained in 36 M.R.S. § 5126-A and applies to the 
subseguent taxable year.
4
I Sections 4 and 6 of the bill should be coordinated with the annual 
inﬂation adjustment of the Sales Tax Fairness Credit required by 36 
M.R.S. § 5403(5). 
1 The seasonal sales tax period should begin on the ﬁrst day of a month 
and end on the last day of a month. 
0 Medical cannabis and prepared food containing medical cannabis 
products are taxed as tangible personal property, but at different rates. 
The bill would impose the additional 2% on sales of medical cannabis, 
but not on prepared food that contains medical cannabis (as it is taxed at 
8%). The seasonal tax would also not apply to sales of adult use 
cannabis. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill continues to be under review. 
Administrative costs are still under review and are likely to be signiﬁcant. 
For example, multiple lines would need to be added to the Sales Tax Return. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
