Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine | becca@mainecohn.org | www.mainecohn.org 1   Testimony of Becca Matusovich, Executive Director Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine on LD 1941, Resolve to Ensure Access to Critical Orthodontic Care by  Increasing the MaineCare Reimbursement Rate  Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services Public Hearing: May 22, 2023 Position: Neither For Nor Against  Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Committee on Health and Human Services.  My name is Becca Matusovich and I am Executive Director of the Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine. COHN is a collaborative effort of many individuals and organizations working together to create a Maine where all children can grow up free from preventable dental disease.  I want to express my gratitude, yet again, for all of the good work you have already done to support and prioritize good oral health policy, and today I am here to speak neither for nor against LD 1941 but to offer some thoughts on it. First, I so appreciate the intent behind this bill. There is a desperate situation in this state regarding access to basic dental care, and even more so when it comes to specialty care like orthodontics, pediatric dentistry, oral surgery, endodontics, and more.  I am in multiple conversations every week, where people are struggling with the challenges of how to help children access the care they need.  It is not just in some counties, and it is not even just bad for children with MaineCare.  It is across the board a very challenging reality we are living in, and it is so frustrating and heartbreaking to have to face people who are in pain and tell them that there simply are no options.   Secondly, as the parent of a child who needed extensive orthodontic treatment, I know first-hand that orthodontic treatment is way more than cosmetics. Her teeth looked just fine, but her bite was just slightly off and the damage that this did to the disc and ligaments in her jaw finally one day caused the disc to slip out of place and her jaw to lock.  Thank goodness we had good employer-sponsored dental benefits and a health savings account.  It took several years in a specialized splint followed by several years of braces in order to realign her bite, at an out of pocket cost of over $7,500. We were very fortunate that were in a position to be able to afford this care on a payment plan because I don’t know how she would have managed without it.     Many people don’t realize that by definition MaineCare only covers medically necessary orthodontic treatment, so when children with MaineCare need orthodontic care and can’t access it, their lives are seriously impacted.  Currently there are only a few orthodontic practices in the state who take 

Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine | becca@mainecohn.org | www.mainecohn.org 2 MaineCare, and my understanding is that none of them are taking new patients.  Several of the few remaining orthodontists taking MaineCare have retired or are soon retiring, and the efforts to recruit new orthodontists to those practices have been futile. The MaineCare rates are certainly a major factor - the financial model simply doesn’t work because the current fees are not enough to cover the costs of employing an orthodontist and the necessary assistants, even in a non-profit dental center. Although I can see this is a serious problem, I actually don’t know enough to offer an informed opinion about whether this bill, as well intentioned as it is, will solve it.  It may be helpful in stopping the bleeding temporarily. However, I know that MaineCare worked very hard to create a strategic and intentional approach to rate setting, and although that process failed to produce sustainable rates for orthodontics, I do respect the need for a more strategic approach.  I would really like to see the Department work proactively with the partners in the MaineCare Advisory Council’s Dental Subcommittee, where we have had quite a few discussions about this challenge, to come up with a solution that can be implemented this year, not waiting until the next rate revision process.  Kids who need medically-necessary orthodontic treatment cannot wait another year or two, and any remaining provider capacity we have will just continue to crumble in the meantime.    Thank you, once again, for your support and commitment to real solutions to the oral health challenges that face our state.  I would be happy to answer questions if I can. 
