Testimony Neither in Support nor Opposition 
 
LD 1941, Resolve, to Ensure Access to Critical Orthodontic Care by Increasing the 
MaineCare Reimbursement Rate 
 
Dr. Kailee Williams, DMD 
President, Maine Oral Health Centers Alliance (MOHCA) 
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, my name is Dr. Kailee Williams and I am the president of the Maine Oral Health 
Centers Alliance (MOHCA), which consists of representatives from Waterville Community 
Dental Center, Kennebec Valley Family Dental, Jessie Albert Dental and Orthodontic Center, St. 
Apollonia Dental Center, and Community Dental Center. I am writing to provide comment on 
behalf of our dental centers for LD 1941.  
  
The Maine Oral Health Centers Alliance would like to thank and acknowledge the sponsor of 
this bill, Senator Stewart of Aroostook, and the cosponsors for bringing attention to a very 
critical access issue that our centers and other providers who accept MaineCare have been 
facing.  
 
Many, if not most, of our patients must travel over an hour to one of the very few and very 
overwhelmed offices still accepting new patients. Our organizations agree that reimbursement 
for orthodontic services as it stands at $2900 is grossly insufficient and acknowledge that an 
increase in reimbursement to $5,000 would bring MaineCare closer to what is likely the 
benchmark in costs associated. We also want to acknowledge that we have been actively 
involved in conversations with MaineCare regarding benchmarking and are aware that there is 
an existing timeline of events that begins later this year, which includes stakeholder 
engagement, to work on creating a methodology for reimbursement that more adequately 
reflects the costs of providing this service.  
 
It is important for our organization to be involved in supporting the systematic changes that are 
necessary to build a sustainable oral health system. Without a clear picture of how this resolve 
would go into effect we cannot fully support or oppose the measure. If the outcome of this 
resolve is to allow for an immediate rate change, in an emergency capacity, and would not 
interfere with the existing plan within MaineCare to proceed with a robust benchmarking and 
rate setting process then we do not see how it could do anything but help the patients and 
overburdened oral health workforce.  
 
I would be happy to answer any and all questions about this issue and can be contacted at 
kwilliams20@une.edu .  
