 
 
 
  
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
 
May 23, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Karen Bazemore, 
and I am the Director of the Jessie Albert Dental and Orthodontic Center 
(JADOC), a program of Catholic Charities Maine.  We are a non-profit oral 
health care center that served over 5,000 patients last year with high 
quality dental and orthodontic care.  We are one of the largest providers 
of orthodontic services to MaineCare patients in the state.  Catholic 
Charities Maine has operated an orthodontic program for over a decade 
and treats patients from 15 out of Maine’s 16 counties. JADOC is a 
member of the Maine Oral Health Centers Alliance (MOHCA) which 
comprises the 5 major non-profit dental providers in Maine who deliver 
care to MaineCare patients. 
I am writing in support of LD 1941. It will improve the financial viability of 
nonprofit organizations delivering orthodontic care and could attract more 
private providers to accept MaineCare orthodontic patients. 
There is a critical shortage of dental care in Maine, especially specialty 
care like orthodontics, oral surgery, endodontics, and more.  The shortage 
of these services is even more acute for MaineCare patients, due to low 
numbers of providers/provider slots for this population.  Recently, our full-
time orthodontist (who provided 66% of all orthodontic services at JADOC) 
‘retired’ from JADOC to concentrate on his private practice and family.  
Our search for his successor has proven to be challenging, lengthy, and 
costly, requiring us to contract with a professional search firm.  Of the 60+ 
orthodontists they contacted on our behalf, well over 95% declined to 
consider a move to Maine.  
During the period between his retirement and until we have a new 
provider on board, we have been forced to take the difficult step of halting 
accepting new patients (and are referring them to the only 3 remaining 
MaineCare orthodontic providers). The reduction in orthodontics capacity 
has lengthened the wait times between follow-up visits for patients in 
treatment and raising the per/patient cost of care.  We were fortunate to  
 
Most Rev. Robert P. 
Deeley, J.C.D. 
President 
 
Lauren Moody 
Chair 
 
Stephen P. Letourneau 
Chief Executive Officer 
 
Meredith L. Davis, DMD 
Clinical Director 
 
Karen A. Bazemore RDH, IPDH, B.S. 
Director of Oral Health Services 
 
 
 
 
 
171 Congress Avenue 
Bath, ME 04530 
 
T.  (207) 443-9721  
Toll Free 1-888-304-8020 
F. (207) 443-9722 
 
JADC@ccmaine.org  
www.JessieAlbertDental.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   
2 recruit an orthodontist from UNE to provide care 1 day/week during this period.  Without these 
measures, CCM would have been unable to weather the financial losses associated with the 
retirement. 
CCM agrees that the current reimbursement rate of $2931.11 for orthodontic services is grossly 
insufficient to cover the costs of delivering care.  An increase in the reimbursement rate to 
$5,000 for the CDT code D8080 would bring MaineCare closer to the actual cost of care.  
Typically, MaineCare patients are more costly to treat and remain in treatment longer than 
patients receiving orthodontic care from private orthodontic providers. This is because they 
have more complex orthodontic needs.  To be eligible for coverage under MaineCare, the 
patient is assessed per the “Handicapping Labiolingual Deviation (HDL) Index Report” and must 
“score” a minimum number of points to demonstrate  significant orthodontic treatment needs.  
“Simple” cases do not meet this threshold.  MaineCare patients thus by definition have 
treatment that is significantly more complex and lengthier than the orthodontic patient 
population overall.  As the complexity of a case increases the cost to treat that case also 
increases.  
LD 1941, as an emergency measure, will help stabilize our program.  We are eager to engage 
with MaineCare in the next rate setting exercise.  At that time, we will be advocating improving 
the methodology for benchmarks used to determine the new rates, which do not reflect the 
financial reality of the insurance or MaineCare orthodontic provider landscape in Maine. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  I would be happy to answer all questions you may 
have. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
