M Al NE 
DENTAL " 
ASSQClATl®N 
Testimony of the Maine Dental Association 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee 
In Support Of 
LD 1941 Resolve, to Ensure Access to Critical Orthodontic Care by increasing the 
MaineCare Reimbursement Rate 
Public Hearing: Thursday, May 22, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Distinguished Members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee: 
My name is Therese Cahill, and I serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Dental 
Association. The MDA is a statewide association dedicated to advancing excellence in dentistry. 
The MDA represents roughly 74% of the dentists in Maine; there are approximately 700 
practicing and retired dentists who are active members of the association. 
On behalf of the Maine Dental Association, l am respectfully providing testimony in support of 
LD 1941 Resolve, to Ensure Access to Critical Orthodontic Care by Increasing the MaineCare 
Reimbursement Rate and thank the sponsor for bringing this bill forward. 
We are all aware that Maine, despite passage of an adult Medicaid dental benefit and increase 
in dental fees across the board, continues to struggle with sufficient access to care. The MDA 
continues to work with the Office of MaineCare Services (OMS) on the issues that have stymied 
access to recipients of MaineCare insurance. We appreciate their partnership and intentional 
processes of rate determination and review, and we understand the rate determination process 
will again begin later this year. MDA member dentists along with advocates and other 
interested parties participated in numerous stakeholder meetings convened by OMS during the 
rate determination process prior to the Chapter 25 Rule being finalized last fall, and we look 
forward to again being at the table during the next review. 
The MDA is cognizant of the fact that — while most particularly in the northern half of the State 
— the availability of orthodontic services is limited. That said, access issues are also now 
apparent in all areas of the state, as pediatric dentists in southern Maine are finding they too 
have no one to send their patients to. 
When the final proposed Chapter 25 Rule was released in August of last year, the MDA had 
several concerns which were stated in our public comments. Among our biggest challenges 
with the rates were for orthodontic care. While these rates increased for the first time in well 
PO Box 215 Manchester, ME 04351 ~ T 207.622.7900 - F 207.622.6210 - medental.org
over a decade, the methodology for orthodontia compared rates from private insurance plans 
that typically cover $1,000 - $3,000 because often the work done is cosmetic. However, 
MaineCare requires cases to be deemed ”medically necessary" , which puts the needs of these 
patients on a higher intensity treatment level. Because of that difference, we believe a 
different methodology should be utilized in order to determine the most appropriate rate. 
As an example, an orthodontic practice offered the following comments: 
While there are many orthodontists enrolled as providers, most are not accepting new patients. 
At the clinic where I work we currently have 500+ new patients waiting for treatment to begin; 
the office receives 20 — 30 new patient calls daily. There lg a/ready a significant access to care 
issue. 
The rates for comprehensive orthodontic treatment reflect a 7.5% fee increase which does not 
cover the increased cost of doing business or inflation. Typically, dental professionals incura 
one-time cost for an extraction, crown, filling, etc. In orthodontics, we are responsible for 
replacing an unlimited number of broken brackets, wires, and appliances. lVlaineCare does not 
reimburse for broken brackets or wires. If a patient comes to their appointment with 10 broken 
brackets, we cannot bill. if we choose to cease orthodontic treatment due to excessive 
breakage, then we are required to refund Mainecare based on the percentage of treatment 
completed. 
As MaineCare providers we treat only the most difficult cases; patients must qualify under the 
HLD scoring standard. We are treating patients with 9+mm overjets, bilateral palatally 
impacted canines, and impinging deep bites, and as a result, cases typically take 
longer. MaineCare reimbursement rates for these more complex cases is likely closer to 40% of 
commercial insurance rates. 
We recognize that the need in our State is great and will continue to encourage our members 
to actively participate in serving those in need. While the MDA does not as a matter of course 
track charity care, I would like to highlight examples of free or reduced fee care provided to 
patients by I\/laine dentists as indicated by a survey of our members: 
0 Question: If you provide charity care to patients who cannot afford dental treatment, 
what is the estimated annual value of the free care you provide? Of the 231 total 
respondents, the aggregate total from 118 respondents was $2.4 million, averaging 
$20,348 per respondent. 
0 In 2021, 27% of MDA member dentists participated in a national program, Dental 
Lifeline Network, referred to in Maine as Donated Dental Services (DDS), which provides 
dental treatment to individuals with disabilities or who are elderly or medically fragile 
and cannot afford or otherwise access treatment for severe dental conditions; the 
national average is 17%. 
Thank you for your time and attention.
