 19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622-7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®    
 Testimony in Support of LD 1673 (“An Act to Encourage Affordable Housing and Mixed-use Development by Establishing a Thriving Corridors Program”)   J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  May 15, 2023  Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.   The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports LD 1673. The bill is a complement to the landmark legislation sponsored by former Speaker Fecteau last session (PL 672 “An Act To Implement the Recommendations of the Commission To Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying Zoning and Land Use Restrictions”). That bill encouraged Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) development by requiring municipalities to update their zoning ordinances to allow ADUs – thus ensuring that property owners may contribute to solving the affordable housing shortage. PL 672 focuses on what can be done at the municipal level to address Maine’s affordable housing shortage and LD 1673 complements the new law by providing municipalities technical support and funding to redevelop high-impact corridors. We need additional housing units to balance the market and that’s exactly what LD 1673 would help achieve.   For these reasons, we support LD 1673 and respectfully urge you to vote ought to pass. Thank you for your time and consideration.   
