 
 
 
 
Committee on Housing  
℅ Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
May 8 , 2023  
 
RE: LD 1 673, An Act to Encourage Affordable Housing and Mixed -use Development by 
Establishing a Thriving Corridors Program  
 
 
Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere , and Members of the Committee:  
 
 Thank you for the opportunity to submit  testimony in support of  LD 1 673, “An Act to 
Encourage Affordable Housing and Mixed -use Development by Establishing a Thriving 
Corridors Program ”, on behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 members, supporters, and 
volunteers. Since 1843, Maine Audubon has worked to conserve Maine’s wildlife and wildlife 
habitat by engagi ng people in education, conservation, and action. The oldest and largest Maine -
based conservation organization, Maine Audubon has eight public centers and sanctuaries across 
the state, seven chapters, and connects with more than 250,000 people annually.  
 
 Maine Audubon recognizes the incredible importance of land use law for creating 
thriving communities  and for conserving valuable habitats and natural resources. By encouraging 
the identification and development of high -impact corridors near municipal downtowns or 
village center s, Maine’s communities can concentrate development closest to existing , high-use 
development  (including downtowns and village centers) , rather than increasing sprawl and in 
turn, habitat fragmentation . By allowing  higher densities/smaller lots in these corridors and 
creating a thriving mixed use downtown or village center, a community can increase the 
desirability of living and working close together , while  protecting farming, forestry, important 
natural resources, and recreation  in surrounding  rural areas. This approach – again – removes 
development pressure from existing undeveloped areas , as well as  reduces time, greenhouse gas 
emissions, and dollars spent traveli ng.  
 
Maine Audubon also recognizes the value to the community and to local wildlife 
populations of offsetting higher human use in one area of town with protection of open space  
and/or rural lands and industries  in other areas of town . When higher densities are allowed within 
the heart of a community, undeveloped conserved lands can provide an invaluable resource for 
the community and  an opportunity for the municipality to support a balance between developed 
 
 
and undeveloped lands . Therefore, we recommend removing Section 4494(2)(G) , thereby 
allowing a community to include a reasonable open space requirement if they so desire.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Eliza Donoghue, Esq.  
Director of Advocacy  

