“Our Latchstring Always Out”  
  
Erin Zwirko, AICP,  LEED AP,  Town Planner  Tel:  207- 846-2401  
E-mail:  ezwirko@yarmouth.me.us  Fax: 207-846-2438  
  
TOWN OF YARMOUTH 
200 Main Street, Yarmouth, Maine 04096 
www.yarmouth.me.us  
May 11, 2023 
 Dear  Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Erin 
Zwirko and I am the Director of Planning and Development for the Town of Yarmouth.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on LD 1673. The Town of Yarmouth has successfully implemented a 
form -based code for our major corridors, Main Street and Route One. The form-based code, known as the Character 
Based Development Code, strives to facilitate the predictable contextually- based planning and development of walkable 
mixed use human-scaled places, similar to the goals of the LD under consideration.  
 
Yarmouth’s code supports infill development that exemplifies the historic qualitie s of Yarmouth and values the healthy 
balance of uses that comprise the Village Center. We understand that the market is a dynamic condition, and while the 
code does not prescribe a proportion or mix of uses, the code enables our major corridors to grow and  change with time 
and trends. By supporting LD 1637, there is the opportunity to assist other municipalities in the development of similar regulations that suit the needs of those cities and towns, in the same way that Yarmouth’s code is tailored for Yarmo uth. 
 The implementation of Yarmouth’s Character Based Development Code has led to a number of successful infill projects, including Yarmouth Commons at 350 Route One and the Sweetser Apartments at 216 East Main Street, the expansion of the 317 Main Street  Community Music Center, and smaller commercial applications such as Five County Credit Union 
and Cumberland County Credit Union. We are excited for the expected start of projects along Main Street including the 
mixed -use building at 298 Main Street and the extension of our Village Center through the Railroad Square Master Plan.  
These projects happened in Yarmouth and in this location because of our flexible standards that are meant to encourage 
development supported by the community. I have included photos of these projects at the end of my written testimony.  
Route One , in particular , provides  the greatest opportunity to encourage infill and redevelopment in a place that is both 
walkable to the Village and will result in fewer impacts than housing built in other areas of town where the protection of 
natural resources and rural areas are important. Although an update to our comprehensive plan is underway and may 
bring up new ideas for Yarmouth to consider, LD 1637 presents an opportunity to build upon important efforts such as the evolution of the Character Based Development Code and the implemen tation of the North of Portland Route One 
Complete Streets Corridor Plan and appreciate any support from the state in making critical investments to our major corridors.  
 Thank you for your time. I  am happy to be available as a resource to help articulate the benefits of a form -based 
approach that encourages significant development in a way that responds to community goals.  
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
Erin Zwirko, AICP, LEED AP  

 
Illustrative Images fr om Yarmouth’s Character Based Development Code:  
 
  
 Yarmouth Commons, 350 Route One:  
 
 Cumberland County Credit Union, 808 Route One:  
 
 
  

“Our Latchstring Always Out”  
  
Five County Credit Union, 219 Route One:  
 
Sweetser Village Apartments, 216 East Main Street:  
 
 
   

 
317 Main Street Community Music Center: 
 
298 Main Street (Rendering Prepared by Barrett Made): 
 
 
    

“Our Latchstring Always Out”  
  
Railroad Square Master Plan (Rendering s Prepared by Barrett Made): 
 
  

