ST A T E  O F  MA I N E
  
GO V E R N O R ’S OF F I C E  O F  PO L I C Y  INNO V A T I O N  A N D  T H E  FU T U R E  
181  ST A T E  HO U S E  ST A T I O N  
AU G U S T A , MA I N E  
0 4333 -0 181  
  
Testimony Neither For, Nor Against  
L.D. 1673  – An Act to Encourage Affordable Housing and Mixed -use 
Development by Establishing a Thriving Corridors Program  
 
May 12, 2023  
 
Senator Pierce , Representative Gere and distinguished members of the Joint Select  
Committee on Housing , my name is Greg Payne and I am the Senior Advisor on 
Housing  in the Governo r’s Office o f Policy Innovation and the Future. I am o ffering  
testimony neither for, nor against  L.D. 1673 – An A ct to Encourage Affordable 
Housing and Mixed -use Development  by Establishing a Thriving Corridors 
Program.  
 
We believe the concept s contained within L.D. 1673 are very good. There are countless 
corridors  as de scribed by this bill  across Maine that connect residents to village centers. 
Far too often, those very corridors contain mostly commercial operations and very little 
residential development. As a result, these areas are likely strong candidates for mixed -
use planning and deve lopment to help tackle the housing crunch , revitalize empty 
commercial spaces, and build stronger connections to  village center s. 
 
As the committee is aware, last year, the supplemental budget contained a new Housing 
Opportunity Fund  administered by the Department Economic and Community 
Development (DECD). The Fund p rovides grants to services providers and 
municipalities alike to identify  ways to address the need for housing.  The Fund was 
subject to rulemaking which was recently final ized and soon applications will open. The 
effort required to stand -up and administer a program like this is strenuous  and time 
consuming . L.D 1673 would require similar staff support and funding to be successful.  
 
Rather than create a new program, the conc epts contained with in L.D. 1673 appear 
worthy of proposals from Housing Opportunity Fund grant applicants. Perhaps, the 
committee might discuss ways  to encourage towns to consider  the principles of  thriving 
corridors as  a reason to pursue the existing grant funds at DECD. Thriving corridors 
would likely increase the  availability of housing. It would be helpful  to utilize existing 
means to encourage towns that are interested in this idea to explore its implementation. 
This  is exactly where the Housing Opportunity Fund can be leveraged.  
 
Finally, if the committee decides to move forward with this legislation, the Department 
of Administrative and Financial Services (DAFS)  would not be the right agency to house 
this effort . This could be an issue for discussion during the work session.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration of our testimony.  
