 
 
mainehousingcoalition.org                              info@mainehousingcoalition.org 307 Cumberland Street, Portland, ME 04101  
 
131st Legislature 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Testimony of Laura Mitchell, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition   
May 12, 2023 
In favor of 1673 -An Act To Encourage Affordable Housing And Mixed-Use Development By Establishing A Thriving 
Corridors Program sponsored by Representative Traci Gere 
Hello Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name 
is Laura Mitchell, I serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition. 
The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) is a nonprofit membership organization of more than 140 Maine 
housing development, architecture, construction, design, engineering, shelter, and housing services organizations. We 
work to address Maine’s housing crisis by advocating for the creation and preservation of housing for all people in 
Maine.  
MAHC is sharing this testimony today in favor of LD 1673 , a An Act To Encourage Affordable Housing And Mixed-Use 
Development By Establishing A Thriving Corridors Program that is sponsored by Representative Traci Gere.  
This bill establishes a program to assist municipalities in redeveloping high-impact corridors proximate to downtowns or 
village centers into mixed-use, mixed-income, walkable neighborhoods by enabling significant infill and redevelopment 
of underutilized land into housing and more. This is just the type of equitable development needed for affordable 
housing in Maine. 
Maine is in a housing crisis and demand outstrips supply. MAHC supports LD 1673 because it encourages economical 
housing development by focusing it in areas that already have infrastructure (sewer, water, roads), and don’t encroach 
on natural resources. Further, this bill unlocks wealth in Maine by adding new buildings to support the municipal tax 
base in areas that often see significant retail turnover. and that are largely underutilized with large parking lots or 
empty, unusually sized spaces. Housing, rather than commercial, needs to be prioritized as the highest and best use of 
land in Maine towns when it is built in already developed, high density, walkable areas. 
All Maine towns are impacted by the state’s housing crisis. Towns need to have more tools and policies to address 
housing needs. This proposal will unlock significant development potential in communities of all sizes across Maine. High 
impact corridors exist from Caribou, to South Paris, to Bangor. LD 1673 can be an efficient way to create significant 
economic activity throughout the state. 
LD 1673 is a long-term strategy that should be a part of Maine’s comprehensive approach to ensuring all Maine people 
have a home. 
Laura Mitchell
Maine Affordable Housing Coalition
LD 1673
131st Legislature Joint Select Committee on Housing
Testimony of Laura Mitchell, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing 
Coalition on May 12, 2023
In favor of 1673 -An Act To Encourage Affordable Housing And Mixed-Use 
Development By Establishing A Thriving Corridors Program sponsored by 
Representative Traci Gere
Hello Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing, my name is Laura Mitchell, I serve as the Executive Director 
of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition.
The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) is a nonprofit membership 
organization of more than 140 Maine housing development, architecture, 
construction, design, engineering, shelter, and housing services organizations. We 
work to address Maine’s housing crisis by advocating for the creation and 
preservation of housing for all people in Maine. 
MAHC is sharing this testimony today in favor of LD 1673, a An Act To Encourage 
Affordable Housing And Mixed-Use Development By Establishing A Thriving 
Corridors Program that is sponsored by Representative Traci Gere. 
This bill establishes a program to assist municipalities in redeveloping high-impact 
corridors proximate to downtowns or village centers into mixed-use, mixed-income, 
walkable neighborhoods by enabling significant infill and redevelopment of 
underutilized land into housing and more. This is just the type of equitable 
development needed for affordable housing in Maine.
Maine is in a housing crisis and demand outstrips supply. MAHC supports LD 1673 
because it encourages economical housing development by focusing it in areas that 
already have infrastructure (sewer, water, roads), and don’t encroach on natural 
resources. Further, this bill unlocks wealth in Maine by adding new buildings to 
support the municipal tax base in areas that often see significant retail turnover. and 
that are largely underutilized with large parking lots or empty, unusually sized spaces.
Housing, rather than commercial, needs to be prioritized as the highest and best use of
land in Maine towns when it is built in already developed, high density, walkable 
areas.
All Maine towns are impacted by the state’s housing crisis. Towns need to have more 
tools and policies to address housing needs. This proposal will unlock significant 
development potential in communities of all sizes across Maine. High impact 
corridors exist from Caribou, to South Paris, to Bangor. LD 1673 can be an efficient 
way to create significant economic activity throughout the state.
LD 1673 is a long-term strategy that should be a part of Maine’s comprehensive 
approach to ensuring all Maine people have a home.

