Grovx/Smart |\/laine 
2023 
Board of Directors 
Rebecca Casey 
Chair 
Ethan Buxewmacomber 
Vice~Chalr 
lean Claveau 
Treasurer 
Maggie Fleming 
Secretary 
Kirsten Brewer 
Jon Boyton 
Elizabeth Frazier 
Philip I-lussey 
Jeff Levine 
Zoe Miller 
Carol Moms 
Lynne Seeley 
Ben Smith 
Sally Stockwell 
Galen Weibley 
Mark C. Wiesendanger 
Maineﬂousing 
Ex—n}}'icI0 
Rhiannon Harnpson 
USDA: Rural Development 
Ex-oﬂicio 
Daniel Hildreth 
Emeritus 
Evan Rlchert 
Emeritus 
Anna Marie Thron 
Emeritus 227 Water Street, Suite 208 
Augusta, ME 04330 
207-250-0220 
Testimony of Nancy Smith, CEO of GrowSmart Maine 
In Support of LD 1673 An Act to Encourage Affordable Housing and 
Mixed-use Development by Establishing a Thriving Corridors Program 
May 12, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Honorable Members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing, 
My name is Nancy Smith, I live in Ellsworth, and I am the CEO of GrowSmart Maine. 
We are a statewide non-partisan non-proﬁt organization helping communities navigate 
change in alignment with smart growth. We advocate for comprehensive policies and 
funding for smart growth practices and outcomes. 
We have partnered with Build Maine to guide a transparent crowd-sourcing of policy 
proposals that began a year ago, and has drawn together over a hundred people from 
across Maine and beyond. Policy Action 2023 has resulted in sixteen proposals from 
eight working groups, all addressing the shared goal, “to address barriers to and 
create incentives for equitable, sustainable growth and development that 
strengthens downtowns and villages of all sizes while pulling 
development pressure away from productive and open natural areas. We 
do so acknowledging that Maine has urban, rural, and suburban settings 
for which any solution may or may not be a ﬁt and a variety of people 
who deserve to be welcomed to their communities. ” 
LD 1673 is one of the most exciting of the Policy Action 2023 proposals because it is 
here that we directly address the interdependence between traffic patterns and road 
design with land use policy and patterns. If we are to facilitate the reuse of aging 
commercial strips as thriving corridors of mixed use development that include housing, 
transportation and land use must be considered together. 
This bill encourages new investment along existing public infrastructure to support the 
municipal tax base in areas that often see significant retail turnover and that are largely 
underutilized. This includes ending the practice of mandating off-street parking spaces, 
which hollows out communities, drives up the cost of development, and prevents 
valuable land from being used for higher and better uses, such as housing. 
I will take this opportunity to share with you a set of case studies GrowSmart Maine 
developed about ten years ago; Implementing the Vision: First Step Practical Steps to 
Transform C01'D.I1 ’l8I‘Cl3 _,l ,, Strips Into Mixed—Use Centers 
With examples from ten Maine communities, this resource answered the question of whether 
commercial strips in the small town environment such as we find in Maine can be retroﬁtted to meet
the needs of both property owners and the public. One example we are all familiar with in our drive to 
and from the Capitol, is the Augusta Plaza, or KMart Plaza as it was commonly referred to then. This 
study begins on page 52 of the report. “Transforming Commercial Strips into Mixed-Use Centers” lays 
out real examples of the potential for creating thriving corridors. 
LD 1673 puts in place a program to encourage this kind of redevelopment. The Thriving Corridors 
Program is voluntary for municipalities, which can apply for State funds to meet the qualifying criteria. 
The critical part of this proposal is the incentives, including preferential consideration for MaineDOT 
capital funding, Maine State Housing Authority funding for affordable housing and mixed-use projects, 
which will spur robust interest from developers for this kind of redevelopment. Why can’t communities 
just do this now? Because it’s complicated and requires both resources to make it happen, and funding 
incentives to encourage municipalities to lean in and change their usual practice. 
The attached Fact Sheet outlines the intent of the bill as well as the beneﬁts of creating the Thriving 
Corridors Program. These beneﬁts include: 
0 facilitating creation of new housing units, including affordable housing, close to service centers, 
jobs, and social networks 
0 creating safer streets by replacing stop-and-go traffic that ﬂuctuates between too fast and too 
slow with more consistent, slower ﬂow movement that is safe for everyone and less frustrating 
for drivers. 
0 drawing development to under-utilized commercial strips unlocks significant development 
potential in communities of all sizes across Maine. Directing incentives to these areas is an 
efﬁcient way to_create signiﬁcant economic 
0 drawing development pressure away from open and productive lands where natural resource 
enterprises represent the “highest and best use.” 
I am excited by the potential of this proposal, and am eager to work with the Committee in any way that 
is helpful to you.
