 
Town Offices (207) 657 -3339 ∙ Planner /Assessor (207) 657 -3112 ∙ Fax (207) 657 -2852  
  
May 11, 2023  
 
Maine Legislature Joint Select Committee on Housing  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
RE: Testimony in support of LD  1673 
Honorable  Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing : 
On behalf of the Town of Gray, I write in support of LD  1673 - An Act to  
Encourage  Affordable Housing And  Mixed -Use Development  By Establishing A 
Thriving  Corridors Program . The Town of Gray is in the planning and design stages of a 
revitaliz ed Gray Village, which is an historic center of economic activity for the town , 
and which has  significant housing potential that is hampered by substantial through -
traffic from the Maine Turnpike ( I-95 Exit 63 is directly adjacent to two complicate d 
intersections known as “Gray Corner ”), Route 202/4, Route 100, Route 26, and Route 
115. Heavy vehicle traffic cuts through the Gray Village, north to Lewiston  / Auburn on 
Route 100, to avoid the toll booth in New Gloucester . This traffic diversion  contrib utes 
to 67-foot tractor trailer trucks regularly coming within a breath of pedestrians walking 
on Gray Village sidewalks who , if they are brave enough,  must  traverse intersections up 
to 80’ in length to cross Main Street. These untenable safety conditions are repairable 
with better street  design, but as of yet we have been unable to resolve Gray’s desire for 
a friendly street system that supports housing and local development, with the Maine 
Department of Transportation’s (MeDOT) assertion that t hese streets need to be 
designed to road standards  for highway “levels of service” , with the preferences  of 
truck  driver s and the speed of through -traffic  taking precedence over th ose of local 
residents and the Town’s economic future.  
{continued}  
TOWN OF GRAY  
Henry Pennell Municipal Complex  
24 Main St, Gray Maine 04039  
www.graymaine.org  OFFICE OF THE TOWN MANAGER  
Nate Rudy, Town Manager  
nrudy@graymaine.org  
(207) 657 -3339  
 
Town Offices (207) 657 -3339 ∙ Planner /Assessor (207) 657 -3112 ∙ Fax (207) 657 -2852  
 Taking a coordinated approach to transportation and land use planning, with the State 
helping to support local housing and economic development objectives, can help create  
streets that feel safer and that have a greater chance for attracting investment .  Slower, 
safer streets are critical for making a place comfortable and safe for future residents. 
This kind of coordinated land use and transportation plan that results in more walkable 
and bikeable places also  improves community health, reduces climate impacts, and 
increases quality of life.  Despite these obvious gains for a town like Gray, which has a 
2020 Comprehensive Plan that directs exactly these types of local investments in a 
pedestrian -friendly Gray Village  that invites new housing, business , and real estat e 
development , we have been told that we cannot expect the road construction projects 
slated for Gray Village to be designed with these goals as the top priority . Without a 
coordinated effort between the State and the Town , and support for local planning t hat 
works to advance both state and local goals, we have little ability to get housing built . 
We believe that streets can be designed to slow traffic naturally, and that lower speeds 
will make Gray safer and more attractive for residential and other develo pment, with 
only minimal delays for through -traffic .  I have great hope that Gray and MeDOT will 
come to an agreement on a people -safe street design . Passing LD 1673  will begin to  give 
municipalities some support from the State in advancing these critical local action plans 
that seek to produce housing in our town centers and corridors . 
Thank you for your consideration  in support of LD  1673 . 
Respectfully,  
 
 
Nate Rudy, Town Manager  
 
 
 
 
 
CC: Gray Town Council  
Nathaniel Rudy
Town of Gray
LD 1673
Maine Legislature Joint Select Committee on Housing
c/o Legislative Information Office
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
RE: Testimony in support of LD 1673
Honorable Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing:
On behalf of the Town of Gray, I write in support of LD 1673 - An Act to Encourage 
Affordable Housing And Mixed-Use Development By Establishing A Thriving 
Corridors Program. The Town of Gray is in the planning and design stages of a 
revitalized Gray Village, which is an historic center of economic activity for the town,
and which has significant housing potential that is hampered by substantial 
through-traffic from the Maine Turnpike (I-95 Exit 63 is directly adjacent to two 
complicated intersections known as “Gray Corner”), Route 202/4, Route 100, Route 
26, and Route 115. Heavy vehicle traffic cuts through the Gray Village, north to 
Lewiston / Auburn on Route 100, to avoid the toll booth in New Gloucester. This 
traffic diversion contributes to 67-foot tractor trailer trucks regularly coming within a 
breath of pedestrians walking on Gray Village sidewalks who, if they are brave 
enough, must traverse intersections up to 80’ in length to cross Main Street. These 
untenable safety conditions are repairable with better street design, but as of yet we 
have been unable to resolve Gray’s desire for a friendly street system that supports 
housing and local development, with the Maine Department of Transportation’s 
(MeDOT) assertion that these streets need to be designed to road standards for 
highway “levels of service”, with the preferences of truck drivers and the speed of 
through-traffic taking precedence over those of local residents and the Town’s 
economic future.
{continued}
Taking a coordinated approach to transportation and land use planning, with the State 
helping to support local housing and economic development objectives, can help 
create streets that feel safer and that have a greater chance for attracting investment.  
Slower, safer streets are critical for making a place comfortable and safe for future 
residents. This kind of coordinated land use and transportation plan that results in 
more walkable and bikeable places also improves community health, reduces climate 
impacts, and increases quality of life.  Despite these obvious gains for a town like 
Gray, which has a 2020 Comprehensive Plan that directs exactly these types of local 
investments in a pedestrian-friendly Gray Village that invites new housing, business, 
and real estate development, we have been told that we cannot expect the road 
construction projects slated for Gray Village to be designed with these goals as the 
top priority. Without a coordinated effort between the State and the Town, and 
support for local planning that works to advance both state and local goals, we have 
little ability to get housing built.
We believe that streets can be designed to slow traffic naturally, and that lower speeds
will make Gray safer and more attractive for residential and other development, with 
only minimal delays for through-traffic.  I have great hope that Gray and MeDOT will
come to an agreement on a people-safe street design. Passing LD 1673 will begin to 
give municipalities some support from the State in advancing these critical local 
action plans that seek to produce housing in our town centers and corridors.
Thank you for your consideration in support of LD 1673.
Respectfully,
Nate Rudy, Town Manager 
