 
 
 Memorandum  
 
 
TO:   Joint Select  Committee on Housing  
 
FROM:  Nina Fisher, Deputy Commissioner at MaineDOT  
  Maine Department of Transportation  
 
DATE:   May 12, 2023  
 
RE:  MaineDOT Concerns with  LD 1673 , An Act to Encourage Affordable  Housing 
and Mi xed-use Development  by Establishing a Thriving Corridors Program  
 
              
 
 
Senator Pierce , Representative Gere , and members of the Housing  Committee , MaineDOT 
would like t o share  some concerns  for your consideration as you  further  deliberate  on LD 1643, 
An Act to Encourage Affordabl e Housing and Mix ed-use Development by Establishing a 
Thriving Corridors Program .   
 
LD 1643 would requi re that MaineDOT prioritize funding for thriving co rridors programs 
established  by the bill  and as such it is an attempt to earmark highway fund dollars, something 
the department  historically opposes.  MaineDOT ’s annual Three -Year  Work plan is compiled 
based on  asset management  system s which strive to pro vide the highest quality overall 
transportation system for users .  We are responsible  for the oversight  and maintenance of a vast 
multimodal transportation system that includes 8,800 miles of state highway, 2,800 bridges, six 
commercial airports, hundreds of miles of railroad, three major seaports, a state ferr y service, and 
miles of active transportation corridors.   Simply put Maine has many transportation needs and 
limited resources to tend to those needs.  
 
Many of the requirements outline d in LD 1643 are duplicative of current MaineDOT programs .  
MaineDOT currently has programs in place to assist communities with “quick -build ” type 
projects.  The Planning Partnership Initiative  (PPI)  and Village Partner ship Initiative  (VPI)  are 
intended to foster communication and collaboration with municipalities  and assis t communities 
finan cially and technically in planning improvements that balance the needs of all users.  The 
VPI program  was established to work closely with municipalities to focus on village centers and 
downtowns with the goal of making these areas more walkable and bikeable for patrons and 
residents. Examples of these types of projects in rural areas can be found in Naples, Fryeburg 
and Belgrade, to name a f ew. In urban areas MaineDOT has reconstructed downtown Ogunquit 
and more recently engaged in a robust planning process for roadway improvements in 
 
 
 
Libbytown in Portland. The project will include improved sidewalks, bike lanes and improved 
road crossings fo r better pedestrian visibility.  
 
MaineDOT has a long history of providing for the needs of all modes of travel in the planning, 
programming, design, rehabilitation, maintenance, and construction of the state’s transportation 
system. We currently plan and c onstruct facilities based on context -sensitive elements of the 
roadway as dictated in our Complete Streets Policy. The intent of this policy is to help ensure 
that all users of Maine’s transportation system, including bicyclists and pedestrians, have safe 
and efficient access to the transportation system.    
 
MaineDOT respectfully request s that parts 4 and 5 under §4495 be removed.  Thank you  for 
your consideration of MaineDOT ’s concerns with the proposed legislation . 
 
 
 
 
