 Testimony for Public Hearing  
 JOINT ST ANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCA TION AND CUL TURAL AFF AIRS  
 March 29, 2023  
 Angie Buker MSN, RN, NCSN  
 President, Maine Association of School Nurses  
 abuker@aos94.org  
 In Opposition of  
 LD 1042 “An Act to Update Youth Sports Concussion and Injury Prevention Protocols” 
 March 28, 2023 
 Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee: 
 I am the President for the Maine Association of School Nurses (MASN) and a member of the National 
 Association of School Nurses (NASN).  On behalf of  MASN, please consider the following testimony in 
 opposition of  LD 1042  “An Act to Update Youth Sports Concussion and Injury Prevention Protocols”. 
 We at MASN have reviewed the above proposed legislation and have concluded that we can not support LD 
 1042 as it is written for the following reasons: 
 The purpose of this document is confusing.  The title suggests that the document is to include “prevention” 
 measures to prevent head injuries and/or concussions, which is not actually the case. There are no prevention 
 measures discussed here at all.  The document discusses actions to be taken  following  a head injury and 
 educational materials that would need to be provided to parents, athletes and coaches prior to engaging in the 
 athletic activity.  The requirements of the educational information do not refer to specific prevention 
 measures.  Specific, evidence based education regarding preventing head injuries, such as proper helmet fit 
 and safety gear, should be included. 
 The definition of “head injury” in this document is vague and could include minor injuries, such as minor 
 abrasions,  that would not require medical follow up or time out of play.  Requiring students to be seen by a 
 provider for minor injuries would be an unnecessary burden on families and could lead to lost educational 
 time for students awaiting appointments.  This requirement would also place an additional burden on the 
 already over capacitated health care system. 
 The definition of “athletic activity” is very specific but not all inclusive. There are activities such as golf, 
 tennis and figure skating that have potential for head injuries but would not be included in this guidance.  A 
 broader definition such as “a program or event, including practice and competition, during which youth 
 athletes participate or practice to participate in an organized athletic game or competition against another 
 team, club, entity or individual” would be more inclusive. 
 Testimony for Public Hearing  
 JOINT ST ANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCA TION AND CUL TURAL AFF AIRS  
 For these reasons, MASN opposes  LD 1042  “An Act to Update Youth Sports Concussion and Injury 
 Prevention Protocols”.  MASN is willing to act as a resource and provide evidence based practice 
 information with any revisions that may take place.  Thank you for your time. 
