 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health of all Maine 
people 
 
TO:   Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
 
FROM: Dan Morin – Director of Communications and Government Affairs  
 
DATE:  March 29, 2023 
 
SUPPORT with amendments – LD 1042  - An Act to Update Youth Sports Concussion and Injury 
Prevention Protocols 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a volunteer statewide professional organization of more than 
4,300 current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties and practice settings. 
 
“When in doubt, sit it out.” 
 
Mild traumatic brain injury, also known as concussion, is common in adults and youth and is a 
major health concern. Concussions account for 80% to 90% of traumatic brain injuries. 
 
Kids take longer to recover from a concussion. 
 
There are a range of physical, emotional, and psychological symptoms and depending on the 
person and the severity of the concussion, our members broadly say patients take three to four 
weeks to recover, although 20 percent of people can require more than a month. 
 
• There is no “cure” for a concussion and no formula when assessing whether someone 
has a concussion. 
• Repeated concussions and blows to the head increase risk for neurodegenerative 
diseases, including chronic traumatic encephalopathy. 
• Second impact syndrome is the major concern - preventing a catastrophic second 
injury. 
• That window of second impact syndrome danger is unknown.  
 
Suggested Amendments 
 
Section 1, Definitions – (D) clarify the definition of “Health care provider”  
 
While we appreciate the specification of, “a licensed person trained in the evaluation and 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties and practice settings.  
 management of head injuries within the scope of the person’s practice,” it’s critical to ensure that 
the health care provider is appropriately and thoroughly trained and educated in concussion 
management. Physicians, including, but not limited to neurologists and certain other providers 
are both allowed by law, and appropriately educated and trained to diagnose and treat 
concussions. 
 
The MMA recommends the following amendment: 
 
(D). “Health care provider” means a physician licensed under Title 32, Chapters 36 or 48, 
physician assistant licensed under Title 32, Chapters 36 or Chapter 48, or licensed advanced 
practice registered nurse licensed under Title 32, Chapter 31.   
 
Section 2, Sustained injury 
 
Lines 29 & 30: 
 
… ensure that the athlete completes a return to play protocol that lasts no more 
than 7 days and is supervised by a health care provider.  
 
Maine’s physicians consistently oppose codifying standards of care and prefer rulemaking 
when necessary. 
 
Section 4, Contents of educational materials. Educational information shall be developed in 
consultation with a statewide professional association of physicians licensed under Title 23, 
Chapters 36 or 48, and provided in accordance with subsection 3 must include the following 
information 
 
Request for Clarification 
 
Section 2 (B) 
 
• What constitutes “supervised by a health care provider”? 
 
Resources: 
 
American Academy of Neurology: Concussion Quality Measurement Set  
US CDC: Sports Concussion Policies and Laws  
Journal of the American Medical Association: 
• Early Subthreshold Aerobic Exercise for Sport-Related Concussion  
• Associations of Apolipoprotein E ε4 Genotype and Ball Heading With Verbal Memory in 
Amateur Soccer Players  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide the committee with our comments and suggestions.  
