Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
Vic
e President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
Tre
asurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
Secr
etary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
Imm
ediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
Boa
rd of Directors  
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Jos
eph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
*Resident Board Representatives
**Medical Student Representatives
Staff
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director  
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Man
chester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185 
www.maineaap.orgTestimony of Maine Chapter , American Academy of Pediatrics in Opposition   
of LD 1042 , ‘An Act to Update Youth Sports Concussion and Injury Prevention Protocols ’ 
Senator Rafferty and Representative Brennan and members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs, t he Maine  Cha pter of the American Academy of Pediatrics has reviewed 
the above proposed legislation and has concluded that as currently written, we cannot 
support LD 1042 for the following reasons:  
• The language within LD 1042 is vague including "head injury" whi ch is not
further  defined as concussion or  traumatic br ain injury. S pecifically, i n Subsection 2B, 
this could prompt a r equirement o f a 7- day return -to-play pr otocol f or a scalp 
laceration or  any o ther he ad injury t hat do es no t include t raumatic br ain injury.  
This w ould b e inappropriate t o exclude a n athlete f rom s port f or many t ypes of head 
injuries. T here are in f act some h ead in juries t hat d o not re quire re moval  from sport. I t 
is als o standard p ractice in the fie ld of sports m edicine t o allow f or sidelin e assessment 
and t he proposed bill does not all ow f or multiple c ircumstances t hat w ould b e 
evidence -based an d ap propriate f or returning an at hlete to p lay. C ertified a thletic 
trainers an d sports medicine p hysicians are trained t o determine c learance an d this 
proposed le gislation c ould ultimately s upplant the ir expertise in m any c ircumstances.  
• The stipulation of "a return-to-pl ay protocol that lasts no fewer than 7 days" would  
be inappropriate under  many circumstances. A minimum of 7 days to return is neither  
evidence
-based nor reasonable for  most head injuries. For example,  the CDC return to  
play progression after concussion outlines 6 steps and does not mandate that this  
occurs over 7 days, nor even 6 days. Medical clearance for stages of return to play 
should be decided by a health care professional  (physician,  advanced practice  
professional, or certified athletic trainer) and could be fewer than 7 days in many  
circumstances.
• The definition of a health care pr ovider is vague and could lead to interpretation that  
clearance could be performed by many individuals who are not trained in concussion  
appropriately for clearance/evaluation. Clarification should be provided regarding 
appropriate licensure and training for individuals who manage concussions.
• If certified athletic trainers are not included in the types of health care providers who  
can provide clearance, then all athletes with any injury to their  head would require a  
visit with a healthcare professional that may delay return as well as overburden the  
healthcare system in appropriately. For example, an athlete who has a small cut to the 
forehead that just needs a bandage, could be interpreted as requiring clearance from a 
health care provider before returning to sport.
• Inappropriately pr olonging return to activity may be detrimental to mental and 
physical health, as well as potentially pr olonging recovery in athletes with concussion.
If the parties proposing this legislation are interested in making revisions  to help reach the 
intended goals,  the Maine AAP can provide consultants with experience and expertise in 
concussion and head injury management.
