3/28/2? 3 30 PM Testimony LD 1042 - Google Docs 
Co-Chair Senator Rafferty and Co-Chair Brennan.....Good morning to you and the rest 
of the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. Thank you for allowing me the 
opportunity to speak on LD 1042: An Act To Update Youth Sport Concussion and Injury 
Prevention Protocols. My name is John Ryan and l am the Past President of the Maine 
Athletic Trainers Association and the head athletic trainer at South Portland High 
School. 
l am testifying this morning neither for or against LD 1042. As you willfor have already 
heard this morning, no one is against youth athlete health and safety. No one is against 
ensuring youth coaches are educated to recognize the signs and symptoms ofa 
concussion, removing them from play and having them assessed by a licensed 
healthcare provider. In fact we are already doing that at the high school and middle 
school levels. We are also providing educational materials to athletes and 
parents/guardians and requiring that they sign off that they have read and understood 
the information provided. Coaches are also required as part of their education and 
requirements to be able to coach in Maine to take the NFHS Concussion in Sport 
course. Additionally, 55% of Maine secondary schools employ the sen/ices of nationally 
board certiﬁed/Maine state licensed athletic trainers who are highly qualified to assess 
and manage these types of injuries in addition to sudden cardiac arrest, heat-related 
illness and orthopdeic injuries. 
Currently, there also already exist in Maine law, LD 1873 An Act to Direct the 
Commissioner of Education to Adopt a Model Policy Regarding Management of Head 
injuries in School Activities and Athletics (May 2012) and LD 104 An Act to Protect the 
Health of Student Athletes by requiring the Department of Education to report on the 
Incidence of Concussion (March 2021). 
With LD 1042, many including myself find the definition of a head injury to be too broad 
and should a young athlete sustain a bloody nose, cut on the chin with no identifiable 
signs or symptoms related to a concussion, the coach would have to remove the athlete 
from play until the athlete has received written medical clearance from a licensed 
healthcare provider, be out no fewer than 7 days and have to complete a return to play 
protocol. The question then becomes, who is responsible for implementing and 
monitoring the return to play? More importantly, where does return to learn figure into 
the equation? Return to learn is not mentioned anywhere in this bill and should be. 
There is a mountain of evidence that shows the negative impact on a child’s education 
due to a concussion if not identified and managed appropriately. 
https //docs.googlc.com/document/d/ l x6pMM84R-TjprHHxnIKDnphAG_K2Q-50aBzgQl8R()5Bedit
3/28/23, 3:30 PM Testimony LD I042 - Google Docs 
ln closing, l would like to encourage the Committee to at least consider tabling this 
legislation and working with all of the youth sport stakeholders including but not limited 
to the MPA‘s SMAC, the MIAAA (Maine Interscholastic Athletic Administrators 
Association), Maine School Management, MDoE, the MATA (Maine Athletic Trainers 
Association), the Maine Chapter of the AAP, the Maine Recreation and Parks 
Association and the Brain Injury Association of Maine to develop legislation that can 
really have a profoundly positive impact on youth athlete health and safety. 
Thank you for your time. 
John P. Ryan, EdD, LAT, ATC, RAA 
25 Sand Point Lane 
Cumberland Foreside, ME 04110 
hllps://docs.go0glc.c0m/document/d/ l x6pMM84R-TjprHHxnlKDnphAG_K2Q-50aBzgQl8R05E/edit
