 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 29, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph  Rafferty, Chair  
Representative  Michael  Brennan , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs   
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1042 - An Act to Update Youth Sports Concussion and Injury Prevention Protocols  
 
Dear Senator  Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and Members of the  Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs : 
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 1042, An Act to Update Youth Sports Concussion 
and Injury Prevention Protocols , and the potential impact of the proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC)  supports this bill  and offers 
the following information for your consideration . 
 
LD 1042 requires youth sports organizations, including schools, to follow specific protocols and 
provide education relating to head injuries sustained during athletic activit ies. 
 
Emerging scientific evidence identifies s ports -related head injuries as a potential threat to the 
health and wellbeing of youth  athletes . This bill clearly identifies universal best practice 
guidelines for appropriate management of head injuries in school sports and community 
athletics , including medical evaluation and a seven -day minimum interval for return -to-play. 
Additionally, educational materials provided  to you th and caregivers will increase awareness of 
head injury warning signs and ensure student athletes receive appropriate care and support.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends this bill  ought to pass . Clear head injury 
guidelines will ensure consistency and compliance with best  practices across all youth sports 
settings, a nd protect the health of youth athletes.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  

