UN Iv E RS [TY O F Office of Institutional Advancement 
NEW ENGLAND l»%.i.iE.Z"?l ‘ii".¥.i’;‘ <‘§§ 
ll\l l\lOV/\TlOl\l FOR /\ ll E/\l_T| l I ER PL/\N E? 2333231 
March 29, 2023 
LD 1042 An Act to Update Youth Sports Concussion and Injury Prevention Protocols 
My name is Paul Berkner, l am a board-certified Pediatrician, the Medical Director for Student Health Services at the 
University of New England and the President of the Maine Concussion Management initiative (MCMI). lt is in these roles 
that I address you today. l am testifying neither for nor against LD 1042. I thought it would be helpful to provide some 
history as you consider the bill before you. 
Please note that at times I will use the term mild Traumatic Brain lnjury (mTBl) in place of concussion. For the purposes 
of this testimony, they refer to the same thing. 
In 2009, best practices for the management of children who sustain a mTBl changed nationwide. As a result, a group of 
passionate Maine physicians, athletic trainers, school nurses, coaches, and athletic directors came together to create an 
organization to educate our community on best practices, diagnosis, and the management of concussions in youths. This 
is what became MCMI. Since that time, MCMI has provided education to over 1,000 providers, hosted countless 
community educational sessions, provided access to the latest concussion management tools, and worked to understand 
the true impact of this injury. 
in 2012 the Legislature passed LD 1873 to codify for schools how best to manage this injury. This law established a 
model policy for all schools to implement around 4 critical areas of concussion identification and management. These are 
referred to as the 4Rs: 
1. Recognize: To ensure that all students who sustain a concussion are recognized. This involved educating 
coaches, parents, students and school administrator on the signs/symptoms of concussions. 
2. Respond: To remove all students who have a mTBl from activity and have them evaluated by a provider who is 
trained in managing this injury. 
3. Recover: To provide resources within the school to support the student’s recovery. Schools were instructed to 
implement a Concussion management policy which included a Concussion Management Team to manage 
students ‘ academic accommodations. 
4. Return: To establish a consistent return to school and return to sport guidance. 
To understand how each school district addressed implementation of LD 1873, MCMI survey 136/151 schools statewide 
in 2015/16. Overall results have been positive. The model policy for concussion management was adopted by 99% of 
schools and immediate removal and evaluation of students after suspicion of concussion was implemented by 100% of 
schools. Schools have struggled with two areas, a plan for gradual return to school and athletics with only 68% and 84% 
respectively having clear policies for these two provisions. 
LD 1873 also established the Concussion Working Group which has been meeting monthly since 2012. This group is led 
by Emily Poland (School Nurse Consultant to the Maine DOE), and includes the Maine Principals ’ Association, Maine 
Athletic Trainers Association, Maine Chapter of the Brain lnjury Association of America, the Maine School Management 
Association, MCMI and other key stakeholders. 
ln 2021 the legislature passed LD 104. The purpose of this law was to better understand who was injured, how they were 
injured, and how long_it took for the students to return to school and sport. This law specifically charged th _e__Maine DOE 
and the VMPA with tracking concussions and reporting to the Education Committee this information on a yearly basis. To 
help facilitate this reporting requirement, MCMI created the Head Injury Tracker (HIT) platform. This is a FREE web- 
based platform that individuals within the school can use to record student data (de-identified), and report this information 
back to the Maine DOE. 
The HIT platform provides a centralized concussion tracking system. Schools can use their data internally to understand 
high risk activities and create mitigation strategies to address the risk. The Maine DOE can use this data to identify 
statewide trends and target resources, particularly for underserved and marginalized communities.
Today, approximately 50 schools have enrolled in the HIT project and are providing data. The data, although incomplete, 
has given the Maine DOE important insight into the effects concussion has on students. For example: On average 
students miss 7 days of full school participation and 21 days (about 3 weeks) of athletic participation. As this database 
grows, we expect it to become an even more powerful tool in our efforts to address and avoid mTBl among Maine youth. 
in summary, LD 1873 and LD 104 have had significant positive impacts. They codified the school identification and 
management around students who sustain a mTBl, and they have allowed us to better understand the 
who/what/wheniwhere of mTBl. 
MCMl applauds Senator Baldacci ’s effort to increase the scope of care for children who suffer a mTBl. We have some 
suggestions and questions that hopefully strengthen this effort: 
1. Terminology: The term “head injury” is not appropriate for the issue we are dealing with. A head injury can run the 
gamut from a bruise to an open skull fracture. We believe that the true focus of this legislation is mild Traumatic 
Brain injury (mTBl) / concussion. 
2. Return to play protocols: The bill mentions a return to play protocol that lasts no less than 7 days- to date, the 
return to play protocol supported by several consensus statements (Concussion in Sports Group 2017 
consensus, and the National Athletic Training Association position statement) includes a 5 day progression, with 
unrestricted game play on day 6. 
3. Health care providers: The bill also mentions that healthcare provider is defined as “a licensed person who is 
trained in the evaluation and management of head injuries within the scope of the person's practice ” l urge you to 
consider the language be changed to “a licensed health care provider who can diagnose a concussion within their 
scope of practice and is trained in the evaluation and management of concussions" . 
4. Scope: MCMI appreciates the effort to focus on the next frontier of childhood mTBl, those that occur outside of 
athletic participation and outside of school. This current bill includes all aspects of childhood mTBl many of which 
fall outside of the school's control. How will this be enforced and who will oversee the "outside" of school portion 
of this law? 
5. Concussion Education for coaches/families/children1 We urge the Legislature to name a speciﬁc group(s) to 
monitor, evaluate, and share information on how this will be implemented. 
6. Return to Learn: This is not discussed in the proposal, yet it is the most important aspect of student care. We 
recommend additional guidance and focus within this bill. 
We thank Senator Baldacci for his attention to this important topic. MCMI and I are happy to help in future work sessions 
and will be available for any questions the committee might have. 
Sincerely, 
Paul Berkner, DO 
Medical Director, Student Health Services 
Associate Clinical Faculty College of Osteopathic Medicine 
Medical Director, Masters in Science for Athletic Training 
Medical Director, UNE Emergency Medical Services 
Presidents of Maine Concussion Management initiative 
Blddeford Campus Portland Campus Tangier Campus 
11 Hills Beach Road 716 Stevens Avenue Rue Abl Chouaib Doukkali 
Biddeford, Maine 04005 Portland, Maine 04103 Tangier 90000 
USA USA Morocco
