Senator Baldacci, Representative Theriault, Senator Rafferty and Representatives Brennan, 
Costain and Dodge, Good morning. My name is Paul Culina. I am a Certiﬁed Athletic Trainer 
and a Maine State Licensed Athletic Trainer. I currently work as an athletic trainer at the 
University of Maine, and I represent the Maine Athletic Trainers ’ Association as it’s President. I 
am here this moming to provide testimony on LD 1042, “An Act to Update Youth Sports 
Concussion and Injury Prevention Protocols ” . I am neither for, nor against the proposed 
legislation, but I am here to offer remarks to improve the bill. 
My primary concern is with the deﬁnition of head injury. The Way this bill is currently worded, 
is that any young athlete that sustains any type of injury to the head should be treated as if they 
have a concussion. Although I believe concussions should be treated appropriately and taken 
seriously, I think it is important to say that not all injuries to the head are concussive in nature. 
Best practices for the management of concussions do in fact require a graduated, step-wise retum 
to play protocol over time. Other injuries such as contusions, abrasions and lacerations place the 
athlete at much lower risk than that of concussions. Best practices when any young athlete is 
treated by a licensed medical provider for these less severe injuries would not dictate placing the 
individual with these more minor injuries in to a seven day return to play protocol. Additionally, 
the document does not address a return to learn protocol if a young athlete does, in fact sustain a 
concussion. 
LD 1042 does in fact, offer some good suggestions such as providing educational materials on 
concussions to coaches and removing a young athlete from activity when a concussion is 
suspected. I do believe though, that more Work needs to be done before considering the 
advancement of this piece of legislation. 
I believe there are many key stakeholders that would be available to you, but please know that 
the Maine Athletic Trainers ’ Association will gladly agree to be a resource for you as you look at 
this matter further. Thank you.A 
Respectfully, 
Forjziﬁ 
Paul J Culina, M.Ed., ATC, LATC 
Athletic Trainer 
President, Maine Athletic Trainers ’ Association 
p1"esidei1t(iDg omataorg 
207-745-7554
