 
 
BRAIN INJURY ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA – MAINE CHAPTER 
126 Western Ave, #261 
Augusta ME 04330 
 
March 29, 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Chair 
Representative Brennan, Chair 
Members, Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
 
Re: LD 1042 – An Act to Update Youth Sports Concussion and Injury Prevention Protocols 
 
Youth concussion and brain injury at a levels of severity is the leading cause of injury and acquired disability of 
young people in Maine, according to Maine CDC hospital discharge data from 2019 – nearly 2,000 ED visits 
alone. On behalf of the Maine brain injury community – survivors, caregivers and families – we urge your 
support of LD 1042.  
 
Critically, more than half of all youth concussion are not sports related. Concussion outside of sports from 
falls, recreational injuries, vehicular crashes and other causes account most youth concussions. 
 
From the perspective of parents within the Brain Injury Association, the key issue in managing youth 
concussion, is not about returning to the playing field, rather its managing the transition back to learning and 
classroom activity. Classroom teachers often lack the knowledge about how best to manage this transition and 
provide practical accommodations for these students. 
 
In current best practice, students should not return to athletic activity until fully back to classroom learning. 
Also related to best practice, is to refer to these injuries as a “concussion” and not as a “head injury”. 
Concussion is about the brain after all and a concussion is a traumatic brain injury. 
 
There is still much work to be done in developing model concussion policies for local schools in Maine. A study 
committee to address this issue in-depth may be the best approach to bring our state up to current best 
practice in the management of youth concussion from all possible causes. Especially when you consider the 
impact of even a mild brain injury on a child’s learning, behavior and emotions. In our experience, youth 
concussion is much more about managing behavior than it is a medical issue. 
 
Thank you for considering our testimony on LD 1042. The Brain Injury Association in Maine stands ready to 
help out any way possible. 
 
 
Steven D. Wade 
Brain Injury Association of America – Maine Chapter 
Consulting Executive Director 
swade@biausa.org  
(207) 482-3705 
 
 
 
