C 
§’é,'.'2,E,i 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
gggggfknon Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 _ _ _ _ _ AA Pvwc EDUCATION Avvowﬁs Website‘ WWW-’"S""""el ’-c"’” .\laincSchoolSup¢'rinrendcn1sAssodaliun 
TESTIMONY REGARDING 
L.D. 1042 
AN ACT TO UPDATE YOUTH SPORTS CONCUSSION AND INIURY PREVENTION PROTOCOLS 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I am 
Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the legislative 
committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents Association, regarding 
L.D. 1042 ~ MSBA is neither for nor against and MSSA is opposed. 
In the past decade there has been a signiﬁcant amount of work done to educate, assess and treat head injuries. The 
understanding of sports related concussions has increased across our state and school districts have adopted 
policies that guide school district personnel within the handling of head injuries. Policy JJIF requires the 
development of a concussion management team who will provide training for school personnel, parents, and 
students in the management of concussive and other head injuries. L.D. 1873 required the Department of 
Education to adopt a model policy regarding the management of head injuries that focused on training and 
protocols, immediate removal and evaluation, medical clearance and return to learn and return to play guidance. 
The Maine Principals ’ Association Sports Medicine Committee under the guidance of the Dr. Sementelli and Dr. 
Lutrykowski has developed robust concussion management guidelines for schools in the management of 
concussions starting with the recognition and management of symptoms, as well as protocols to follow for 
returning to the classroom and physical activity. In short school districts take any injury to the head seriously. 
Our associations oppose this bill as it raises safety concerns for our students who participate in youth sports. As 
you can see, school districts are guided by robust protocols developed by the Maine Department of Education and 
the Maine Principals ’ Association. 
We are concerned about who oversees Youth Sports. This program falls under the Department of Health and 
Human Services Community Sports, yet are there policies and protocols in place for community sports programs 
that guide the handling of head injuries? Who will ensure that the guidelines in this bill are followed? 
We are concerned about a lack of communication between the Youth Sports programs and a school district ifa 
student who has suffered a head injury returns to school without having followed the proper procedures and 
protocols; or worse the school is not notiﬁed. 
We are concerned about the broad tenn “head injury” . Does a scrape on the chin meet the deﬁnition of head 
injury? And if so, is the student automatically banned from activity for seven days and required to be monitored by 
a health care provider for these seven days? 
Our Associations recognize how serious head injuries are. In the interest of our students ’ health, we would like to 
see Youth Sports programs be required to follow the same concussion protocols that are outlined by the DOE, the 
MPA and MSMA’s policy JJIF, and that clear communication guidelines are developed that require Youth Sports 
programs to communicate any head injuries suffered by an athlete to their school district. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
*MSMA/MDOE SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA CODE: J HF 
MANAGEMENT OF CON CUSSION AND OTHER HEAD INJURIES 
The Board recognizes that concussions and other head injuries are serious and could result in 
signiﬁcant brain damage and/or death if not recognized and managed properly. The Board 
further acknowledges that a student may suffer a concussion during any activity during the 
school day or outside of school. The Board adopts this policy to promote the safety of all 
students, regardless of where or when the head injury occurred, in [School unit name| 
schools, PreK-grade 12 [OR: insert school unit grade range]. 
DEFINITIONS 
The following deﬁnitions shall apply for the purpose of this policy. 
Concussion: A concussion is a traumatic brain injury caused by a bump, blow, or jolt to the 
head that can change the way the brain normally works. Concussions can occur from a fall ora 
blow to the head or body that causes the head and brain to quickly move back and forth. 
Concussion Management Team: A Concussion Management Team (CMT), appointed by the 
superintendent or head of school, may include, but is not limited to the following: school 
administrator, school nurse, athletic administrator, school counselor, and school physician. 
The Team shall oversee the implementation, graduated school reentry protocols, and make 
recommendations related to implementation and review of this policy. This team may be 
combined with another existing student support team within the school or school 
administrative unit. » 
Graduated school reentry: Graduated school reentry is a gradual and coordinated return to 
school activities following a concussion. It is an individualized, ﬂexible plan developed by 
the Concussion Management Team or designee with input from the student, parents, and 
medical provider. 
Medical clearance: Medical clearance includes a written statement from a health care provider 
licensed to diagnose a concussion, who is trained in the treatment and management of 
concussions, which allows a student to start the school’s graduated school reentry plan and/or 
graduated return to play protocol. 
School: School means any public school and any private school enrolling more than 60% of 
its students at public expense in the State of Maine. 
School personnel: School personnel include any persons working within and on behalf of the 
school in a supervisory role to students during school sponsored activities including volunteers 
in a student supervisory role, such as athletic coaches. 
Page l of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA CODE: J JIF 
TRAINING 
Prior to the beginning of each sports season, athletics-related school personnel (including 
volunteers) identiﬁed by the school unit’s Concussion Management Team must be made 
aware of this policy and protocols related to the management of concussive injuries and 
must participate in concussion awareness training that includes recognizing signs and 
symptoms that may suggest a concussive or other head injury and include instruction in the 
use of graduated school reentry protocols. This training must be consistent with protocols as 
identiﬁed or developed by the Maine Department of Education (DOE).‘ 
Prior to the beginning of each school year, non-athletics related school personnel (for 
example, physical education teachers, school nurses, personnel with recess duty) identified 
by the school unit’s CMT, must be made aware of this school policy and protocols related 
to the management of concussive injuries and must participate in concussion awareness 
training that includes recognizing signs and symptoms that may suggest a concussive or 
other head injury. This training must be consistent with protocols as identified or 
developed by the Maine Department of Education (DOE). 
STUDENT AND PARENTS/GUARDIANS 
Prior to participating in any school athletic activity, all students will be provided 
information including: 
A. The risk of concussion and other head injuries and the dangers associated with 
continuing to participate when a concussion or other head injury is suspected; 
B. The signs, symptoms and behaviors associated with concussion and other head 
injuries; and 
C. The school administrative unit’s protocols for l) removal of the student from the 
activity when the student is suspected of having sustained a concussion or other 
head injury, 2) evaluation, 3) medical clearance, and 4) graduated school reentry 
protocols. 
The student and his/her parent(s)/guardian(s) must sign a statement acknowledging that they 
received and read this information before the student is allowed to participate in any school 
athletic activity. 
Page 2 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA CODE: J J IF 
MANAGEMENT OF CONCUSSIVE AND OTHER HEAD INJURIES 
It is the responsibility of all school personnel trained in the signs, symptoms and behaviors 
related to concussion or other head injury, to act in accordance with this policy when that 
person recognizes that a student may be exhibiting such signs, symptoms and/or behaviors. 
~ Any student suspected of having sustained a concussion or other head injury 
during school or a school athletic activity must be removed from the activity 
immediately and evaluated by a qualiﬁed school personnel. 
~ Any student suspected of having sustained a concussion or other head injury is 
prohibited from further participation in any school activities until he/she is 
evaluated by the school nurse or other school personnel trained in such evaluation, 
such as an athletic trainer who is able to determine if referral to a licensed health 
care provider is necessary. 
0 The student and his/her parent(s)/guardian(s) will be informed of the referral toa 
licensed health care provider for a medical evaluation for possible concussion or 
brain injury before the student is allowed to begin the graduated school reentry 
and/or graduated return to play protocol, and then full participation in learning, 
recess, physical education, and any school activities. 
0 No student is permitted to return to the activity or to participate in any other 
school activity on the day of the suspected concussion. 
o If referral to a licensed health care provider is necessary, the student will require 
written medical clearance from a licensed health care provider qualified and 
trained in concussion management. The student is also required to complete the 
graduated return to school protocol. 
0 School persomiel should be alert to cognitive and academic issues that may be 
experienced by a student who has suffered a concussion or other head injury 
including but not limited to: difficulty with concentration, organization, long-and- 
short term memory, and sensitivity to bright lights and sounds. 
0 School personnel shall accommodate a graduated school reentry protocol for 
retum to full participation in all academic activities as appropriate, based on the 
recommendation of the student’s concussion trained health care provider and 
appropriate designated school personnel (e. g. 504 Coordinator, school nurse). 
0 No student is permitted to return to full participation in extra-curricular school 
activities until fully returned to his/her academic program. 
Page 3 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA CODE: J J IF 
0 If at any time during the gradual return to school process the student exhibits 
signs, symptoms or behaviors of concussion, the student must be removed from 
the activity for that day and follow the graduated school reentry protocol. 
MEDICAL CLEARANCE 
Once a referral to a health care provider has been made by the school nurse, athletic trainer, or 
other health services persormel, the student must receive written clearance from a health care 
provider licensed to diagnose a concussion who is trained in the treatment and management of 
concussions. The medical clearance allows a student to begin the graduated school reentry 
protocol. 
CONCUSSION MANAGEMENT TEAM (CMT) 
The Superintendent will appoint a Concussion Management Team including a school 
administrator to be responsible, under the administrative supervision of the Superintendent, 
to make recommendations related to implementation and review of this policy. The 
Concussion Management Team will include the school nurse and athletic administrator and 
may include one or more principals or assistant principals, the school physician and other 
school personnel or consultants as the Superintendent deems appropriate. The Team shall 
oversee and implement this policy and related protocols for concussive head injuries based 
on the currently accepted best practices. The Team, under the direction of the superintendent, 
shall identify the school personnel who shall be trained in concussion signs and symptoms 
and the school activities covered by this policy. 
DATA 
The Board recognizes how serious concussions are and the need for improved understanding 
of concussions in our schools and their impact on learning and school attendance. The school 
unit will track the number of concussions, activity associated with the injury, number of 
school days missed, and other information determined necessary by the Concussion 
Management Team. The CMT will review this data and make recommendations to the Board 
as needed. 
Legal Reference: 20-A MRSA§254(l7) 
Adopted: 
Page 4 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA CODE: J J IF 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect official 
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used asa 
starting point for a board’s policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board's policy sen/e 
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful analysis of 
the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and suitability to the 
individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are 
not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board's own legal counsel. 
Page 5 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
