   
 
 
Main Office: 7 Ames Way , Machias, M E 04654   
Calais Office: 330 North Street , Calais, ME 04619  * Milbridge Office: 87 Maine Street, Milbridge, ME 04658  
Tel: 207.255.0983  * Fax: 207.255 .4987 * www.sunrisecounty.org  
 Via email only (lio@legislature.maine.gov  & 
casey.mill igan@legislature. maine.gov )  
 
 
May 23, 2023  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement  
& Business  
Cross Building, Room 2 06 
Augusta, Me 04333  
 
  
Re: Testimony in support of LD 1918 An Act to Modernize Maine’s Business 
Incentive Programs by Creating  the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and 
Eliminating Certain Other  Tax Incentive Programs   
 
 
Senator Curry , Representative Roberts , Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Adva ncement  & 
Business ,  
 
The Sunrise County Ec onomic Co uncil respectfully  submits this test imony in 
favor of LD 19 18 An Act to Modernize Maine’s Business Incentive Programs by 
Creating  the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other 
Tax Incentive Programs .  We also ask for two changes that will strengthen  the 
program’s impact in Wash ington County:  
1. Clarification  that aquaculture  is an Eligible Sector and  
2. Allowing new investments from businesses currently certified  as Pine Tree 
Development Zon e businesses to qualify for the new incentives.  
 
The Council  is a nonprofit corporation that works to create jobs and prosperity in 
Washington County; we are also the economic development arm of Washington 
County Government.   Washington County ’s economy is built on natur al resource 
industries  and LD 1918 will encourage the investment needed to ma ke our 
fishing, blueberry , and wood products businesses compet itive and sustain able in 
 
Board of Directors  
 
Megan Sorby  
Chair  
Kingfish Maine  
 
Scott Beal  
Vice Chair  
Woodland Pulp  
 
Lucas Morris  
Treasurer  
Machias Savings Bank  
  
April Norton  
Wyman’s  
 
Ardis Brown  
Town of Danforth  
 
Brian Frutchey  
RH Foster, Inc  
 
Carla Ganiel  
Max and Marian  Farash 
Charitable Foundation  
 
Charlie McAlpin  
Eastern Maine Electric 
Cooperative  
 
Dee Sabattus  
United South and Eastern Tribes  
 
Renee Gray  
Town of Lubec  
 
Susan Mingo  
Washington County Community 
College  
 
 
Ex-Officio  
 
Betsy Fitzgerald  
Secretary  
Washington County  
Commissioners  
 
Representative Tiffany Strout   
Washington County Legislative 
Delegation  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 this period of rapid technological change.  The Pine Tree Develo pment Zone s have only had a limited 
effect with o nly four Washington County based businesses currently certifi ed.  The Diri go Business  
Incentives Program is simpler , and its clear focus on capital investment and workforce training  will be 
more effective for a broader range of businesses  in our county.    
 
Aquaculture  should be explicitly included as an Eligi ble Sector  to reduce uncertain ty for firms that are 
looking to invest in this k ey sector.  Aqua culture currently supports over one hundred j obs in Washington 
County and is one of the most promising sectors for  investment, innovation, and growth . 
 
We a sk that the legislation  be changed  to allow new investments and workforc e training  from certified Pine 
Tree Development Zone bu sinesses (such as  St. Croix Tissue and Kin gfish Maine) to quali fy for the Dirigo 
incentives.  St. Croix Tissue is considering investing  hundreds of mi llions of dollars in an additional tissue 
machine  in Baileyville .  Kingfish Maine is con sidering investing over one hundred million dollars in an 
aquaculture  facility in Jonesport.  Both  projects are in the final sta ges of permitting and entering the ca pital 
financi ng stage.  The ir exclusion from the Dir igo Business Incentives Program may threaten the se vital 
investme nts in Washington County ’s future.  
 
Thank  you for y our thoughtful considera tion of this imp ortant bill and your commitment to our state’s 
future  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Charles J. Rudelitch, Esq.  
Executive Director  
Sunrise County Economic Council  
 
 
cc: Senator Marianne Moore  
 Representative Tiffany  Strout  
 Representative Anne C. Perry  
 Representative Kenneth Davis  
 

