 
41 Court St, Skowhegan, ME 04976  
207-474-0166  
 
May 19 , 202 3 
 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business Committee,  
 
I am writing in support of  LD 19 18 “An Act to Modernize Maine ’s Business Incentive Programs by 
Creating the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other Tax Incentive  Programs  “ 
 
Somerset Economic Development has provided services through out Somerset County  since 1999  and 
although we have had significant impact and successes helping businesses start or grow, we feel there is 
still tremendous op portunity in Somerset County and more we  all could provide to assist our businesses  
in rural Maine . 
 
Since 2001, Somerset County’s real GDP has grown 5.6%, compared to 28.5% for Maine as a whole (and 
47.8% for the United States). Like many of Maine’s more rural areas, Somerset County has had difficult 
years of disinvestment.  Recently, there has been an upswing  in economic activity but in our opinion, 
Maine ’s business incentive offerings fall short compared to other states across the country.  
 
LD 1918 would i ncentiviz e more businesses to provide quality training for their workers and is a gr eat 
way to advance the workforce in our area  as Somerset ’s workforce participation rate is fail ing compared 
to the rest of the state . Instead of having to figure out what training programs are worthwhile and how 
to pay for them, workers can gain skills and advance their careers more directly through trainings their 
workplace arranges.   
 
LD 1918 would also incenti vize more capital investment —investment in physical facilities and 
equipment placed in Maine communities —helping  businesses add valuable assets to Somerset County 
towns and contribute more to our economic success.  
The Dirigo Business Incentive program will be more accessible to small  and medium -sized businesses 
that are an important part of growth in Maine’s more rural areas, while still providing value for the 
larger businesses that anchor our county’s economy.  
Somerset Economic Development encourages the IDEA Committee to support LD 1918 and add to our 
economic development toolkit for all of us in development work to utilize and move o ur communities 
forward.  
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
 
  
Christian Savage  
Executive Director  

