Maine Community 
g College System 
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
323 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330-7131 
(207) 629-4000 I Fax (207) 6294048 I mccs.me.edu 
TO: Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
FROM: David Daigler, President 
RE: Testimony in support of LD 1918 An Act to Modernize Maine's Business Incentive 
Programs by Creating the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and Eliminating 
Certain Other Tax Incentive Programs 
DATE: May 19, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Joint Standing Cormnittee on 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, please accept this 
testimony in strong support of LD l9l8 An Act to Modernize Maine’s Business Incentive 
Programs by Creating the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other 
Tax Incentive Programs (hereinafter “the Dirigo Business Incentives Program” or “the 
Program”). 
The U.S. economy is undergoing a radical shift. Pandemic-related disruptions to the industrial 
supply chain, global geo-political tensions, and changing attitudes within the workforce have 
added to rapid technological advances and demographic shifts that all contribute to this 
transformation. 
A 2022 survey by the Maine State Chamber of Commerce of nearly 500 business leaders called 
for added investments in the trades, technical skills, and in vocational programs. 
But, if we step back for a moment, we realize we have seen these changes coming, and Maine 
has started to prepare. Released in 2019, before all the pandemic-related disruption, Maine 
released a I0-year economic plan that said then what we know now: We need to focus on talent 
and innovation. 
LDl9l8, the Dirigo Business Incentives Program, does both. It offers ﬁnancial incentives for 
businesses looking to make investments that reﬂect our current economic reality. The Dirigo 
Business Incentives Program encourages investments that support Maine’s workforce needs and 
help companies invest in people and infrastructure that support growth. Ar‘-4ﬁ;‘.';; 1;‘-;>¢';L“‘-2l1t‘~';l:*;r. “s$"»‘i~'i§“_’:"1'5‘ . ": *3?‘ ;";;~:-;: “*;” ...
Said another way, the Program will incentivize employers to invest in, grow, and develop their 
talent pool. 
There are several ways employers can access the incentive: Apprenticeships, on-the-job contracts 
already ascribed into law, or education and training through one of Maine’s accredited 
institutions, including both UMS and MCCS. 
MCCS is prepared to support these businesses. We have long recognized that the demand for 
frontline workers is intense, and we are working directly with Maine businesses to understand 
the skills their employees need and deliver in real-time. 
Lately, you have primarily heard me talk about the success of the Free College Program. That 
news may have overshadowed the achievements of the Harold Alfond Center for the 
Advancement of Maine’s Workforce (hereinafter “the Center”). The Center has created active 
working relationships using a written agreement called a Maine Workforce Development 
Compact, and the Center has engaged over l,l00 employer Compact Partners. 
The relationship is unique. Maine is leading the way in building a coordinated system of training 
programs and opportunities that ﬁt together in a logical stepwise fashion, are accessible to all 
who need them, are designed to provide real-time deployment of customized training programs 
to meet emerging labor market needs and are true partnerships between the state’s public and 
private sectors. 
So, the Dirigo Business Incentives Program is a good policy. It supports businesses working 
through a period of signiﬁcant economic transition where talent and innovation provide 
pathways to prosperity. And Maine’s workforce development partners are ready. 
I encourage you to vote Ought to Pass on L.D. 1918. I strongly support this legislation. 
Thank you.
