EDUCATE 
The Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
Testimony from Jason Judd, Executive Director, Educate Maine 
In Support Of 
L.D. # I918: "An Act to Modemize Maine's Business Incentive Programs by Creating the Dirigo 
Business Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other Tax Incentive Programs" 
May 19, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Jason Judd, Executive 
Director of Educate Maine, a business-led education advocacy organization. Thank you for the 
opportunity to testify in support of L.D. #1918. 
Educate Maine’s mission is to champion college and career readiness through increasing educational 
attainment. We are a founding member of the MaineSpark Coalition working diligently to increase 
adult educational attaimnent to 60% by 2025 to meet the needs of Maine employers. We know that 
our economy needs additional workers with credentials of value or college degrees in order to meet 
the open and future jobs available in our state. This bill allows employers and employees to 
collaborate on upskilling in order to increase long-term productivity and economic mobility. 
Expanding our workforce is essential in order to grow our economy. In 2022, the Maine State 
Chamber of Commerce, Maine Development Foundation, and Educate Maine collaborated ona 
statewide survey on the most pressing needs of the business community. This survey, Making Maine 
Work, highlighted the size of Maine’s workforce as three out of the top six priorities for Maine’s 
employers. These results also reinforced the need to expand the trained workforce as outlined in 
Maine’s Economic Development Strategy. This bill prioritizes upskilling people to create pathways 
into hi gh-wage jobs and high-value sectors like manufacturing, agriculture, ﬁshing, forestry, 
software, and other ﬁelds. 
At Educate Maine, we administer a variety of internship and apprenticeship programs in partnership 
with Maine higher education institutions and employers. These experiential learning programs help 
students leam the skills needed to thrive in the workforce. This bill will encourage employers to 
invest in high quality training programs for their employees and plan for long-term workforce needs. 
It will also help Maine reach its state attainment goal by helping employees get their ﬁrst credential 
of value or college degree while prioritizing the skills needed in speciﬁc industries. We have made 
tremendous progress with education attainment as a state raising our rate to 55.0% of adults witha 
credential of value which is just a few points shy of the 2025 goal. This bill will help employers, 
employees, and our economy. 
I strongly encourage you to support L.D. #1918. Thank you for your time. 
482 Congress Street, Suite 303, Portland, ME 04101 ~ 20784/7~8638 ~ inf0@educaternaineorg
