0 
 
 
 
 
From:  Jay Chace, Central Maine Power, Program Manager 
To: Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
Date:  May 19, 2023 
 
Re: Public Testimony on An Act to Modernize Maine's Business Incentive Programs by 
Creating the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other Tax 
Incentive Programs (LD 1918) 
 
 
On behalf of Central Maine Power (CMP), I would like to thank Chairs Curry and Roberts, along 
with the distinguished members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business for the opportunity to comment on Legislative Document 1918. While 
CMP is speaking neither for or against this bill today, we appreciate the work of the Governor’s 
Office, the DECD, the Legislators and this Committee on issues of economic development in the 
State of Maine. 
 
Over the course of the past year, we have been coordinating with the DECD staff on various 
economic development efforts and we appreciate meeting with them recently to discuss the 
important work of LD 1918 prior to this public hearing. Our substantive comments in this 
testimony are primarily related to the provisions Sec. 4. 35-A MRSA §3210-E, sub-§1, 1. Discount 
Rates. 
 
For those that are not aware, there is a Public Utility Commission (PUC) approved economic 
development incentive price rider which provides credits for electrical delivery rates which is 
explicitly tied to the State’s Pine Tree Development Zone (PTDZ) statute. The proposed language 
in LD 1918 includes language which clarifies the qualifying energy consumption to which the 
incentives would be applicable.  
 
To briefly introduce the PTDZ economic development rider, this is a special pricing plan designed 
to work with the State’s PTDZ benefits to create and retain high quality jobs for Maine. In short 
summary, CMP’s PTDZ price rider ensures that eligible and approved businesses will receive 
credit on their incremental energy consumption. This credit is currently defined as the lesser of 
either of (1) the customer’s stranded cost contribution for the preceding twelve-month billing 
period or (2) the customer’s total incremental kilowatt-hour usage (at least 10% ) for the preceding 
twelve-month billing period. 
 
CMP’s PTDZ price rider program is set to expire the ‘sooner of either 12/31/24 or at the 
termination of the State’s PTZD program’. Assuming the legislative language moves forward as 
is, no adjustment to the tariff would be needed as the sunset dates are aligned. However, the 
timeline established in the proposed LD 1918 provides an opportunity for the state’s electric 
delivery companies, the PUC, and other partners to consider benefits and incentives that could 
1 
 accompany the State’s Dirigo program, similar to what has been provided through the PTDZ 
program.   
 
The main intent of our comment is to provide this awareness of the PTZD electrical consumption 
price rider existing program, and to encourage on-going discussions related to the benefit and 
incentive programs that may accompany the Dirigo program.   
 
With respect to specifics of the proposed language, I would like to highlight that there appears to 
be some similarities in approach between the reporting language in LD 1918, Sec. 12. 36 MSRA 
5219-AAA(10)  (see line 17-32) with the LD 1804 being considered by the Taxation Committee. 
For clarity and consistency purposes perhaps a comparison of the provisions of these two bills 
might be warranted.    
 
Finally, as noted during spoken testimony, I spent 20 years has municipal planner drafting and 
reviewing ordinance and regulatory language. To that end, I’d offer the two non-substantive 
comments specific to the drafted legislation LD 1918 for purposes of clarity: 
(Proposed additions highlighted below) 
a. For clarify of intent that the discount rate is established for the Dirigo program, suggest 
modifying Sec 4,35-A 3210-E(1)  
1. Discount rates. Transmission and distribution utilities may offer discounted rates on new 
incremental electricity usage to qualified Pine Tree Development Zone businesses 
established under Title 30-A and qualified businesses with respect to the Dirigo business 
incentives program established under Title 36, section 5219-AAA. If a transmission and 
distribution utility requires approval prior to offering any such rate, the transmission and 
distribution utility shall apply to the commission in accordance with applicable provisions 
of this Title, and the commission may approve the rate if it finds it to be in accord with 
applicable requirements of this Title, except that the commission may take into account the 
overall benefits to ratepayers resulting from state efforts to promote economic development 
within Pine Tree Development Zones and the Dirigo business incentives program.  
 
b. Proposed language aims assist reader of the legislation. As written, the term ‘eligible 
sector’, is only found in other definitions of “Qualified business” & “Qualified business 
activity”.  Suggest modifying Sec 12, 36 5219-AAA(3) - see line 24 
3. Certification of qualified business. An eligible sector business may apply to the 
commissioner for certification as a qualified business for purposes of the program. Upon 
review and determination by the commissioner that a business is a qualified business, the7 
commissioner shall issue a letter of certification to the business that includes a description 
of the qualified business activity for which the letter is being issued. A letter of certification 
for a qualified business activity is valid for 5 years for purposes of this section. A letter of 
certification may describe qualified business activities in multiple locations and multiple 
eligible business sectors. The commissioner may issue more than one letter of certification 
to a qualified business. A business may not be a qualified business if the business is: 
 
 
Thank you. 
 
