LEADERSHIP TEAM 
Michael E. Dubyak NE 
Chairman Curry, Chairwoman Roberts and distinguished members of the lnnovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business committee. 
Co-Chair, FocusMaine - 
Former President, CEO, & Chairman Good mommg' 
WE)(, Inc. 
Andrea Clanchette Maker 
Co-Chair, FocusMaine 
Former Partner 
Pierce Atwood 
Michael Bourque 
President & CEO 
MEMIC 
Jay Dearborn 
Chief Strategy Officer 
WE)(, lnc. 
Dr. John Fitzsimmons 
President Emeritus 
Maine Community College System 
Charles E. Hewett, PhD 
Executive Director 
institute for Engineering and Life 
Sciences (IDEALS) 
Ed McKersie 
Founder & President 
ProSearch, lnc. 
Dana O'Brien 
President 
FocusMaine 
ADVISORY TEAM LEADS 
Academic 
Joan Ferrini-Mundy 
Team Chair 
President 
University of Maine 
UMS Vice Chancellor for 
Research and lnnovation 
Business 
Dana Connors 
Team Chair 
Former President 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
CONTACT 
128 State Street #101 
Augusta, ME 04330 
(207) 200-3813 
info@focusmaine.org 
Focus Maine.org My name is Leo Waterston. I am a resident of South Portland, and I am the Program 
Director of FocusMaine, a statewide economic development organization whose mission is 
to accelerate the growth of our state's food economy and bioeconomy. I am here today in 
support of LD 1918, An Act to Modernize Maine's Business Incentive Programs by Creating 
the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other Tax Incentive 
Programs. 
FocusMaine works with partner organizations to support the creation of good jobs, 
economic growth, and talent pipelines in our key sectors. Those sectors are chosen based 
on evidence and data showing where Maine has a unique opportunity to lead regionally 
and nationally. ln recent years, we have seen exciting momentum building in these sectors, 
including Maine’s national reputation as a food, seafood, and beverage business hub, anda 
strengthening life sciences ecosystem that includes innovative biotechnology and 
entrepreneurship. 
FocusMaine appreciates your interest in promoting innovation and economic growth. LD 
1918 is an opportunity to modernize Maine’s signature business attraction and incentive 
programs to better serve Maine-based companies innovating to stay relevant in today's 
marketplace or to adopt more sustainable practices, companies wishing to expand their 
existing operations, and companies seeking to locate operations in the state. 
Maine’s legacy industries of farming, fishing, and forestry, Maine's biotechnology industry, 
and many other industries will benefit from this program. We see tremendous 
opportunities for these industries to leverage technology and innovation to adapt to the 
headwinds of climate change and the digital divide. But to do so, Maine must have strong 
business incentives in place to spur this innovation. We believe the Dirigo Business 
Incentives Program will also help propel Maine’s iconic heritage industries into the future. 
Whether it's a growth opportunity in one of FocusMaine ’s key sectors, or any other 
industry sector, the proposed Dirigo Business Incentives Program will be better aligned 
than today's Pine Tree Development Zone incentives with the growth challenges today's 
business face in securing capital investment and developing a strong workforce. lt also 
promises to be easier to understand and navigate in its implementation. 
For all these reasons, FocusMaine enthusiastically supports LD 1918. Thank you for your 
consideration of this important program. 
Respectfully, 
Leo Waterston
