HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
is 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Maureen Fitzgerald Terry TTY3 Maine R6135’ 711 
9 Lombard Street 
Gorham, ME 04038 
Cell Phone: 712-9735 
Maureen.Teny@le2islature.maine.gov 
May 19, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Maureen Terry introducing 
LD 1918, An Act to Modernize Maine's Business Incentive Programs by Creating the 
Dirigo Business Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other Tax Incentive 
Programs 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
and Business 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and esteemed colleagues on the Joint Standing Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, I am Maureen Terry, 
representing part of Gorham in House District 108. I am thrilled to present LD 1918, An Act to 
Modernize Maine's Business Incentive Programs by Creating the Dirigo Business 
Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other Tax Incentive Programs. 
This program is intended to fulﬁll the mission that the Pine Tree Business Incentive Program and 
the Employee Tax Increment Financing (ETIF) program initially sought to accomplish, but have 
so far failed to do so adequately. 
I will never forget my ﬁrst day on the job in the Legislature. I read the Pine Tree report and to 
say I was confused was an understatement. The report gave me absolutely no information about 
how the program was working, what metrics were used to measure success or if it was actually 
beneﬁting rural Maine communities as intended. Since then, I’ve spoken with folks who have 
been around for a long time who have helped explain the intent of these programs and the many 
ways they have evolved over the years. 
What started out as speciﬁcally a rural development tool for businesses has turned into an 
economic development tool for the entire state, which deviated signiﬁcantly from its initial 
purpose. Unfortunately, we were never really able to understand just how far off the rails the 
Pine Tree program went because there are no metrics to measure its successes or failures. 
House District l08: Gorham (part)
At its core, the Dirigo program is a business incentive for exactly the kinds of businesses that are 
growing fastest, nationally, and that we want to encourage to come and set up shop here in 
Maine. It’s industries like aquaculture, biotech, software, professional services, among others 
that are getting national attention for their rate of growth. If Maine, and especially rural Maine, 
wants to be competitive in these burgeoning markets, we need to establish ourselves as an 
attractive destination. Dirigo accomplishes that. 
This program would only cost the state $50 million but the return on investment is estimated at 
roughly $750 million - excluding the dollars brought in by more folks moving to Maine, starting 
families, buying homes, and contributing to the economy in their day-to-day lives. This isa 
smart decision for our state. 
Not only will it attract the kind of industry we want and need, especially in targeted rural 
communities, it also better serves the goals of the ETIF program by tying the credit to skilled 
workers. This encourages businesses to invest in their employees ’ continued education and 
prioritizes hiring folks who are trained or who are highly motivated and seeking greater 
professional development opportunities. 
My favorite part of the Dirigo program is that we will no longer be in the dark about the effect 
our investments are having on the state’s economy. Included in this proposal are clear, annual, 
public reporting requirements. This will ensure that we are optimizing our investments in 
accordance with Maine’s strategic plan while simultaneously creating space for bright, talented 
individuals and businesses in Maine’s future. 
I am incredibly excited about this program and look forward to working with the committee to 
make this a reality for Maine. Thank you, and I’m happy to take any questions you may have. 
House District 108: Gorham (part)
