MAINE 82 CO. 
131“ MAINE LEGISLATURE 
THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, 
ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT & BUSINESS 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1918 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & Business, my name is Peter 
DelGreco, President & CEO of Maine & Co. My organization exists to find growing 
companies and show them how they can be successful in establishing an operation in 
Maine. Created during the administration of Governor Angus King, we are a privately 
funded 501(c)6. We compete with states from the entire country and countries around 
the world to attract new jobs and investment to Maine. We also work with existing 
Maine companies, helping them implement their growth plans. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share why I support LD 1918. 
At Maine & Co. we work tirelessly with companies evaluating investment decisions. 
Over the years, this has given our organization incredible insight into how companies 
make these decisions, understanding what criteria is important to them. When it comes 
to investing in local economies and hiring local people, companies have many choices. 
The more tools we have at our disposal, the more we can demonstrate to a company how 
they can be successful in Maine by employing Maine people. I’ve been fortunate to be 
with Maine & Co. since 2004. One thing that I’ve learned over the years is that 
companies evaluate their choices as micro- and macro- economic conditions change 
over time. 
Coming out of the pandemic, we’ve seen the nature of projects change. Companies are 
no longer focused solely on long, lean supply chains. They are now balancing their 
supply chains with resiliency and redundancy to protect when something goes wrong. 
As a result, we are seeing companies build production and operations closer to the 
markets that they serve. These projects require dramatically higher capital expenditures 
than what we’ve seen in years passed. Maine is an ideal location for these investments 
as we have untold millions of people within a one-day truck drive our state. 
Additionally, the nature of work is changing. While we hear about the pros and cons 
concerning remote work, changes are also happening in the production world. 
Companies are investing in cutting edge machinery that requires employees with 
different skill sets than they may have had. Employers recognize the need to upskill and
re-train their workforce. Companies we work with want to invest in their workforce to 
reduce turnover, increase productivity, and generally create a better work experience. 
This legislation addresses both major issues by encouraging capital investment and 
rewarding investing in workforce training. These are the issues that today are driving 
investment decisions. 
Passing this legislation provides a smooth transition from our previous tool to a new 
tool. It ensures that Maine has a tool in its toolkit when competing for new investment 
projects. Importantly, we need to recognize the applicability of this program to our 
companies already here in Maine. Our employers are constantly contacted by other 
states trying to attract their next investment. LD 1918 will now be a tool available to 
Maine companies to help encourage investment here, rather than across our borders. 
Over the years, I’ve spoken with many economic development professionals, 
consultants, and economists. Conventional wisdom suggests that a program can be 
defined as “good” if the community still beneﬁts even if the project does not succeed. 
LD 1918 meets this test. When a company makes a capital investment in a targeted 
industry in a community, it improves the site. We can almost always ﬁnd new users for 
locations that have shown increased levels of investments. Likewise, if a company helps 
its workforce develop new skills, we can always find new companies who will want to 
employ that skill set. 
LD 1918 is a chance to update the Pine Tree Zone program that was put in place about 
twenty years ago. That program was developed for a vastly different economy than we 
have today. Even as our economy has changed over the decades, the Pine Tree Zone 
program maintained some effectiveness. However, recognizing the realities of today’s 
economy and building a program around those realities is an important step in helping 
to encourage new investment activities. 
I’m thankful that the legislature is considering this vital piece of legislation. Letting the 
Pine Tree Zone program expire without a replacement program would put Maine ata 
stunning disadvantage in the new economy that is emerging post-Covid. Having a tool 
that encourages employers to invest in capital expenditures in Maine while also 
investing in the skills of their workforce will be very powerful. Companies will ﬁnd this 
new program compelling. 
Thank you again and I urge this committee to support LD 1918.
