 
  
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
Letter In Support of LD 1918: An Act to Modernize Maine's Business Incentive Programs by Creating 
the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other Tax Incentive Programs 
 
May 17, 2023  
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & Business,Dear chairs and members of the 
committee,  
  
Wwe write to you in enthusiastic and collective support of LD 1918, An Act to Modernize Maine's Business 
Incentive Programs by Creating the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other Tax 
Incentive Programs.  
 
Our working group consists of organizations represent a working group who has have collaborated over 
the past two years to plan and refine the proposed business incentive reforms proposed in this billin this 
bill for the past two years. Working with leadership at DECD, we engaged in a deliberate and thoughtful 
process to assess best practices across the country that would attract the attention of businesses looking 
to invest and grow.  Of particular importance, we spoke with Tim Bartik of the Upjohn Institute for 
Employment Research.  Mr. Bartik is a frequent critic of business incentive programs, especially when they 
are designed poorly.  He provided insight on how to properly structure programs to help prevent abuse 
while providing accountability and transparency. 
 
Through our research and discussions, we learned that programs that encourage companies to invest in 
communities work best.  We also learned that states across the country are investing resources to 
encourage companies to provide additional workforce development opportunities.  While many other 
states are using “deal closing funds” and upfront cash grants, we decided to propose a program built 
around the pillars of workforce training and capital investment. 
 
We are excited to see these efforts come to fruition, in the form of LD 1918. The new, unified Dirigo 
Business Incentives Program will modernize and streamline Maine’s signature incentives investment 
attraction program to attract and grow new businesses in key sectors., and toIt also seeks to develop the 
skilled workforce to sustain and grow those sectors. 
 
Key updates and improvements to the existing PTDZ and ETIF incentive programs include: 
 
• The benefits would will be tied directly to capital investment and training instead of new job 
creation 
•  and indirect location and investment incentives  
• A company would not need to add new jobs to participate  
• Applying for and receiving the incentive would will require fewer steps for the business  
• The benefits would will be issued over a shorter term, with the full benefit available within five 
years instead of ten, which adds predictability and stability Commented [PD1]:  I’m not sure what this part of 
the sentence means? 
Commented [Le2R1]: That was taken from the 1 
pager summary that Phoenix sent--we can delete, I 
agree it's not clear.  
 
  
Additionally, the Dirigo Business Incentives Program provides resources for businesses to train workers 
through diverse pathways that more robustly address Maine’s multifaceted workforce shortageneeds. 
These pathways leverage the state’s strong community college system and provide a low barrier to entry 
for workers who may be looking to transition from one industry to another with better career prospects. 
 
This incentive reform comes at a critical time for Maine. Since the pandemic, Maine’s economy has faced 
significant headwinds , and new opportunities. Nationally, workforce trends have shifted and both 
employers and employees have recognized the importance of quality of life and quality of place as an 
economic driver. As Maine’s national prominence has grown, we have seen an steep increase in in-
migration to the state. For the Maine economy to succeed in the 21st century economy, we must attract 
and retain the best talent and businesses., from entrepreneurs, to land and sea farmers, to 
biomanufacturing facilities and scientific research. Innovative state inventive packagesbusiness assistance 
programs like the Dirigo program are a key component to a successful attraction strategy.  
 
We strongly support LD 1918 as a modern, streamlined incentives package program for Maine. We are 
confident passage of this legislation will lead to increased business growth, new job creation, and 
opportunity and prosperity for Maine people. 
 
Thank you for considering this important legislation. We would be happy to answer any questions the 
committee may have regarding the proposed incentives.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Peter DelGreco       Leo Waterston 
Maine & Co.       FocusMaine 
 
Garvan Donegan      Galen Weibley 
Central Maine Growth Council     City of Presque Isle 
INSERT NAMES/ORGS HERE  
 Commented [PD3]:  Since we are submitting this 
letter, I’m not sure how the mechanics work to 
answer questions? 
