 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙ University of 
Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School o f Law 
 
DATE:   May 19, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                        samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   LD 1918, An Act to Modernize Maine’s Business Incentive Programs by  
  Creating the Dirigo  Business Incentives Program   
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: I write on behalf of the 
University of Maine System (UMS) to info rm your consideration of LD 1918, An Act to Modernize 
Maine’s Business Incentive Programs by Creating the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and 
Eliminating Certain Other Tax Incentive Programs.  
The need to grow the size and skill of the state’s workforce is the greatest li mit on Maine’s economic 
growth and global competitiveness. For this reason, the state’s 10 -year economic development plan 
focuses on talent and innovation and  has “growing local talent ” as its foremost strategy , noting that 
Mainers will need to upgrade their skills to qualify for better -paying jobs and to keep existing 
positions that will require new skills as technology changes.  
Recognizing this, the Mills Administration’s proposed Dirigo Business Incentives rightfully invests in 
Maine people  by crediting employers who directly  underwrite  the upskilling of their workers . 
As Maine’s largest education and economic developmen t asset, UMS supports  policy , programs  and 
investments that enable Mainers to more easily access affordable , high-quality postsecondary 
education and training , including  for the estimated 185,000 working  adults  in the state  who have 
some college but no door -opening degre e. Not only does investing in work er education and training 
help employers strengthen and grow their business, but it allows more  Mainers to realize the provide 
power  of postsecondary education to advance their own social and economic mobility.  
Maine’s public universities  — and especially our R1 flagship, the University of Maine  — uniquely  
offer world -class education and research  and have strong industry partnerships  in the high -growth 
sectors  areas proposed to be eligible under the program. Examples of the many relevant 
opportunities available through UMS  that would allow qualified employers to benefit from  Dirigo  
Business Incentives and employees to improve their skills , increase their earning potential  and 
potentially secure certificates or other credentials  include : sustainable recirculating aquaculture 
systems workshops offered through UMaine’s Center for Coope rative Aquaculture Research, 
innovation engineering training from UMaine’s Foster Center for Innovation , and customized trainings 
offered by the University of Maine at Presque Isle’s EmployerU , the University of Southern Maine  or 
UMaine’s Maine Business Institute .  
Main e has many tremendous  assets , its people foremost among them. Investing in Mainers’  
knowledge, skills and abilities will unleash their  full potential and prosperity , and that of our great 
state.  Beyond the 10 -year state economic plan, the workforce development investment incentives 
proposed by this program  also advance  the State’s  statutory  postsecondary  attainment goal, which 
calls for 60% of Mainers to have a post -high school degree or credential that positions them for 
workforce success , and the recommendations of Making Maine Work  and the Maine  Innovation 
Economy Action Plan .  
Thank you for your ongoing support. Please let me know if there is any additional information I can 
provide on behalf of Maine’s public universities regarding  this important legislation.  
