 
33 McAlister Farm Road, Ste. 102 87 Winthrop Street
Portland, ME  04103 Augusta, ME  04330
207.747.4406 www.mainemfg.comManufacturers Association of Maine 
 
19 May 2023 
 
Sen. Curry, Rep. Roberts and distinguished Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business, 
My name is Mike Roughton. I am testifying on behalf of the 
Manufacturers Association of Maine in support of LD 1918, 
An Act to Modernize Maine's Business Incentive Programs 
by Creating the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and 
Eliminating Certain Other Tax Incentive Programs.   
Maine hosts more than 1880 manufacturing businesses 
employing 56,700 Maine workers, with payroll topping 
$3.6 billion, representing 14.5% of wages paid statewide.  
Manufacturers in Maine build everything from DDG 
destroyers to silicon chips for electronics to baseball bats 
favored by professional athletes.   
Maine manufacturers are famously collaborative, doing 
everything they can to support each other.  For example, 
Dovetail Bats in Shirley, Maine, uses unique technology 
that allows professional baseball players and other 
consumers to remotely scan a baseball bat and have it 
almost immediately produced and shipped.  On its own 
that is amazing, but Dovetail didn’t create this scanning 
technology on its own.  It turned to Newfangled Solutions, 
based in Livermore Falls, Maine, to develop the scanning 
and production systems.   
At MAME, we believe that if we work together, we can 
solve any problem, build common cause, and continue to 
both grow Maine’s economy and workers’ wages. 
 
 2023 Executive BOARD
Chair of the Board 
Judith Borelli
Texas Instruments
Vice Chair of the Board, &
Legislative Chair
Dave Fortin 
Kennebec Technologies
Treasurer & Investment Chair
Samantha Pedersen
Albin, Randall & Bennett
Secretary & Business Svcs. Chair
Neal Prescott
Prescott Associates
Past-Chair & Energy Program Chair
Alan LaPoint
The Strainrite Companies
Executive Director
Mike Roughton
MAME_LD 1918 testimony 052223
 
33 McAlister Farm Road, Ste. 102 87 Winthrop Street
Portland, ME  04103 Augusta, ME  04330
207.747.4406 www.mainemfg.comIn LD 1918, the State of Maine is becoming a collaborative partner to help 
manufacturers train their workforce.  As proposed, this training focusses on the 
unique needs of individual manufacturers, making it a far more effective and 
efficient investment than a generalized curriculum at an external site.  Every Maine 
manufacturer’s needs are unique. While one business might need marine welders 
another needs technicians who can design, build, and test semiconductor chips.  
The 20-year-old Pine Tree Development Zone Program helped 17% of our members.  
We are thrilled that those members currently enrolled in PTZ will have the option to 
continue taking advantage of the program until they complete their 10-year cycle, 
and then will allow them to transition into the new program, should that be in their 
best interest. 
Our only disappointment is that manufacturers like Bath Iron Works will be ineligible 
to participate in the program because they participate in other incentives.  We 
believe those other incentives to encourage investment in the physical plant to 
remain competitive are not duplicated by financial support for workforce training.  
As Governor Mills said in a recent radio address, “we need to reward companies who 
make investments in training and incentivize other businesses to begin doing that”.  
The Governor’s words describe BIW and other manufacturers that have been doing 
the right thing – for a very long time - by providing on-going development of their 
workforce to increase their skills and build their earning potential. 
We hope that you will consider including all Maine employers regardless of location 
and whether they take advantage of other tax incentives designed to make them 
competitive.   
Thank you for your efforts on behalf of Maine’s manufacturing entrepreneurs. I’d 
be glad to take any questions you might have. 
