Testimony in Support of LD 1918  
An Act to Modernize Maine's Business Incentive Programs by Creating the Dirigo Business 
Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other Tax Incentive Programs  
May 19, 2023  
 
Senator Curr y, Representative Roberts , and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business , my name is Susan Swanton. 
I’m a resident of Biddeford, the retired Executive Director of the Maine Marine Trades Association  (MMTA)  and proud to serve as Chair of  the Board of Trustees of The Landing School 
of Boatbuilding and Design in Arundel.  
 I am pleased to see that Gov, Mills has put forth this bill that will help many of M aine ’s 
businesses and workers. My forty years in the boating industry showed me just how important 
a skilled workforce is to the success of our b usinesses and , by extension, our State. The early 
part of my career was spent working in boatyards, as well as retail and wholesale businesses. In 
every circumstance the biggest problem I faced was  the lack of a skilled workfor ce. In fact, it 
played a large part in my decision to leave that pa rt of the industry and accept the position of 
Executive Director at MMTA . The Association frequently offered training to its members , and 
from my own personal experience I was well aw are how much it was needed.  
 Our industry has been so fortunate  to have  The Landing School where students can come for a 
school year and earn a diploma in Wooden Boatbuilding, Yacht Design, Marine Systems or Compos ite Boatbuilding. A second year at the School graduates students  with an Associate of 
Applied Science  Degree  in Mari ne Industry  Technology . In the fall we will be we lcoming our first 
class of students  to our recently launched Boatyard Management Program. Our graduates are 
highly sought after, tend to be well respected and generousl y compensated. They advance in 
their careers quickly and ind eed man y of them have become the leaders of well known 
boatbuilding companies, owners of businesses of their own and even instructors at our School . 
 Good education comes at a cost and  yet I have seen time and again, in this industry , employers 
of every size spending  hard earned dollars to train their workers. They pay for courses, travel 
expenses (including meals and lodging), pay wages during the training and bear the burden of 
lost production time while an employee is atte nding a class. Some h ave even provided full 
scholarships for employees to attend The Landing School. The tax credit s that will be available 
to eligible  employers when this bill is enacted into law will help them meet their company ’s  
goals , generally lead to increased earn ing power for their emplo yers and will keep  Maine at the 
forefront of an industry  that has been active here for more than 400 years.  
 
On Saturday morning The Landing School Class of 2023 will gather to rec eive their diplomas and 
degrees  at our 44
th graduation ceremony . How I wish you could be there  to see the pride and 
sense of accomplishment  on their faces, to see the work they have comp leted  whether i t’s the ir 
final yacht design project o r the boats they have built or those they have repai red. Their stories 
of how much this education has  meant to them, to hear a parent say that their child ’s time here 
has changed them in ways they di dn’t think poss ible and knowing that most of the m have 
already found employment and will s oon be embarking on amazing and rewarding careers 
would prove how important programs like the Dirigo Busine ss Incentive s Programs are to  so 
many people and to the State of Maine.  
 
I thank President J ackson and all the co -spon sors for brin ging th e Governor ’s bill forward and I 
hope that as members of the IDEA Committee each of you will support the bill with your vote of 
ought to pass.  
 
  
