 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE IMMIGRANTS’ RIGHTS COALITION  (MIRC)  
Opposing L.D.  1918: An Act to Modernize Maine's Business Incentive Programs by 
Creating the Dirigo Business Incentives Program and Eliminating Certain Other Tax 
Incentive Programs  
Sponsor:  Senator Troy Jackson  (“Governor ’s Bill ”) 
Public Hearing: Friday, May 19,  2023  
 
 
Senator Curry, Representa tive Roberts, and Honorable Members of the  Committee on 
Innovati on, Development, Economic Advancement , and Business : 
 
My name is Tobin Williamson  and I am the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ 
Rights Coalition (MIRC), a statewide network of almost 100 member organizations working to 
enhance the lives of Maine’s immigrant communities. MIRC works to advance systemic changes 
in Maine through  collaborative advocacy to ensure that voices of the state’s large, diverse, and 
growing immigrant communities are heard.   MIRC is also part of the Mainers for Tax Fairness 
coalition, and we join them today in testifying against L.D. 1918 ., the Dirig o Business Incentive.  
According to the Maine Center  for Economic Policy, “small Maine businesses will likely receive 
little, if any, benefits compared with large corporations. ” Small businesses are the hear t of 
Maine ’s economy  and often showcase the entrepren eurial spirit of many of Maine ’s immigrant -
owne d businesses. We are concerned  that people like childcare providers in Lewiston, s hop 
owner s in Bangor, and restauranteurs in Rockland  would be left behind compared t o large 
corporations  who are often b ased out of state . 
Additionally, we feel funding would be a better spent if it went toward the issues keeping 
workers from reachin g their full potential, such  as the lack of afforda ble childcare, inefficient 
public transportation, and a shortage of affordable housing in the communities where they work.  
Our primary  concern, quot ing MECEP ’s analyst Maura P illsbury  again, is due to  the fact  
“numerous assessments by state auditors over the years have failed to find a clear benefit of such 
tax incentives, noting that they divert money away from other important priorities. ” 
Moreover, t ax credits for large corporations  with limited accountabili ty measures  are not the  best 
way to hel p ever yday Maine workers  when there are so many existing unmet needs  right now . 
Thank you very much for your consideration of this important issue.  
 
### 
