¢~ HQUSE UP REPRESENTATIVES 
if“ 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
it AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) zsv-1440 
Michael H. Lemelin MAINE RELAY 711 
‘£*'if.i’;‘§§I‘T§§E" <>i"¢?§'E? 
’\l|ch‘1el l_€lll¢llIl €(:i legisl;11i|| ‘e.|nainc <_o\ 
R \1dc11ce"(Z()7|79$- ‘H99 
Testimony of Rep. Michael Lemelin introducing 
LD 828 An Act to Ban the Drug Tianeptine 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Good morning, Senator Center, Representative Salisbury and esteemed 
members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, my name 
is Representative Michael Lemelin of Chelsea representing House 
District 53. I am here to present LD 828 - An Act to Ban the Drug 
Tianeptine. 
Tianeptine is currently banned by eight states, Alabama, Georgia, 
Indiana, Michigan, Mississippi, Ohio, Tennessee, and most recently as 
an Emergency bill in Kentucky. This drug is not approved by the FDA, 
and is an opioid-like drug known as the “gas station heroin” . Sold as 
Tianna, Nootropic, Pegasus, TD Red or Za Za Red. According to the 
CDC, the clinical effects of tianeptine abuse and Withdrawal can also 
mimic opioid toxicity and Withdrawal. Vfhat makes this drug so 
dangerous is that it mimics opioids and is not regulated and can be sold 
over the counter or online by anyone! Tianeptine is an antidepressant, 
which is highly addictive, and has severe Withdrawal symptoms, sold as 
a dietary supplement. While gas station heroin doesn’t actually have 
“heroin” in it, it does offer very similar effects. It is not as potent as 
heroin, but many people are buying and using it so they can manage or 
maintain their opioid consumption. Brian Kuhn, PharmD, a pharmacist 
and poison education specialist at Banner Health in Phoenix, AZ said, 
“the decision to manage opioid use disorder with an alternative fentanyl- 
like substance, like “gas station heroin” is not going to maximize your 
potential to recover. ”C 
District 53 Chelsea, Dresden. Pittston and Randolph 
Primed on l6C\ cled paper
Many members will be concerned about the severe penalty for obtaining 
this drug. Keep in mind, that most states which have banned the drug 
have severe penalties, and in countries Where there is minimal 
punishment, crime rates like the drug crisis in Maine, becomes severe. 
In countries where there are severe punishments, like Singapore, the 
crime rates are reduced. The more We support drug dealers and the 
unfortunate people who have an addiction, the more we will continue to 
have a severe drug issue in Maine. Individuals with mental illness or 
similar diagnosis, who possess this drug, will be hospitalized and not 
placed in jail. 
The Drug Enforcement Administration reported in January that 
tianeptine consumed in pills in a “salt” form—has been discovered by 
law enforcement in packages mimicking hydrocodone and oxycodone. 
All the states who banned tianeptine did not worry about someone 
coming in from a border state. If I bring in empty plastic Water bottles 
from New Hampshire and return them here in Maine I can go to jail and 
pay a very steep ﬁne, and yet members are concerned about doing the 
same to prevent a drug overdose or Worse. Making laws to help people 
who have a drug addiction continue to do drugs, but making it safe for 
them, with no consequences, will not solve our severe crisis. Whena 
drug is sold online and at gas stations, as a dietary supplement, it 
becomes most dangerous.- 
In Alabama it is a Schedule 2 felony. 
In Michigan it is a Schedule 2 felony. 
In Kentucky it is a Schedule l felony. 
In Mississippi it is a Schedule l felony with fine and up to 30 years. 
We must act before people die. The goal is never to punish anyone. It is 
presenting incentives for prevention.
