TESTIMONY OF DIRECTOR RICHARD R. DESJARDINS 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
MAINE CRIMINAL JUSTICE ACADEMY 
(In Support) L.D. 828 
“An Act to Ban the Drug Tianeptine ” 
Submitted by the Department of Public Safety pursuant to Joint Rule 204. Reference to the Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered printed. 
Sponsored by: Rep. Lemelin 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Hearing Date: April 4, 2023, at 10:00 a.m. in Room 436, State House 
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety. My name is Richard R. Desj ardins, and I am the Director of the Maine 
Drug Enforcement Agency, representing the Maine Department of Public Safety. 
I am here today to testify In Support of LD 828, “An Act to ban the drug Tianeptine ” . This bill as 
Written would add the drug Tianeptine to the list of prohibited drugs in Maine and amend sections in 
Title l7-A MRSA §l 102. 
As the new Director of Maine’s Drug Enforcement Agency, and a law enforcement officer in 
Maine for many years, I have witnessed ﬁrsthand the devastation illicit drugs have had across our 
State. I’m sure many of you have been Witnesses to the tragedy of substance use disorder, the lives 
taken and the harm to all involved. 
Based on what we know and have leaned about the drug Tianeptine, it is not approved as a drug 
for humans in the U.S, the substance is considered dangerous and is banned in 8 states (Alabama, 
Michigan, Mississippi, Tennessee, Georgia, Indiana, and Ohio). It is often marketed as a cheap 
alternative to an opioid and sometimes referred to as “Gas Station Heroin” and easily bought on-line. 
To our knowledge, Tianeptine has yet to be experienced in Maine in a criminal case. The State’s 
lab Director and MDEA’s drug prosecutor indicate that the substance “may” fall within the definition 
of an “opiate” under Section 1101, which would make it a “narcotic drug” or potentially a 
“counterfeit ” drug under 1'7-A M.R.S. §1 104, which was used when the chemical formulation of “bath 
salts” were evolving beyond Maine’s legal deﬁnition. However, establishing a violation using our 
existing statutes would involve additional work to establish a violation, take precious time, and has no 
guarantee of success. We believe taking proactive steps to ban this drug and sending a clear message 
to individuals that would consider offering this drug as an altemative substance to other illegal drugs 
makes good sense. 
I would be happy to answer any questions you may have, either now or at any future work 
session.
1
