: 
MAINE 2, T A *1“ F _1 
_.._...-..-_=__-_-_-_--ii--- 
C H AZ;/l B ER 
to (3 M F1/IEZR CE 
U2 if’ x»‘0i<;¢* of Maéizzz 1’>z:.§'i.m2,sc,s' 
March 8“ , 2023 
Hon. Senator Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Hon. Representative Paige Zeigler, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
RE: MSCC Testimony in Opposition to the proposed amendment to L.D. 442: An Act Regarding 
Renewable Energy Projects 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
Committee: 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in opposition to L.D. 442 as drafted. The Chamber 
had the opportunity to meet with the sponsor of this bill last week to learn more when it was in concept draft 
form. We appreciated the opportunity to express some of our concerns with the sponsor. 
Section one of the proposed amendment is where our opposition to L.D. 442 comes from. A moratorium on any 
development project in Maine is of concern to the business community and a moratorium on renewable resource 
projects is in that category. As I have already said to this committee, the State Chamber supports renewable 
projects from any type of generation to help diversify our energy portfolio and lower the cost of energy. Right 
now, the businesses community is facing unsustainable increases in energy from the volatile prices of natural 
gas and the New England region not having enough capacity. We certainly would support more natural gas and 
recognize natural gas will never go away. But we support renewable energy coming on to the grid. 
Renewable projects also have massive economic benefits — from investment dollars and job creation — to the 
energy and environmental benefits they provide. We should be welcoming to this type of investment and 
unfortunately a moratorium would send the wrong message to investors and about our business reputation asa 
state. j 
We understand that the sponsor might be open to making improvements to this legislation, and we certainly 
would serve as a resource to help the sponsor and the committee accomplish that. We would like to see section 
one of the legislation removed and have L.D. 442 stick to the comprehensive energy planning — something the 
Chamber supports, and we feel there is uniformed agreement for among all interested parties. 
1'28 State 8t1"cet,Suitc l0l ' 
Augusta, Maine 04330-5030 ' 
tc1[Z07) 6234500 * 
fax ('20?) 022-7.7123 ' 
website: www.1i1ainechmnbermg ' c-mail: info@1r1aincchainbabrg
In closing, we respectfully ask the committee to vote “ought not to pass” on L.D. 442. Again, we appreciate the 
sponsors willingness to meet with us and work with us on making improvements moving forward and the 
Chamber stands ready to help address those concerns working with the committee in advance of the work 
session. 
Sincerely, 
Benjamin R. Lucas 
Senior Government Relations Specialist 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org
