STATE or Mama 
()F¥iCE OF THE GOVERNOR 
q ISTATE HOUSE STATION 
Al§GUS'i ‘A, MAHEE‘ 
. 04333-0001 
JAi\'E'r MILLS DAN BURGESS 
GOVERNOR DIRECTOR or GOVERNOR'S 
ENERGY QFFICE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act Regarding Renewable Energy Projects 
L.D. 442 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
March 8, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and I am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies in opposition to L.D. 442. 
This legislation proposes a prohibition on the approval of renewable energy resources until after the 
adjournment of the second Regular Session of the 131“ Legislature. lt also establishes a new 
Commission to Study Maine's Energy Policies to consider and analyze the impacts of Maine's climate 
and clean energy goals. 
Maine has seen significant development of new renewable energy resources in recent years, driven by 
the competitive economics of these technologies and supportive state and regional climate and 
renewable energy policies. Maine's investments in renewable energy helped to stabilize prices and save 
ratepayers money — last year alone, as electricity rates increased due to our region's overreliance on 
natural gas to generate our electricity, Maine's renewable energy contracts saved ratepayers $68 million 
as approved by the PUC. Renewable energy development also brings considerable local economic 
development in the form of new jobs, investment, and local tax revenue. 
The Governor's Energy Office, as established by Maine Revised Statues Title 2, §9, is established to carry 
out responsibilities of the State relating to energy resources, planning and development. As the lead 
energy office for the state, the GEO works on a wide range of energy issues and is responsible for 
several activities such as providing policy leadership and technical assistance, energy programs, 
monitoring energy markets, and reporting on heating fuel and energy prices. The GEO has produced an 
unprecedented amount of energy analysis. Over the last four years, the GEO published numerous 
reports and led and participated in a variety of stakeholder driven processes in different settings as 
directed by the Legislature or initiated by the office to support the advancement of state policy goals. 
For example, in 2022, the GEO published the 2022 Maine Energy Summary and Assessment as required 
by statute which builds upon prior energy plans developed by the GEO in 2009 and 2015. The GEO is 
currently moving forward with a planning effort that will produce a new energy plan analysis at the end 
of 2023. Other Maine stakeholder-informed reports, studies and working groups led or co-led by the 
GEO can all be found online at www.maine.gov[energy and include:
1
0 Maine Won't Wait, the Maine Climate Council's 2020 Climate Action Plan and subsequent 
Progress Reports 
0 State of Maine Renewable Energy Goals Market Assessment 
0 Maine Clean Energy industry Report 
0 Maine Clean Energy Workforce Analysis Report 
0 Maine Offshore Wind Roadmap and multiple reports of supporting technical analysis 
0 Maine Energy Storage Market Assessment 
0 Northern Maine & Rural Energy Monitoring Report 
0 Northern Maine Reliability and Rate Stability Stakeholder Group — Summary Report 
0 Final Report of the Distributed Generation Stakeholder Group 
0 Report of the Agricultural Solar Stakeholder Group 
0 State of Maine Clean Transportation Roadmapi 
0 Strengthening Maine's Clean Energy Economy 
We must continue to refine and adjust our policies to meet the evolving dynamics of our energy market 
and technology cost reductions; however, creating an unnecessary Commission that stalls the 
development of clean energy in Maine would jeopardize the energy and economic opportunities that 
these projects offer. 
The GEO looks forward to continuing its engagement with state agencies, stakeholders, and the 
Legislature on the most responsible and cost-effective path forward to achieving this target. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. 
CM.~.C.2M~_ Caroline Colan, Legislative Liaison 
Governor's Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
