i 
Z 
2 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
Z §§"i'?‘\'i“E H€j)L}SE S"???-\'l"l(,)N 
:’-‘~tL(}L§ST.» ’\. N'i;’%l?\iE 05.333-i,)(}{)2 
éiifii Z8?-iéiii 
Richard T. Bradstreet i\/iAi§ \EE Rlii-.»’x\."' 7 il 
if-l ii-ar:n<>i"=y i..lt§3’Q 
\" ais1\..2:§' m‘-r<.:>. Mi" . ‘J?-5*.>i.\i ‘§‘ 
i3icl;.i%1 ‘adsz;-gemlegisiaiam \ it <.\ 
Pt Cciii i- >?;l><4I>}-m~' 
March 8, 2023 
RE: LD 442 —An Act Regarding Renewable Energy Projects. 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, l'm Representative Dick Bradstreet of 
House District 61, representing my home town of Vassalboro and most of Sidney. l'm here 
today to introduce LD 442, An Act Regarding Renewable Energy Projects. 
l've come to understand that the whole issue of “energy” is a very complicated one, and 
no doubt you're much more familiar with that than lam. What l do see in conversing with 
people from various parts of the state is that they're extremely concerned with where the price 
of energy is going. l've read numerous articles on the many different aspects of energy issue 
from the cost and availability of minerals necessary for electric storage, the current capacity of 
the grid and the necessity for additional infrastructure to accommodate planned 
electrification, the possible shortcomings of electric vehicles in cold weather, the real possibility 
of blackouts due to lack of energy reliability —the list can go on and on. lust yesterday the 
Bangor Daily News headlined that ”solar growth initiatives will be borne by the poor." We 
really need to address these and other issues under a long term comprehensive energy plan 
rather than attacking them piecemeal which right now we're pretty much forced to do. 
So I actually decided to propose two bills — this one that originally concentrated on 
renewable energy projects, as indicated by its title, and another one that would have the Public 
Utilities Commission and/or the Public Advocate do a comprehensive review of the energy 
situation here in Maine. Upon attending a meeting earlier this year hosted by various types of 
businesses, individuals and non-profit groups, I heard a lot about the state's need fora 
comprehensive energy plan. The repeated statements were, "we have goals, but we don't have 
a long range energy plan." Shortly after that I decided to essentially combine what I believe the 
state needs into one bill — what is actually an amendment that is before you today. 
Before talking about the bill itself, l'd like to thank Governor l\/lills for her proactive work 
on Maine's energy challenges. She's taken the bull by the horns and has been working 
diligently in establishing energy goals for the state in creating renewable energy resources and 
District {>1 Sidnq {Part} and \' assaiim1'o 
) O teaF
thereby decreasing our dependence on fossil fuels. We need to continue in that direction ina 
way that is effective and affordable for the benefit of all Mainers. There are a couple of 
considerations that should be recognized. One is that we, elected Legislators, should be setting 
public policies. After all, we do all serve on policy committees. Of course we need to work 
hand in hand with the Administration, which leads me to my next point. We have pretty much 
relied on the Administration to establish energy goals and actions. But like all Administrations, 
this one will one day come to an end. We need a State energy plan, one that belongs to the 
State and that will give future Administrations guidance and parameters under which it can 
operate. That's something we should always do in our policy discussions -thinking long term 
and provide stability and predictability for Mainers who live under the policies we create. This 
will be a complicated task, but working with the Governor, we can accomplish it! 
I've listed the Duties that l believe a Commission to Study Maine's Energy Policies should 
deal with. l hope the list is fairly comprehensive when considering all the factors that will affect 
our ability to ensure availability, stability, reliability, sustainability and affordability of the 
various types of energy we now consume or will decide to consume here in Maine. There isa 
portion of the bill that will allow latitude for the Commission to consider other factors as it sees 
fit. The bill does not speak to a time frame that any State Energy Plan should cover. I would 
suggest at least ten years, and the Commission could also create provisions where the Plan 
could be extended or altered in some fashion as circumstances change in the years ahead. As 
you can see, there is also a $20,000 request in the bill to fund the Commission, but this is 
probably way too little. l put a figure in simply to note that there will be a Fiscal Note. 
Regarding the makeup of the Commission, my focus is on designating individuals who 
have demonstrated expertise in various segments of the energy industry, as well as different 
types of energy consumers. l am hoping for members who do not have intractable opinions for 
or against any particular type of energy resource and who will offer thoughtful, dispassionate 
input to the Commission's deliberations. I understand that there may testimony with several 
suggestions for additional or different members coming later, and l'm certainly receptive to 
that. My goal is to have an inclusive and balanced Commission. 
Lastly, the Moratorium issue. Originally I thought this would be a good idea —to pause 
issuance of State renewable energy project permits until such time as it took to develop a State 
Energy Plan. To a point, l believe that still has some merit, perhaps on a limited basis, but after 
further consideration do not deem it advisable. It is not a priority of mine — the creation of the 
proposed Commission is what I really hope for and what l think the state needs. l hope it will 
come up with recommendations for this committee so that you can propose legislation that will 
create a comprehensive Energy Plan for our state. Thank you.
