CORNERSTONE mmgr AN El\/|PLOYEE —O\/\/NED COl\/IPANY ~—#~ 
March 8, 2023 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Chair 
Representative Paige Ziegler, Chair 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in opposition to LD 442, “An Act Regarding Renewable Energy Projects ” 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee: 
My name is Jeremy Payne and I am a principal with Cornerstone Government Affairs Group 
here to testify in opposition to LD 442 on behalf of our client the Maine Renewable Energy 
Association (“MREA”). 
Over the last 20+ years MREA members have invested billions of dollars developing, building 
and operating renewable energy projects around the state. These projects are often times among 
the largest property tax payers in their host communities — they also provide vital employment 
for Mainers all across the state. That investment and employment did not happen by accident, 
but rather what led to this is investors ’ belief that Maine is a reasonable and predictable place 
within which to deploy their capital. Unfortunately, if LD 442 passes it would immediately halt 
the ability for any state regulatory agencies to “issue any license, permit, or otherwise approve or 
authorize the siting, construction or operation of a renewable resource... ” — these types of ideas 
are what spreads seeds of doubt about whether Maine is truly committed to making a clean 
energy transition. Passing a de facto two-year moratorium on reviewing and issuing permits for 
renewable energy projects would send a deeply damaging signal to the energy marketplace: 
Maine is closed for your clean energy dollars. 
We believe Governor Mills has rightly stated that “Maine Won’t Wait” as it relates to taking 
meaningful action on climate change impacts, and that passing the moratorium would 
undoubtedly lead to: two more years of waiting; continued overreliance on electricity with 
volatile fuel prices; and pushing investment to the other 49 states where making permitting 
decisions is not prohibited. 
To be clear, MREA does not object to energy planning and would be glad work with the sponsor 
and others to help design a study commission that will provide new and comprehensive 
information for this legislature and those that follow. However, we would also encourage this 
committee to clearly and narrowly identify the goals of such an effort, and to be sure those goals 
are not already being met through other past or ongoing efforts (e.g., reports by the Governor ’s 
Energy Ofﬁce, and open dockets at the Public Utilities Commission). As drafted, this 
\/VVVVV.CGAGROUP.COMl ‘{§@CGAGlKOUl ’
commission would have a very Wide-ranging charge and we are not sure the $20,000 
appropriation would be nearly sufficient to examine the various items envisioned in Section 6 
We respectfully urge you to vote ought not to pass. 
Thank you. 
V\/\V\?V .CGr\GROUI ‘.('IOi\'i I ?@CGAG RO U1’
