 
 
 
 
Committee on Energy, Util ities and Technology  
By Pete LaFond, Acadia Center  
March 2, 2023  
  
  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representa tive Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilities an d Technology Committee:  
  
Acadia Center opposes the proposed Amendment to L.D. 44 2, which seeks to undo tangible progress in Maine on 
renewable energy by forbidding the Maine PUC and DEP from issuing “any” license or permit for the construction or 
operation of a renewable resource. Th e Amendment would also appoint a Commi ssion to study aspects of renewable 
energy already studied for years by the Maine Climate Coun cil and a host of stakeholders from across Maine.   
  
Through this Legislature, the Executive, and more specific ally the Maine Climate Counci l, the State of Maine has 
worked diligently for years to encourage renewable energy in  Maine, with tangible results. There are a number of 
renewable energy projects already online which are sa ving Maine customers money and reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions. This Amendment would bring that progress to a grinding halt by putting a hold on any permitting for the 
construction or operation of a renewable resource. The proposed Amendment to L.D. 442 would disrupt the green 
energy economy in Maine, causing uncertainty and delay for companies and their Maine customers.  Moreover, the 
Commission could potentially conflict with a legal and regulatory framework established by th e Legislature and 
overseen by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.   
 
Additionally, the proposed makeup of the Commission includes no  references to environmental and environmental 
justice representatives. The components  of the proposed study also ignore entirely an assessment of the many 
benefits of Maine’s climate and clean energy policies. 
  
For these reasons we urge the Committe e to reject the proposed Amendment in its entirety. Th ank you for your 
attention to these matters.  
 
 
Pete LaFond 
Senior Advocate and Maine Program Director 
8 Summer St. PO Box 583 
Rockport, ME 04856-0583 
plafond@acadiacenter.org  
207-236-6470 x305 207-329-4606 cell 
 
