MAINE CAMPGROUND OWNERS ASSOCIATION
229 Center Street, Unit 5, Auburn ME 04210
Telephone (207) 782-5874 ● Fax (207) 782-4497
Web: www.campmaine.com
Email: info@campmaine.com              
Senator Curry
Representative Roberts
Members of the Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & Business Committee
Re: LD 281, An Act to Require Ski Area Safety Plans and Reporting
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the IDEA Committee.  My name is Kathy Dyer and I 
am the Executive Director of the Maine Campground Owners Association (MECOA).  The Association is the 
premier resource for supporting campground owners and promoting camping in Maine.  Our mission is to 
ensure that people who visit our State to enjoy camping, as well as Maine people who enjoy camping, have an 
enjoyable, fun and safe time while experiencing all that Maine has to offer our visitors and guests. 
We are testifying in opposition to LD 281 on the basis that requiring a recreational entity to provide this level 
of detail on every incident is onerous, time consuming and will not provide the public with any meaningful 
information to base their recreation decisions on.
Although LD 281 is specific to the ski industry, it could apply to any of Maine’s Tourism Entities and 
recreational activities like camping, hiking, mountain biking, water skiing, etc.
The National Ski Area Association, NSAA, already publishes fatality and catastrophic injury info on its web 
site.  The ski industry is transparent on the overall facts and readily admits that skiing has risks which are 
assumed by skiers and snowboarders under Maine law.  The Ski Industry post one’s Responsibility Code in 
multiple locations at the ski areas along with required Maine signage explaining the risks assumed.
https://www.nsaa.org/NSAA/Media/Industry_Stats.aspx look under Slope Safety Stats. 
Note: It is very important that members of this committee review this web site to get a better understanding 
of how our ski industry operates and how they put safety of their guests as their number one priority.
MECOA is a proud member of the Maine Tourism Alliance.  Members of the Alliance are committed to the 
hospitality industry in Maine, and we work collaboratively on behalf of all the various organizations involved 
that support the Tourism and recreational activities in Maine.  It will not come as a surprise to you that as a 
result of the pandemic, many, many people in the State looked at these activities in a new light when some 
traditional recreational activities were shut down.  I know for the camping industry, we anxiously awaited the 
time when we could once again host guests, and although we had to make many accommodations, we knew 
that we would be able to offer the opportunity to enjoy the outdoors in a safe and responsible manner.  
Camping in and of itself, is not a hazardous activity, however, there are likely numerous times when an 
individual can be injured when enjoying the out-of-doors.  I shudder to think if we had to report on every 
incident that happens in a campsite while people are recreating.  Tripping over roots, slipping on a slippery 
rock or getting a fishhook stuck in a finger are all things that can and do happen when you are outdoors.  We 
endeavor to make our campsites as safe as possible but accidents do happen, and when they do, we assess 
whether or not there is some way to ensure they do not happen again.
In closing, we hope you will consider the very real consequences of what LD 281 is asking.  They are asking 
that every time an incident occurs, the industry do extensive reporting even though the event may have truly 
been an accident that would occur in the best of circumstances.  Everyone in this industry wants to have a 
safe environment while still recognizing that being active and outdoors will always result in some incidents.
Thank you for your time and attention and I’d be glad to provide you with any more information you may 
want on our operations.  We at MECOA are proud to be a part of the extensive Tourism and Hospitality 
industry in Maine, a true vacationland.  
Respectfully Submitted by Kathy Dyer, Executive Director
Maine Campground Owners Association

 
