Dirk Gouwens – Executive Director
Ski Maine Association,  PO Box 689, Farmington, ME  04938
www.skimaine.com   (207) 773-SNOW (7669 (o)  (207) 653-5590 (mobile)March 9, 2023
Testimony in opposition to LD 281
An Act to require ski area safety plans and reporting
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business.
My name is Dirk Gouwens and I live in New Portland, Maine and I am the Executive Director of the 
Ski Maine Association with its offices in Farmington, ME.  Please accept this testimony in 
opposition to LD 281, An Act to require ski area safety plans and reporting.
Ski Maine Association collaborates with Maine ski areas, regional and national associations 
sharing educational programming in all aspects of our business.  Safety conversations and 
educational seminars are a primary focus of nearly every aspect of ski area operations.
Ski resorts in New England compete fiercely for customer’s free time.  We work diligently to make 
sure that we offer the safest guest experience possible.  Maine ski areas are a diverse group.  We 
offer community ski areas with easy access for Maine families and our destination resorts rank 
among the best in the country. We are the economic driver of many communities and this 
additional burden serves no real purpose.
Neighboring ski states like New Hampshire, Vermont and Massachusetts do not have similar laws.  
Indeed, none of the 36 other ski states have this mandate and it will unfairly burden Maine ski 
areas to the benefit of other states which will harm the rural economy of Maine.
Further, there is no need for reporting injuries by individual ski areas since NSAA (the national 
trade association) annually publishes online a wide variety of ski industry statistics including 
fatalities, catastrophic injuries and overall injury trends, avalanche incidents and chairlift injuries 
and mechanical malfunctions. ( go to www.nsaa.org, click on the Industry stats link and scroll down 
to the slope safety link) The ski industry has been transparent about the risks of our sport for many 
decades and no other recreational activity makes this kind of data freely available to the public.
Maine ski areas are not unreasonably safe.  In fact, Maine ski areas have seen only one fatality in 
the past 8 years.  Why single out and target skiing alone when there have already been 7 
snowmobiling fatalities in Maine this year alone.  What about cycling, hunting, boating, rafting, ATV 
riding etc. etc.
Maine ski areas are already highly regulated and subject to oversight and accountability.  Ski areas 
are regulated by dozens of federal, state and local agencies. The Maine office of elevator 
inspection oversees the operation of our lifts and follows the guidance of ANSI B-77, the national 
standards organization for aerial and surface lifts.  Maine is the only state in the country that 
requires two annual inspections of its ski lifts, once prior to the season and a second inspection 

during operation.  Maine ski areas are already required to report incidents and accidents to the 
state and can be shut down if not in compliance.
The Maine legislature has identified and acknowledged the risks involved with skiing and 
snowboarding as outlined in Title 32, Chapter 133 subsection 15217.  Ski areas are required to 
post signs with specific language outlined by the legislature at every ticket sales point and at every 
lift loading area. (images attached) Maine ski areas are transparent about the risks involved with 
skiing and acknowledge this risk at multiple locations throughout the ski area.  We have also 
followed the NSAA “Your Responsibility Code” since its inception many decades ago. (attached).
As stated earlier, safety is a regular part of every day operations at ski areas.  We focus on safety 
throughout the year and are confident that our safety record is among the best in the country.  I 
urge you to vote Ought Not To Pass.

Dirk Gouwens – Executive Director
Ski Maine Association,  PO Box 689, Farmington, ME  04938
www.skimaine.com   (207) 773-SNOW (7669 (o)  (207) 653-5590 (mobile)


