1 
  
Janet T. Mills  
                Governor  
 
 STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL  
AND FINANCIAL REGULATION  
OFFICE OF PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL 
REGULATION  
35 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  
04333- 0035 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anne L. Head  
Commissioner , DPFR  
Director, OPOR  
  
 
March 10, 2023 
 Senator Chip Curry, Senate Chair  
 
Representative Tiffany Roberts, House Chair   
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business
 
100 State House Station   
Augusta, ME   04333- 0100  
 Re: LD 281, An Act to Require  Ski Area Safety Plans and Reporting. 
 
Dear Senator C urry, Representative Roberts , and H onorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic  Advancement and Business : 
The Department of Professional and Financial Regulation’s Office of Professional and 
Occupational Regulation  shares this letter in opposition to LD 281, An Act to Require Ski Area 
Safety Plans and Reporting.  We hope this information is helpful to your deliberations.    
This bill p roposes to create a new section located in the enabling statute for the Maine Elevator 
and Tramway Safety Program (Title 32, Chapter 133).  A  new ly created  Section 15230 would 
require that beginning in 2024, and annually thereafter, a ski area operator mus t create and 
maintain a safety plan, to be accessible on the ski area’s public website and  in printed form to 
any person on request .  For those operators with a vertical drop of 500 feet or more and at least 
one aerial tramway , they must also  produce a de ath and injury report for the preceding season 
and maintain a publicly accessible accident database that includes data elements relevant to accident analysis for injury prevention planning.  
The purpose of the Elevator and Tramway program is to protect Mai ne citizens and visitors 
from : 
[U]nnecessary mechanical  hazards in the operation of elevators and tramways and 
to ensure that reasonable design and construction are used, that accepted safety devices and sufficient personnel are provided and that periodic maintenance, 
inspections and adjustments considered esse ntial for the safe operation of elevators 
and tramways are made. The responsibility for design, construction, maintenance and inspection rests with the firm, person, partnership, association, corporation or company that owns elevators or tramways .” 32 M.R.S. § 15201. (emphasis added)  
 
 
 
PHONE : (207)624- 8511  (VOICE )  
OFFICES: GARDINER ANNEX,  76 NORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE  
 
TTY users:  call Maine Relay 711   
 
 
FAX : (207)624 -8595  
  
  
 
  
 
2 
 As noted, the current program is focused on the regulation of equipment  that falls within the 
statutory definition of “tramway.”  Program staff have oversight authority over the owner of a 
tramway.  The tramway owner may or may  not be the same person or entity that is the “ski area 
operator.” The tramway owner has responsibility to have their equipment inspected as required and properly maintained and operated in accordance with national standards adopted by the director.  By co ntrast, program staff has no jurisdiction or authority over the ski area terrain, the 
conduct of individuals who use the terrain, or the ski area operator if that entity is not the tramway owner.   
Title 32, Section 15211(1) already requires that each tram way accident that is caused by 
equipment failure or results in significant injury to a person or results in substantial damage to equipment must be reported by the owner to the chief inspector.  The bill is proposing that the ski operator maintain data and  an accessible database broader than the reporting requirements of 
15211, as an accident reportable per the bill need not be related to the tramway equipment and would include accidents at ski areas involving skiers, snowboarders and other users of ski are a 
terrain unrelated to the safety of tramways.  
Relatedly, the bill is silent as to enforcement and consequences if a ski area operator fails to 
create and maintain a safety plan and make it accessible, or to produce a death and injury report and maintain an accessible accident database.  Under the current program, if a tramway owner (which may be a different entity than the ski area operator) fails to report a tramway accident (which is more narrowly defined than in the bill), the inspection certificate fo r the involved 
tramway may be summarily revoked. 32 M.R.S. 15211(2).   
Thank you for your consideration of these comments and we would be happy to answer any questions  at the work  session.  
Sincerely,  
Joan  
Joan Cohen 
Deputy to the C ommissioner  
Department of Professional and Financial Regulation   
 
