Testimony In Favor of LD 1179 An Act to Reinstate the Marine Recreational Fishery Advisory 
Council at the Department of Marine Resources 
Good Afternoon Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Marine Resources. 
My name is Bailey Bowden and I live in Penobscot. 
The mission statement of DMR is deﬁned by law as: 
§6021. Purpose The Department of Marine Resources is established to conserve and develop 
marine and estuarine resources; to conduct and sponsor scientiﬁc research; to promote and 
develop the Maine coastal fishing industries; to advise and cooperate with local, state and 
federal oﬁicials concerning activities in coastal waters; and to implement, administer and 
enforce the laws and regulations necessary for these enumerated purposes, as well as the 
exercise of all authority conferred by this Part. 
Please note that there is no reference to recreational or sustenance ﬁsheries in this statement. 
DMR has 9 Advisory Councils —— 
aquaculture, scallop, seaweed, sea urchin, shellﬁsh, 2 lobster 
councils, commercial ﬁshing safety, and a general advisory council. None of the existing councils 
address the concerns of the recreational or sustenance ﬁshermen. 
The creatures that live in the sea belong to all the citizens of Maine equally. The only 
opportunity for Maine's residents, that ﬁsh for entertainment or sustenance, to voice their 
opinion about ﬁshery management or rule making is through the public hearing process. 
Citizens present their testimony and then perhaps answer a question. That's it. 
Council meetings provide a space where citizens can participate in an open discussion without 
time limits orjust one chance to speak. 
Since the last Council disbanded, sustenance ﬁshermen need to be licensed, the possession 
limit for alewives went from one bushel to 25 ﬁsh, the smelt limits were cut in half or 
eliminated, and the mackerel bag limit went from an unlimited amount to 20 ﬁsh. The size limit 
for striped bass changes every few years and there are rules about what tackle may be used. 
This is a lot of regulation without representation. 
Reestablishjng the Recreational Advisory Council will allow sustenance ﬁshermen to make their 
concerns known and be part of the process. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this bill. 
Respectfully, 
%1@///e.//~
