TESTIMONY OF 
Patrick Keliher 
Department of Marine Resources 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying 
In Opposition to 
LD 1179 An Act to Reestablish the Marine Recreational Fishery Advisory Council 
at the Department of Marine Resources 
Before the Committee on Marine Resources 
Sponsored by Representative Russell 
Date of Hearing: April 13, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources, my 
name is Patrick Keliher, Commissioner of the Department of Marine Resources, and I am testifying on behalf 
of the Department in opposition to LD 1179. 
The Marine Recreational Fisheries Advisory Council was originally created in 1999, and was eliminated through 
the inactive Boards and Commissions bill in 2009, which means it had been at least 2 years since the Council 
had met at the time it was proposed for elimination. 
ironically, in my former role with the Coastal Conservation Association, I had advocated for the creation of this 
Council. i also took an active role in suggesting topics for the Council to consider and provide input to the 
Department. However, after a few years we had exhausted the subject matter that was of interest to the 
group, and there was minimal interest in continuing to meet. For these reasons, the council was eventually 
eliminated with no opposition from the Department or the sector represented. 
Currently the Department staffs eight advisory councils, as well as the seven lobster Zone Councils. Ongoing 
Council administration requires significant staff time to do well, and DMR does not currently have any 
additional capacity with the Resource Management Coordinator positions to take on new Council activity. 
Our experience with existing Councils is that they seem to be most effective in situations where the 
Department has a recurring need for input from a range of participants within the same fishery that are within 
the state's regulatory authority (e.g. the annual setting of a season). 
For situations where we don't have Advisory Councils, the Department holds meetings on topics as needed, to 
collect input on pending management actions, which are often taking place through the New England Fisheries 
Management Council (e.g. groundfish species) or the Mid-Atlantic Council (e.g. mackerel) or the Atlantic States 
Marine Fisheries Commission (e.g. striped bass and river herring,). For example, in April 2021, DMR held an 
open, online meeting to share update on striped bass management and research in Maine, to hear from 
recreational fishermen on what they wanted from the fishery and the fishery managers. There was an 
update on activities at ASMFC, but it was not a public hearing. 
The Department's position is that it is more effective and efficient to hold meetings on certain species as they 
are needed, particularly ahead of management actions, so that input can be obtained in a more informal way, 
outside the public hearing process. We will keep this need in mind, and do more of this whenever it is 
possible. 
Thank you for your consideration, and l would be happy to answer any questions you might have.
