Full Plates 
Full Potential Fl\.'Dll\iG CHll.D Hl_.‘NGEl? lN MA;l\[' 
Testimony of Anna Korsen, Full Plates Full Potential 
In Support of LD 921 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Anna Korsen, Advocacy and Implementation Director with 
Full Plates Full Potential, a statewide non-profit working to address childhood food insecurity by 
providing technical and financial assistance to schools and communities to help feed kids now, while 
advocating for the systemic changes necessary to ensure that all Maine children have consistent 
access to nutritious meals. Our strategy is to maximize access to USDA Child Nutrition Programs - 
commonly known as school lunch, school breakfast, afterschool meals, and summer meals. 
Today, l'm submitting testimony in support of LD 921 "An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund for Public 
Schools to Be Used for Processed and Value-added Maine Food Products." We would like to thank 
Senator Reny for her commitment to Maine children and our local food system. 
The Local Food Fund is Maine's local food purchasing incentive program for schools. School nutrition 
programs get reimbursed $1 for every $3 spent on local foods. Originally the Local Produce Fund, 
reimbursements could only be used for purchases of raw, unprocessed local produce purchased 
directly from the farm. After learning from school nutrition professionals about barriers that existed 
within the fund leading to low participation, we worked together last session to expand the Local Food 
Fund to include protein, value-added dairy, and minimally processed produce that has been peeled, 
chopped, or frozen and to allow schools to source local foods from their contracted distributors in 
addition to direct from the grower or producer. That expansion resulted in a 350% increase in local 
food purchasing in schools last year. 
However, the current definition of "minimally processed" food accepted for reimbursement through 
the fund leaves out many great Maine products that could add value to school meals. This bill seeks to 
further expand the Local Food Fund by allowing the Department of Education to create standards 
around additional processed and value-added local products like marinara sauce made with Maine 
tomatoes, breaded and frozen local fish, and bread made with Maine grains to be eligible for 
reimbursement through the fund. 
We urge the committee to support LD 921 to further expand Maine's Local Food Fund. Thank you for 
your time and consideration. I'm happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Anna Korsen 
Advocacy and Implementation Director 
Full Plates Full Potential 
akorsen@ful|glates.org 
207.653.6301
