 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN SUPPORT  -  LD 921  An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund for Public Schools  
to Be Used for Processed and Value -added Maine Food Products  
 
Dear Senator Rafferty , Chair, Representative Brennan , Chair, and Members of the Committee on Education and Cultural 
Affairs,  
 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association  (MGFPA). 
MGFPA is a business trade association representing more than 200 businesses within Maine’s food community; Main Street 
businesses including independently owned and operated grocery stores and supermarkets, food and beverage producers and 
processors, manufacturer s, wholesalers, distributors, and supportive service companies.  
 
We support removing the reference to minimally processed foods from the schools’ Local Foods Fund purchasing 
requirements. This will in turn allow for additional value -add and manufactured M aine food -goods to be procured by Maine 
schools. We appreciate that it continues to leave the program’s management within the Department of Education to 
determine nutrient standards and continued oversight of  health guidelines.  Removing the minimally proce ssed definition will 
allow for cooked foods or heated items , expanding school s’ options.  
 
There is a bountiful market of Maine food producers. In fall of  2022, Maine awarded nearly  $20 million in grant awards 
through the Maine Jobs & Recovery Plan  to help Maine farmers and food processers address infrastructure needs to expand 
in-state production and processing. It was noted, “These funds will help our farmers increase the supply of  Maine -grown food, 
meet growing demand, create and sustain jobs in one of Maine’s iconic heritage industries while also strengthening our food 
system, supporting economic growth, and enhancing Maine’s national reputation for food excellence. ” Of particular interest is 
that these  AIIP grants “will be used to support a variety of infrastructure needs, including harvesting, processing, and 
manufacturing or packaging and handling equipment .” The grants will ensure  “resilience, grow our agricultural and food 
econo my, and enhancing production of Maine -grown foods.” In Q3 of 2022, Maine’s Quarterly and Annual Industry 
Employment and Wages  reported more than 280 “Food Manufacturers” (NAICS code 311 ) established in the state (growing by 
more than 40 established busi nesses since  2015). It’s evident there  is a significant  market  of Maine food businesses for 
schools to  purchases from. Permitting expanded  local  school  spend /credits  is a clear win for students and businesses alike.  
 
We’re encouraged that  Maine food manufacturers both large -scale and artisan -crafted may now be able to assist in  feed ing 
Maine students . This effort furth er supports the local food economy and brings additional local items to schools ’ menus.  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.   
 
 
Christine Cummings   
Executive Director  
March 2 2, 2023  
