Testimony of Jeanne Reilly, NDTR, SNS, 
Director of School Nutrition, RSU #14
In Support of LD 921
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Jeanne Reilly I am a resident of 
Kennebunk, as well as the Director of School Nutrition for RSU #14 – the Windham & 
Raymond School District.  
Today, I’m submitting testimony in support of LD 921 “An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund 
for Public Schools to Be Used for Processed and Value-added Maine Food Products.” 
In RSU #14, we are committed to our mission statement: Healthy Food Fuels Hungry Minds.   
We embrace the idea that school meals are an integral part of the school day, and not only 
are we feeding children healthy & delicious school meals, but through the foods that we serve 
and the menus we prepare, we are influencing the next generation of healthy eaters: we are 
Fueling the Future.   
In RSU#14, we have embraced the local foods fund since its inception.   We love supporting 
the farmers in our community and we are passionate about bringing the freshest and 
healthiest foods to the children in our community.  In our opinion, the local foods fund is a 
win/win:  it supports local growers and it gets fresh Maine food onto the trays of thousands of 
school children every day. On any given day in RSU #14 – you may see local Maine apples, 
locally grown carrots, Maine yogurt, beef, cheese, lettuce, chicken…  the list goes on & on!  
We feel that we are supporting our local economy and our students and their  parents see our 
commitment to Maine & to providing the freshest & healthiest foods available in our meals.   
The Local Foods Fund resulted in a 350% increase in local food purchasing in schools.  This 
equals healthier students and support for Maine farmers and the local foods economy. 
Additionally, placing local Maine foods on the trays of school children all across the state is a 
strategic marketing plan for our local growers!  Mentioning “fingerling potatoes” from 
Bumbleroot Farm, or “Maine caught pollock in our fish tacos today” familiarizes the public with 
Maine’s food economy and builds support.
Expanding the definition of processed of local foods to include more allowable value added & 
processed Maine foods will allow MORE Maine schools to fully embrace this program.   With 
the current labor shortages and aging infrastructure in most school kitchen facilities, farm 
fresh produce that may need extra processing and cooking may create barriers for school 
nutrition programs that do not have the necessary skills, labor and/or equipment.  Being able 
to utilize the local foods fund to purchase some value added & processed Maine foods (think: 
marinara sauce or salsa) will serve to expand this program and make it more accessible to all 
school nutrition programs.  
I support LD 921 – An Act To Improve The Local Foods Fund For Public Schools, and I hope 
that with the support from Maine’s legislature, the Local Foods Fund will continue to be 
successfully implemented in MORE Maine districts, providing MORE local Maine foods on 
school meals trays all across the state.
Thank you for your time, and for your long standing dedication & commitment to the well 
being of Maine’s children.
Sincerely,
Jeanne Reilly, NDTR, SNS
Director of School Nutrition, RSU #14
Resident: Kennebunk Maine
 
