Martha Poliquin
Lisbon Falls
LD 921
Testimony of Martha Poliquin, Falmouth School Nutrition Program
In Support of LD 921
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Martha Poliquin. I am a resident of 
Lisbon and the director of School Nutrition for Falmouth Public Schools.
Today, I’m submitting testimony in support of LD 921 “An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund 
for Public Schools to Be Used for Processed and Value-added Maine Food Products.” 
The Falmouth School Nutrition Program has made local food purchasing a priority over the 
past several years, as have many other school districts in Maine. The most nutritious food we 
can feed our students is grown, raised, caught, and processed here in Maine. Local food has 
been a far more reliable source of food for our program the past 2 years than the big 
distributors doing business in the state. We are grateful for the financial support through the 
Local Food Fund and make full use of it. It makes a big difference in affording local food on 
tight school budgets. 
We see many more nutritious products that could be used in our program, that students 
would love, and that would support Maine businesses. Bread, pizza dough, salsa, marinara 
sauce, breaded fish sticks, beet slaw, kelp slaw, tofu. These value-added items don’t fit the 
current definition of “minimally processed” for the Local Food Fund.
1 in 6 Maine kids experience food and nutrition insecurity.
School meals are the most reliable and nutritious source of nutrition for many students.
A previous expansion in the Local Foods Fund resulted in a 350% increase in local food 
purchasing in schools.
The current definition of processed food accepted for reimbursement through the fund leaves 
out many great Maine products that could add value to school meals.
Please support this bill so we can purchase a greater variety of nutritious local foods and 
support our many, many Maine growers, producers, and processors  Thank you for your time 
and commitment to Maine’s children. I’m happy to answer any questions you may have.
Martha Poliquin, Falmouth Schools
Mpoliquin@falmouthschools.org
