 
Testimony of Mary Emerson, Westbrook Public School Department
In Support of LD 921
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Mary Emerson. I am a resident of 
Kennebunk and the School Nutrition Director for Westbrook Public Schools.  I am also the 
Secretary & Treasurer for the Maine School Nutrition Association. 
Today, I’m submitting testimony in support of LD 921 “An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund 
for Public Schools to Be Used for Processed and Value-added Maine Food Products.” 
Here in Westbrook, 2 out of 3 students in our system are at the 185% poverty level and 
experience food insecurity.  Many of these families live in apartments and may not have 
access to gardening spaces.  We are in the process of expanding and vertically integrating  
our sustainability and agricultural curriculum for students.  We plan to have raised beds on 
the grounds at each school for students to learn and practice gardening with the growing of 
Maine food crops.  In Westbrook we have a large immigrant community with students coming 
from a variety of other countries around the world and they are not familiar with some of the 
native Maine foods.  We know that kids who participate in programs to grow food crops are 
more likely to eat these types of foods.  We want kids to have a connection with their foods.  
We have used the Local Foods Fund to purchase locally grown products.  We would like to 
expand that to be able to purchase locally processed foods made from locally grown crops.
We want to support our local farmers, fisherpeople, and food processors.  We want our 
students to know where their food comes from and opportunities within our community for 
potential employment in the future.  Previous expansion of the Local Foods Fund resulted in a 
350% increase in schools purchasing local food.  We strongly support the expansion of the 
Local Foods Fund to include allowable processed and value added food products. 
In closing, I encourage you to support LD 921 “An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund for 
Public Schools to Be Used for Processed and Value-added Maine Food Products” so all 
Maine students can benefit from the diverse agricultural offerings in Maine.  Thank you 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs for your time.   I welcome any questions or 
concerns you may have, so please contact me at emersonm@westbrookschools.org.
Mary Emerson, MS,RD/LD,SNS
Kennebunk, Maine
