 
 
Testimony of Monique Coombs,  
Maine Coast Fishermen’s Association  
In Support of LD 921  
 
March 22, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs.  
 
My name is Monique Coombs and I am the Director of Community Programs for the Maine 
Coast Fishermen’s Association located in Br unswick. Founded in 2006, MCFA works with 
Maine fishermen to restore the fisheries in the Gulf of Maine and sustain Maine’s fishing 
communities for future generations.   
 
Today, I’m submitting testimony in support of LD 921 “An Act to Allow the Local Foods  
Fund for Public Schools to Be Used for Processed and Value -added Maine Food Products.”   
 
The Maine Coast Fishermen’s Association operates a program called Fishermen Feeding 
Mainers. This program was created in response to the COVID pandemic and the massi ve 
disruption that took place within our seafood -related food system. For those who catch 
groundfish (species like cod, haddock, and flounder) landing value plummeted an astonishing 
73% in the months following the shutdown, and markets have been slow to re turn. At the same 
time, Maine communities were facing spiking food insecurity with high -quality protein being 
some of the hardest donations to source. In response, MCFA created  Fishermen  Feeding Mainers 
which helps provide market stability for fishermen and has supp lied over 800,000 seafood 
meals to food banks, local community groups, and Maine schools. Within this program, fish is 
purchased directly from Maine Fishermen . Local businesses on Maine’s working waterfront then 
cut and package and freeze the fish  and then it is  donated around the state.   
 
We have been particularly focused at helping reduce the barrier for schools to receive and use 
local fish. School meals are the most reliable source of nutrition for many students, and seafood 
is one of the best things t hat kids can eat for their mind, body, and community. A recent analysis 
of over 44 studies on seafood consumption show that children who regularly eat seafood had 
lower risk of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, better school grades, and higher I.Q.  by as 
much as 9.5 points compared with their peers who ate no fish. The highest intakes — more than 
8 to 12 ounces a week — were associated with the greatest benefits. ( Study out of University of 
Texas at Austin). We believe strongly in building a better  future for the next generation of 
Mainers, and one of the best things we can do for them now, is  to feed them more fish.   
 
MCFA has received funding for this project from foundations, individual donors, and federal 
COVID relief funds allocated through the M aine Department of Marine Resources. Fishermen 
Feeding Mainers has been incredibly successful at supporting our working waterfront and 
feeding our community, and now we are looking to figure out how to keep a program of this scale 
of impact going after cri sis funding and COVID relief funds go away.   LD 921 may be a part of 
that solution.   
Under normal circumstances, most schools cannot afford to buy local seafood and that does 
a disservice to our communities, our schools, and our children. LD 921 represents  an 
 
 
opportunity to empower schools to get more local food into their kitchens and support the 
local businesses who make up Maine’s food system.  
