 
                                                         
Healthy Communities of the Capital Area M ission:  
to convene and support people, organizations, and  communities to collaborate on quality of life  and public health issues  
 
11 Mechanic Street, Suite 101, Gardiner, ME 04345 ~ 207. 588.5354 ~ www.hccame.org  
  
 
Testimony of Renee Page, Executive Director, Healthy Communities of the Capital Area, 
fiscal and staffing home to the Maine Farm & Sea to School Network  
and Maine Farm to Institution  
 
In Support of LD 921 An Act To Allow the Local Foods Fund for Public Schools to Be 
Used for Processed and Value -added Maine Food Products  
 
Senator R afferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultu ral Affairs. My name is Renee Page. I am a resident 
of Farmingdale and Executive Director at Healthy Communities of the Capital Area  
(HCCA)  in Gardiner . HCCA is the  fiscal and staffing home to the Maine Farm & Sea to 
School Network and Maine Farm to Institution , two statewid e food systems networks 
working to increase the amount of locally -grown food in food -serving institutions  as 
both public health and economic development strategies .  
 
Today, I’m submitting testimony in support of LD 921 “An Act to Allow the Local Foods 
Fund for Public Schools to Be Used for Processed and Value -added Maine Food Products.”  
 
In addition to being an original  founding member of the ME Farm & Sea to School 
Network and ME Farm to Institu tion, I am a former school nutrition director and have 
worked  in the farm to institution space for more than 15 years. True to our Dirigo  motto, 
Maine is a leader in efforts to incentivize local purchasing  by K -12 schools  and the 
original Local Produce Fund was a groundbreaking strategy to match $1 for every $3 
spent on fresh, whole farm -direct produce by K -12 schools.  This addresses  one of the 
fundamen tal barriers to local food purchasing  – the sometimes higher cost. The statute 
was updated to  the Local Foods Fund to  allow for  the purchase of  a wider range of whole  
and minimally -processed  products , and the ability to source from food distributo rs in 
addition to  farm direct, thereby br eaking down more barriers  to local food purchasing . 
The recent passage of School Meals for All and $20million in Agriculture Infrastructure 
Investment Program grants is helping to break down more barriers by increasing access 
to sch ool meals and creating the infrastructure to facilitate more sourcing of Maine -
grown foods for those meals.  
 
The current definition of processed food accepted for reimbursement through the  Local 
Foods Fund leaves out many healthy  kid-friendly Maine produc ts like fresh baked 
products,  salsa,  breaded fish,  and more. Another example  of a product currently 
prohibited  for reimbursement by the Local Foods Fund is the marin ara sauce being 
developed for schools and other food -serving institutions by the Maine Mari nara 
Collaborative  with support from the Henry P. Kendall Foundation Food Vis ion Prize . 
Ingredients sourced for this sauce are more than 50% Maine -grown and more than 1/3 
sourced from disadvantaged farmers  in the state.  The proposed change in definition of 
what is allowable as processed food could further leverage the three  aforementioned 
 
                                                         
Healthy Communities of the Capital Area M ission:  
to convene and support people, organizations, and  communities to collaborate on quality of life  and public health issues  
 
11 Mechanic Street, Suite 101, Gardiner, ME 04345 ~ 207. 588.5354 ~ www.hccame.org  
  
 
important investments (school meals for all , agricultur e infrastructure investment  
grants , and the Kendall Food Vision Prize ).  
 
We know that schools lack the physical infrastructure, capacity, labor force, and 
sometimes skill  sets to create these products from scratch. One way to help address this 
is by providing training and equipment, but we ha ve learned more recently that most 
schools, even if given equipment and training, simply do not have the capacity, time, or 
workforce to do this level of scratch cooking . Thus, products must be purchased in their 
ready to use state , sending food dollars across the country  for products grown, 
harvested, and processed elsewhere .  
 
We have always known, and it was made more apparent during the pandemic, that 
Maine is at the end  of the food distribution line. Local sourcing and processing helps 
address these supply cha in disruptions  that occurred and will occur again.  It is in 
Maine’s best interest to strengthen the l ocal food system with efforts like this to support 
the local economy and public health.  
 
By expanding the scope of the Local Foods Fund to allow the purch ase of staple food 
products made from Maine ingredients , more schools will utilize the Local Foods Fund 
and more  food -buying dollars will remain in the  local economy . Additionally, kids will 
eat healthier foods that are fr esh and nutrient -dense while gaining  an appreciation of 
food origins . 
 
Please support LD 921 to help continue to break down barriers to local food purchasing 
by schools to support Maine’s youngest eaters, the school nutrition staff who feed them, 
and the food producers who grow the food for them. Thank you Senator Rafferty, 
Representative Brennan,  and members of the Joint Standing Committe e on Education 
and Cultural Affairs for your  time and commitment to Maine’s children . Please feel free 
to reach out to me with any questions you may have.  
 
Renee Page, MPH, PS -C, CLC  
Executive Director, Healthy Communities of the Capital Area  
Home to the M aine Farm & Sea to School Network and  
Maine Farm to Institution  
r.page@hccame.org    207.446.9444  
 
Gardiner, ME  
