Testimony of Ronald Adams, Maine Farm and Sea Cooperative 
In Support of LD 921 
My name is Ronald Adams and I am a resident of Porter in Oxford County and live in the 
RSU 55 School District. I am a former Director of School Nutrition with over 35 years of experience 
feeding children local foods in Yarmouth, Gorham, and Portland Schools. Currently, I am the Chief 
Operating Ofﬁcer of the Maine Farm and Sea Cooperative whose goal is to maximize the amount 
of Maine foods served by institutions. We also work with farmers and processors to tailor their 
products to meet institutional demand. 
I disclose that I have a vested interest in this legislation through my work in the Maine 
Marinara Collaborative which was awarded a Kendall Foundation Food Vision Prize to bringa 
value-added sauce to the institutional and K12 School market in the fall of 2023. 
I further disclose that Maine has a vested interest in addressing the issue of food insecurity 
when 1 in 6 children are at risk on any given day. Maine responded to one section of this problem 
by funding universal school meals. School meals without charge improve access to food while 
actually eating a school meal is What reduces hunger. Local foods improve meal quality and 
students respond to better tasting foods by eating more meals. 
The former Local Produce Fund was one attempt to encourage schools to purchase directly 
from farms with a $1 rebate for every $3 purchased. But without funding it did not make an 
impact. The Local Food Fund of 2022 increased local purchases by 350% with 71 out of 216 
districts participating. Yet, two-thirds of districts did not participate. 
Not all districts employ a chef who can scratch-cook with fresh produce, a beef roast, ora 
whole ﬁsh every school day. Districts have kitchen stafﬁng challenges the same as the rest of our 
economy and scratch cooking skills do not come cheap. 
More schools would offer Maine foods if they could access value-added and processed 
local foods that meet nutritional standards. Additional choices could convince schools to buy
local instead of national brands. Additional incentives could convince processors to develop local 
products to meet that new demand. Last year Maine invested $20M in farms and food processing 
under the Agricultural Infrastructure Investment Program to create a more resilient food system in 
Maine. By expanding the Local Food Fund to include value-added and processed foods, you 
provide another market for these Maine businesses and shorten our supply chain. 
The Department of Education, Child Nutrition Program would have the expertise to 
assemble a stakeholder group to create deﬁnitions, set nutritional standards, and review local 
food products for eligibility. DOE should include the Department of Agriculture, Conservation, 
and Forestry to align with any future legislation to deﬁne Maine grown or Maine processed foods 
much as Vermont did in 2020. Representation would also help align with DACF efforts that 
require all Maine institutions, excluding schools, to purchase 20% local foods by 2025. 
As a youngster, my father shucked corn for the Fernald, Keene, and True sweet corn 
cannery in West Poland Maine. Today, I urge you to recognize the importance of local food 
processing and the importance of school nutrition programs to the future of our state by 
expanding the Local Food Fund. 
Thank you for your work to guide investments in the children of Maine. 
Ronald Adams, MPPM, SNS 
207-749-2929 
ron@<:hefradanis.com 
Chief Operations Ofﬁcer, Maine Farm and Sea Cooperative 
Consultant, Wild Blueberry Commission 
Certiﬁed Candidate for Ordained Deacon, UMC
