March 22, 2023
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Dear
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on
Education and Cultural Affairs,
My name is Ryan Parker, and I am the Maine Impact and Partnerships Lead at FoodCorps. I am a
lifelong Mainer and I live in Newport with my family where I also serve on the RSU 19 School Board. I am
writing to ask you to support passage of LD 921 An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund for Public Schools
to Be Used for Processed and Value-added Maine Food Products.
FoodCorps is a national nonprofit organization that partners with schools to provide students with
nourishing meals and food education that set them up to thrive for a lifetime. For the past 12 years, we
have worked with Maine communities from the Katahdin Region to Portland, Indian Township to Eustis,
to place emerging leaders in schools to provide hands-on lessons that get students excited about eating
fruits and vegetables and support school nutrition staff in getting nourishing meals on the lunch tray.
I have spent the better part of my adult life and career working at the intersection of agriculture,
education, and policy, first as a commercial farmer, then with a Maine based non-profit focused on
helping schools reduce food waste, as a school board member, and currently as the manager of Maine
programs for a national nonprofit that works with schools. All of this work has allowed me to develop
relationships with the people all across this state who do the relentless but rewarding work of feeding our
children multiple meals per day at least 180 days per year, and in many cases nearly year round.
Drawing on these relationships and constant conversations with School Nutrition Directors and their staff
all around Maine, I offer FoodCorps’ full support of LD 1002.
This legislation is a no-additional-cost amendment to an existing law that will make an already excellent
idea and program, even better. Working as I do with school nutrition professionals all over the country, I
can attest to the fact that Maine’s local procurement law is unique and looked to as a model by states
that don’t have such a program but are hoping to start one. One main reason this program, which
provides financial incentive for school nutrition programs to support local farmers and food producers,
thereby improving the quality and freshness of the ingredients on school trays, is that it has continued to
be modified due to direct feedback from the School Nutrition Directors themselves. The people who use
the program.
LD 921 will increase the diversity of locally produced and processed food available to our state’s school
meal programs and, ultimately, the children they serve. I am happy to try to answer any questions you
may have, provide additional information, and be available during your work session.
I urge you to support the passage of LD 921 An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund for Public Schools to
Be Used for Processed and Value-added Maine Food Products.
Sincerely,
Ryan Parker
FoodCorps Impact and Partnerships Lead, Maine
ryan.parker@foodcorps.org

