Testimony of Sam Miller, Maine Food Group 
In Support of LD 921 
My name is Sam Miller and I am a resident of Topsham in Sagadahoc county and live in RSU 
75 school district and am also the founder of Maine Food Company, located in the town of 
Brunswick in Cumberland County. 
Today, I'm submitting testimony in support of LD 921 “An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund 
for Public Schools to Be Used for Processed and Value-added Maine Food Products. ” 
Maine Food Company is a value add vegetable, fruit, and ingredient food processing company 
focused on supporting the north east food systems with a range of produce processing 
capabilities. I founded the company on the concept that we can process fresh ingredients into 
ﬁnished products at scale - speciﬁcally for institutional and food service markets. Our strategy is 
to become an accumulator of produce, fruit and vegetables, through building relationships with 
our local farms, growers, and distributors; then turning that produce into products that compete 
with the national conventional food products currently dominating the market. 
I disclose that I have vested interest in this legislation through my work as the processor in the 
Maine Marinara Collaborative which was awarded a Kendall Foundation Food Vision Prize to 
bring a value-added sauce to the institutional and K - 12 School Market in fall of 2023. I further 
disclose that I received funding from the Agricultural Infrastructure Investment Program to 
create a more resilient food system in Maine. The funding in that grant directly supports Maine 
Food Companys ’ capabilities to compete with the conventional value added food products 
currently in the institutional and food sen/ice market. 
The former Local Produce Fund was a good first step into bridging local produce into the 
schools market. While the Local Food Fund of 2022 increased local purchases by 350%, 71 out 
of 216 districts participated in the program, which is only two thirds. 
As we all know, school meals are the most reliable and nutritious source of nutrition for many 
students. 1 in 6 Maine kids experience food insecurity, therefore many families rely on these 
daily meals provided by schools. The universal school meals program was a fantastic solution to 
this problem and the result of this program was a larger demand for school meals. 
Pairing this increased in demand of school meals with the fact that many schools are not able to 
employ chefs who can scratch-cook fresh produce into meals every day - and on top of that 
adding the stafﬁng issues impacting all districts, it presents a challenge for many schools with 
the expertise, time, resources, or money needed to provide the quality, nutritious meals, that this 
program is intended to provide. 
Value added food products are a solution for saving time and money, while providing 
convenience. With the strain on labor and budgets, value added products are an easy solution 
for schools to provide nutritious meals.
l support LD 921 because it helps build the market for local food and it alleviates multiple 
problems in school kitchens today. There are two core reasons why: 
(1) Stabilizes the SUPPLY -> value added products both increase and stabilize the supply of 
local food because the shelf life is extended. There is not a school in Maine who is going 
to be buying local tomatoes for the rest of year - why? Shelf life. Growing season ended 
months ago. But, if we turn those tomatoes into tomato sauce, pizza sauce, tomato 
soup, or salsa - these local products are available year round. But, these tomatoes wont 
be converted into these finished products because the food producers won’t take the risk 
to sit on that inventory (which is money). Therefore it's unlikely we will make the product 
even though we can. And if we do make the product in season, one off deal, it's too 
small of scale to compete with the conventional groups because the demand is 
fractured, it is inconvenient for school buyers from a price and distribution standpoint 
and simply put, it's not sustainable. There needs to be a market incentive to builda 
sustainable supply of value added products. 
(2) lncentivise the DEMAND -> at the end of the day, the decision of what products to buy IS 
driven by what is available from the distributors and the price. These conventional 
national brands already have low priced options for these schools in distribution and 
these products are low priced because they have the market and demand, along with 
the distribution. Maine has the resources to provide value added food products made 
with local ingredients at a competitive price. To compete, there needs to be assistance of 
funding to shift the buyers to these local products so that we too can build our market to 
stabilize our supply chain and drive down our price to compete with the national 
companies. This levels the playing field to build the local market and the financial 
incentive support can gradually be removed from the market to let it naturally operate 
It takes time to build a supply chain and market. The incentives proposed on value-added 
products will have a far larger impact on the annual total gross weight of local produce provided 
to schools and will also increase the participation rate of all schools in Maine because of the 
convenience these product types provide. 
Thank you for your time listening to my testimony in support of LD 921, which supports the 
operations of school kitchens, local businesses, local farms, the creation of local jobs, and the 
nutrition of our children. 
Please let me know if you have any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Sam Miller 
Sam@MaineFoodGroup.com
