1
131st Legislature
Senate of 
Maine 
Senate District 24 
Senator Eloise Vitelli
Senate Majority Leader
3 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0003
Office (207) 287-1515
Testimony of Senator Eloise Vitelli supporting
LD 921, An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund for Public Schools to Be Used 
for Processed and Value-added Maine Food Products
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
March 22, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Eloise Vitelli, and I proudly represent 
Senate District 24, which includes all of Sagadahoc County and Dresden. Today I am pleased to 
offer testimony in support of LD 921, “An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund for Public 
Schools to Be Used for Processed and Value-added Maine Food Products.”
Some Members of this Committee might remember that I have long been a supporter of making 
local Maine foods available in Maine schools. In the 129th Legislature, I introduced LD 454, 
“An Act To Encourage the Purchase of Local Produce for Public Schools,” which funded the 
Local Produce Fund for the first time. For those who are not familiar, the Local Produce Fund 
incentivizes schools to purchase produce and other minimally-processed foods from local 
farmers and producers by matching one dollar for every three dollars a school administrative unit 
spends on qualifying local foods. 
Following LD 454, in the 130th Legislature I was proud to sponsor LD 636, “An Act To 
Encourage the Purchase of Local Foods for Public Schools,” which broadened the eligibility 
criteria for the Local Produce Fund to further benefit Maine farmers, schools, and students. The 
bill, now law, added value-added dairy and protein sources such as yogurt, fish, eggs, meat, and 
tofu to the Local Produce Fund. The law also changed the name of the program to the Local 
Foods Fund so that we could support Maine farmers and all their products – the fruits and 
vegetables, but also dairy, fish, and meat products.
Now that I’ve shared some of the legislative history on this program, I will direct your attention 
to LD 921, “An Act to Allow the Local Foods Fund for Public Schools to Be Used for Processed 
and Value-added Maine Food Products,” which would remove “minimally processed” from the 
eligibility criteria for foods purchased using the Local Foods Fund. It would also direct the 
Department of Education to set standards for allowable processed and value-added Maine foods. 
I support this proposed improvement to the Local Foods Fund. It’s important that we support our 
local farmers and food producers. It’s also important that we encourage high participation in the 
program. If a school has less kitchen equipment or a small cafeteria staff, why should they be 
2excluded from the program? That’s a disservice to the school, the students, and the farmers and 
food producers in the area. By making more foods eligible for reimbursement, including Maine 
processed foods, we can help schools with a wide range of food processing capacity participate. I 
would urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 921.
Thank you for your time, I will do my best to answer any questions you may have.
Eloise Vitelli
Senate Majority Leader, Senate District 24
Sagadahoc County and Dresden
