20160175.1 
20160175.2 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Support to L.D. 428,  
An Act To Reclassify Certain Offenses Under The Inland Fisheries 
And Wildlife Laws And Increase The Efficiency Of The Criminal 
Justice System 
Submitted by Chief Charles Rumsey  
March 6, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished Members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is 
Charles Rum sey, and I am the Chief of the Cum berland Police Department. I am  
submitting  testimony  on  behalf  of  the  Maine  Chiefs  of  Police  Association in
Suppo rt of LD 428.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in 
law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of 
Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
Part A amends certain laws regarding inland fisheries and wildlife in the 
Maine Revised Statutes, Title 12, Part 13, limiting the sentences for certain 
crimes to fines and changing some crimes to civil violations.  Crimes 
reduced to civil violations include junior hunting without a license, 
unlawful practice of falconry, unlawful hunting of migratory birds with a 
shotgun, allowing duck decoys or  a  stationary  blind  to  remain  in  the  
water  in Merrymeeting Bay beyond the legal hours and unlawful hunting 
of bear with dogs or with bait; certain violations of field trials, training dogs 
and opportunity to hunt laws; and certain violations of live smelt and 
baitfish laws.  
Part  B  amends  the  Maine  Criminal  Code  provision  governing  civil  
violations  to explicitly provide that evidence obtained pursuant to an 
unlawful search and seizure is not admissible in any civil violation 
proceeding, not just those arising from cannabis possession by a person 
under 21 years of age or possession of butyl nitrite or isobutyl nitrite, and 
to permit a law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
20160175.1 
20160175.2 a violation of the law has taken place or is taking place to make application 
for a search warrant. 
Part C establishes an effective date of January 1, 2024 for Parts A and B.  
We support Part A of LD 428, which reclassifies these incidents from criminal 
to civil penalties because criminal convictions have lasting consequences that 
effect all aspects of a person’s life and also often their family lives.  A criminal 
conviction should only be used as a deterrent when it is absolutely necessary to 
hold the person accountable and is proportional to their offense. The civil penalties 
proposed in LD 428 would ensure a proportional level of accountability and would 
still allow the individual an opportunity for a hearing to contest charges. We also 
support Part B because it is a natural step associated with decriminalizing these 
laws. 
The Association recognizes that the criminal justice system is completely 
overwhelmed. The backlog is astonishing, and we believe that we should advocate 
for all options that would decrease this backlog. LD 428 would simplify the process 
and would make more a much more efficient resolution.  
For these reasons, we hope that you will vote in favor of LD 428. And, on behalf 
of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank you for your work on 
this Committee.  
