 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 4, 2023 
 
Re: In Opposition to  LD 428 An Act to Reclassify Certain Offenses Under the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Laws a nd Increase the Efficiency  of the Criminal Justice System  
 
Senator Ann Bee be-Center , Representat ive Salisbury , and m ember s of the Committ ee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety : 
 
My name is Beth Gallie and  I am President of Main e Animal Coalition.  Maine Animal 
Coalition is a not for profit dedicated to the elimination of animal abuse and e xploitation 
through education , adv ocacy, and example.  
As an attorney, I do understand  the need to reform the criminal justice system and 
agree with the overall thrust of LD 428. This need for reform comes from  the heavy 
burden of a criminal  record and not because the c riminal justice  system is 
overwhelmed. (In 2021 the Department of Public Safety reported that crim e in Maine 
has dropped 60 % since 2012 .)   
Maine Animal Coalition , however, strongly oppose s the inc lusion of the section s 
regarding bear hunting, trapping,  and baiting.   
Bear s have a special  place in the hearts of Mainers. In 20 14 a statewide  referendu m to 
ban hunting bears using bait, traps and dogs almost pass ed with  279,617  votes in favor  
versus 320,873  votes ag ainst .  
Almost three hund red thousa nd Maine rs voted agains t bea r baiting, trapping,  and 
hunting with dogs because it i s cruel  and lack s the eleme nt of  fair chase.  
 
 
 
Bear h ounding involves a pack of GPS -collare d dogs chasing a bear until exhausted , 
treed or cornered  and then shot at close range. Dogs used for hounding can be injured  
or killed during the chase and in confrontations with the bear. Cubs can also be chased 
and killed.  
Baiting involves lur ing bears t o piles of donuts, candy , grease, and rotting garbage  and 
then shooting them . And the consumption of such products harm s all wild animals in 
the same way it harms humans.  
Bear trappin g is particularly cruel,  and Maine is the onl y state  that still allows it for 
sport. Trappers typically bait the bears with junk food  to attract them to a particular 
spot in the woods  where they are  caught  in foot snare traps and eventually  shot at close 
range. A bear’s instin ct is to break free from these  traps, which can lead to extensive 
injuries to the bear . Trappers have reported bears chewing off their own paws to free 
themselves.  
LD 428 proposes that vio lations of Maine ’s unpopular bear hunting laws be merely 
fined . This means that hunters could run 1 2 dogs after a single  bear and/or place bait on  
another ’s property without permissio n and if caught , only pay a for a small  fine.  A 
hunt er’s license would not be automatically suspended  until he has been adju dicated of 
multiple  violations  within fi ve years.  
If you must decrim inalize  violations of the cu rrent bear hunting laws, I implore you to 
add such violations to the list of violations that resul t in an automatic suspension of an 
adjudicated p erson ’s hunting license.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Beth Gallie  
South  Portland  
 
 
 
 
