 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
Ought to Pass - LD 428  
 
An Act to Reclassify Certain Offenses Under the Inland Fisheries and  
Wildlife Laws and Increase the Efficiency of the Criminal Justice System  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY  
 
March 6, 2023  
 
Senator Bebee -Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety,  greetings .  My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support LD 428, which would turn 
some low -level crimes from Title 12 into civil violations, saving people from unnecessary 
criminal convictions on their records . 
The ACLU of Maine has long opposed unnecessary expansion of our state’s criminal 
code. It has been our position that creating new crimes for behavior that is already illegal does 
not deter bad behavior but does expand our jail and prison populations. Even with one of the 
lowest incarceration rates in the country, our state’s i ncarceration rate is still higher than  the rates 
of Bahrain, Brazil, United Arab Emirates, Singapore, Israel, Turkey, Portugal and the United 
Kingdom, among many other countries. With thousands  of crimes on the books , it is no wonder 
that we have this relatively high incarceration rate . There are over 1,400 Class E crimes alone, 
across 35 different titles of the Maine Revised Statutes. Indeed, t here are more crimes outsi de the 
criminal code than inside it .1  
The ACLU is glad to suppor t this bill. Last session, this committee heard a similar bill 
written by Maine’s prosecutors , in an effort to start to chip away at our overreliance on the 
criminal legal system as a mechanism to control behavior. Th is bill addresses almost exclusively 
 
1 Title 12, our Conservation code, contains over 600 Class E crimes, and 29 -A, the Motor Vehicles and 
Traffic title, contains over 150 Class E crimes.  
 
 
  
 
 
 2 Class E crimes, which punish behaviors that the legislature has de termined are the least serious 
offenses under our criminal laws.  If this bill passes , a person would no longer be subject to arrest 
or being sentenced to 180 days in jail or fined up to $1,000 for such behaviors as unlicensed 
falconry , 12 MRSA §11159 (1) , or hunting bears with more than six dogs , 12 MRSA §11302(1) -
(3). 
These are commonsense reforms that do not jeopardize public safety but do move away 
from giving people criminal records and any result ing collateral consequences . Even t hough they 
are not felonies, Class E misdemeanor convictions can jeopardize a person’s housing, 
employment, and education. With fines  of up to $1,000, Class E convictions can mean spending 
years in a payment arrangement with our courts as folks pay what little they have in their 
monthly budget to the judicial branch. Missed payments on fines when times get tough can mean 
dire consequences , including arrests and additional court fines.  
This bill takes modest steps towards reducing our reliance on the crimin al legal system. 
We encourage the committee to go farther, and look at the other hundreds of Class E crimes in 
Title 12 to see if there are other ways to reduce reliance on the criminal legal system. We also 
encourage the committee to think about whether w e can go farther by removing some of the 
Class E crimes and not replacing them with civil violations at all.2 This committee has made 
great strides to make our criminal legal system smarter and leaner. We encourage you to 
continue that work by supporting this legislation.  
 We urge you to vote ought to pass .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Civil violations still involve entanglement with our courts, and still can lead to similar problems with 
unpaid fines as fines on criminal charges.  
