TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 428 
" An Act to Recl assify Certain Offenses Under the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Laws  
and Increase the Efficiency of the Criminal Justice System ”  
Committee On Committee On Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
March 6 , 202 3 
 
Senator Beebe -Center , Representative  Salisbury , and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony in opposition  to L.D. 428 " An Act to Reclassify Certain Offenses Under the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Laws and Increase the Efficiency of the Criminal Justice System .”   
 
I support decriminalization in most instances, but not when the crimes involve animals or violation of landowner privacy  
rights , which is the case for parts of L.D. 428.  Specifically, I o ppose the proposed changes to the statute  pertaining to bear 
baiting, bear hunting , field tria ls and training dogs.   
 
While I understand the intent of this bill is to “increase the efficiency o f the Criminal Justi ce System” I  think it is important for 
this commit tee to ask the question: “How many of these cases are actually  prosecuted? ”   From my  own past 
experience as a volunteer  for an organization that field s many citizen complaints  concerning  hunting infraction s, the existing 
laws are minimally enforce d.  C harges and penalties  are rarely  pursu ed even when a viol ation occurs. The few that make it 
through the system are likely egregious violations and/or involv e repeat offenders that deserve all the available 
repercussions that come with being charged with a Cla ss E crime .   
 
Our existing game hunting laws  are already extremely  loose  and include very few protections  for animals or 
landowners .   
 
Bear hunting with bait - Bear h unters that use bait are legally allowed to place literal ly tons of decaying junk food into our 
woods  for months  with little restriction as to location . The bait  sites train bear to come feed at one location making th em 
easy targets once the season begins.  This bait is a hazard – it not only attract s bears -- but other wildlife and companion 
animals.   The bait often contains s ugar and chocolate which  are toxic to many wild animals , as well as to dogs an d cats.  
 
Legal trespa ss / Hunting with dogs  - Due to the  exemption in the state ’s dog -at-large / dog trespass laws for hunting 
dogs, h unters that use dogs are allowed almost a free pass to run packs of dogs , often in deadly pursuit,  across private 
property .  This intrusion occur s during training season  (July 1 – March  31), during field trial season (September 1 – April 10) 
and during open hunting season s.  For many lando wners, this intrusion  is an invasion of their peace and  can be terrifying  as 
well as damaging , especially  if there are children , free -roaming livestock  and/or companion animals on site.  
 
Last week , someone reached out to me because her neighbor wh o has a hunting dog (beagle ) kennel , is regul arly allowing 
his dogs to run loose on  her property  which is causing problems for her own dogs  and family .   She reached out to her 
neighbor to ask that he keep his dogs off her land.  His written response was : "It is perfectly legal to run dogs wild from July 
1 right through March 31."     There is very little recourse for this woman under existing laws  and what litt le exists requires an 
immense burden of proof from the landowner.  
 
There is already  little deterrent to keep hunters that use bait and dogs from infringing on the peace and privacy of 
landowners that invest time and money into posting their property .  Removing the few repercussions that exist under the law 
will result  in even fewer options for recourse for landowners who wish to have privacy , peace , and coexist with nature . 
 
Passing this bill (as written ) will do little to lessen the burden on the Criminal Justice System and will reduce already minimal 
consequences in place to  encourage hunters to abide by the laws.    Please amend L.D. 428 to strike out  the changes to the 
bear baiting, bear hunting , hunting  dog field trial s and training  sections.  Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Susanna Richer - Portland, M E 
Susanna Richer
Portland, ME
LD 428
Thank you for considering my testimony regarding  L.D. 428 " An Act to Reclassify 
Certain Offenses Under the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Laws and Increase the 
Efficiency of the Criminal Justice System.”  
