  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasure r 
Walt er F. McKee  
 
Secreta ry 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642 
Portland, ME 04112 -8642 
(207) 523-9869      
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
 February 16, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe- Center, Chair  
Representative S uzanne Salisbury 
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436 
Augusta, ME 04330 
 
RE: LD 428 --  An  Act to Reclassify Certain Offenses Under the In land 
 Fisheries and Wildlife Laws  and Increase the  Efficiency of the Criminal 
 Justice System  
 
Dear Senator Beebe- Center , Representative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice  and Public Safety Committee:  
 
MACDL supports  LD 428. 
 
This bill makes perfect sense ins ofar as it reduces a number o f crimes to civil 
violatio ns.  Arguably, this bill could go e ven farther in eliminating a number of Inland 
Fisheries & Wildlife crimes from being crimes in the f irst place  and causing a person 
to have a criminal record for offenses t hat, though some would consider particularly 
serious , in the  big picture should really result in a civil violation .  
 
The narrow list of crim es being reduced to civil violations provides a good example of 
offenses that are important to recognize , but are unnecessary to criminalize.  I am 
highly confident that a person will give enough pause to whether they want t o engage 
in the “unlawful practice of falconry ” regardless of whether they are going to be fined 
or have a criminal convi ction.   
 
Part B of the bill is also important because it makes clear that unlawful searches and 
seizures must be applied to civil viola tions and not just crimes.  Allowing it to be 
otherwise  would allow law enforcement the  free ability to search  a person and take 
their things without any repercussions whatsoever because there would just be a civil 
case.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity t o address this issue.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F. McKee  
Chair, Legi slative Committee  
