1! ’_i_ W 
lji Shenna Bellows 
3‘-5- *;',»\é¥;| Secreiary of Siate 
. ‘I\ ‘ “'All§§' Kate McBrien 
Maine State Archivist Department of the Secretary of State 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
March 7, 2023 
Testifying in favor 
L.D. 78, “RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the Constitution of Maine 
Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations ” 
And 
L.D. 5'78, “RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Concerning the 
Publication of Maine Indian Treaty Obligations ” 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State. I am speaking today in 
strong support of L.D. 78 and L.D. 578 as the keeper of the records of this state and as a defender of 
the Constitution. 
First, as the Secretary of State I play a role in the reprinting of the Maine Constitution. Per Article 
I0, section 6 of the Maine Constitution, the Chief Justice of the Law Court is ordered to arrange the 
Constitution every 10 years. This process sometimes begins with the Secretary of State sending the 
Chief Justice a letter notifying them of any new resolutions enacted by the legislature incorporating 
all new amendments and arrange the Constitution. After that is done, the draft is then sent to the 
legislature for approval. Once approval is voted upon, the Constitution is sent to the Secretary of 
State to be printed and preserved at the Maine State Archives. I take the role I play in this process 
very seriously. 
However, I also have another role and that is to uphold the oath I took when I assumed office. It is 
an oath to defend the Constitution of the State of Maine — and this includes section 5 of Article X of 
the Maine Constitution. It is imperative to a fair and free democracy that our Constitution be printed 
in its entirety. To have any provision of the Constitution not printed but in full legal effect is 
antithetical to the entire premise of a transparent government. Making our state records, including 
the entire Maine Constitution, more easily accessible to the public and the people we serve isa 
cornerstone for an open and credible democracy. 
The Constitution is the bedrock upon which all Maine’s laws are built. No part of that Constitution 
should be hidden from the Mainers whose lives it affects every single day. 
This concludes my testimony. I am happy to answer any questions the committee may have. Thank 
you.
