JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOR AND HOUSING 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION OF THE 131ST MAINE LEGISLATURE 
TUESDAY, MAY 2, 2023 AT 1:00 P. M. 
CROSS BUILDING, ROOM 202 
PUBLIC HEARING FOR L.D. 1803 
AN ACT TO IMPROVE THE MAINE WORKERS’ COMPENSATION ACT OF 1992 
TESTIIVIONY BY WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BOARD 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of this Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing, I am Richard Hewes, General Counsel of the Workers’ Compensation Board. On 
behalf of the Maine Workers’ Compensation Board, I am here to testify in favor of L.D. 1803, an 
Act to Improve the Maine Workers’ Compensation Act of 1992. 
Over the course of 2022, directors of the Workers’ Compensation Board together With Workers’ 
compensation stakeholders reviewed Title 39-A and agreed upon modiﬁcations that will beneﬁt 
the workers’ compensation system. The amendments contained in LD 10803 reﬂect that effort. 
These amendments will not add costs to the Workers’ compensation system, they will not adda 
ﬁscal impact to the Workers’ Compensation Board and, signiﬁcantly, they have the support of 
labor and management directors.M
REFINEMENT OF §105 (3) 
At the outset, I would like to note that a sentence in LD 1803 should be revised. 
Brian Parke of the Maine Motor Transportation Association recently pointed out a problem in the 
wording of the amendment for §105 (3). The sentence at the end of page 1 (Lines 41 through 43) 
and at the beginning of page 2 (Lines 1-4) should be changed to avoid a potential problem. 
As currently worded, the sentence in question states: 
“The board shall post, on its publicly assessable website, information pertaining to a worker or 
person, as defined in section 105-A, subsection 1, E, who has ﬁled a statement pursuant to this 
section. ” 
That sentence should be changed to read: 
“The board shall post on its publicly accessible Website infonnation pertaining to independent 
contractor and construction subcontractor statements ﬁled pursuant to this section. ” 
Section 105-A applies to construction subcontractors. The status of other independent contractors 
is addressed in §lO5. The intent of the amendment is that all subcontractors will be listed on the 
predetermination Web page. Reference to subcontractors in §105-A implies that only construction 
subcontractors should be mentioned. 
In Maine, a tenant of statutory construction is that the express mention of one thing in a statute (e. 
g. construction subcontractors under §lO5-A) can be interpreted to imply the exclusion of others 
not listed (such as independent contractors under §lO5). 
LD 1803 should be reworded to clarify that all independent contractors recognized by the 
predetermination process in §105, not just construction subcontractors in §105-A, will be posted 
on the Web page.
Sec. 1. 39-A MRSA§ 105 
This amendment to §l05 is designed to simplify the independent contractor predetermination 
process. The change mentioned at the outset of this testimony should be inserted into §l05 (3). 
Currently, an individual who Works as an independent contractor may apply to the Board fora 
predetennination of independent contractor status. The application has 5 pages of questions and 
the applicant typically presents the application and the approved predetermination to the entity 
with Whom the applicant proposes to do business. In essence, this is a self-declaration process. 
During calendar years 2021 and 2022, the Board approved about 10,300 applications and denied 
3. 
The predetennination creates a rebuttable presumption that the individual is an independent 
contractor and, therefore, not entitled to Workers’ compensation insurance if injured during the 
Work. If, however, the injured Worker proves an employer-employee relationship existed based 
on the facts at the time of the injury, then the injured individual will be eligible to claim Workers’ 
compensation beneﬁts against the hiring entity’s workers’ compensation coverage. 
The proposed amendment is intended to simplify the process for all involved. Individuals will be 
relieved of the burden of ﬁling and producing copies of a cumbersome application. Hiring entities 
will be able to independently determine if a predetermination has been granted" by going to the 
Board’s Website. 
Sec. 2 39-A M.R.S.A. § 153 (10) 
Summary: This amendment deletes the requirement that the Board submit annual permanent 
impairment (PI) reports to the legislature. 
By way of background, partially incapacitated employees injured prior to January l, 2020, were 
entitled to lost Wage beneﬁts for a maximum of 520 weeks. For those injured before January 1, 
2013, beneﬁts could extend beyond the statutory maximum if the employee ’s permanent 
impairment exceeded a threshold periodically adjusted by the Board of Directors. 
In 201 l, legislation was enacted that raised the PI threshold to 18% (ﬁom approximatelyl2%). 
The Board was tasked with collecting, analyzing, and reporting to the legislature information about 
PI ratings. 
To compile this report, the Board primarily used PI data that was required by rule to be submitted 
when a case was settled. That rule was repealed in 2018 because it was seen by employee and 
employer representatives as too costly and as an impediment to the efficient processing of cases. 
The Board has not been collecting sufﬁcient data to produce meaningful reports. 
Because of these changes, the collection and reporting of PI data is no longer needed and this 
amendment repeals the reporting requirement.
Sec. 3. 39-A M.R.S.A. §209-A (4) 
This amendment changes the fallback provision that applies if the Board should fail to complete 
its armual review of its medical fee schedule. 
Section 209-A of the Act requires the Board to adopt rules that set fees for health care services. 
The rule reﬂects the methodology established by the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services. 
The Board is required to annually update the fee schedule. 
If the annual update is not done, reimbursement rates for health care providers change from an 
amount speciﬁed in the rule to “105% of the private 3rd-party payor average payment rate for the 
provider or the amount agreed to in writing by the provider and the insurance company or self- 
insured employer prior to the rendering of service by the provider. ” 
We expect the fee schedule will be updated annually. But, the present fallback provision, if it 
should come into play, would be confusing and would be susceptible to litigation. The proposed 
amendment minimizes the potential for confusion and litigation by establishing that, if an annual 
update is not completed, reimbursement rates for medical services will be the amount established 
by the medical fee schedule in effect when the update is due. 
Sec. 4. 39-A M.R.S.A. §210 (1) 
Section 210 states that the Board “shall” adopt rules for utilization review. These rules would 
establish protocols for the extent and length of medical treatment for speciﬁc injuries. 
This amendment substitutes “may” for shall and deletes the requirement for utilization review. 
Since I993, the Board has only adopted three utilization review standards. In each case, they 
remained in the Board’s rules long aﬁer they were obsolete. The Board repealed them in 2018. 
Identifying speciﬁc protocols has been difﬁcult. This amendment does not eliminate utilization 
review from the Act. It eliminates the mandate and makes adoption of rules permissive. 
Sec. 5. 39-A M.R.S.A. §221(2)(A) 
This amendment seeks to simplify the coordination of beneﬁts as set forth in section 221(3). 
While receiving lost wage beneﬁts from workers’ compensation carriers, some claimants also 
receive income from other sources. Section 221(3) allows insurers to reduce Workers’ 
compensation ‘ beneﬁts. by the after-tax value. -of disability payments, paid time off, wage 
continuation payments and pension and retirement income received at the same time as the 
Workers’ compensation beneﬁts.
For employees injured before January l, 2013, Weekly lost time beneﬁts were based on tax tables. 
Offsets for income from other sources was determined by using the tax tables to produce an after- 
tax amount and then multiplying that amount by 1.25. 
Pursuant to a 2012 amendment, weekly lost time beneﬁts for employees injured on and after 
January l, 2013, has been 2/3 of the gross weekly wage. The offset for the above-described income 
was determined based on the employee ’s after-tax wage. 
In the intervening years, the Board stopped issuing tax tables. As a result, employers and 
employees have found it difﬁcult to determine the appropriate offset. 
The proposed amendment to §22l(2)(A)(2) seeks to simplify the calculation method for 
determining the after-tax amount of outside income. The new calculation calls for multiplying the 
above-described income by 2/3 and then multiplying by 1.25. 
Sec. 6. 39-A M.R.S.A. §303 
This amendment, which is tied to Sec. 7, below, removes ﬁom §303 a provision that allows an 
insurer to recover from its insured employer the cost of a ﬁne that the insurer paid for a late First 
Report of Injury (FROI) if that late ﬁling was caused by the employer ’s tardy notice to the insurer. 
The reimbursement provision in §303 pertains to FROI’s, and not to other Board forms. In Maine, 
an important principle of statutory interpretation is that the express mention of one concept ina 
statute (e. g. FROI’s) can, be interpreted to imply the exclusion of others not listed, such asa 
Memorandum of Payment (MOP); ("expressio unius est exclusio alterius" - the expression of one 
thing is the exclusion of the other). 
Because speciﬁc language allows insurers to seek reimbursement for late ﬁled FROI’s, insurers 
might not be allowed to seek reimbursement of penalty payments for other late ﬁlings such asa 
MOP’s or Wage Statements. 
Sec. 7. 39-A M.R.S.A. §360 
This amendment is related to the previous change in Sec. 6. 
This change to §360 (1) Will add a paragraph that allows an insurer to recover from an insured 
employer the cost of a penalty imposed by the Board for any form ﬁled late if an employer ’s late 
notice to the insurer caused the form to be ﬁled late. 
As mentioned above, an insurer may recover from an employer a fme imposed by for-late- ﬁled 
FROI’s if the insurer ﬁled it late because an employer gave the insurer late notice of an injury. 
This amendment to §360 will allow insurers to pass fmes on to employers for all late ﬁlings caused 
by employers ’ late notice of injury to their insurers.§ 
< 
l
1 
E 
z
I    
l
l     
Sec. s. 39-A M.R.S.A. §401 (4) 
Sections 8, 9 and 10 are interrelated. Together, they simply consolidate the predetermination 
process for landowners and wood harvesters into one section. The predetermination process for 
landowners and wood harvesters works well. No change to this process is intended. 
Sec. 9. 39-A M.R.S.A. §401 (4) 
See Sec. 8, above. 
Sec. 10. 39-A M.R.S.A. §401 (4-A) 
See Sec. 8, above.M
‘ 
<
t 
l
5
I
S
5
l
