MAINE 9FTI.., €M..§Tfi!§. ﬁ,$§.9€!.tiTl,9.F§i 
Seeing health through YOUR eyes. 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1956, "An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Optometrists" 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
May 23, 2023 
Good aftemoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance, and Financial Services Committee; my name is Dr. Sheridon Gove of Freeport. I am 
a licensed Maine optometrist and own Family Eye Health in Lewiston. I currently serve as 
president of the Maine Optometric Association. The Association has been in existence since 
l 9 l l. 
Optometry has always been a part of my life. My father was a licensed optometrist in Maine and 
I joined his practice just over a decade ago. I have also served on the MOA Board for 
approximately ten years. Simply put, optometrists must, and do, provide the highest of standards 
in eyecare for their patients. It is through this lens that I have reviewed the proposal before the 
committee today. 
Importance of Optometrist-patient Relationship 
The personal connection between the optometrist and their patients is crucial. During the time 
optometrists spend with their patients, we get to know them. We are able to listen to their 
concerns, communicate important information related to their eye care in a way that they 
understand, and answer questions to help them make the best choices for their own care. This 
type of relationship and care cannot be formed when the only encounter with patients is remote. 
Accordingly, MOA believes there are a few areas within the drafted legislation that the 
requirement for in-person examinations should be clariﬁed. 
The deﬁnition of optometrist-patient relationship (page 3, line 23) should be amended to clarify 
that there must be an in-person examination at the outset of the doctor-patient relationship. This 
creates a baseline for care before remote services are appropriate. Accordingly, the language at 
page 3, line 30, should require an in-person “encounter. ”
1 
204939493
As drafted, some additional requirements for minimum standards for eye examinations should be 
established. The language in LD 1956 includes a requirement for a physical examination of each 
eye (Page 9, Line 38). The “physical examination of the eye” should clarify that the examination 
be conducted in person and by the licensee. Additionally, objective and subjective refractions, 
which are in the current law at 32 M.R.S. §2417(3)(E), should be retained as a part of in-person 
minimum examination standards. The subjective aspect of the exam is important; this is where 
the optometrist not only evaluates objective data, but through discussion and observation 
augments the examination. 
The deﬁnition of “therapeutic pharmaceutical ” on page 4, line 24, should include “diagnose ” as 
there are therapeutic drug applications that can assist in a diagnosis. 
Finally, I suggest a change to the minimum prescription requirements for contact lenses. On page 
11, starting on line 28, LD 1956 outlines what must be included in a contact lens prescription. As 
drafted, it requires that a prescription must include the date of examination, issue date of the 
prescription, expiration date, postal address of the prescriber, power, base curve or appropriate 
designation, diameter when appropriate and brand name or material or both. We suggest 
changing the language by striking “when appropriate ” on line 30 and adding at the enda 
sentence, “The prescription cannot be altered. ” 
Thank you again for allowing me to provide comments today on LD 1956. I would be happy to 
answer any questions the committee may have.
2 
204939493
