 
 
 
  
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
In Opposition to  
LD 1743, An Act to Eliminate the Personal Property Tax  
 
May 3, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My name is 
Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in opposition to LD 1743 on behalf of the 70 municipal leaders 
who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s Legislative Policy Committee and directed 
to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest.   
The elimination of the personal property tax would have devastating impacts on the ability of 
more industrial ly and commercial ly based  municipalities to fund and provide mandated state and locally 
desired services and programs .  When coupled with the impacts of the Senior Property Tax Stabilization 
Program, the costs of these services  and program s would primarily  shift to younger homeowners.  To put 
the financial impact into perspective, when treat ing all Maine towns and cities as one large community, 
personal  property tax es raised $ 82.5 million in revenue for municipalities , accounting for 3% of all 
property tax revenues .   
While the lost revenue  may seem like a dro p in the bucket statewide, w hen looking at the impacts 
on individual communities the reductions in those  revenues  are far more significant .  In South Portland 
for example, the loss of personal property would reduce property tax collections by $5 million , which i s 
7% of total property tax revenue .  In Madawaska, the loss is $1.2 million, representing  16% of total tax 
collections, w hile in Jay the revenue loss is $1.6 million , accounting for 23% of total property  taxes 
collected .  
Unless the state reduc es obligation s to provide services or increas es the amount of state sales and 
income tax revenues  shared with these communities, LD 1743 will result in increases to the mil rate and 
cuts to needed  municipal services.   
Rather than shift ing additional burden s onto the property  taxpayers , primarily homeowners, 
municipal officials urge the Committee to consider implementation of a state funded program that 
provide s desired relief  to owners of personal property .   
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  If you have any questions 
about the Association’s position on this bill, please do not hesitate to contact me at kdufour@memun.org  
or 1-800-452-8786.  
 
 
       

