STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
23 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, ME  04333-0023 
 
 
JANET T. MILLS                                                                                                                                                                    PENDER MAKIN  
              GOVERNOR                                                                                                                                                                              COMMISSIONER  
 
 
 
OFFICES LOCATED AT THE BURTON M. CROSS STATE OFFICE BUILDING                          AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER  
PHONE (207) 624- 6600     FAX:  (207) 624- 6700     TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711                                     ONLINE:  WWW.MAINE.GOV/DOE  
 
February 16, 2023  Senator Rafferty, Senate Chair 
 
Representative Brennan, House Chair  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committees:  
 
LD 222, An Act to Require Students to Demonstrate Knowledge of the Constitution of Maine 
and the United States Constitution  proposes that the demonstration of knowledge of the 
Constitution of Maine and the US Constitution be included in the social studies and history 
requirement for a high school diploma.  
 
Maine statutes include requirements for the high school diploma standards.  These requirements can be found in Title 20-A, Chapter 207-A, §4722. High school diploma standards, section 2, requires 2 years, or standards equivalent in standards achievement, in social studies and history, including American history, government, civics, and personal finance to be eligible for a high 
school diploma.  
 §4706. Instruction in American history, African American studies, Maine studies, Maine Native American history and the history of genocide further clarifies what is to be taught within that 
American history requirement. Specifically,  section 1, American history, states that, “American 
history, government and citizenship, including the United States Constitution , the Declaration 
of Independence, the importance of voting and the privileges and responsibilities of citizenship, must be ta ught in and required for graduation from all elementary and secondary schools, both 
public and private.” Section 2, Maine studies, states that “Maine history, including the Constitution of Maine , Maine geography and environment and the natural, industrial and 
economic resources of Maine and Maine's cultural and ethnic heritage, must be taught.   In addition to the U.S. and Maine Constitutions  being required for high school graduation under 
§4722 and §4706, the social studies standards, Rule Chapter 132: Learning Results: Parameters for Essential Instruction, include specific performance expectations that address processes, 
purposes, ideals, and structures of democratic government in Maine and the United States with the study of the Maine Constitution and the U.S. Constitution, the Bill of Rights, and other primary sources.  The Maine and U.S. Constitution are embedded throughout the social studies 
standards at the performance expectation level from grade 4 through grade 12 in the following 
places:  
 Strand:  Civics and Government  
Standard:  Students draw on concepts from civics and government to understand political 
systems, power, authority, governance, civic ideals and practices, and the role of citizens in the 
community, Maine, the United States, and the world.  
Performance Expectation:  
• Grade 4:  
o Civics & Government 1: S tudents understand the basic ideals, purposes, 
principles, structures, and processes of democratic government in Maine and the 
United States by explaining and providing examples of democratic ideals and constitutional principles to include the rule of law,  legitimate  power, and common 
good. 
o Civics & Government 3: Students understand the basic ideals, purposes, 
principles, structures, and processes of democratic government in Maine by 
explaining that the structures and processes of government are described i n 
documents, including the Constitution of Maine.  
• Grade 5:  
o Civics & Government 1: Students understand the basic ideals, purposes, principles, structures, and processes of democratic government in Maine and the United States by explaining that the structur es and processes of government are 
described in documents, including the Constitution of the United States.  
o Civics & Government 3: Students understand the basic rights, duties, 
responsibilities, and roles of citizens in a democratic republic by identifying and 
describing the United States Constitution and Bill of Rights as documents that establish government and protect the rights of the individual United States citizen.  
• Grade 6 -8 
o Civics & Government 1: Students understand the basic ideals, purposes, princi ples, structures, and processes of constitutional government in Maine and 
the United States as well as examples of other forms of government in the world by: 
 Describing the structures and processes of United States government and 
government of the State of  Maine and how these are framed by the United 
States Constitution, the Maine Constitution, and other primary sources.  
 Explaining the concepts of federalism and checks and balances and the 
role these concepts play in the governments of the United States and  
Maine as framed by the United States Constitution, the Maine Constitution 
and other primary sources. 
o Civics & Government 2: Students understand constitutional and legal rights, civic 
duties and responsibilities, and roles of citizens in a constitutional democracy by:  
 
  
 Explaining the constitutional and legal status of "citizen" and provide 
examples of rights, duties, and responsibilities of citizens.  
 Describing how the powers of government are limited to protect individual rights and minority rights as described in the United States Constitution and the Bill of Rights. 
• Grades 9 -Diploma 
o Civics & Government 1: Students understand the ideals, purposes, principles, structures, and processes of constitutional government in the United States and in the American political system, as well as examples of other forms of government and political systems in the world by: 
 Explaining how and why democratic institutions and interpretations of 
democratic ideals and constitutional principles change over time.  
 Evaluating current issues by applying democratic ideals and constitutional principles of government in the United States, including checks and balances, federalism, and consent of the governed as put forth in founding documents. 
o Civics & Government 2: Students understand the constitutional and legal rights, the civic duties and responsibilities, and roles of citizens in a constitutional 
democracy and the role of citizens living under other forms of government in the world by: 
 Explaining the relationship between constitutional and legal rights, and 
civic duties and responsibilities in a constitutional democracy.  
 Evaluating the relationship between the government and the individual as 
evident in the United States Constitution, the Bill of Rights, and landmark court cases.  
 Analyzing the constitutional principles and the roles of the citizen and the government in major laws or c ases.  
 
The Department is happy to answer any questions related to L.D. 222, An Act to Require 
Students to Demonstrate Knowledge of the Constitution of Maine and the United States 
Constitution  and will be available for work sessions on this bill.  
 Sincerely,  
 
Beth Lambert  
Director of Teaching and Learning  
 

