, , HoUSE oE REPRESENTATIVES 
iii; 2 STATE HoUsE STATIoN 
, _" AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
_ (207) 287-1440 
»u 
" 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Chad R. Perkins 
POB 251 
Dover-Foxcroft, ME 04426 
Residence: (207) 279-0927 
Fax: (207) 305-4907 
Chad Perkins@legislature.maine.gov 
15 Feb 23 
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD 
SUBJECT: LD 222 An Act to Require Students to Demonstrate Knowledge of the 
Constitution of Maine and the United States Constitution 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, 
Thank you for allowing me to address you on LD 222, An Act to Require Students to 
Demonstrate Knowledge of the Constitution of Maine and the United States Constitution. 
The United States was founded on the four principles of virtue based equal justice 
under the law, the protection of individual liberties, the protection of private property and 
the free market. It was these four principles that guided the framers of the US 
Constitution when they drafted that document, and it is those same four principles and the 
freedoms that are protected by that document that still makes America shine as a beacon 
to millions around the world as a haven of freedom, prosperity and safety today. 
The Constitution of the United States stood unique among the world, when drafted, in 
that it was the first to recognize that the rights of our citizens were not granted by any 
principality, but were inherent within us by the very fact that we are human; inseparable 
from our very being. It put on paper the American ideal that each of us was responsible 
for our own destiny, with the freedom to try, succeed or fail by our own agency, while 
recognizing the rights of others and the responsibilities of those rights as a moral society. 
The Constitution gave us room to grow as a nation, and gave us the mechanism to 
correct some of the failings that the original founders were unable enact when 
establishing our nation, such as Thomas J efferson ’s failed amendment to condemn 
slavery, which failed passage because two of the thirteen original colonies would not 
accept its passage. 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
Most importantly, the US Constitution gave us the Bill of Rights. These amendments to 
the Constitution guarantee to every American the right to speak and worship freely, to 
have access to a free press, to defend their hearth and home from both villainy and 
oppression, to have access to a fair and impartial judiciary, to have their private property 
protected and to have the right to self determination, among others. 
These rights, imbued upon every living person, are inalienable regardless of our age, 
sex, race, ethnicity, religion, beliefs, creed, political affiliation or any other marker of our 
being. In fact, they are part of every man, woman and child, regardless of any national 
border. They are true even for those who are not in America; we are just fortunate enough 
to live in a country so free as to have a constitution that guarantees those rights. It is what 
makes America unique and exceptional. 
However, we cannot advocate for or protect those rights if we do not know that we 
have them. Failing to educate our children in the fundamentals of those rights will only 
lead future generations to ignorance of them. 
We have only to look back in history to see how dangerous and authoritarian regimes, 
intent on denying their citizens the very fundamental rights that we enjoy, have taken 
extraordinary measures to erase their own histories. Whether it was the imprisonment on 
teachers and intellectuals in the Soviet Union as described in Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn ’s 
“Gulag Archipelago ” , the systematic replacement of teachers and university professors 
under the fascist National Socialist regime in Germany, Mao’s erasure of culture and 
history in his ‘Cultural Revolution ’ (now being repeated by Xi) or the murder of overa 
million intellectuals, teachers and professors by the communist regime under Pol Pot, 
whole societies can be changed when their history is erased or silenced. Even in our own 
nation, in recent times, there are those that would seek to erase history, not understanding 
that to truly understand history and to learn from it, one must study both the good and the 
bad. 
Therefore, I say wholeheartedly that it is vitally important that we ensure that our 
young people, the future of our nation and our legacy, are educated and well versed in 
one of the most important documents in their lives, the Constitution of the United States 
of America. It is only by their familiarization with it that they can truly know what rights 
they have, how vital those rights are, and how to protect them. I strongly urge the 
committee to support passage of this bill. 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
I thank you for your polite consideration in this matter. 
Respectfully, 
Rep. Chad R. Perkins 
District 31 
ATT: 
CF: 
Committee Chair Senator Joseph Rafferty 
Committee Chair Representative Michael Brennan 
Committee Members 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
