HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
'5 ¢,—,- 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
ill
A :.
_ 
_,y,M A;- :. 
1,;_‘,\,- .'“ UGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
‘gut TIY: (207) 287-4469 
Reagan Paul 
815 North Main Street 
Winterport, ME 04496 
Home Phone: (207) 944-8033 
Reagan.Paul@legislature.maine.gov 
February 16, 2023 
Testimony 
In Support of 
LD 222 An Act to Require Students to Demonstrate Knowledge of the Constitution 
of Maine and the United States Constitution 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Reagan Paul, I represent House District 37, which includes Winterport, part of 
Frankfort, Prospect, Stockton Springs, and Searsport. I am here before you today to testify in 
support of LD 222, “An Act to Require Students to Demonstrate Knowledge of the Constitution 
of Maine and the United States Constitution ” , which I co-sponsored. 
Since its inception in 1787, the US Constitution has been a guiding light for generations of 
American citizens. It is the blueprint of this great nation. The Founding Fathers took painstaking 
efforts to create this Supreme Law of the Land that protects the security, freedom and prosperity 
of WE the People. 
Our beloved Constitution is under attack from those who apologize for this nation being the 
greatest and most powerful in the World. New generations of Americans are not being 
enlightened about the true importance of our country’s founding documents. By teaching about 
the US Constitution in schools, We will help protect and uphold our values, rights and freedoms. 
If it is taught properly, students can understand the true meaning of their rights and the vital 
constitutional amendments that protect those rights. But teaching the Constitution in schools as the framers 
intended it, Without biased interpretations, is the key. Too often, professors and educators insert their personal 
ideological viewpoints when presenting the Constitution to students. 
How ﬂee would We be Without our Constitution? How would our government operate without 
it? These questions should be answered with education programs not only on Constitution Day 
and Citizenship Day, but every day of the school year. Our youth must learn and truly understand how amazing 
this nation is. Thomas Jefferson said: 
“Enlighten the people and tyranny and oppression will vanish like evil spirits at the dawn of 
day.” 
George Washington said:“ . . .what duty more pressing. . .than communicating it to those Who are
to be the future guardians of the liberties of the country? ” 
The Founding Fathers agreed: the youth of America must learn about the document that makes their success 
possible. As times change, one thing should remain certain: the guarantee of our inalienable rights as free 
citizens. Our rights are not assigned to us, they belong to us. These rights are based on natural 
laws. They are inherent to the human experience and apply to every American. 
Certain politicians have forgotten and ignored how the US Constitution protects our rights every 
day. It is only through proper teaching that We the People can ensure our children (and we 
ourselves) know the principles of liberty and prosperity. It is through education We take our 
freedom into our own hands. 
George Washington said: “The People are [the Constitution ’s] only keepers. ” 
The heart of the Constitution and the United States is... The People. Power belongs in the hands 
of the people, not the government. The more school students understand the US Constitution, 
the more they understand what Congress can and cannot do, and the more they understand when 
laws are unconstitutional and how to ﬁght them, just like our Founding Fathers would have done. 
The US Constitution is more than a piece of paper. Together with the Declaration of 
Independence and the Constitution of the State of Maine, they are the pillars of our nation and 
state, standing free from the oppression and tyranny of any ruling class, including our own 
government. Not only does it protect our national sovereignty, religious freedom, and right to 
free speech, it also guarantees the complete and total freedom of every citizen, both now and in 
the future. 
It is everyone ’s right to receive constitutional teaching in our schools. 
Today, our nation faces great challenges from Within. Help bring the US Constitution back into 
the hearts and minds of young Americans. Take a stand and help ensure our country’s freedom 
for generations to come. Only 16% of my generation say they are proud to be American. There is a reason for 
that. Today I stand before you as one of the 16% Who is proud to be an American and a Mainer because I 
Was taught to love my country and the original intent of our Constitution. 
Thank you for your time. 
Reagan Paul 
State Representative
