ms a §'i;|l'$i,L 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
M SS ggélgg|§m0N Telephonew(2b02) 622-3473 Fax. £207) 626-2968 I8 
PUBUC EDUCATION ADVOCATES g Site’ “"mV'n1Sn1a “]e 'c0m Maine SchooISuperimi-nilems Assodulion 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 222 
AN ACT TO REQUIRE STUDENTS TO DEMONSTRATE KNOWLEDGE OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF MAINE AND THE UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association in opposition to L.D. 222. 
School Boards and Superintendents oppose this bill as this requirement is already in the Maine Learning 
Results. The teaching of the constitution is imbedded in the Civic and Government strand with standards and 
performance expectations beginning as early as kindergarten. 
The constitution of Maine is introduced in 4th grade and the United States constitution is introduced in Sm 
grade. In grades 6-9 students focus on the structures and processes of government and how these are framed 
by the US constitution and the Maine constitution._ 
In high school students dive deeper into their understanding of the constitution by analyzing constitutional 
principles to create an in-depth understanding of government and the rights of citizens. 
We not only believe this bill is redundant, it also raises the larger topic of curriculum mandates. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/NSBA Code: IGA 
CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT AND ADOPTION 
As deﬁned in Maine Department of Education rules, “curriculum ” means [School unit 
name]’s written document that sets forth the learning expectations for all students for all 
content areas of Maine’s system of Learning Results, as well as for other content areas as 
speciﬁed by the Board. 
The [School unit name]’s curriculum shall reﬂect continuous, sequential and speciﬁc 
instruction aligned with the content areas of the Learning Results including the 
knowledge and skills described in the “Parameters for Essential Instruction ” and the 
"Guiding Principles ” of the Learning Results. 
Through its curriculum, the schools will provide courses and/or learning experiences that 
support multiple pathways for learning, accommodate variety of learning styles, provide 
multiple options for students to demonstrate proﬁciency, and prepare students for 
responsible citizenship and success in a global society. 
The Board recognizes that curriculum development, review and evaluation is an ongoing 
process, and that programs and practices may need to be adjusted or revised to meet 
educational standards, to reﬂect community aspirations and values, and to serve the best 
interests of students. 
In development, revision and evaluation of curriculum, the Board expects that:V 
A. School administrators and staff will be sensitive to initiatives such as the 
Next Generation Science Standards, and other changing conditions that 
may require modiﬁcations in curriculum. 
B. All programs will be subject to ongoing review and evaluation to ensure 
that they meet the instructional needs of students. 
C. The school system will undertake intensive curriculum revision as needed. 
D. The Superintendent/designee will take the lead in the ongoing curriculum 
development and review process and in aligning the alignment of 
curriculum with educational standards and with advances in knowledge, 
educational research and “best practices. ” 
E. Curriculum development and revision will be achieved with appropriate 
involvement of administrators, instructional and support staff, students, 
parents, community and the Board. 
Page l of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: IGA 
[OPTIONAL: The Board may appoint one of its members to serve as a liaison to 
[School unit name]’s Curriculum Committee OR: to serve as a member of [School 
unit name]’s Curriculum Advisory Committee] 
The Board will review and adopt (approve) all curriculum guides, course descriptions and 
courses of study prior to their implementation. 
The Superintendent/designee is expected to develop plans and timelines as necessary for 
the development, implementation and evaluation of the curriculum. 
The Superintendent is expected to make recommendations to the Board, consistent with 
Board policy, in regard to professional development, instructional materials and the 
resources needed for curriculum implementation. 
The Superintendent will report annually, or as otherwise requested, to the Board on the 
status of the curriculum. 
Legal Reference: 20-A M.R.S.A. §§ 1001(6), 4701-4729, 6209 
Me. Dept. of Ed. Rule Chapters 125, 127 
Cross Reference: ADF-School Unit Commitment to the Learning Results 
IHA—Basic Instructional Program 
IJJ-Instructional and Library-Media Materials Selection 
IL—Evaluation of Instructional Programs 
Adopted: 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reﬂect official 
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used asa 
starting point for a board‘s policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve 
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful 
analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and 
suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and 
are not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board's own legal counsel. 
Page 2 of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
