  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of  
LD 883 (HP 549) “An Act to Exempt Emergency Medical Services Community Paramedicine  
Programs from Home Health Care Provider Licensing Requirements  
March 22, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Repr esentative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Laurie Belden, a resident 
of Durham and the Executive Director of the Home Care & Hospice Alliance of 
Maine (Alliance).  The Alliance is a network of hom e health care, hospice, home 
care and personal care providers across our State delivering in -home care to older 
adults and disabled individuals of all ages, allowing them to stay in their home 
and community.  
I’m here today to offer qualified  support for LD 883 (HP 549) An Act to Exempt 
Emergency Medical Services Community Paramedicine Programs from Home 
Health Care Provider Licensing Requirements , with proposed amend ments . I wish 
to thank Representative Salisbury for being the bill sponsor ; as well as Sam 
Hurley, Director of Maine Emergency Medical Services, for collaborating  with the 
home health care industry  on this initiative.  
Alliance members  recognize  the beneficial adjunctive support and services 
provided to patients within their homes by community  paramedics. We further 
recognize that community paramedic services can help support patients that  may 
not qualify for other services such as home health care, and can  partner with 
home health and  hospice agencies to support the most efficient delivery of car e. 
This can further reduce re -hospitalization  and provide additional resources to 
help respond to subacute needs of patients.  
The Alliance  leadership  recognizes that there are several successful community 
paramedicine programs  across the country, and they have demonstrated strong 
partnerships with home health and hospice  organizations and , most importantly,  
have demonstrated favorable outcomes  for patients . 
This bill’s intent is to correct a possible oversight that would prevent community 
paramedicine  programs from provid ing services to patients in their homes 
without having a home health license. To that  end, Alliance leadership  and the 
director of Maine Emergency Medical Services developed mutual ly acceptable  
language for the  amendment  which has been presented by Rep. Salisbury  (see 
attached).  
  Board of Directors  
 
President  
Colleen Hilton  
Northern Light Home Care  
 
Vice President  
Daryl Cady  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Treasurer  
RJ Gagnon  
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Secretary  
Laurie Bourgoin  
Home Hope & Healing  
 
 
Members  
Ken Albert  
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Patricia Aprile  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Kyra Chamberlain  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Elaine Collins  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Chris Costello  
CHANS Home Health& Hospice  
 
Zetta Fogg  
McKesson Medical -Surgical  
 
Lisa Harvey -McPherson  
Northern Light Home Care & Hospice  
 
Adam LaMonica  
Maxim Healthcare Services  
 
Amy McVety  
Mount Desert Nursing Association  
 
Greg Pizzo  
MaineGeneral HomeCare & Hospice  
 
Amy Shawley  
St. Joseph Homecare and Hospice  
 
  
  
In addition to the proposed amendment , the Alliance also recommends further amendments to address 
concerns of home care providers. In general, home care providers want to maintain a delineation between 
home care services and community paramedicine. Providers are concerned about “creep” and whet her the 
changes proposed in this legislation, combined with the underlying scope of practice for community 
paramedicine, could lead to some providing what are essentially home care services under the auspices of 
community paramedicine.  
To address Alliance  members’ concerns related to Community Paramedicines’ scope of practice, we propose 
additional language be added to  statue along the following lines : 
“Community paramedicine programs are not intended to replace the care provided by licensed home health 
agencies. For patients enrolled in a home health episode of care, care must be coordinated with the licensed 
home health agency. Community paramedicine providers  are required to notify the patient’s primary care 
physician if they feel the patient may be considered homebound or  would  otherwise qualify for  home health 
services. ” 
We also respectfully request that the number of seats allocated to  the home health care sector on the EMS  
Community Paramedicine  board be increased from one to two with both seats filled by individuals nominated 
by the Alliance. This additional representation will ensure improved communication  and input related to 
services or interventions that could be perce ived as duplicative of the home health benefit .  
We are prepared to continue engagement with the Maine Board of Emergency Medical Services on these 
matters to ensure an ongoing  collaborative partnership that avoids duplication and enables the best care 
possible for patients across Maine .  
We are supportive of the bill  with the  amend ments outlined here  and feel this will codify the ability of 
community paramedicine  programs to continue performing certain at home services, which Maine and many 
other states have  demonstrated to be an incredibly valuable and integral component of community -based 
healthcare.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony  in support of this important legislation to ensure the safety 
and wellbeing of our fellow Mainers.  
 
Laurie Belden , Executive Director  
laurie@homecarealliance.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester, Maine 04351 -0227  
Ph: 207 -213-6125  |  Fax: 207-213-6127  
www. Home CareAlliance.org  
 
  
  
32 MRS §84 (4)  
4.  Establishment of community paramedicine services.    The board may establish community paramedicine 
services. As used in this subsection, "community paramedicine" means the practice by an emergency medical services 
provider primarily in a n out -of-hospital setting of providing episodic patient evaluation, advice and treatment directed at 
preventing or improving a particular medical condition, within the scope of practice of the emergency medical services 
provider as specifically requested o r directed by a physician.    
 
The board shall establish by rule the requirements and application and approval process of community paramedicine 
services established pursuant to this subsection. At a minimum, an emergency medical services provider, includi ng, but 
not limited to, an ambulance service or non -transporting emergency medical service, that conducts community 
paramedicine services shall work with an identified primary care medical director, have an emergency medical services 
medical director and c ollect and submit data and written reports to the board, in accordance with requirements established 
by the board.  
 
Exemption of community paramedicine services from licensure requirements for home health services may be referenced 
at Title 22, chapter 41 9, subchapter 3.   
 
 
Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as defined in   Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter  2-A .    
 
 
 
Title 22: HEALTH AND WELFARE  
Subtitle 2: HEALTH  
Part 4: HOSPITALS AND MEDICAL CARE  
Chapter 419: HOME HEALTH SERVICES  
3.  Home health care provider.   "Home health care provider" means any business entity or subdivision thereof, whether 
public or private, proprietary or not for profit, that is engaged in providing acute, restorative, rehabilitative, maintenance, 
preventive or health promotion services through professional nursing or another therapeutic service, such as physical 
therapy, home hea lth aides, nurse assistants, medical social work, nutritionist services or personal care services, either 
directly or through contractual agreement, in a client's place of residence. This term does not apply to any sole practitione r 
providing private duty nursing services or other restorative, rehabilitative, maintenance, preventive or health promotion 
services in a client's place of residence or to municipal entities providing health promotion services in a client's place of  
residence. This term does not a pply to a federally qualified health center or a rural health clinic as defined in 42 United 
States Code, Section 1395x, subsection (aa) (1993) that is delivering case management services or health education in a 
client's place of residence . Ambulance services and non -transporting emergency medical services as defined and licensed 
pursuant to 32 MRS §81 et seq., and who are providing community paramedicine services which have been established 
and approved pursuant to 32 MRS §84 (4) shall be exempt from this chapter for the express and exclusive purpose of 
delivering community paramedicine services. This exemption does not authorize the unlicensed delivery of home health 
care services.  Beginning October 1, 1991, "home health care provider" includes any bu siness entity or subdivision 
thereof, whether public or private, proprietary or nonprofit, that is engaged in providing speech pathology services.   
 
 
