Testimony in Favor of LD 883 
"An Act to Exempt Emergency Medical Services Community Paramedicine Programs from 
Home Health Care Provider Licensing Requirements" 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee. My name is Rick Petrie, and I am a Paramedic who has worked in the 
Maine EMS system for 42 years. I am now the Chief Operations Officer for North East Mobile 
Health, a for-profit Ambulance Service based in Scarborough Maine and the Program Director 
for the Jackman Paramedic project. 
I was also fortunate to serve as a member of the EMS Blue Ribbon Committee whose work laid 
the foundation for this, and other, legislation supporting Emergency Medical Services in Maine. 
We have been hearing repeatedly over the last several years that EMS is in trouble in the state 
of Maine. Rural areas are particularly hard hit, and we are desperately in need of funding 
solutions that will help revive and sustain EMS organizations for the future. However, part of 
the solution for EMS agencies is also having the ability to innovate; looking to their 
communities and identifying unmet healthcare needs that could be filled by local EMS 
providers. in addition to the possibility of another source of income for the agencies, it also 
offers the opportunity to expand the typical role of the EMS provider and provide some 
incentive to attract new providers to the field and allow experienced providers to look at 
healthcare from another angle. 
Community Paramedicine is one of those opportunities. In many places where it has been 
implemented, they have seen a reduction in transports to emergency departments, fewer re- 
admissions, and a reduction of unnecessary calls. Community Paramedicine is not intended to 
replace the current home health care system, but support it. These requested changes to the 
law, as well as the amendments, will enable EMS agencies to explore the needs of their local 
communities and develop programs that willhelp them shore up their current EMS operation 
while also helping their community. 
As the Program Director for the Jackman Paramedic Project, l can attest to the positive impact 
these types of programs have in their coverage areas. We are currently working with Penobscot 
Community Health Center and Northern Light Home Care and Hospice to develop and 
implement a community telehealth monitoring, palliative care, and hospice-at-home programs, 
valuable additions to the Jackman-Moose River Valley Region. 
Thank you for your consideration, and l am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Rick Petrie, EMT-P 
rpetrie@nernhs.com 
207-754-9109
