$ STATE OF MAINE 
. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
MALNE EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES _. 
TATE OUSE TATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
J“-MET T- MILLS IvLrCEAEL SAUSCHUCK 
GOVFMOR COMMISSIONER 
]. SAM HURLEY 
DIRECTOR 
Testimony of J. Sam Hurley, MPH, EMPS, NRP 
Director, Maine Bureau of Emergency Medical Services (Maine EMS) 
Department of Public Safety 
Neither For Nor Against of LD 883 
“An Act to Exempt Emergency Medical Services Community Paramedicine Programs ﬁom 
Home Health Care Provider Licensing Requirements” 
Presented by Representative Suzanne Salisbury 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND HUIVIAN SERVICES 
Public Hearing: Wednesday, March 22, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services: 
My name is Sam Hurley, and I am the Director of Maine Emergency Medical Services, Maine 
EMS, Within the Department of Public Safety. I am testifying on behalf of Maine Department of 
Public Safety and Maine EMS neither for nor against LD 883, “An Act to Exempt Emergency 
Medical Services Community Paramedicine Programs from Home Health Care Provider 
Licensing Requirements." 
For over a decade, Maine EMS and EMS agencies throughout the state have been actively 
engaged in the provision of community paramedicine services. The prograrmning in Maine 
began as a pilot project in 2012 but was codiﬁed in statute in 2017 by authorizing community 
paramedicine services to provide episodic, better identiﬁed as incidental, patient evaluation; 
advice and treatment directed at preventing or improving a particular medical condition; Within 
Excellence O Support O Collaboration 0 Integrity 
PHONE: (207) 626-3860 TTY: (207) 287-3659 FAX: (207) 287<6251 
With offices located at the Central Maine Commerce Center, 45 Commerce Drive, Suite 1, Augusta, l\/[E 04330
the scope of practice of the EMS clinician as speciﬁcally requested or directed by a physician in 
an out-of-hospital setting. ‘ 
The recent Blue Ribbon Cormnission on EMS convened by the 130* Legislature identiﬁed that 
there may be some dissonance between the statutory language enabling community paramedicine 
and the 1983 Home Health Services statute regarding home health licensure. ” There is concern 
that the language from the 1983 statute may lead to contusion regarding the authorization of 
EMS entities to conduct community paramedicine activities Without separate, duplicative 
licensure as a home health entity.‘ 
Nationally, community paramedicine has continued to evolve and progress as a complementary 
adjunct to existing healthcare resources, such as home health entities. Community paramedicine 
has never and has no intentions of supplanting the home health system in the State of Maine. 
Instead, Maine EMS has seen the home health community as partners in delivering the highest 
quality care to patients throughout the state, no matter their need, location, or situation. To the 
point home health representatives sit on the Maine EMS Community Paramedicine Committees 
Ultimately, our view is that We must work collaboratively to develop robust systems of care that 
meet the needs of all Mainers with the right care, at the right time, delivered by the right 
licensee, in the right enviromnent. 
This bill seeks to establish an exemption in the 1983 statute that will authorize community 
paramedicine to exist and continue to function throughout the state Without having duplicative 
licensure processes for the entities and persormel involved. Maine EMS has an existing 
community paramedicine designation process that requires EMS agencies Who are interested in 
applying to submit applications that include overviews of their project and services, patient 
interaction plans, staffing plans, training plans, quality assurance and improvement plans, as Well 
l 
32 MRS § 84 (4) 
2 Blue Ribbon Commission to Study Emergency Medical Services in the State (Dec. 2022) 
https1//legislature.maine.gov/doc/9404 
3 22 l\/IRS § 2141 et seq. 
4 “Recommendation C-1: To facilitate the growth of community paramedicine programs in Maine, the Legislature 
should explore options for addressing a potential disparity created by the statutory deﬁnition and licensure 
requirements of home health care providers and community paramedic requirements. ” (Blue Ribbon Commission to 
Study EMS in the State (2022) 
5 Maine EMS Community Paramedicine Committee (https://WWW.maine.gov/ems/boards-committees/community- 
paramedicine) 
Page 2 of4
as robust involvement of physician-led medical direction.6 Community paramedicine services 
are unique in that they are completely physician directed and are intended to serve as an 
extension of the physician or authorized healthcare provider to speciﬁcally perform patient 
evaluations, provide advice, and/ or render treatment as ordered by that clinician. 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Maine DH1-IS as well as many other comparable entities 
throughout the nation, have seen the immense value that EMS has to offer in bridging the gaps 
between our existing healthcare system and the needs of patients in our communities. To the 
extent, that DI-11-IS provided funding for Maine EMS to work to expand our community 
paramedicine infrastructure and craft a pathway by which EMS entities providing community 
paramedicine services can be reimbursed.7 The Community Paramedicine Committee has been 
Working diligently on this programming and trying to develop resources for healthcare 
professionals Who are interested in making referrals to the EMS system about the capacity of 
community paramedicine professionals. In doing so, the Committee has drafted a scope of 
practice for persons practicing within the community paramedicine ﬁeld that falls within the 
National Model EMS Scope of Practice, the National EMS Education Standards, and the 
National Cormnunity Paramedic Certiﬁcation course materials.8 However, some of these skills 
are not included in the traditional 9-1-l scope of practice as the Board has reservations about 
requiring clinicians who are not practicing within the community paramedicine ﬁeld to maintain 
clinical competencies on material that may not be directly related to the provision of emergency 
care. 
Maine EMS understands that there are some concerns expressed regarding this explicit 
exemption to the home health statutes and we are eager to to help craft an amenable pathway 
forward that ensures: 
0 The Board of EMS retains full authority over the scope of practice of EMS professionals 
in the State of Maine; 
6 Maine EMS Rules Chapter 19; Maine EMS Community Paramedicine Application 
(https://WWW.maine.govlerns/sites/maine.gov.ems/ ﬁles/inline- 
ﬁles/Maine%20EMS%20Community%20Pararnedicine%20Project%20Application.pdf) 
7 Funding through COVID—l9 Disparities Grant to help address the healthcare needs of rural Mainers and other 
marginalized populations in the state who may have limited access to healthcare resources, especially those related 
to COVID-19 testing and treatment. 
8 Crosswalk of each of these standards can be made available upon request 
Page 3 of4
0 Existing and future community paramedicine programs are empowered to continue 
delivering services to the residents of the State of Maine as they have done for the past 
decade; and 
0 We ensure that the language we draft retains a focus on being patient-centric While not 
subverting the existing systems We have in place. 
Maine Bureau of EMS continues to be eager to Work collaboratively with the Committee and 
associated stakeholders on this legislation. I am more than happy to answer any questions that 
you may have at this time, but please feel free to reach out to me anytime if there is any 
additional information that I can offer you and/or the Committee. 
Thank you. 
Page 4 of4
