PA§Ei"tT§ ’ 
REGHTS 
menucmou 3: 
Testimony of Allen Sarvinas 
Parents’ Rights in Education Maine 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
l.D 391+; Chapter ll7 Ought Not To Pass 
April 6, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the distinguished members on the 
Committee of Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Allen Sarvinas andI 
serve as director of Parents’ Rights in Education Maine (MePRlE). We area 
nonpartisan, non—profit 50l (c) (3) that advocates for parents’ rights in 
education. 
MePR|E opposes this new major substantive rule Chapter ll7 based upon our 
federal and state constitutional right to enjoy our civil rights, unethical regulatory 
and licensure processes, and the aggressive campaign by the ASCA and MSCA 
who guide those in which this new rule is applicable. 
Article l, Section 6-A, of the Maine Constitution speaks to the prohibition of 
discrimination. Specifically, Chapter ll7 further discriminates against parents and 
guardians' inherited right to enjoy directing the upbringing, education, and care of 
their children. Federally, with substantive due process, the llrth Amendment 
protects a parent' s right to direct the educational upbringing of their child which is 
violated by the use of the Chapter ll7’ s referenced Title 20-A, §l|-O08. Parents and 
guardians do not enjoy their children sharing their most intimate inner thoughts 
and/or developing intense relationships with school counselors and school social 
workers without their knowledge or consent. Parents are scared of facing 
communications that read,“ our district office will be looking into what next steps 
are” . [I] Denying the equal protection of these inherited rights forces us to 
implore this esteemed committee vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 394. 
The current regulatory and licensing processes are unethical, leading to 
unnecessary disruptions in school districts violating our youth' s right to an 
uninterrupted education. This is due to state employees not having the proper 
experience or expertise as intended during the passing of Title 20-A, MRS §l|-O08. 
[L2] This is a summary of dissenting testimony to the original bill l.D 2lr7 which 
provoked the current MDOE rule making process for Chapter ll7. A Certified 
Phone: 410-739-5368 maineprie@gmai|.com
%%§i.?§T5j 
§§%iii§ 
!N£DUCATlON 
School Counselor and Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor pointed out, “the 
concern is that [school social workers] are taking on the school counselor role 
without the proper certification and training. This is unethical and against both the 
school counselor and school social worker standards." Due to these critical 
fractures in the system that produces school social workers, it forces us to implore 
this esteemed committee vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 39li. 
The American School Counselor Association (ASCA) has openly declared an 
ideological war on Maine students proclaiming, “it is an expectation, not the 
exception, for...[see artifact] ." They are violating the First and lli-th Amendments 
to the U.S. Constitution, and Title IX of the Education Amendments of I972 as it is 
never the government' s role to promote or endorse specific sincerely held beliefs, 
especially through our compulsory education system. This holds true in all courts 
due to the inability to avoid discriminating against a separate but equal sincerely 
held belief. Equal protection matters. 
The ASCA are executing their mission through their strong partnership with the 
Maine School Counselor Association (MSCA). The ASCA and MSCA helps staff, 
train and guide Maine school counselors for local School Administrative Units 
(SAU). The state and local SAUs must immediately suspend their active 
partnership with the ASCA and MSCA until there is a thorough investigative 
process in which the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee is fully debriefed. 
This was the approach by state agencies in California and Ohio after the National 
School Board Association verbally attacked parents. Considering these attacks are 
based in action and currently occurring within Maine schools, it' s imperative for 
legislators and SAUs to suspend their cooperative relationships with the ASCA and 
MSCA immediately. Due to the unconstitutional practices of Maine school 
counselors, it forces us to implore this esteemed committee vote Ought Not To Pass 
on LD 394. 
MePRlE intent is to provide substantive and constructive feedback for the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, so they may request the vital 
information and data required to use their legislative powers to correct the current 
course which will concurrently provide a safe and productive environment for 
Maine students and protect parents’ rights in education. Until this occurs, it forces 
us to implore this esteemed committee vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 391:. 
Phone: 410-739-5368 maineprie@gmaii.com
