._ ,s
’ _.><v‘;2 
1»? I 
3. 
LD l‘l\7 TESTIMONY \: 
April 5, 2023 
Annalyse Sarvinas — Topsham, Maine 
Hello Representative Brennan, Representative Rafferty & Honorable Members of the Education & 
Cultural Affairs Committee. My name is Annalyse Sarvinas and I' m a resident of Topsham, 
Maine. I am writing to express my opposition to Chapter II7, “Rules Regarding the Duties of 
School Counselors and School Social Workers”. 
First, I'd like to share a little bit about my personal experience with counselors. When I was in 
high school, I worked closely with my school counselor as years of various trauma' s came toa 
head myjunior year. I remember in the beginning of seeking out help, telling my counselor that 
there was no way she could tell my parents what was going on because they would disown me. 
My counselor looked at me, and with the best of grace, told me she knew that was a lie. She 
forced me to look at the real problem, which was not my parents. The real problem was the 
trauma I had endured while outside my parents care, and the ways I was choosing to deal with it. 
Because of her ability to tell me the truth, and help me do hard things, I was able to get life 
changing help with my parents from real doctors outside of school. What could have turned into 
a lifelong struggle with self-doubt, and broken relationships caused by misplaced blame, 
became healing and growth. This rule the committee is facing today, paired with a solely 
affirmative approach, obstructs counselors ability to help students the way my counselor helped 
me. 
I am the majority. The majority of students facing mental health issuesjust don't want to get in 
trouble, or don't want to face the shame they feel. Cosigning those feelings does not bring 
healing and growth, but further damages children who don't have the tools that adults have to 
navigate. 
I'll also address a couple of technical concerns I have regarding this rule that ought not to pass.I 
believe the original law passed in I989 had good intentions aimed at protecting children and 
providing for their needs as best as possible. However, times have changed in the last 25 years. 
For one, masters degrees are the new bachelors which call into question all laws based upon 
titles. Secondly, the Ethical Standards adopted by the American School Counselor Association 
(ASCA) in I998 stated that school counselors must,“ refrain from consciously encouraging the 
counselee' s acceptance of values, lifestyles, plans, decisions and beliefs that represent the 
counseIor' s personal orientation." In ZOZI, ASCA ethical standards state, “It is an expectation, 
not the exception, for school counselors to integrate multiculturalism and social justice
perspecfives info fheir work as advocafes and leaders." This is fexfbook indocfrina ﬁon, nof 
counseling or social work. 
Chapfer H7 should nof allow school counselors and school social workers ’ro keep secrefs from 
parenls or adminisfer medicaﬁons. Allowing secrefs To be kep’r from parenfs or guardian' s 
should be rare and documenfed. l do no’r supporl major subs’ran’rive rule Chapfer ll7 and a'r 
minimum, requesf ’rhe rule go back To a sfage fhaf allows language edifs. 
Respecffully, 
Annalyse Sarvinas 
Topsham, Maine
