State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCAITON 
Testimony of Bear Shea, Mental Health Specialist and Office of School and Student Support 
Team Coordinator 
In Support: L.D. 394 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 117: Rule Regarding the Duties of School 
Counselors and School Social Workers, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of 
Education (EMERGENCY) 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Brennan 
Date: April 6, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Bear Shea, and I am here today representing the Department of Education speaking in 
support of L.D. 394, Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 117: Rule Regarding the 
Duties of School Counselors and School Social Workers, a Major Substantive Rule of the 
Department of Education (EMERGENCY). 
As a result of Public Law 2019, Chapter 45, statutory changes were made regarding school 
counselors and social workers; specifying definitions for direct and indirect services, and that these 
professional positions spend at least 80% of their time focused on direct and indirect support of 
students. Additionally, the statute included a requirement to develop a rule regarding the duties of 
school counselors, including that a school counselor delivers a comprehensive school counseling 
program, and guidelines regarding the duties of school social workers. 
Through analysis of feedback from state professional organizations and education professionals 
and under the authority of state statute 20-A §4008-A, the Maine Department of Education 
proposed a new Chapter 117 Rule. The rule includes definitions, scope of work by practice, and 
use of time. 
The proposed rule does not change the definitions or practices of these professions, which are 
outlined in statute 20-A §4008. Likewise, the proposed Chapter 117 rule does not describe how 
school counselors and school social workers deliver direct and indirect services. The rule will have 
a positive impact for professional school staff by outlining the scope and duties of these dynamic 
positions and creating a foundation for continued guidance. This new rule not only highlights how 
the important, and complimentary roles of school counselors and school social workers fit into an 
overall school structure, but also the unique knowledge and skills both provide for the support and 
success of Maine students.p 
The Department of Education believes in a whole student approach to education that develops and 
prepares students for the challenges and opportunities of today and tomorrow by addressing their
1
comprehensive needs through a shared responsibility of students, families, schools, and 
communities. One of the tenets of Maine’s Whole Student Approach is supporting healthy and 
safe schools. LD 394 helps us achieve this goal by supporting the variety of mental health 
professionals that engage with our families and communities to keep our students safe. 
For these reasons, the Department of Education is in support of L.D. 394, Resolve, Regarding 
Legislative Review of Chapter 117: Rule Regarding the Duties of School Counselors and School 
Social Workers, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Education (EMERGENCY), I 
am happy to answer any questions the Committee may have, and I will be available for Work 
sessions on this bill.
2
