Carey Hotaling
Freeport
LD 394
Senator Rafferty and the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee,
I have been an educator my whole career, and was a middle school science teacher 
from 1995-2021.  During my years as a teacher I saw my students in the beginning of 
their most volatile stage of discovery.  Being a teenager has always been wrought 
with self and community exploration.   Because teen brains are wired for social 
interaction, often they get most of their emotional support from their peers.  However,
if a child is feeling particularly vulnerable or confused, we are lucky when they want 
to seek out the guidance of a trained professional.  Teens will not seek out an adult if 
they feel their conversations are not in confidence.  
The work on the LD 394, DOE Chapter 117 has already gone through the full process 
at the DOE to define and clarify the role of a school counselor or social worker.  The 
school personnel are certified, educated, have degrees, and care about the whole 
student body.  As a parent, I mostly was concerned with my own children, and didn’t 
fully understand the needs of the whole student body.  These professionals are helping
with the significant struggles teens are having in this moment in time.  Rather than 
pulling away supports as children discover themselves, we should be adding supports.
I believe in the privacy laws that we have for those over 18, and I believe that we 
need to protect those rights for students under 18 as well.  If the child in question is in
clear and imminent danger of harming themselves or if they need significant new care
team members, this information is shared.  If not, please model what is being done for
adults - privileged communication exists between a client and a provider.  Please treat
our children not as mini-adults, but full human beings with rights to have their 
thoughts shared when they give consent.
Thank you for your consideration,
Carey Hotaling, Freeport, Maine
Retired Falmouth Middle School Teacher

