LD 394 Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 117: Rule Regarding the 
Duties of School Counselors and School Social Workers, a Major Substantive Rule 
of the Department of Education 
 Good Afternoon Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee of 
Educational and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey and I live in Bowdoinham. I am writing this 
testimony in opposition to LD 394 Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 117: Rule Regarding 
the Duties of School Counselors and School Social Workers, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department 
of Education. 
Parents should never be kept in the dark over their child’s education, mental health, or general 
wellbeing. To do so violates every aspect of parental rights and the child’s physical, spiritual, and mental 
health. The only way a parent should lose their rights over their child is through the courts and be given 
due process. Something that was once was held to high esteem in our country. 
Most kids, pre-teens and teenagers go through an awkward stage or stages trying to find 
themselves, explore and question one’s identity, but that doesn’t give anyone the right, especially non-
parents, the green light to manipulate and then exploit them into transitioning.  
Kids who still believe in Santa Claus, Easter Bunny, and the Tooth Fairy are in no way mature enough 
to “select or pick” their gender. Kids who do, have obviously been manipulated and exploited by “unsafe 
adults.”  
“Adults” who tell students or kids in general to keep secrets from parents are not “safe adults.” 
Are you the same person you were five, ten, fifteen years ago? What’s changed? How did it change? 
You are assisting in the destruction of a child’s innocence and taking away their future.  
All these resources, time, energy, and tax money would’ve been better spent if it went towards 
actual education and giving these kids the academic toolboxes, they need to succeed in life. Yet, we 
have “adults” who care more about what’s between a child’s legs than a strong education. Again, I ugh 
this committee to vote against LD 394 Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 117: Rule 
Regarding the Duties of School Counselors and School Social Workers, a Major Substantive Rule of the 
Department of Education. 
 
V/r 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 394
LD 394 Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 117: Rule Regarding the 
Duties of School Counselors and School Social Workers, a Major Substantive Rule of
the Department of Education
Good Afternoon Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the 
Committee of Educational and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey and I live 
in Bowdoinham. I am writing this testimony in opposition to LD 394 Resolve, 
Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 117: Rule Regarding the Duties of School 
Counselors and School Social Workers, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department 
of Education.
Parents should never be kept in the dark over their child’s education, mental health, or
general wellbeing. To do so violates every aspect of parental rights and the child’s 
physical, spiritual, and mental health. The only way a parent should lose their rights 
over their child is through the courts and be given due process. Something that was 
once was held to high esteem in our country.
Most kids, pre-teens and teenagers go through an awkward stage or stages trying to 
find themselves, explore and question one’s identity, but that doesn’t give anyone the 
right, especially non-parents, the green light to manipulate and then exploit them into 
transitioning. 
Kids who still believe in Santa Claus, Easter Bunny, and the Tooth Fairy are in no 
way mature enough to “select or pick” their gender. Kids who do, have obviously 
been manipulated and exploited by “unsafe adults.” 
“Adults” who tell students or kids in general to keep secrets from parents are not “safe
adults.”
Are you the same person you were five, ten, fifteen years ago? What’s changed? How
did it change? You are assisting in the destruction of a child’s innocence and taking 
away their future. 
All these resources, time, energy, and tax money would’ve been better spent if it went
towards actual education and giving these kids the academic toolboxes, they need to 
succeed in life. Yet, we have “adults” who care more about what’s between a child’s 
legs than a strong education. Again, I ugh this committee to vote against LD 394 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 117: Rule Regarding the Duties of
School Counselors and School Social Workers, a Major Substantive Rule of the 
Department of Education.
V/r
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
