Edwin Thelander 
Bristol, Maine 
Ought Not To Pass: Speaking in against LD 394 
Good morning and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you about this bill. 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the committee, I am 
asking you today to vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 394. 
I am the father of three awesome children who are all different and incredible young people in 
their own right. They all attended Great Salt Bay School in Damari scotta, a school that has 
recently made national headlines for guiding a 13-year-old girl down the path of gender 
transition without her mother knowing about it. It’s frightening to think that if this or another 
unqualiﬁed social worker were to have interacted with one of my children, they might have been 
able to make my child uncomfortable or unhappy with who they are instead of making them 
happy and content with who they are. 
The children of Maine have suffered enough over the past several years, primarily because of 
decisions that were made by the government to take our children out of schools, to mask them in 
their developing years and segregate and divide the children while calling it diversity, equity, and 
inclusion. So yes, the children do need help, now more than ever, but the solution should not add 
fuel to the ﬁre. 
Parents should always have a say in every aspect of their child’s life. It is always true that there 
are different ways to tackle problems, but if you try to hide the problem from the parent, who is 
in charge, you are going down a road that will be extremely hard to repair, if indeed it can ever 
be repaired. Even if your solution might be better, if that solution is not executed properly, and 
within the guidance and knowledge of the parent, you will create a rift in the family that will 
cause more harm than good. 
If you are intent on passing legislation to hide what social workers will do to a child, which right 
now appears to have no limits, when are you going to bring the child’s family in on the grand 
scheme? Decisions are being made on a child’s whim that may cause lifelong, irreparable 
damage. 
Before a child sees a social worker, the parent needs to be informed. After permission is given, 
and the child sees the social worker, the parent needs to continue to be infonned. When someone 
is choosing a doctor, or a psychologist, or any other professional, you will always want to pick 
one who aligns with your beliefs. If one cannot be provided at school that does align with the 
parents’ beliefs, I would rather go with none, or handle the matter privately. 
As you write this bill, or any other version thereof, please put strong limitations on anyone that 
may interact with Maine‘s children, and never let them act in the dark by keeping secrets from 
the parents. Please vote Ought Not To Pass. Thank you.
