My name is Francine Michaels and I am a resident of Kennebunk Maine. 
The role of a school counselor or social worker is not and should not be the role of a parent.  
I’ve been hearing countless testimonies from people who have children that are either suicidal or who’s 
children knew children that killed themselves, not on television or social media, but in person. 
This infiltration of sexuality and gender into the school system and social work departments is creating 
inner turmoil in children by forcing those too young to make moral decisions which will affect their 
entire life. 
The Millgram Experiment was a study that was done in 1963 to show that people would comply with 
those in authority, even if it meant that they believed what they were doing could kill someone.  This 
study was conducted after a Jerusalem court tried Nazi SS Lieutenant Colonel Adolf Eichmann for crimes 
against the Jewish people.  The study explained how Nazi’s could have agreed to follow the directions of 
their supervisors knowing what they were doing is wrong. 
A similar experiment is happening with the children in the schools, showing how far children will go to  
gain the approval of someone in authority, but it isn’t a case study. Children’s lives are being destroyed 
by this experiment. 
When a social worker or a counselor puts themselves in the role of authoritarian, as a parent, the 
children are exceedingly likely to obey. 
Most recently it has been shown that some social workers, teachers and counselors, have been 
rewarding those that are reading pornographic literature and choosing alternative gender assignments 
or sexual roles.   
Any social worker or counselor who puts themselves in a position of authority overriding parental 
authority has put him or herself in the position of crossing professional boundaries. 
Mental health professionals that encourage children to see them as family, while likewise discouraging 
them from having parental involvement is malpractice.  Social workers should be trying to help children 
form relationships, not help destroy them. 
Unless a child has anti-social disorder, children inherently try to please and will do anything to initiate 
the praise of those in authority over them.  The more fragile the child’s psyche, the more likely the child 
will go to an extreme to receive praise from someone in authority. This would clearly be a reason why 
those with spectrum or autistic disorders may be more easily manipulated by authority figures. When a 
person poses as an expert, it is more likely for the children to do whatever they thought would gain the 
approval of that expert . 
Every individual is born with a conscience and self-identity. Counselors are using their authority to twist 
the natural development of the conscience and self-identity of the children under their care as soon as 
possible.  
These social work programs are motivating children to participate in activities which will result in sexual 
trauma, since the purpose of pornography is to initiate some form of sexual activity, more than likely the 
same type of activity as in the pornography.  
When sexual activity is experienced prior to the correct developmental age however, it results in trauma 
to the psyche and may result in intense emotional confusion and extreme cognitive dissonance. 
How much more dangerous would these be for a child who already has psychological and or psycho-
social developmental issues? 
Individuals with intense emotional confusion can do anything, which is the reason such individuals are 
admitted to hospitals for treatment even against their will to prevent them from hurting themselves or 
someone else. 
These school programs initiating sexuality are motivating children to develop pornography addiction. 
The type of behavior causes an inability to develop intimate and healthy relationships, even with adults.  
It is for this reason that these programs being initiated by the counselors and social workers at the 
schools create self-loathing, hate and confusion. The mix of these three things is dangerous, potentially 
creating violent behavior. 
How can a person develop close and intimate relationships with anyone when have been taught by 
social workers or counselors to distrust their own parents? 
If a person thinks no one cares because they can’t have intimate personal relationships (or trust their 
own parents) is not that person more likely to commit suicide if they are depressed or even homicide if 
they feel betrayed? 
Rather than help those that are confused or frustrated with their genders and sexuality, these social 
workers and counselors are coercing confusion and frustration on the rest of the children.  It is 
completely backwards.   
As a woman that was sexually violated at a young age and read material unsuitable for teens, (even 
though it was not even pornographic), I understand fully the ramifications of not having the proper 
sexual boundaries developmentally.  It creates an emotional chaos that can go on for decades and into 
the next generation.  It was only by God’s grace that I was able to redevelop emotionally and create safe 
boundaries. 
We need to protect the children from the intensity and intentionality of this invasion into their young 
psyches for their development and for future generations.  
The role of any social worker or school counselor would be to alleviate trauma, not create it. 
They have overstepped their boundaries. They are not family. They are destroying the family unit, which 
is at the foundation of a healthy society. 
Anyone that tries to destroy the family unit is intentionally attempting to create a completely 
emotionally dysfunctional generation. 
For these reasons I am against 117! 
