Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President | Jesse Hargrove Vice President | Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org
Testimony 
                                     In Support of  
LD 394 Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 117: Rule Regarding 
the Duties of School Counselors and School Social Workers, a Major Substantive Rule of the 
Department of Education  
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
April 6, 2023 
  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee,  
 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certified teacher.  The MEA 
represents nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-12 schools as well 
as in our institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine 
Community College System, along with students in teacher prep programs as well as many retired 
educators. 
 
I am here to testify on behalf of MEA in support of LD 394, Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of 
Chapter 117: Rule Regarding the Duties of School Counselors and School Social Workers, a Major 
Substantive Rule of the Department of Education. 
 
As the title indicates, LD 394 specifies the rules for the duties of both school counselors and school 
social workers. These are two especially important positions in our preK-12 schools, particularly now as 
we have seen for several years an increase in the number of students experiencing a variety of mental 
health issues. The needs of our students in this regard must be addressed in order for our students to be 
able to learn their best and be successful in academics. School counselors and school social workers 
provide essential supports for many students who are dealing with a number of issues. An important part 
of counseling is privileged communication so that the communication between a client, in this case the 
student, and their counselor can be open and problems and situations can be discussed freely in order to 
find possible solutions and ways to cope with issues. But the communication can only be open and free 
if there is assurance that confidentiality can be maintained. There is an appropriate exception to 
maintaining confidentiality when necessary, as noted in Section 2. F. (20-A MRSA 4008(3) such as in a 
situation where there is imminent danger or a need to report a possible case of abuse. Of course, when 
appropriate a counselor may encourage a student to share information with a parent, but again, in order 
to best meet the student’s needs it may not be possible or even advisable for the student to do so. The 
safety and well-being of the student is of the highest priority to all educators, and for school counselors 
and social workers alike it is their professional responsibility that this be their primary concern. A 
student who senses that what they share with their counselor may not be kept confidential will not be 
likely to be willing to have frank conversations with the professional who is trained to assist and support 
them. 
 
MEA urges the Committee to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 394. 
 
