Jeri Stevens PhD, LCPC, CCS  
1580 Pond Rd 
Sidney, Me 04330  
 
207- 872-7558  
 
 
LD 394:Chapter 117 
 
 
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and respected members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs committee,  
 
 
I am Jeri Stevens, PhD, LCPC, CCS. I am halftime assistant professor and clinical coordinator in the counseling graduate program at Husson University as well as clinical supervisor for school counselors and school behavioral health clinicians.  
 
I am asking you to vote in favor of LD394 with suggested recommendations by my peers, 
colleagues and myself. 
 
Chapter 117 was originally developed in the ‘80s when these rules made sense.  At the time, 
there were only school counselors , who served all students with a general focus on academic, 
career and social emotional guidance and counseling, and social workers , who served the 
special education needs to provide ‘social work services” through then what was called PET. Psychologists were primarily providing testing services and LCPC’s were not yet licensed in the state. Therefore the use of “social work services” and “Social Worker” were the primary words to describe behavioral health. 
 
Fast forward to 2023, the services in the school are complex and have changed drastically from 
the 1980’s. Some of the language in the current proposals are not clear enough and put some clinicians at risk of working out of their scope. For example, to call a Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor (LCPC) a Social Worker puts the LCPC is a complicated place of calling 
themselves something other than what their credential are. See PL 233 
An Act To Address 
Licensure of Behavioral Health Practice in the State.  
 
School “guidance” counselors are highly trained and skilled graduate level counselors  who work 
under certification 075.  In the current proposal , the reference to school counselors only 
identifies “support” when they  are trained to and provide a wide varied of serv ices to include but 
not limited to College/Academic, Career and Social Emotional Guidance and C ounseling to all 
students. My request is that the “school counseling” language in Chapter 117 clearly reflect the 
vast roles of the school counselor.  
 
The proposed rules for LD 394 continue to use the words “social work services” and “Social 
Worker”, creating a very minimal scope. Social Workers along with the other clinically licensed 
behavioral  health provider s work in the schools providing behavioral and mental health services 
to general education and special education. It is recommended that the words “social worker 
services” be changed to better define the scope of service and that the provider list be included 
to reflect all the clinical licensed providers. A possibility  is to call they service “behavioral and 
mental health services ” to be provided by a qualified licensed clinician.  
 
Jeri Stevens PhD, LCPC, CCS  
1580 Pond Rd 
Sidney, Me 04330  
 
207- 872-7558  
 
 
It appears that some readers believe that section 4008 privilege communication is new to this 
chapter.  It is not new, and it is crucial for student development. Adding “social 
workers/behavioral health providers” to this language is only consistent with meeting the needs 
of all students as well as consistent with their respective regulator licensure laws.  I am happy to participate in the work session or to be available for any future discussions. 
Thank you for taking the time to read this testimony.  
 
Kindly, 
 
Jeri W Stevens, PhD, LCPC, CCS  
 Jeri Stevens PhD, LCPC, CCS  
Clinical Supervisor  
Husson University Assistant Professor / Clinical Coordinator  
 
