              
 
  LD 394 Chapter 117 comments 
 
 
 
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and respected members of the Education and Cultural Affairs committee,
 
 
 
The following comments are submitted in broad support of the provisional guidelines outlined in Chapter 117 (Rule Regarding Duties of School Counselors and School Social Workers).
 
 
 
We, the undersigned, representing Maine Counseling Association, Maine Mental Health 
Counsel ors Association, National  Association of Social Workers Maine, Maine School 
Counselor Association and Maine Psychological Association, are grateful and encouraged that 
this legislative committee is actively engaged in a process which will help to define, enhance, and protect the critical work performed in Maine’s schools by school counselors and school 
social workers. Both these groups of mental health and education professionals provide distinct 
and vital services to students and families in our state and have done so for decades against a backdrop of incr easing needs, now risen to unprecedented levels in the wake of the global 
pandemic. Against this urgent backdrop of exploding rates of behavioral and mental health issues and needs, and indeed often in the face of misinformation campaigns and attacks by a 
vocal minority which have no basis in fact, school counselors and school social workers 
(alongside other mental health professionals who provide counseling and support in schools) are committed to working together toward the well -being of our students and families.
 
 
As this committee finalizes the language in this rule, we ask that the following points/suggestions be considered in order to lessen the possibility that certain portions may be 
misinterpreted or that they may be more clearly open to further clarification by guidance from 
the Department of Education. School counselors work with all students in a school, not a 
subset. The first sentence of section 3 may be amended to read “...who help all students succeed…” to reflect this. School counselors are trained and qualified to provide counseling services, and section 3, subsection B, number 6 may be read “Mental and Behavioral Health Counseling and Supports” as well as subsection B, number 2 reading “
Academic  /College and 
Career Readiness Guidance and Counseling ” to explicitly express this. Lastly, in recognition of the 
fact that some clinical services are provided in schools by professionals who are not clinically trained social workers (e.g., LCPCs, LMFTs, LADCs, Psychologists), we suggest re- wording a 
segment of section 2 subsection A “Clinical Practice” to read “providers of these services (e.g., 
LCSWs, LCPCs, LMFTs, LADCs, Psychologists)...” so as to delineate some of these qualified 
providers, and revising a line in section 4 to read “Clinically licensed school social workers are 
among those professionals trained and qualified to provide clinical services. They are highly 
educated mental health professionals…” in order to make this explicit.  

 
Thank you for your work on behalf of Maine students, families, school counselors, and school 
social workers. We appreciate the opportunity to share our comments with you, and as always 
feel free to reach out to members of our organization(s) with any questions regarding the 
practice of professional counseling in Maine schools and communities.  
 
 
Signature:  Stan Pelletier, M.Ed., LCPC, NCC 
Public Policy Chair, Maine Counseling Association (MeCA) 
 Signature: Logan McCarthy, PhD, LCPC, NCC, ACS & Michelle Wells, LCPC Co-Presidents  
Maine Mental Health Counselors Association  
 
Signature:   
Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW 
Executive Director  
National Association of Social Workers  Maine 
 Signature: Kimberly Raymond Board Chair Maine School Counselor Association  
 Signature: Amy Safford, Executive Director  
Maine Psychological Association 
 

