 
Child Protection League   PO Box 463, Mankato, MN 56002   contact@childprotectionleague.com  888-538-3188 
 
 
 
Testimony RE: Chapter 117: RULES REGARDING THE DUTIES OF SCHOOL COUNSELORS  
AND SCHOOL SOCIAL WORKERS 
 
April 6, 2023 
 
Child Protection League (CPL) protects children from exploitation, indoctrination, and 
violence. We write here in strong opposition to your proposed Chapter 117 Rules regarding the duties 
of school counselors and school social workers. 
 
The policy being considered here is extreme and destructive. It transfers family and parental 
responsibility, authority, and care of children to the state through government schools. This Chapter 
117 policy allows minors to be influenced and directed into life-changing, permanent physical and 
mental decisions with not even the knowledge of parents, much less their consent.  
 
The Chapter 117 policy is a direct attack on children. School counselors and social workers 
cannot ever have the physical and emotional love, commitment, and bonding to classrooms of 
children that parents, by nature, have to their individual children. There is no love in this policy. 
None. The proposed policy abuses children by using them as a weapon to advance a radical 
ideological agenda that undermines families and expands the authority and power of the state. 
 
This policy silences parents. The Comprehensive School Counseling Program (CSCP) is 
described as “a collaborative effort with families, community stakeholders and other educators, to 
create an environment resulting in a positive impact on student achievement.” Families are not 
“stakeholders” to be allowed to collaborate with the schools and other “community” members. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that parents are the primary authority over children. The CSCP is an 
illegitimate creation because it violates that principle. Nor will its program result in achievement 
improvements. Such a claim is simply a convenient spin to justify your unjustifiable proposal.  
 
This policy empowers and directs social workers to gather, file, and assess detailed, personal, 
“life issues” data about all students and their families, a brazen assault on personal privacy. Who and 
what bureaucratic state and federal entities have access to that data? This policy establishes social 
workers as the authority over the entire development and life of students. This is not the proper role 
of schools.  
 
I urge you to reject this Chapter 117 Rule as an extreme violation of the rights of children and 
families and an assault on children who have the right to the care and counsel of parents. 
 
Julie Quist 
Child Protection League 
 
 
 
