Lisa Patten
Franklin
LD 394
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural
Affairs Committee, My name is Lisa Patten from Franklin. I am writing in opposition 
to LD394. This bill would give school counselors and social workers full authority 
over minor children and teens, taking away parental rights regarding life altering 
decisions involving their minor children. These children are struggling with numerous
and serious emotional and mental health issues. During these years of physical and 
mental development, Their brains are still developing and are incapable of making 
wise decisions for themselves that will  negatively effect the rest of their lives.  
Giving this kind of authority to school staff members with the welfare of these 
children is an extremely dangerous step. Decisions and actions such as would be 
allowed under this bill would give individuals the power to control all decisions 
regarding these children whom they have no right to have authority over. This sets a 
precedent that keeping secrets from parents is acceptable and beneficial, when in fact 
this is the most harmful thing you can do to a child. This bill would create a 
separation between parents and their children.  I personally know a man who has 
detransitioned after spending 20 plus years as a transgender woman. A decision he 
deeply regrets. He was involved in the LGBTQ community for over 30 years. These 
decisions were made as a young teen, after much persuasion and pressure from 
LGBTQ community. He has suffered numerous and debilitating health issues since 
beginning hormone therapy. His life was dramatically altered and forever changed 
due to these changes. I have viewed numerous testimonial videos from other 
detransitioners who all report the same claims of mental fog and confusion, emotional
and physical deterioration and hopelessness with thoughts of suicide every day, since 
transitioning. Once these steps are taken, they are irreversible. No school staff should 
ever be given authority over minor children or  be making decisions for these young, 
impressionable children, especially decisions that will have a drastic,  negative 
lifelong impact on their mental and physical health. I urge you to please vote to 
oppose LD394. Thank you for your Consideration. Lisa Patten
