 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  
 
April 26, 2023  
 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committ ee 
Cross Building Room 208  
Augusta, ME 04333  
  
RE:  LD 394:  Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 117:  Rule Regarding  
the Duties of School Counselors and School Social Workers, a Major Substantive Rule of  
the Department of Education  
  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs,  
  
We, GLAD, EqualityMaine, MaineTransNet, OUT Maine, Portland Outright, the ACLU of 
Maine and the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics wish to provide our 
support for LD 394 as this Committee nears a work session on the bill.  
  
Vis-a-vis the Rule on School Counselors and Social Workers, our understanding is that school 
counselors and social workers provide student support, whether directly or indirectly.  The 
underlying statutes governing the relevant definitions and practices ar e set by 20 -A MRS sec. 
4008.   
  
We are saddened to hear that some of the parents and advocacy organizations testifying against 
the Rule are worried about schools displacing parents.  This is a false conflict.  
 
Parents and schools share the same goal of ens uring students are safe, protected and learn what 
they need to succeed in life.  
 
Parents also have unique opportunities to forge the strongest of bonds with their children.  They 
can share their views and values with their children as those students grow.  
 
Schools are for students.  Those students and their stated needs have to be the focus of our 
schools.  In our view, every student matters no matter who they are, and everyone’s primary 
concern should be the health and wellbeing of students.  Every child sh ould feel safe at school 
and be given an opportunity to learn in a welcoming and supportive environment, and school 
counselors and social workers are part of what helps to make that happen, and help young people 
to thrive.  
 
Brief Points of Signatories  
2 
 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org   
Schoo ls are also legally obligated by our state and national nondiscrimination laws to provide a 
safe learning environment in which every student can learn what they need in life and to grow.  
Many students need support from time to time for questions, concerns  or challenges in their 
lives, peer groups, etc. Students talk to teachers, staff, coaches, and social workers and 
counselors who support that young person so they can engage in school.  Those supports, 
including from school counselors and social workers a re part of what helps young people engage 
their “equal educational opportunity” and thrive at school, at home, and in life.  
 
-Mary L. Bonauto, Attorney, GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders (Portland)  
  
As pediatricians, we recognize the importance of forming  a trusting, therapeutic relationship with 
our young patients.  We foster that trust by creating an environment free from judgment or 
discrimination that encourages youth to ask questions about their health, or confide in us about 
challenges they are exper iencing with their peers, family, or society.  Not every child is fortunate 
to grow up in an environment where they feel valued or supported, and unfortunately, many find 
themselves surrounded by rejection, trauma, discrimination, and hostility.  A pediatr ician may 
only see their patients once or twice a year, but school counselors and social workers are 
available to their students on a much more regular basis.  They aim to develop similar 
therapeutic connections with their students, and can serve as that s upportive adult for the child 
who can’t find support & acceptance elsewhere.  Encouraging these support systems can literally 
be life -saving, and should be accessible to every child growing up in Maine.  
 
-Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP, Advocacy Chair, Maine Chapte r, American Academy of Pediatrics  
  
"All students, including transgender students, deserve access to safe and affirming mental health 
care without the fear of being outed. We want families to be involved, and the best way to do 
that is to ensure that young  people are able to get the support they need to have those 
conversations when they are ready. That can't happen if clinicians are required to out kids the 
second they disclose."  
 
-Quinn Gormley, Executive Director, Maine Transgender Network (MaineTransNet)                                                                                  
 
“The well -being of children is important to all of us. Every child, including LGBTQ+ youth, 
needs to be able to learn and thrive in a safe environment while at school, and th e role school 
counselors and school social workers play is vital to helping young people navigate the social 
and emotional challenges they face while at school. The ability for students to build relationships 
with trusted adults, like teachers, coaches, ad ministrators, and school counselors and social 
workers, is one the best ways to empower young people to make informed decisions about their 
own lives, leading to safer and healthier outcomes for all kids. We should all be able to agree on 
the importance of  protecting every child, including their privacy and confidentiality, while at 
school, and this can be accomplished by also respecting the family's wishes.”  
 
- Gia Drew, Executive Director, EqualityMaine  
                 
 
