Maura Murphy
Lewiston
LD 394
It is time for Maine legislators to prove that they are worthy of the stewardship they 
have been vested with by the citizens of Maine. This includes those citizens the law 
deems not old enough to get married, drink alcohol, smoke tobacco, get tattoos and 
piercings, drive, serve in the military or cast a vote. While adults are free to do what 
they wish, those who are considered not old enough to make life and health-altering 
decisions are also supposed to be protected by the law from the harmful actions of 
others towards them, including school personnel. Why would school personnel 
actively try to put up barriers of secrecy between children and parents? The fact that 
enshrining secrecy in law is being attempted at all should be of urgent concern to 
every legislator and Maine parent, regardless of political or ideological orientation. 
Why have our public schools become the giant, stinking loophole where in loco 
parentis adults – self-proclaimed professionals in various aspects of child 
development – are free to secretly usher children into a multi-billion dollar, rapidly 
growing “gender transition” industry, blazed into life and fed by school counselors, 
social workers, non-profit organizations embedded within the Maine Department of 
Education and Maine classrooms, doctors, psychologists, surgeons, the 
pharmaceutical industry, gender clinics, etc.?…
Looking at the long list of actions that are illegal for minors to make should put the 
danger and absurdity of adults facilitating minors’ gender transition into high relief 
for lawmakers, parents and administrators, yet among many in leadership positions in 
the legislature, Maine Department of Education and our local schools, it has not; we 
must ask, why not? Has the 14th Amendment, which protects the fundamental right of
parents to direct the care, upbringing and education of their children disappeared? Can
any lawmaker or government official condone the selective flouting of such an 
explicit and clear Constitutional right? 
The Maine Department of Education and thousands of taxpayer-funded school 
counselors, teachers, principals, superintendents, social workers, as well as nonprofits,
legislators and school boards are not only complicit in this disaster, they are fueling it 
with the bodies, minds and souls of the children they are sworn to protect. Shame on 
them all.
