Michael Costa
Gays Against Groomers
LD 394
Good Afternoon. I am writing on behalf of Gays Against Groomers, a non-profit 
organization that is fighting gender identity being forced into the public school 
curriculum, age-inappropriate classroom material, and surgically removing the 
healthy organs of children. We are submitting this testimony to formally say NO to 
enacting Chapter 117, which would expand the powers of school counselors and 
social workers to hide a child’s trans identity from parents. We believe that 
counselors and social workers have a responsibility to approach this situation, 
according to actual psychosocial data. Public schools claim that socially transitioning 
a child behind their parents' back is the best thing for their mental health. But this is 
not the case. We would like you to consider a new study that just came out this week, 
which surveyed 1,655 parents of children who have recently adopted a cross-sex 
identity. They found that after social transition, children became much worse off, 
showing an increase in psychosocial distress. Their mental health deteriorated 
considerably. Socially transitioning a child at school might actually harm children’s 
mental health.
Experts in The Netherlands now advise against socially transitioning children because
they consistently found that it increases the likelihood of the child seeking 
sterilization. Without social transition, upwards of 80% of these kids grow up to be 
gay or bisexual. Inflicting this pain and distress on a minor is cruel. And this abuse is 
being hidden from parents. It will just lead to more gay people being enslaved to the 
pharmaceutical industry for the rest of their lives. Parents have a right to know what is
happening in the classroom. And they should be allowed to opt-out of the sexual 
material being promoted. Chapter 117 would take that right away from parents and 
force children to keep secrets from them. Not only that, but these socially-transitioned
children would be encouraged and “validated” in their identity. It is a belief that 
requires everyone to participate in...even at school. It is a social & medical process 
that starts at any age now. Jazz Jennings began this process as a child and now suffers
from severe health problems as a young adult.
Affirming a trans identity in a child sounds like a positive thing when taken at surface
level. But in actuality, it tells a child that there is something wrong with them, and it 
will require dangerous drugs and surgeries to fix. Causing confusion in minors is not 
helpful in any way and can only lead to long-term problems. Never in history have so 
many young people been rushed to hormone blockers, chest binders, and double 
mastectomies as they are now. There has never been so many gender-distressed 
children as there have been in very recent years.
Chapter 117 would embolden this insidious form of grooming, parent-child 
separation, and psychological burden. We find it very unfortunate that instead of 
considering the APA-accredited data, your mental health professionals are inevitably 
creating more test-subjects for a medical scandal that is being banned across the 
world. Children are NOT a social experiment. While you usher minors down a 
conveyor belt to lifelong pharmaceutical dependency, we will continue to stand 
against you until the abuse is stopped. This has gone on long enough and we will not 
allow this to be done in our name. Children deserve to grow up into healthy adults and
live their life in ways which make them happy. Policies like this one prevent them 
from ever achieving that. If you truly care about the well-being of your students, you 
will oppose Chapter 117, as well. Thank you.

