Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, my 
name is Rebecca Hinchliffe. I am speaking in opposition to LD 394. 
As a mother, my kids are my kids. This bill seeks to undermine my role as a mother. It gives schools and 
counselors power to decide what is best for my children, regardless of what I believe. Even worse, it allows 
critical information about my own children to be hidden from me. This legislation divides Maine families by 
separating children from their parents. It seeks to usurp the parental role and hand it over to individuals who 
stand to proﬁt from their own professional counsel - which is a blatant conﬂict of interest. 
Prescribing pubeﬂy blockers, chest binders, or hormones to children is a serious matter. A study In the Joumal 
of the American Academy Of Child and Adolescent Psychology (Vol. 52, No.6 June 2013) conﬁrmed that 
gender dysphoria does not persist past puberty in most children. Up to 80% of minors reverted back to their 
biological genders when given more time to sort things out. What will happen to that 80% if they are medicated 
behind their parents backs? The onset of puberty is an important time in a child’s development. Many of us may 
recall that time in our own lives as being awkward or confusing. By enabling counselors to legally medicate and 
treat children without parental involvement, you will be responsible for permanently altering the physiological 
and psychological state of these children. 
The American College of Pediatricians states, “There is not a SINGLE long-term study to demonstrate the 
safety or efficacy of puberty blockers, sex hormones or surgeries for transgender-believing youth.” 
(ht;tps:[[acpeds,org) Why then would you vote to approve legislation that would effectively turn our children 
into Science Experiments? Additionally, studies conﬁrm that puberty blockers can cause depression, suicidal 
thoughts, osteoporosis, seizures, cognitive impairment, and sterility. If a boy later decides against transition, he 
will end up with a permanently stunted penis and compromised sexual function. Sex hormones also put youth -at 
a greater risk of heart attacks, stroke, diabetes, blood clots and cancer. 
Medical organizations around the world have characterized these interventions in children as experimental and 
dangerous. World renowned psychiatrist Dr. Christopher Gillberg has said that pediatric transition is “possibly 
one of the greatest scandals in medical history” and called for “an immediate moratorium on the use of puberty 
blocker drugs because of their unknown long-term effects. ” 
Mutilating and sterilizing youth is a serious crime. Children cannot make properly informed decisions 
considering the severity of medical and psychological risks. You have an opportunity and a responsibility to 
defend and protect our children and to ensure their future success. Please vote to preserve Maine families by 
voting against LD 394. Thank you.
