Good afternoon. I’m Steve Karp. To the Honorable Chairs, Senator 
Rafferty and Representative Brennan and the rest of this of this 
committee, greetings from Waldoboro. 
A. A quote from DOE’s Chapter 117, Section 2, paragraph F: 
“Privileged Communication means A school counselor or school 
social Worker may not be required, except as provided by 20-A 
MRSA §4008(3), to divulge or release information gathered during 
a counseling relation With a client or with the parent” [end quote], 
guardian or a person or agency having legal custody of a minor 
client. A counseling relation and the information resulting from it 
shall be kept confidential consistent with the professional 
obligations of the counselor or social Worker. 20-A MRSA § 4008(2) 
Any society is only as strong as the families Within that society. The 
proposed legislation, LD 394 (Which codifies into law, Chapter 117), 
le galizes deceit in the family, creating distrust Within the family and as 
a r€s*ult, weakening the family. When my children Were younger, asa 
father I know that I Would have Wanted to be included in any and all 
discussions and decisions regarding my children. This bill would 
effectively cut fathers (and mothers) out of the loop. 
We need more parental involvement in our children ’s lives, not less.I 
have a suggestion. Why don’t the members of this committee go back to 
the DOE and Work on a new policy which encourages this? Require all 
school districts in this State to have a Parent - Teacher Association, to 
require periodic and regular Parent — Teacher conferences for each 
individual student and Where applicable, periodic and regular Parent— 
Counselor Conferences, Whether it be with the School Counselor or 
School Social Worker. This \iTﬁ|C1'68.l3(-3 a support team for our children 
with the aforementioned par 16S)‘ 111OSt importantly includé=ag(;£iarents. 
As I said earlier, a society is only as strong as the families Within that 
society. Maine is only as strong as the families in Maine. 
My comments are respectfully submitted. Thank you for your time.
