 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  
 
L.D. 3 94 
 
RESOLVE, REGARDING LEGISLATIVE R EVIEW OF CHAPTER 117: RULE REGARDING  
THE DUTIES OF SCHOOL COUNSELORS AND SCHOOL SOCIAL WORKERS, A  
MAJOR SUBSTANTIVE RULE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee.  I 
am Steven Bailey , executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association , neither for nor against L.D. 3 94. 
 
L.D. 394 provides fo r the approval of major substantive Department of Education rules for new Chapter 117, 
a Rule Chapter that  provides fo r guidance and provisions for social workers and school counselors working in 
our public school s. 
 
School counselors and social workers have been hired and working in Maine’s public schools for decade s. 
School counselors are certified by the Maine Department of Education and social workers are licensed by an 
independent professional licensing boar d. Their individual and professional work  is guided by their respective 
professional organizations.  Each has their own professional standards and ethics they are required to uphold in 
order to keep their certification /license . These descriptions of their respective responsibilities within the  
written proposed rule have not changed and help to provide written notice of what is expected of each of these 
important professionals . 
 
The addition to these professional responsibilities within L .D. 394 is the percentage of time school counselors 
and so cial workers are expected to be working with students during direct and indirect  service s. This 
percentage is to be 80% by statute in 20 -A, §4008. Chapter 117 merely  states what is in the law and what is 
expected of these important professional s. 20-A, §4008, sub -§2 provide s definition  for school counselors and 
social worker s regardin g privileged communicatio n and has been in effect since 198 9. Chapter 117  does not 
deviate fro m this statut e. 
 
MSSA and MSBA are  providin g testimony neither for nor aga inst L .D. 394. These associations are providing 
testimony to support the work of the social workers and school counselors in our schools, and to recognize the 
time requirement for services to be provided to students . 
