Yolonda McBreairty
Maine Source Of Truth
LD 394
Yolonda McBreairty
Hampden, ME
Podcaster and Reporter for Maine Source Of Truth
4/6/23 LD394 - Chapter 117 - Ought NOT to pass
I’m Maine’s foremost expert on the educational horrors inside these indoctrination 
centers known as k-12 public schools.  
I’ve been thinking, as an oppressed, unemployed, white, middle-age, Christian, 
handsome, married, heterosexual man, how can I gain favor from the State of Maine? 
Well, I figured it was time for me to announce that today, 4/6/23, I now identify as a 
100 pound, black, transgender-woman, lesbian, who is vaccinated, in a wheelchair, a 
registered Democrat and sometimes I just identify as a big, hairy, beaver, because I 
am a trans-species.  
I use “it” as my pronoun and since it is on my email signature, it’s gotta be true. 
I wish to have all members of this education committee to refer to me as Yolanda. 
If you don’t, you are transphobic and deadnaming me and as said by the unhinged 
Vicki Wallack of the MSMA, that would be “hate speech.”  
That’s how ridiculous Chapter 117 is for Maine parents and students.  Most of you on 
this committee don’t fully understand the insanity running amok inside these K-12 
Maine schools now.  This is what is happening.  Choose your sexuality as a 5 year 
old.  Demand your pronouns be used.  Act like a furry.  Denounce your parents.
This Chapter 117 policy in Maine, as we’ve seen is already in use, will expand the 
powers of school counselors and social workers to keep transgender and sex-related 
secrets from parents. 
This results in separating children from their parents under the emotional blackmail 
that parents are not “safe” and that they’re “abusive” for not succumbing to 
transgender ideological cult inside our public schools.
These social workers and counselors are sexual predators, deviants, groomers causing 
emotional, mental and physical abuse on students, minors, kids…children.
The normalization of sex, for their own perversions.   
Christopher McLaughlin, the Executive Director for the National Association of 
Social Workers - Maine stated, he will always follow the lead of the youth, that it is 
not ever his role…to OUT that kid to their parents, even if there are safety issues 
present…”
Here is him saying this in his own words:  
https://rumble.com/v1ufpfe-maine-counselor-will-not-share-student-safety-issues-wit
h-parents.html
Safety issues, as if the minor child has considered killing themselves, this person in a 
leadership role, won’t let the parents know the root cause of the real problem.
This same person said, asking questions and being willing to explore things that as 
clinicians we might have felt was a little taboo in the past, especially when working 
with youth…
Again, in his own words!:
https://rumble.com/v21bw9y-taboo-subjects-says-school-board-member-and-social-w
orker.html
Taboo definition is banned on grounds of morality or taste, or banned as constituting a
risk.  
He goes on to say, “Sometimes it is as easy as watching what Hollywood serves us 
when they are depicting a queer youth…and ask ourselves does that match my 
understanding of this community”
Watching Hollywood to determine how to deal with minors in school!?  Seriously!? 
His favorite book that he “loves,” is Gender Queer, a cartoon kiddie porn book!  In 
his own words!:
https://rumble.com/v1q14d6-counselor-pushes-porn-in-public-schools.html
 
He’s also on the Hermon, ME school board and has been paid $20k by Turner and 
Blue Hill School Districts to push his trans-activism grift, because besides being a 
social worker, this is his side hustle.  
That’s your Social Workers in Maine.  Sexually grooming minor children.  
The featured Maine School Counselor Association member at the American School 
Counselors Association Conference, Tara Kierstead, from Hall-Dale Middle School, 
said that it is your job as parents to support your kids at home and it is her job to 
co-parent them and support them in school. 
That it is best practice to call a student whatever they want to be called in school.  
In her own words!:  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oVUd9jLRB7A
Then to keep it a secret from the parents.  
This Same Maine Counselor, Tara Kierstead then stated that you need to be a 
trans-ally and pushes GLSEN, a dark money trans-cult group pushing Gay Sexuality 
Alliances in 4k schools across the country, in 40 states, including most schools in 
Maine.  
These GSA’s are creating bullying in schools like we’ve never seen. 
Kierstead said If a student makes up their narcissistic pronoun and you don’t know as 
a Maine counselor, just go to YouTube and the kids will tell you how to process it.  
Go to YouTube?  Seriously, that’s what’s happening with Maine School Counselors, 
as they sexually groom minor children:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k6xfAMOElMw
Chapter 117 is another beautiful advertisement for homeschooling by the MDOE 
Commissioner, Pender Makin.  Did you know that on your own Maine Department of
Education site, you are not more than 3 clicks away from getting a chest binder sent to
your school, and you can make sure your parents don’t know?  
The MDOE already celebrates trans-activism, with our tax dollars:
https://www.maine.gov/doe/lgbtq/student
You can get to Equality Maine, GLAD, Out Maine, Maine Transnet, supported by our
tax dollars.  
This is another grift, the biggest taxpayer increase in every Maine school budget this 
year will be for the “mental health” of our kids, the problem caused by these very 
schools and these above “nonprofits.”  
Selling taxpayers the dream to fix the nightmare the MDOE, MSMA and MEA have 
all caused. 
But needing dozens of more counselors per school to do so.
Remember, A lie is a lie even if everyone believes it.  The Truth is the Truth, even if 
no one believes it!
Why LD394 is even going to a work session, after the passionate testimony of dozens 
of taxpayers, is mind blowing.  
An overwhelming 86% of written testimony is asking you to reject Chapter 117 and 
abolish it.  
Vote no on LD394, Chapter 117 ought NOT to pass and do it for the kids and parents 
of Maine.  Because each one of you on this committee owes them.

