I» 
A 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
0 I 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
I c 
(207) 287-1400 
-Ronald B_ Russell TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
PO Box 353 
Bucksport, ME 04416 
Cell: (207) 735-4450 . 
Ronald.Russell@legislature.maine.gov 
0 
March 13, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Ron Russell cosponsoring 
LD 791, An Act to Support the Maintenance of Historic Fort George 
‘ 
in Castine 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Good moming, Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. My name is Ron Russell 
and I represent House District 17, the towns of Bucksport, Orland, Penobscot, and my hometown 
,.o,f_Ye_r_ona Island. Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support of LD 791, An Act to 
Support the Maintenance of Historic Fort George in Castine, which I am pleased to 
cosponsor. 
I grew up in Penobscot and when I was 10, we moved to Castine. Fort George was just up the 
street from my house. I studied about Fort George at the Adams School on the town common. 
My ﬁrst “paycheck job” , 
was the summer of 1964 when I tumed 15, and my employer was the 
State of Maine. I worked on the archaeological dig and restoration of the bastion in the southeast 
comer of the fort. The work was hard, but exciting. When I turned 15 in mid-July, I got to work 
on the sifter and found things like pieces of clay pipes, musket balls, interesting metal objects, a 
couple of coins, and a button from a British redcoat solider with the number of his regiment on it. 
We were the talk of the town that summer and everyone was looking forward to the state’s 
interest and ﬁ1tt1re,,§t;p;;9;;tl.of,_§;§ie¢ of Maine’s most historic forts in one of Maine’s most historic 
towns.‘ 
Early in c0untry’s history, Castine was a strategic location situated at the mouth of the 
Penobscot and Bagaduce Rivers. The land was inhabited ﬁrst by Native American tribes, and 
then the Dutch, French, British, and ﬁnally our young American nation. Fort George was built by 
the British in 1779 and played a key role in the Revolutionary War and the War of 1812. It 
played a part in the Penobscot Expedition, which included the largest assembled ﬂeet of 
District 17: Bucksport, Orland, Penobscot and Verona Island
American vessels in the Revolution, and its defeat marked the worst -disaster in American Naval 
history prior to Pearl Harbor. »I
t
-
F 
Fort George is al Maine Historic Site and is owned by the Maine Bureau of Parks and Lands 
(MBPL). It is on‘ the National Registry of Historic Places,and in another twist, it ﬁguresI 
prominently in the history of baseball. It holds a signiﬁcant place in both American and Maine 
history. AI
l
1 
Yet over the years, due to lack of any funding from the state, much of the work that was done in 
the sixties has deteriorated. The general condition of the fort has suffered over time. While its 
plight may not be unique when compared to other Maine Historic Sites, it does have manly 
reasons beyond its signiﬁcant history to ﬁnd funding to preserve Fort George. 
s. 
,. 
Through a granti from the US Department of the Interior and the National Park Service, a 
comprehensive Historic Properties Management Plan (HPMP) was completed in September 
2021. The development of the plan brought many stakeholders together, including the Maine 
Historic Preservation Commission, the Town of Castine, the Castine Historical Society, the 
Wilson Museuni, and the Friends of Castine Fortiﬁcations. The crucial element of shared 
funding is the next ‘step to preserve and protect Fort George’s integrity and archaeological 
resources for generations to come. These stakeholders (Friends of the Fort) are ready to make 
sure that the fort is saved for future generations and that is what makes any investment in Fort 
George a good one, and sets it apart. 
The irony of ﬁrst real employer in 1964 being the State of Maine at the minimum wage of 
$1.15/hour in a job I loved, to now working in job that most likely will be my last, again for the 
State of Maine,1 whichI’ve got to say, I also love, is notlost on me. New wages aside. So for me, 
this gives real symmetry to being here today and testifying on behalf of Fort George in Castine. 
I would be glad to take any questions.'
l
\
l 
l 
District l7_§ Bucksport, Orland, Penobscot and Verona Island
