Nicole Grohoski
Senator, District 7
THE MAINE SENATE
131st Legislature
P.O. Box 1732
Ellsworth, ME 04605
Testimony of Senator Nicole Grohoski 
In Support of LD 791, “An Act to Support the Maintenance of Historic Fort George in Castine”
Before the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
13 March 2023
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker , and members of the Agriculture, Conservation and
Forestry Committee. I am Senator Nicole Grohoski and I represent District 7, the majority of
Hancock County . Thank you for providing me the opportunity to introduce and express my
support for
LD 791: An Act to Support the Maintenance
of Historic Fort George in Castine.
Few Maine towns have a colonial history as decorated as that of Castine. The Town of Castine –
ancestral homeland of the Penobscot people – has been a battleline for four nations because of its
strategic position on Penobscot Bay: the Abenaki, the British, the Dutch and the French. French
colonists settled Castine in 1613, seven years before British colonists settled the Plymouth
Colony .
Fort Geor ge was erected by the British during the Revolutionary War to protect the Crown
Colony of New Ireland, what is now Downeast, Central, and Northern Maine. The Americans
attempted and failed to wrest Fort Geor ge from British grip in the calamitous Penobscot
Expedition (1779). The British abandoned the fort until the War of 1812, when they invaded
Maine and tried again to make New Ireland a reality . When the Treaty of Ghent was signed,
American troops took char ge of Fort Geor ge and used it from 1815 to 1819.
The Fort consisted of earthen ramparts, ditches, and projecting bastions in each corner . I’ve
included a few images from the Fort Geor ge Historic Properties Management Plan that was
completed in 2021 with funding from the Department of the Interior (National Park Service) and
the Maine Historic Preservation Commission. If you are interested in learning more about the
design and history of Fort Geor ge, I am happy to share this comprehensive document with you!
3 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333
State House (207) 287-1515 * Fax (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711
Nicole.Grohoski@legislature.maine.gov
* legislature.maine.gov/senate


The State of Maine formally acquired Fort Geor ge in 1940 and invested in the refurbishment of
the fort’ s magazine in 1960. Since 1981, the management and maintenance of Fort Geor ge have
been governed by a contract between the State and Town of Castine. Basic upkeep – like lawn
mowing and keeping the ramparts clear of saplings – has been ongoing, but the lack of greater
maintenance investments by either party has unfortunately resulted in much of the fort falling
into disrepair . A great deal of it is unsafe. As a result, no one wants to promote what could be a
crown jewel of America’ s early history .
You’ll note that this bill asks for an appropriation of $1 million dollars, which would restore Fort
Geor ge and help with interpretation and promotion of the site. This number is an estimate, based
on the 2021 Management Plan. Castine is a resourceful community of 1,320 people, but the
financial burden of properly managing this fort (along with others in the town) is too great. I
have brought this bill before you because the Fort is a part of our greater history which should be
preserved, and it is also owned by the State.
As I mentioned, the State and Town have been in a renewing agreement for over 40 years now ,
which both parties agree is outdated. I am pleased to report that since introducing this bill, staf f
from the Bureau of Parks and Lands and the Town of Castine have been meeting to discuss a
new way forward, joined by regional legislators and members of the Castine Historical Society .
Through these meetings, we have learned that there are around 20 historic sites that are owned
by the State (see map below), many of which are also in disrepair and unsafe. Two years ago, the
Legislature authorized $50 million in American Rescue Plan funds to rehabilitate our State
Parks; however , this money is not available to State Historic Sites. The Maine Historic
Preservation Commission is able to provide some resources to these sites, but their funding is
limited compared to the need.
As I have learned more about these important sites all around our state, I have become convinced
that it is not enough to champion the restoration of Fort Geor ge – we should allocate funds to
improve all of our historic sites that are in need. It is incumbent upon us to learn about and
preserve these important pieces of American history . Furthermore, I think there would be a great
economic development benefit if these sites were restored and interpreted for visitors. This is
especially true for Fort Geor ge, seeing as Castine is home to Maine Maritime Academy , which
provides a nice connection between the past and present.
I look forward to continuing the conversation about preserving Fort Geor ge and other State
Historic Sites with both the Bureau of Parks and Lands and this Committee. Thank you for your
attention and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.

