Janet T‘ Mills Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
Governor 1%,: _ Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
<1 ll State House Station =1! ll 
220 Capitol Street 
éeanne . Lambrew, Ph.D. Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 
°'“"“”‘°““ ‘"7 Tel; (207) 2s7-3771; Toll Free: (sss) 664-9491 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay); Fax (207) zs7-1093 
Testimony of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Neither For Nor Against LD 982 
An Act to Allow the Disclosure of Death Certificate Data to Hospitals and Health Care Practitioners 
Sponsored by: Senator Joseph Baldacci 
Hearing Date: Wednesday, March 22, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, my name is Kim Haggan and I am the State Registrar at Maine CDC’s Data, Research, 
and Vital Statistics ofﬁce. I am here today to provide testimony on behalf of the Maine Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention and will be speaking neither for nor against LD 982, An Act to Allow the Disclosure 
of Death Certificate Data to Hospitals and Health Care Practitioners. 
LD 982 requires the Department to provide death certiﬁcate data, upon request, to a hospital or health 
care practitioner. While Maine CDC had signiﬁcant concerns related to the bill as drafted, we appreciate 
the willingness of Hospitals to come to the table and, we believe, identify a solution that addresses our 
concems and meets their needs. 
There are legal and regulatory restrictions as to who, when, and how vital records data are disclosed in 
the State of Maine. Current law provides Maine CDC - Data, Research, and Vital Statistics (DRVS) some 
discretion when in receipt of a request for vital record data; however, the broad language of this bill as 
drafted would remove this discretion. 
Given our concerns and our statutory responsibility to be good stewards of this conﬁdential information, 
we propose that this bill be amended to direct the Department to draft rules for the disclosure of this data, 
with discretion, an application process, and a disclosure agreement, as well as the ability of DHHS to 
deny or limit the scope of a request. We have discussed this with stakeholders and understand that they 
are amenable to this amendment. 
DRVS recognizes that these death data will be helpful in purging patient records and updating provider 
ﬁles; however, there should be an opportunity for Department to limit the data items shared to a minimal 
amount necessary and/or to deny a request. Existing laws and Department protocols are in place to protect 
the conﬁdentiality and direct record disclosure. 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. The Maine CDC is available to provide additional details 
for the Committee ’s consideration.
