Testimony Sarah Calder, MaineHealth
In Support of LD 982, “An Act to Allow the Disclosure of 
Death Certificate Data to Hospitals and Health Care 
Practitioners”
Wednesday, March 22, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Sarah 
Calder, Senior Government Affairs Director at MaineHealth, and I am 
here to support LD 982, “An Act to Allow the Disclosure of Death 
Certificate Data to Hospitals and Health Care Practitioners.” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to communities throughout Maine and 
New Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support 
our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest 
in America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty 
physician services to a continuum of behavioral health care services, 
community and tertiary hospital care, home health care and a lab.
As part of our commitment to patient safety, MaineHealth has undertaken 
a Zero Suicide platform for our system, which is a national quality-
improvement suicide prevention model. This program is driven by the 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration and the Joint 
Commission.  
The Zero Suicide program is comprised of seven elements and each 
element involves quality improvement strategies to improve suicide care 
and reduce deaths. One of the elements is ensuring a health system has 
adequate data around suicide deaths involving their patients. Knowing this 
number allows the system to calculate their baseline rate so that when 
every quality improvement strategy is implemented, the system can know 
if the rate has improved and the strategy has been effective. 
Unfortunately, we have not been able to access the death certificates of 
our patients who have died by suicide, and we have to rely on what 
families or outside sources inform us of, which is often incomplete. LD 
982 would provide that access, and I urge your support. 
Thank you for your time and consideration and I would be happy to 
answer any questions you may have. 
