55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.orgBOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director  
  
 
 Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing, 
 
My name is Devon Stockmayer, I am the Advocacy Supervisor at Preble Street. I 
would like to encourage you to support LD 1867: An Act to Establish the Community 
Housing and Rural Development Authority.  
 
It is no secret that the state of Maine, as a microcosm of the nation, is facing a housing 
crisis right now. With sky rocketing rental and market prices, wage stagnation, and 
significant inflation, we face a dual challenge: there is not enough housing to go 
around, and many people cannot afford the housing that is available. In response to 
this crisis, LD 1867 will create a fund to establish permanently affordable, public 
community housing sites across Maine.   
 
In an increasingly expensive and unstable economic climate, the “permanently 
affordable” nature of community housing in LD 1867 will provide critical security to 
individuals and families who are constantly teetering on the edge of instability due to 
factors out of their control. For individuals attempting to exit homelessness, affordable 
low-income housing opportunities are few and far between in the present market. The 
concept of mixed-income community-owned housing proposed in this bill offers an 
option tailored to the needs of each tenant. Individuals and families who are 
frequently priced out of markets could find a home here.   
 
The concept of mixed income developments proposed in this bill should become a 
model for new housing throughout the state. Some of the most vibrant aspects of 
community can be found at the intersection of our differences, and this ought to be 
reflected in the socioeconomic distribution and physical layout of new developments.   
Perhaps more importantly, this is a scalable model that can be replicated across the 
state. Having affordable, accessible housing options throughout Maine —from 
populous cities to rural towns —is the only way to comprehensively address the 
growing housing crisis.   
 
Like food access, secure housing is essential to long-term stability. LD 1867 will give 
low-income people and individuals from all walks of life the opportunity to exist in 
community together without the constant worry of losing their homes. Beginning with 
the individual or family and rippling outwards to communities, the state of Maine will 
be made stronger by this investment in a community housing model.  
 
Sincerely,  
Devon Stockmaye r
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to 
homelessness and hunger
 
