HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES .1. VV 
gr r. »- 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Grayson Lookner TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
P.O. Box 8264 
Portland, ME, 04104 
Phone: (207) 200-3860 
Graysog,Lookner@lggisla§1re.m§ine. gov 
May 19, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Grayson Lookner introducing 
LD 1867, An Act to Establish the Community Housing and Rural 
Development Authority 
Before the Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Good morning Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and honorable colleagues on the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing. My name is Grayson Lookner, and I represent House District 113 which 
includes part of Portland. I’m here today to present LD 1867 , An Act to Establish the 
Community Housing and Rural Development Authority. 
What does it mean that we are living in a housing crisis? For many of the people hardest hit by 
the lack of affordable, accessible, safe, and stable housing, it means that their circumstances 
dictate that they cannot get their voices heard in our state’s goveming process. Dealing with the 
day-to-day realities of having instability in one’s living situation can make things such as 
showing up to testify at a public hearing seem distant and superﬂuous. Survival needs take 
precedence. This is not only for people with low or no incomes. Increasingly, as we all have 
heard frequently this session - housing instability is affecting people making moderate and even 
slightly above median incomes as Well. I know this from experience. 
For a number of years in the 2010s, I bounced from living situation to living situation, trying to 
ﬁnd a balance of being able to afford my rent while earning wages I brought in While Working 
with homeless youth and as an Emergency Medical Technician. For me during this time,I 
wanted to ﬁnd meaning in Work that I felt served my community. I found great value in these 
experiences, but unfortunately I could not make it Work materially. 
District ll3: Part of Portland
In the course of a few years I had very similar experiences at different places where I rented. The 
buildings went up for sale, and the new owners wanted to do renovations with the intention of 
increasing the rent, or of tuming the units into Short Term Rentals. I was forced to move. It 
seemed to be a trend that followed me wherever I went. It was that experience that led me to get 
involved in local and state housing policy, and that experience was the inspiration for this bill 
that I am presenting today. 
We all want to ensure everyone in the state of Maine has adequate shelter, and there are many 
ways of getting us closer to that goal. Since the crisis that we ﬁnd ourselves in is so multi-faceted 
and complex, we need to be using every tool at our disposal as we approach it. The Community 
Housing and Rural Development Authority (“the Authority ”) that I am proposing in this bill 
would be one such tool, one that doesn’t compete with other methods of creating affordable 
housing, such as the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC). 
“Simple, fast, and scalable, ” are not Words that we are used to hearing in this committee when 
talking about approaches to housing, but those are the words that the Housing Opportunities 
Commission of Montgomery County, Maryland (HOCMC) used in describing their recently 
created Housing Production Fund during their presentation to this committee in March. This bill 
is modeled off of what HOCMC has been doing for decades, and what some municipalities and 
states are in the process of implementing today. It is a model that has worked around the world 
for generations, in urban and rural settings. Mixed-income, permanently affordable, publicly 
financed, and resident controlled Community Housing. 
The premise is simple - developments are funded using low interest bonds that the Authority 
issues. This process is described in Subchapter 3 of the bill. The authority buys land or buildings 
that need to be renovated, and completes the construction. The legislature can also transfer 
suitable state land or properties to the Authority for development if it votes to do so. 
Construction costs are overall lower than projects funded with private equity, because there is no 
need for the Authority - which is also ﬁnancing the development - to make money from the 
construction. Construction costs for these projects would be between 10 and 20% less than 
construction that uses private equity. Units in the building are set at affordable rates for a variety 
of incomes, from low-to-no-income, to middle-to-high income. Income ranges from 0% to 120% 
District 113: Part of Portland
of Area Median Income (AMI) as described in Subchapter 1 of the bill would be eligible to live 
in the developments. 
This mix of incomes is a critical missing factor in our current milieu of affordable housing in 
Maine. T 00 often, developments are segregated by income, leading to a lack of overall cohesion 
in the social fabric of our cities and towns. The Authority could also create housing for the 
storied “missing middle” of income-earners, as this is not a type of housing that is usually funded 
by either tax credit deals or by market-rate development. People in this range of incomes perfonn 
vital roles in our communities, such as teachers, ﬁreﬁghters, social workers, and EMTs. They 
deserve to be able to afford to live in the communities where they serve. 
The rents of the units are set at 30% of what a resident earns, so that even income-earners in the 
upper brackets are paying less than market rate rent. This means that the mix of incomes ina 
given development can be calibrated so that a percentage of units are “cross-subsidized, ” so units 
are available for people making 0% to 50% AMI. For these groups of tenants, housing choice 
vouchers and other sources of subsidies can be utilized, but are not necessary for the 
development to work. Community housing could provide a crucial source of housing for both 
people who receive vouchers but cannot ﬁnd a place to rent, and for people on the long and 
ever-expanding wait list for a section 8 voucher. 
Since the Authority only needs to generate enough revenue from the developments to cover 
upkeep costs and to pay down its debt obligations, it can charge substantially less than market 
rate for high-quality buildings. Once the debt obligations are paid off on the bonds, it can use the 
additional revenue it is bringing in to create more housing. This is the main purpose of the 
Authority. 
The buildings created by the Authority will be governed by a board of residents that is elected by 
the residents of each building, who will oversee the day-to-day operations of the developments. 
They will be responsible for maintaining the buildings, mediating resident conﬂict, and 
providing for other community needs like organizing childcare and social events. The residents 
of the developments will also be able to elect the board of directors of the entire Authority, which 
will be comprised of residents of the developments themselves. The appointments and elections 
of the governance boards are detailed in subsections 5173 through 5182, and in subsections 5191 
and 5192 of the bill. 
District 113: Part of Portland
In addition to being a direct way of providing stability for residents of the developments, this isa 
model of housing that is designed to be a “production solution ” that will have the effect of 
reducing market pressures on housing costs all over the state on the private market. Other 
tangential beneﬁts of Community Housing will be that it will assist the state in meeting its 
climate goals, by creating buildings constructed to high environmental standards. It will create 
walkable neighborhoods where use of public and active transportation can be encouraged. Other 
economic development will spur from these buildings, such as retail stores and other services. 
In our system of govermnent, it is hard to plan too far into the future, seeing as most of us in this 
legislature will be serving a maximum of four consecutive two-year terms. That doesn’t mean we 
shouldn’t try to look down the road at another beneﬁt of this type of community housing — it will 
remain affordable in perpetuity. It is not a coincidence that we fmd ourselves in a housing crisis 
today when looking at the housing policies that were implemented federally 40 years ago. Low 
Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) developments often only stay in affordability for l5 -45 
years. Federal public housing has been left to die a slow death by a thousand cuts since the 
1980s. A generation after these policies were implemented, we ﬁnd ourselves here today. 
This brings me to my next point, that this “ain’t your grandpa’s public housing. ” While the 
housing built and maintained by the Authority will remain in public ownership in perpetuity, this 
program avoids many of the pitfalls that undermined public housing nationally, such as income 
and racial segregation, systematic underfunding of proj ects, and lack of democratic govemance. 
This is a model that has worked wonderfully in many countries around the world, and could 
work here just as well. It is worth noting that our state spends over $200 million a year on 
Corrections, and in the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, the lack of safe and 
affordable housing for people is often cited by Corrections and members of Law Enforcement as 
reasons for why people end up involved in the Justice system. We could be saving our State 
signiﬁcant money by providing this type of housing, which will relieve pressure on state 
corrections, county jails, and municipal law enforcement agencies. 
This program can create housing in rural areas as well, since the main difference between how 
this program operates, and how private and non-proﬁt developers operate, is through the 
fmancing. Capital generated by bonding will come at a much lower interest rate than capital ﬁ'om 
private equity sources. Anywhere that a private developer can put together deals to build 
District 113: Part of Portland
housing, so will the Community Housing and Rural Development Authority. 
The Authority could be a stand alone entity, or it could also work just as well within an existing 
state entity, such as the Redevelopment Land Bank that was established last session. You may 
have noticed that the version of this bill before you has indeed created this program within the 
Land Bank, and that I have distributed an amendment removing the land bank from the bill and 
making this Authority a stand-alone entity. I did this after discussing this bill with folks who are 
involved in the creation of the Land Bank who initially expressed great interest in being able to 
create and manage this type of housing. The Land Bank is only just now appointing its board of 
directors and getting started. At this juncture, the Land Bank is unable to take on this kind of 
development responsibility. In the near future, I still think this would be a good match for the 
Land Bank, and whether this committee decides to create a stand alone entity or create it within 
an existing state entity can be a matter we discuss in our deliberations at the work session. I am 
open to suggestions. 
The Maine we all know and love is one made up of tight-knit communities, where we care for 
our neighbors and want to see them all in safe and stable homes. That is the Maine I grew up in, 
and the one I want to see preserved for generations into the future. Establishing the Community 
Housing and Rural Development Authority will provide one vital tool that does not currently 
exist in our State. Permanently affordable, mixed income, vibrant, livable, resident controlled 
community housing can be a reality in Maine. 
Thank you all for listening to my testimony, and I look forward to working with this committee 
to pass this legislation. 
District 113: Part of Portland
