ST A T E  O F  MA I N E
  
GO V E R N O R ’S OF F I C E  O F  PO L I C Y  IN N O V A T I O N  A N D  T H E  FU T U R E  
1 81  ST A T E  HO U S E  ST A T I O N  
AU G U S T A , MA I N E  
0 4333 -0 181  
 
MEMORANDUM  
 
TO:   Joint Select Committee on Housing  
FROM:   Governor’s Office of Policy Innovation and the Future  (GOPIF)  
DATE:  Friday, May 19, 2023  
RE:  Information for L.D. 1867 – An Act to Establish the Community Housing and       
                        Rural Development Authority  
 
 
For your deliberations on L.D. 1867, An Act to Establish the Community Housing and Rural  
Development Authority , GOPIF would like to offer this letter. L.D. 1867 seeks to establish a  
publicly developed and owned model for housing.  Furthermore, the proposal tasks the appointed board 
with property management . As previously mentioned during the  committee’s work, curren t federal 
policy favors tax credits and partnerships with the private sector to construct low -to-moderate income 
housing in the United States.1 As part of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, the U.S. Congress created  the 
Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) which is the single largest investment in th e construction  of 
affordable housing in the country.2 LIHTC, as you know, is a partnership with private  developers for 
the purpose of constructing affordable housing. Housing construction being intertwined with the 
private sector dates back many decades. As a result, state housing policy, for the most part, reflects the 
available federal resources to maximi ze the state’s investment.  
 
1 https://yonahfreemark.com/wp -content/uploads/2019/08/Chapter -14.pdf   
2 https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datas ets/lihtc.html   
 

While state programs typically seek to maximize federal resources, it is difficult to meet the requisite 
affordability for families earning 30% of AMI or below  and that is a critical need in Maine . L.D. 1867 
contemplates a potent ial model for helping house such families , who are  earning what the bill 
describes as “very low incomes ”. We appreciate the opportunity to consider this complet ely new 
approach t o creating housing but  believe that the concept could  benefit from more robust discussion 
during committee meetings to take pla ce between this session and the next one . Montgomery County, 
Maryland has been mentioned during previous committee discussions. Perhaps, it would be prudent to 
invite officials from their Housing Opportunities Commission (HOC) which is charged with carrying 
out a similar mission to the one described by L.D. 1867. There  might be additional exam ples across the 
country. In addition, it’s important to consider how th e mission described in L.D. 1867 overlaps and 
differs from the work being undertaken by public housing agencies in cities  and towns  like Portland, 
Augusta, and Bangor . 
 
Finally, it woul d be important to consider the costs associated with creating this new entity. L.D. 1867 
does not allocate any financial resources to the Community Housing and Rural Development 
Authority. For this proposal to be successful, there  would need to be professi onal staff overseeing day -
to-day operations, legal professionals, and either in -house or contracted services for property 
managements such as maintenance and general upkeep. These costs should be weighed against our 
existing programs with proven track  records and the opportunities these programs provide to  draw 
down federal resources. Being able to maximize the state’s investment by correlating programs to 
federal funds results in more housing for Mainers.  
 
Should you have any  questions, Greg Payne, Senior Adv isor on Housing Policy, w ould be happy to 
answer them. Thank you for your consideration of this letter . 
 
 
