               5/19/2023  
               1 | P a g e    
* Please consider the environment before printing this message . 
 To: Maine Legislature Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business  Committee  
From:  Tony Donovan, Resident City of Portland  
Date:   May 19, 2023  
Re: LD 1867 An Act to Establish the Community Housing and Rural Development 
Authority  
 
Senator  Curry , Representative Roberts,  Esteemed Members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business  Committee  
 
My name is Tony Donovan, I am a Portland resident and Realtor, practicing  in Maine for over 40 
years .  I am here to speak in support of LD 1867 as a needed Act of this legislature  to begin to 
address  the serious issue of lack of afforda ble and accessible housing.  
 
My own children, born and raised in Maine as their ancestors have been for generations, cannot 
afford to buy a home .  They are young adults with professional careers  wanting to live in Maine 
and raise children. They are not able to.  One daughter moved away  seeking better opportunities . 
 
I speak of professionals with g ood incomes.  If these young people  cannot find affordable  
housing, what can we expect of the more vulnerable in our population?  Maine residents  and 
newcomers  who have talents needed for our economy and social fabric .  The situation  is real and 
it is dire.  
 
The need for housing is truly universal – no matter who we are, where we’re from or how much 
money we have , we all need a safe, stable place to live.   From Fort Kent to Lubec to Kittery,  Maine 
is in a housing crisis.   
 
The solution to this crisis won’t come from just one place – it requires a combination of actions we 
take now to ensure everyone has a stable home, and planning for a future where there is enough 
housing for everyone, no matter what  their income.  
 
We need a toolkit, so we can employ the right tactics when they’re needed.  
 
LD 1867 is a vital tool in the state too lkit, along with renter protections and making it easier to 
build new housing. Why? because it serves people in income brackets that our market -based 
housing system doesn’t serve. This includes many teachers, firefighters, librarians, and nurses, 
(people w hose incomes are 60 -120% of the Area Median Income) who find themselves priced out 
of their home communities.  
 
 Please Vote LD 1867 Ought to Pass.  Support Maine and support Maine people  
 
Thank  you,  
Tony Donovan  
Portland  
 
Tony Donovan
Portland
LD 1867
To:Maine Legislature Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business Committee
From:Tony Donovan, Resident City of Portland
Date: May 19, 2023
Re:LD 1867 An Act to Establish the Community Housing and Rural Development 
Authority
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, Esteemed Members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business Committee
My name is Tony Donovan, I am a Portland resident and Realtor, practicing in Maine 
for over 40 years.  I am here to speak in support of LD 1867 as a needed Act of this 
legislature to begin to address the serious issue of lack of affordable and accessible 
housing.
My own children, born and raised in Maine as their ancestors have been for 
generations, cannot afford to buy a home.  They are young adults with professional 
careers wanting to live in Maine and raise children. They are not able to.  One 
daughter moved away seeking better opportunities.
I speak of professionals with good incomes.  If these young people cannot find 
affordable housing, what can we expect of the more vulnerable in our population?  
Maine residents and newcomers who have talents needed for our economy and social 
fabric.  The situation is real and it is dire.
The need for housing is truly universal – no matter who we are, where we’re from or 
how much money we have, we all need a safe, stable place to live.   From Fort Kent 
to Lubec to Kittery, Maine is in a housing crisis. 
The solution to this crisis won’t come from just one place – it requires a combination 
of actions we take now to ensure everyone has a stable home, and planning for a 
future where there is enough housing for everyone, no matter what their income.
We need a toolkit, so we can employ the right tactics when they’re needed.
LD 1867 is a vital tool in the state toolkit, along with renter protections and making it 
easier to build new housing. Why? because it serves people in income brackets that 
our market-based housing system doesn’t serve. This includes many teachers, 
firefighters, librarians, and nurses, (people whose incomes are 60-120% of the Area 
Median Income) who find themselves priced out of their home communities.
 Please Vote LD 1867 Ought to Pass.  Support Maine and support Maine people
Thank you, 
Tony Donovan
Portland
