 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Good Morning.  My name is Angela Cannon and for the last 15 years I have been 
an Assistant District Attorney at the District Attorney’s Office in Cumberland County.  
Since 2019, I have been the Team Leader of the Domestic Violence Unit and have 
predominantly pr osecuted domestic violence cases, both at the felony and misdemeanor 
level.  
When I went to law school in 2004, my goal was to become a prosecutor.  During 
my third year of law school, I worked as in intern at the Cumberland County District 
Attorney’s Offic e and began my career with the office when I graduated from law school 
and passed the bar exam.  I loved it. Since becoming a prosecutor, I have often said that if 
I could not be a prosecutor, I don’t know what else I would do.  However, increasingly I 
find myself trying to answer the question what other career would I want to do as the one 
I love has started to eat away at my happiness and mental wellbeing.  
Fifteen year ago when I began as a prosecutor, it was not an easy career to break into.  
Jobs as pro secutors were scarce – there was not a high level of turnover in the world of 
prosecution.  However, in the years since the COVID -19 pandemic struck several 
attorneys have left the world of prosecution moving to the private sector, for other legal 
OFFICE OF THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY  
CUMBERLAND COUNTY  
142 Federal Street, Portland, Maine 04101  
101 New Meadows Road, West Bath, Maine 04530  
 Jacqueline A. Sartoris  
District Attorney  
 Portland  
(207) 871 -8384  
Bath  
(207) 443 -5104  
opportun ities, or leaving the practice of law all together.  This is not a situation unique to 
Cumberland County.   
Since COVID -19 hit, the work of the criminal justice system has changed 
dramatically.  Everyone is familiar with the backlog the COVID -19 pandemic c reated in 
the court system.  This has a direct impact on the job of prosecutors. In the last few years, 
the court in Cumberland has added an additional 14 court lists per month to the schedule.  
Twelve of these lists are plea lists – court dates for people  to appear to resolve their 
pending criminal matter.  Two of these lists are added court dates for the mental health 
docket.  And this number does not include the court dates and schedule of trials or motion 
hearings.  Each of these lists requires a prosec utor to be court to handle the court matters.  
Sometimes, more than one prosecutor needs to handle matters on the list.  Each case on 
these lists need to be reviewed and prepared by a prosecutor.  This is a great increase to 
the workload of prosecutors.  
The judiciary and defense bar has said that prosecution controls its own workload 
and thus, the workload of the court and the defense bar.  I have to disagree.  The crime 
rate controls the workload for the prosecution, court, and defense bar.  Prosecutors ta ke 
an oath to uphold and enforce the laws of the State of Maine.  What elected district 
attorneys and prosecutors have been repeatedly asked to do over the last few years is to 
ignore the laws and those who are violating it.  To do so is actually a violati on of the oath 
we take when we become prosecutors.  
  District Attorneys and prosecutors statewide have taken measures to decrease th e 
backlog of the courts.  In 202 1, in Cumberland County, approximately 1,000 criminal 
cases were dismissed by the district a ttorney’s office.  Additionally, prosecutors apply a 
stricter review of cases when deciding to bring forth criminal complaints.  Also, more 
cases are being diverted away from the criminal justice system with the use of restorative 
justice.  However, even t hose cases going through the restorative justice process requires 
a prosecutor to review the case and oversee it through the process.  Overall, the number 
of criminal complaints being filed with the court are less today than the number filed 
before the COV ID-19 pandemic.  
The pandemic is not the only factor changing the face of prosecution.  Criminal 
cases are more complex today than they were 15 years ago.  The majority of police 
departments now use body cameras for their officers and cameras in police cruisers 
creating ho urs of videos that needs to be reviewed.  Digital evidence has greatly 
increased given that just about every person owns a cell phone.  More and more people 
have home cameras, doorbell cameras, as well as stores having surveillance systems – all 
of which c reates evidence that needs to be watched and reviewed when deciding to 
charge a criminal case.  
 Prosecutors are carrying caseloads far above the recommended levels stated by 
the American Bar Association and has led many prosecutors to questions if they a re even 
able to meet their ethical obligations. The workload is simply crushing.  
When the Maine Prosecutor’s Association asked me to prepare remarks for you, I said 
yes, but then immediately wondered when I would be able to do so.  As I sit my couch at 
1 AM writing this, I realize this only time I have to do so.  I find myself working at 1 AM 
for the third night in the row, not preparing for a trial or writing a brief for the law court, 
both of which usually requires extra work hours, but simply to keep up  with my everyday 
caseload.   It is now common that after working a full work day,  and once my eight and 
nine year old sons are tucked into bed, I pull out my work laptop and settle in to work 
into the early morning hours just so I can hope to keep my hea d above water.   This 
workload, this pace – it is simply not sustainable.  So I find myself asking again, what 
other career could I be happy with besides prosecution?  I know I am not alone in these 
thoughts.  These are the same thoughts of prosecutors sta tewide.  
 
