1 
  
DEPUTY DISTRICT ATTORNEY  
JUSTINA A. MCGETTIGAN  
 
VICTIM/WITNESS ADVOCATES:  
PAMELA A. ROBERTS, Director  
DOREEN STAPLES    
RACHEL SHERMAN  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KATHRYN LOFTUS SLATTERY  
DISTRICT ATTORNEY  
YORK COUNTY COURTHOUSE  
 45 KENNEBUNK ROAD  
ALFRED, MAINE   04002  
TEL: (207) 324 -8001  
FAX: (207) 490 -6990           ASSISTANT DISTRICT ATTORNEYS  
   TANYA PIERSON  
   LINDA HOLDSWORTH DONOVAN  
   JOHN W. CONNELLY  
   THADDEUS W. WEST  
   LAUREN K. DALEY  
   ANNE MARIE PAZAR  
   SHIELA E. NEVELLS  
   ANDREW E. BERGGREN    
   MARK SQUI RES 
   KRISTEN DOIRON  
   MATTHEW RICHWALDER  
   TAYLOR SAMPSON  
    LAURENCE ADAMS  
    STEPHANIE KNIGHT  
    ASHLEY JORDAN  
 
My name is Justina McGettigan and I serve as the deputy district attorney for District 1 (York County).  
I have worked as an attorney at the district attorney’s office since October of 1991. I have worked in both the 
district and superior court.  
Right now, my office in Alfred where our superior court is located but I have worked in every court in 
York County during my career. My caseload  includes all felony and domestic violence cases investigated by the 
York County Sheriff’s Office, as well as any crimes investigated by the York County jail, the fire marshal’s 
office, the warden service, the department of motor vehicles, and the labor de partment.  I also litigate any active 
probation violation case filed in York County. That caseload is about 530 cases split between probation matters 
and new cases.  
I am in court either in person or virtually every day of the week.  I am often double book ed for court 
appearances. On Mondays, Wednesdays and Friday mornings I am reading district court prisoner arrest reports 
and approving complaints to be filed with the court by a 10:30 deadline while I am simultaneously in court in 
Alfred handling felony ar raignments, dispositional conferences, sentencings, motions to amend bail, and first 
appearances for probation matters.  
On Tuesday mornings, I handle conferences on open probation revocation matters. These conferences 
are scheduled with the judge, defense  counsel, and the probation officer and we discuss how to help the 

2 
 probationer meet his or her probation obligations. Sometimes the probationer has a new criminal charge, 
sometimes they are not engaging in their required counseling, or are struggling with mental health issues. We 
work cooperatively to try to reach a reasonable resolution.  Sometimes we can, if not we proceed to a court 
hearing. Tuesday afternoon I appear for a docket call and every hour cases are scheduled to either plea, or to be 
set for j ury selection. Meanwhile there is a simultaneous mental health docket held one Tuesday a month and 
scheduled at the same time as the docket call. It is not unusual to be required to be at both court proceedings.  
Wednesday afternoon and all day Thursday I am scheduled for conferences with the court and defense 
counsel to discuss open cases and direct those cases to either a plea, a motion hearing (to address a 
constitutional challenge raised by defense) or docket call for a potential jury selection.  Friday  morning the 
court schedules us for treatment court, pleas, arraignments in the morning and the afternoons are set aside for 
complicated pleas or motions to suppress.  
I also share duties with other ADAs in the office for “on call” weeks. For an “on call” w eek, the attorney 
must be available to answer questions from any department that wants advice after hours. That could include 
reviewing arrest warrants, consulting about court orders, reviewing search warrants and the like.  We are not 
paid overtime for th is work; it is just part of our duties as an attorney for the state.  
As you can see, I am in court all the time.  When do I prepare my cases you might be wondering?  Well, 
that is what nights and weekends are for!  I must follow the deadlines provided by t he court to screen domestic 
violence cases on a priority basis, and meet the summons dates for the felony matters.  
“Screening cases” has changed dramatically since I started working back in 1991.  Then , I would have 
been provided with a several page polic e report to read that might include a written witness/victim statement.  
Now , screening means reading a police report from every officer involved in the case and viewing their body 
cam footage that can be hours long. This footage includes interviews with w itnesses and victims and interviews 
of the suspect. Viewing this information one must ensure that the video matches the written summaries. I then 
read the statute to make sure that the conduct alleged includes all elements of the crime so I know the conduc t 
3 
 can be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.  If it cannot be proven, I need to decide if there is more investigation 
needed and what that investigation should entail. If there is enough evidence, I look at it to find out if there is 
anything about the infor mation provided that is inculpatory or exculpatory concerning the defendant. I consider 
the defendant’s history and the victim’s situation when planning what charge to bring and what sentence to 
recommend to defense and the court. I seek victim input. I al so look to see why the crime was committed and 
can the defendant be rehabilitated with a deferred disposition or a probated sentence.  
As part of our case screening process , I attend child interviews conducted by the Child Advocacy 
Center. The forensic inte rviewers question alleged child victims about crime involving physical or sexual abuse. 
I attend those interviews (or view the tape after) as part of the screening process for crimes involving child 
victims. These interviews often take many hours to comple te. 
I am also spending time writing sentencing memoranda to present to the court. The court routinely 
requests in felony cases a memorandum outlining a sentencing recommendation with supporting case law. One 
recent weekend I found myself writing two such m emoranda: one for a manslaughter case in which the 
Defendant killed a little girl by driving tired, and the second for a robbery case where a 19 -year-old man broke 
into a young man’s home and beat him with a baseball bat while two accomplices stood by one armed with an 
AK-47 and another with a semi -automatic pistol.  
The court expects us to “know” our cases. So if, for example, I have six motions to amend bail on 
domestic violence cases (defendants wanting to change the bail or conditions that have been impo sed upon them 
as a condition of their release) scheduled among my morning cases -- the court will want to know the basic facts 
of the case, what the victim’s position is regarding the motion, the defendant’s history, and the ODARA score.  
There is no one si ze fits all for this colloquy and the court expects us to differentiate among our cases. These 
motions will only be some of the cases on my docket. Whatever the case is before the court, the judge expects a 
prosecutor to provide a fair, cogent and detailed  analysis of the case and its procedural posture.  
4 
 Preparing for trial is another matter entirely. Trials can involve expert testimony that requires extra study 
in a particular area of science – DNA, for example. Trials take longer than they did when I sta rted. Before the 
Unified Criminal Docket, a trial in the district court on a misdemeanor would take an hour or two.  A similar 
case now will often take several days of trial time in the superior court. As part of my trial preparation, I meet 
with witnesses  either in person or by phone. Often fragile victims need the confusing court processed explained.  
Speaking of victims, I do not just meet with victims when preparing for trial. I am often scheduled for 
meetings with our domestic violence victims and our f elony victims. I update families of manslaughter victims 
as the cases wend through the court system. I also meet with victims of fraud, robbery, arson, aggravated 
assault, sexual assault, and burglary. We have a great victim advocate’s office but the victi ms regularly want to 
hear from the prosecutor assigned to their case.  
If I receive a conviction after trial, I can expect an appeal. I then write a brief and argue the case before 
our Law Court.  In addition, I and the other attorneys in the office, handle  post-conviction reviews that 
incarcerated defendants file with the courts seeking to have their cases or sentences revisited.  
I also, along with my coworkers, provide training to area police departments  on various criminal law 
topics.  Additionally, I me et with SARSSM and Caring Unlimited to address victim safety.  
This is not a forty - hour a week job. It is often a fifty or more likely, a sixty -hour a week job depending 
on whether I have a trial or need to catch up. I always need to catch up. Again, this is very different from the job 
thirty or even five years ago. When I started, I was in court three and half days a week.  Now it is five full days.  
When I started, I could be a generalist. Now I am a generalist and a specialist. The cases take more time a t each 
stage of the process: arguing bail, arguing motions, discussing plea offers, meeting with the court, going to trial 
or appearing for a sentencing, arguing an appeal or post -conviction matter. In the not so distant past, there was 
time to do the work  during work hours. There was time to prepare for trials and motions. Now the demands of 
job are unceasing. The prosecutor has a special role in the criminal justice system to make sure justice is served. 
5 
 Justice involves all the parties to the case – victims, society and the defendant. To do the job well takes care, 
attention, and time. Time is always in short supply . 
