TODD R. COLLINS 
District Attorney 
KARI WELLS-PUCKETT 
Deputy District Attorney 
CHRISTIANA REIN 
IVIATTHEW HUNTER 
CHRIS KA SIN CHU 
AMANDA BRIDGES 
IAN M. ANDERSON 
Assistant District Attorneys STATE OF IVIAINE 
144 Sweden Street 
Caribou, ME 04736-2353 
207-498-2557 
FAX 207-493-3493 
27 Riverside Drive 
Presque Isle, ME 04769-2730 
207-764-0504 
FAX 207-764-2046 
26 Court Street, Suite 101 
Houlton, ME 04730 
207-532-4294 
FAX 207-532-1504 OFFICE OF THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY 
AROOSTOOK COUNTY 
PROSECUTORIAL DISTRICT NUMBER8 
Ci 97 
An Act to Provide Funding for Prosecutor Positions 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Public Hearing Date: March 28, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 186 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary. My name is Kari Wells-Puckett and I am the Deputy District Attorney for District VIII 
(Aroostook County) and am here to testify in support of LD 186. 
Background 
I have Worked for the Aroostook County District Attorney ’s Ofﬁce for seven and a half years. 
Prior to being hired by District VIII, I was in private practice for approximately 6 years. I am based 
in the Presque Isle Ofﬁce with one other Assistant District Attorney. In 2022, We jointly 
prosecuted over 1000 cases. This number does not reﬂect holdover cases from previous years, 
juvenile cases, appellate work, or probation revocations. 
Work Schedule 
My Work schedule typically exceeds 10 hours per day and I Work most weekends. In addition to 
my regular work schedule, I ﬁeld phone calls and review Warrants from law enforcement most 
evenings after hours and on the weekend. I currently have 5-6 Weeks of vacation banked due to 
difficulty in scheduling vacation opportunities. 
Responsibilities and Court Schedule 
District VIII currently employs ﬁve ADA’s and a Deputy District Attorney. The Aroostook County 
DA’s Ofﬁce has no specialized prosecutors or trial prep assistants. Our prosecutors are responsible 
for all trial and hearing preparation as Well as appellate Work and post-conviction reviews. 
Aroostook County prosecutes all MDEA cases that arise within our jurisdiction.
Court demands for prosecutors ’ time have exponentially increased in the last two years. Before the 
COVID pandemic, Aroostook County held in-custody initial appearances and arraignments three 
times per week. In-custodies are now held daily. The time allotted for in-custodies now includes 
specially set bail reviews and pleas. The Court provides each of our offices with set dates for the 
year for arraignments, dispositional conferences, motion hearings, docket call, and juvenile 
matters. However, prosecutors are regularly required to appear in court nearly every day of the 
Work week. The Court provides scheduling notices and emails requiring our appearance on “non- 
criminal ” days for pleas, bail hearings, bench trials, probation revocation hearings, hearings on 
motions to revoke bail, and status conferences (among other things). Sometimes our notice for 
these additional court appearances is less than 24 hours. 
The amount of preparation necessary to adequately prepare for hearings (including witness 
preparation, legal research, and review of increasingly voluminous digital and video evidence) 
requires a substantial time commitment. We don’t just want to prosecute cases but prosecute them 
successfully and with confidence. 
Due to the immense amount of court time and preparation for court appearances, prosecutors must 
work additional long hours to complete our routine office responsibilities and tasks. The current 
pace is not sustainable, and many prosecutors in my ofﬁce are experiencing “burn out”. 
I am proud to be a prosecutor. Each day is satisfying and rewarding. Additional resources will help 
retain and attract prosecutors and alleviate current stresses. 
For these reasons, I am in support of LD 186. 
Ke 
eputy District A orney 
District VIII
p
