 
1 
 
 
 
  Neil E. McLean Jr  
         District Attorney  
 
 
 
 
      Kate Bozeman  
  Deputy District Attorney  
 
 STATE OF MAINE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OFFICE OF THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY  
DISTRICT THREE  
 Assistant District Attorneys  
James A . Andrews  
Richard R. Beauchesne  
J. Scott Davis  
Thomas Michael Haggerty Jr.  
Katherine M. Hudson -MacRae  
Patricia A. Mador  
Brian E. Ranta  
Christina A. Reese  
Ellex N. St. Pierre  
                Nathan R. Walsh  
 Leslie Wilson  
Alexandra W. Winter  
 
 
 
 
   
February 26, 2023  
 
To Whom It May Concern,  
 
  My name is Katherine Hudson -MacRae. I have the honor of being an 
Assistant District Attorney in Androscoggin County, where I have worked since the 
Spring of 2019. Prior to that, I was an Assistant  District Attorney in Wiscasset . In 
my current position, I am on a team of four prosecutors exclusively handling 
domestic violence and sexual assault cases. I am curre ntly handling around 150 
active felony and misdemeanor cases.  
 
This job is immensely rewarding; every single day I know that I strive to do 
justice. I work to ensure th at victims of domestic violence and sexual assault are not 
forgotten. I work to protect defendants’ constitutional rights while ensuring  the 
public and victims’ rights to safety with equal measure.   
 
At a time where, appropriately so, the focus is on the crumbling court -
appointed attorney system, it is hard to imagine asking this Legislature and our 
Governor for help as a prosecutor —but I ask nevertheless. More often than  not, the 
person in the courtroo m trying to balance the seemingly impossible task of ensuring 
that victims are heard, defendants’ constitutional rights are preserved, and that 
justice is done, is the prosecutor. And to prosecute the right way —the just way —in 
the current system, with its current resources, is burning out prosecutors.  
 
I am, simply put, exhausted. Since August of 2021 , I have had 13 trials. On 
February 22nd , at 8:45pm , I finished a tw o-day trial involving 32 counts, includ ing 
Burglary (Class B), Domestic Violence Stalking (Class D), and 25 counts of Violation 
of a Protection Order (Class D). The same day that that trial began, I had a brief 
due with the Law Court  for an appeal in a felony Domestic Violence Stalking and 
 
2 
 Violation of Protection Order case . I am now preparing for a Domestic Violence 
Assault (Class D)  trial scheduled to begin  tomorrow,  February 27th.  As these trials 
happen, the work does not stop. M y colleagues are left to cover  my other cases —set 
for dispositional conferences, in -custody a rraignments and initial appearances, 
victim meetings, and miscellaneous bail and motion hearings. This is my normal 
work schedule.  
 
I have spent almost five years as a prosecutor trying to do the im possible: 
trying to do justice for the people of the State  of Maine, for victims and defendants, 
while also protecting  my personal life and physical and mental health . I have 
watched as prosecutors that I admire leave  because of the stress  of the crushing  
caseloads . This job quite literally keeps me up at night.  It consumes my weekends 
and takes me away from  precious  time with my loved ones.  
 
Three times a week, I make charging decisions about people who are in -
custody. I prepare for bail or motion hearings that occur multiple times a month 
and sometimes in two different courthouses on the same day. I meet with victims. I 
prepare for week -long dispositional conferences, a time to attempt to settle cases, 
which require a thorough understanding of the evidence , history,  and strengths, 
and weaknesses of cases. I n wh at I consider my “spare work time,” I  have  also 
worked to reform the written  jury questionnaires to ensure that they account for 
racial and gender bias.  
 
While all of this happens , I also prepare for trial. Because the State is, 
appropriately, held to the  highest burden of proof, and because the State gets one 
chance to try a case the right way, the just way, it is the most stressful part of my 
job.  Each month, in Androscoggin County, the court produces a list of about 20 
cases that may go forward to tria l that month. On average, I am the prosecutor for 
approximately eight cases on each of these  trial list s. These cases include , for 
instance,  allegations of Unlawful Sexual Touching, Domestic Violence Assault, and 
Domestic Violence Aggravated Assault.  
 
I am responsible for preparing each case on the trial list as if it will go to 
trial. For every case on the trial list , subpoenas are sent to every victim and civilian 
witness and  each  law enforcement officer involved is notified. The trials that  will 
actually move forward each month are confirmed  at jury selection,  typically  the 
Thursday before trials begin the following Monday. At some point , amongst all of 
this, trial preparation actually begins, which requires meeting with all witnesses  
and vic tims, preparing exhibits, and more.  
 
While the stress of managing the volume of cases on each trial list can be 
overwhelming for prosecutors, cases being continued month after month creates 
chaos for victims . Victims are asked to mentally prepare to reliv e what is often the 
 
3 
 worst experience of their life  many times over without any clear understanding 
whether  the trial will take place that month.   
 
Asking  defense attorneys to carry excessive caseloads  violates their ethical 
obligations . Asking prosecutors  to do the same violates their equally important 
ethical  and constitutional obligations. A prosecutor must have adequate time to 
prepare. How else can they review all of the discovery?  How else can they determine 
whether a traffic stop was constitutional or Miranda  warnings were appropriately 
provided ? If they should even charge the case? Or prepare a victim  or witness  to 
testify?  
 
Often, the response that I hear to concerns about overworked prosecutors is 
that prosecutors should “charge  fewer cases.” How do you tell a victim of domestic 
violence that —although I believe we could prove the case at trial, I believe their 
partner assaulted them —I have too many cases?  The simple answer is that I don’t. 
I charge the case. This means that I co me in early, stay late, work weekends, and 
take few vacations where, even then, I still work.  
  
 Providing more support for prosecutors throughout the State ensures  that the 
other equally important components of our justice system continue to function.  Our 
system of justice depends on the balancing of interests —criminal defendants, public 
safety, and victims of crimes.  Prosecutors form an essential  part of that balance  by 
ensuring that people who commit crimes are held accountable .  
 
Please consider prov iding more prosecutorial resources  throughout the State .  
 
        
With sincere thanks,  
 
 
       Katherine M. Hudson -MacRae, Esq.  
       Assistant District Attorney  

