To the Members of the Judiciary Committee: 
RE: LD 186 
I assumed ofﬁce on J anuary l, 2023, as District Attorney for Prosecutorial District 7 
which encompasses Hancock and Washington Counties. We have offices in Ellsworth, Machias 
and Calais, and we operate in two Uniﬁed Criminal Court systems and ﬁve Courts overall. My 
District is allocated 6 assistant prosecutors in addition to myself to cover the two Counties. My 
assistants are working far beyond capacity and well in excess of case-load recommendations 
urged by the American Bar Association. My Deputy District Attorney, for example, is 
responsible for over 1,000 cases in two Counties. He should have no more than 600 to 700 cases 
total. We do not have a choice with current staffing levels. We have approximately 1,800 pending 
cases which is more than 30% above the number of cases on the books one year ago at this time. 
Law enforcement case submissions are up across the board. Prosecutors were already operating 
at capacity a year ago. We are currently short one prosecutor in Washington County, which is 
straining prosecutor workloads even more. While we are actively advertising to ﬁll the position, 
we have not had a single applicant in the month and a half that the position has been posted. 
ADA salaries cannot compete with the private sector job market and it is difficult to ﬁll these 
positions in remote locations, especially when new attorneys leam about the demands of the job. 
We have all heard about the lack of indigent defense attorneys state-wide but the shortage of 
prosecutors is equally compelling. 
As I look to other legislation to being considered this term to fund additional Judicial 
positions and to raise the pay rates of indigent defense counsel to entice more attorneys to take 
on indigent cases, I cannot stress enough the need to provide additional funding to increase 
prosecutorial positions to keep pace. There are three pillars to the criminal justice system
1
(prosecution, defense and judiciary) and each needs to grow equally to maintain court 
operations. We cannot increase the number of sitting Judges to hear additional cases without 
having additional prosecutors to take on that additional workload as it would present a physical 
impossibility. Thus, I am in full support of LD l86 which seeks funding for additional Assistant 
District Attorneys statewide. 
Since I took office, I literally have had no more than 6 days totally “off.” I had hoped to 
alleviate some of the caseload per prosecutor situations by assuming responsibility for a greater 
percentage of the caseloads but I have found that I am stretched thin out of the box running three 
separate prosecutorial offices. If we have just one prosecutor out sick on any given day, we are 
unable to adequately provide coverage. It is much like relying on a fire extinguisher to tacklea 
forest ﬁre. While I have assumed responsibility for a number of serious matters such as 
manslaughter, aggravated assault and a high~prof1le child pornography case, I have endless 
meetings and requests for meetings to attend in two counties which all limit my available time to 
handle a regular caseload. These include Sexual Assault Response Team meetings, Child 
Advocacy Center meetings, department head meetings in each county, federal and state 
intelligence brieﬁngs in Calais, Machias and Ellsworth, Maine Prosecutors Association meetings, 
Court Calendar Scheduling meetings, Chiefs of Police meetings, Restorative Justice meetings, 
County Commissioner meetings, County Administrator meetings, Victim-Witness Advocate 
meetings and so forth. In addition, I spend my weekends and evenings sifting through each and 
every case that enters our office for initial review and case assignment to speciﬁc prosecutors. 
Prosecutors are also being pulled in different directions with what amounts to a growing 
list of unfunded mandates. These include the push to grow Adult Diug Treatment Courts, 
Restorative Justice Programs and some Districts must contend with Veterans Court cases. Diug
2
Court meets every Friday in each of my counties and this requires that I assign two prosecutors 
out of my current 5 ADA’s to attend Dmg Court programs (treatment meetings and Court) for 
full days in each county. That results in a 40% loss of prosecutors one day per week who are not 
available to address regular court loads. In addition, these prosecutors must ﬁeld endless emails 
and telephone calls from Drug Court personnel about case management, individual case 
situations and applications for ADTC admission throughout the week leading up to each session. 
This work is in addition to the regular caseloads ADA’s must carry to ensure coverage at 
arraignments, case disposition conferences, Grand Jury presentations, Motion hearings, J uiy 
Selection days, jury trials, trial preparation and on-call weeks. The on~call weeks present 
additional problems because the on-call prosecutor must work their regular shift and then be 
available 24-hours-a-day to respond to law enforcement queries, search warrant requests, arrestI 
warrants and handle in-custody arraignments on short notice. There are occasions where the on- 
call prosecutor is woken up three times a night during their on-call week. The physical demands 
on prosecutors is challenging. 
The un-funded mandates also keep piling up. We are now also required to submit case 
information statistics to the Department of Justice, United States Courts, National Guard and 
other Agencies by mandate where we have no administrative personnel to address these issues. 
A recent Bill before the U.S. Congress would require each State prosecutorial District overa 
certain population size to report virtually every case prosecutorial decision to U.S.D.O.J. without 
funding to handle the workload simply needed to tabulate the information (the legislation would 
require that we provide our basis for declining each speciﬁc case). I estimate this would require 
at least one new attorney and one administrative staff member to meet those requirements. I do 
not know where that federal legislation stands at present, but I objected to the Bill as another
3
unfunded mandate and intrusion on state prosecutorial decision-making. Each year we see more 
proposals which burden the prosecutotial Districts without funding to provide support to meet 
the demands. 
I am certainly not complaining about the job as I love the challenge and the work. I am 
concemed, however, that I will not be able to keep assistant prosecutors in their positions over 
the long-term because of the over-bearing workload requirements they each face which 
inevitably intrudes upon their days off, evenings and vacation time. I know my Assistants work 
many hours on their days off and vacations, and this cannot be sustained in the long run. I have 
one Assistant who works virtually every weekend to keep up with his caseload because he has 
insufficient time during the week to address all required tasks. He is a work-horse and diligent 
prosecutor. 
I urge you to support LD I86 to ensure that our prosecutorial districts can continue to 
meet the demands being imposed upon them with the significant backlog of cases, increased 
criminal activity and increased demands created by new alternative court programs. Thank you. 
,X’e 
Z. /-/" 
ROBERT C. GRANGER, ESQUIRE 
District Attorney 
Prosecutorial District 7 
70 State Street 
Ellsworth, Maine 04605 
Tel. 207.667.4621 
robert.granger@maineproscutors.com
4
