Auburn School Department 
Superintendent 60 Conn; Street 4th Floor 
Comelia Brown PhD Auburn, ME 04210 
Assistant Superintendent Fax: 207-333-6628 
Sue Dorris, EdD Phone: 207-784-6431 
Business Manager 
Mark Conrad, CAGS 
"Empowering lifelong learners to succeed in an ever changing world" 
httpy/www.aubumsch1.edu 
Testimony 
Support: LD 1053 
An Act to Allow School Activity Buses for Public Schools 
Dr. Cornelia Brown 
Superintendent of Schools 
Auburn School Department 
Good morning Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee of the 131st Maine Legislature. My name is Connie Brown and l am the Superintendent of Schools for 
the Auburn School Department in Auburn, ME. l am here today to testify in support of LD 1053, An Act to Allow 
School Activity Buses for Public Schools. 
Section 1, 29-A MRSA 2301, as currently written, allows for private schools, daycare providers, camps, 
municipalities and collegiate athletic teams, among others, to transport students on Activity Buses. These Activity 
Buses have a carrying capacity of 10-15 passengers. The only students who are prohibited from riding an Activity 
Bus are those who attend a public school. This seems inherently unfair to me and to my students. . 
This legislation does not impact the transportation of students to and from school. it does, however, allow small 
teams or clubs from public schools to utilize a transportation option not currently available. An Activity Bus increases 
the ﬂexibility available to public schools as it can be driven by someone without a Commercial Drivers License 
(CDL) and/or with a Bus DriverlPassenger endorsement. 
The bus driver shortage in Maine and throughout the country is a very real problem in Auburn. l have at least ﬁve (5) 
vacancies for bus drivers. l must prioritize getting students to and from school and it's been a constant struggle. l 
have amazing bus drivers in Auburn. They've gone above and beyond to try and ensure that our students get to 
school. We have doubled and tripled routes and, regrettably, had to cancel bus runs, which is a signiﬁcant 
inconvenience to families. The reality is that there are simply not enough bus drivers. 
In order to prioritize routes to and from school, using the drivers I do have, it means that l need to ﬁnd alternative 
ways to get athletic teams and clubs to their activities, often at considerable cost as we need to hire outside 
vendors. ln some instances we've called upon parents to help us out and to transport their children. Everyone does 
their level best to help our students. 
Extending to public schools the same flexibility that private schools have would be greatly appreciated. Each yearI 
attend athletic events, for example Cross Country meets. The parking lot is filled with School Activity vans from 
Lincoln Academy, St. Doms Academy and others, yet public schools often need to send a 72 passenger bus, 
irrespective of the number of students, because we are currently not allowed to use a Student Activity Bus. 
In closing, l hope you will support LD 1053 and give public schools the same ﬂexibility and opportunity that others 
have.
