-rs 
.<=>’*'?»% 
Q .. 
if” 
I‘f~ i‘ "‘~ 
t.;&- 
ll 
Eric Brakey 1315‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
L.D. 1053, An Act to Allow School Activity Buses for Public Schools 
Before the Maine Legislature ’s Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Wednesday, March 29, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing 
the people of Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Today, I am here to 
present L.D. 1053, “An Act to Allow School Activity Buses for Public Schools." 
The school bus driver shortage is real and impacting those in both rural and urban 
areas of the state. With many bus drivers aging into retirement and few individuals 
stepping in to fill those open positions, the absence of drivers is causing delays and 
cancellations in bus routes to schools and after-school activities. This problem isn't just 
a crisis for school districts, but for students and their parents too. When a ride is 
cancelled, students are at risk of missing school and participating in extra-curricular 
events. 
School districts have had to become creative with attempts to address the shortage 
while ensuring students receive necessary transportation. In many cases, districts have 
been offering greater compensation, free training, and bonuses. In Washington 
County, a principal signed up to get a Class B driver's license in order to meet the 
bussing needs of his school. It's fair to say, we have reached a point where districts are 
making every effort to entice people into driving school busses. 
I submitted this legislation after hearing from the Auburn Superintendent, Dr. Cornelia 
Brown. I believe it is a simple and sensible measure to alleviate the current bus driver 
shortage. 
L.D. 1053 would allow for public schools to use school activity busses for point-to-point 
transportation, carrying students to activities outside of the typical home to school route. 
These busses (also known as short busses) are smaller in size, accommodating 10— 
15 passengers. As such, they do not require a CDL license to operate. This would help 
ensure drivers with CDL licenses are available for drop~off and pick-up. 
Under current law, private schools are permitted to use school activity busses for point- 
to-point transportation but, public districts are not. I can see no good reason for this
disparity. By allowing public school districts this same flexibility, CDL drivers can be 
better prioritized and we may see more people stepping up to drive. Current school 
district employees who do not have a CDL license might even be interested in driving a 
bus when they are not working as a way to earn extra money. . 
Allowing public school districts to utilize these vehicles for specific needs (such as 
transporting students to sporting events and field trips), will help to alleviate the current 
bus driver crisis felt across the state. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. l will gladly take questions.
