95 High Street, Limestone, Maine 04750 P: 207-325-3303    F: 207-325-3340    E: mssm@mssm.org www.mssm.org    March 25, 2023  Dear Committee Members,   I write in support of LD 1053: An Act to Allow School Activity Buses for Public Schools.   Having worked as a teacher and school leader for sixteen years in a variety of states and school types (public, private, higher ed, and town academy), I have seen many versions of the challenges of student transportation, along with a variety of stances and approaches states and institutions have taken to solve them.   I began working with young people in the early 2000s, just as 15-passenger vans were being removed from fleets due to safety concerns. In the years that have followed, fatal accidents involving these vehicles decreased, as older vehicles were phased out and new regulations prompted safety reforms in both technology and usage. Over the next decade, I saw organizations ditch their vans in favor of dually “short buses,” then in recent years return to a mixture of modern passenger vans and buses. The newer versions of these once-demonized vehicles are much safer than their predecessors, with extended wheelbases, stability control, improved tire technology, and a variety of modern safety features. This is something that summer camps, private schools, churches, universities, outdoor education organizations, and many states have understood and embraced for some time.   Permitting specialized activity vehicles allows schools to tailor their fleet to the size and needs of their student bodies. As a small residential public school, MSSM’s transportation needs fall entirely within the “activity” category. We routinely must choose between taking multiple minivans or chartering a bus (at half-capacity) for student activities near and far. Neither option is cost effective, nor is it environmentally friendly. With the shortage of bus drivers affecting schools across the state, it would be particularly valuable to have vehicles capable of transporting 10-15 students without the need for a School Bus CMV-licensed operator. Other schools and districts (particularly those in small communities and/or rural areas) would see immediate upside to this option as well.  With the context of modern vehicle technology, Maine’s bus drive shortage, and the opportunity to curtain environmental and economic waste, LD 1053 ought to pass.    Sam Critchlow Executive Director Maine School of Science and Mathematics critchlows@mssm.org (207) 325-3303  Maine School of Science and Mathematics A Residential Community of Academic Excellence 

