MAINE ‘ti "i A ll r -\ ~.
I 
. .1 
CHAJVIB ER _ ._ i__ of“ 
(‘{}1\/IMf.I%lR(lIi 
W “ ‘"_‘ ~-=-l"‘ —~' '‘ > "Ti ~ ,_ M ~ 
'~=‘—=>1 '' 
at ~—----' ~~~i .— — t" 
ma 1;: __ , ‘ $5‘ 
The voice of III!-Ifi'2£? Z)I!5IiZ €S‘> 
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce In Support 
of 
L.D. 1053 An Act to Allow School Activity Buses for Public Schools 
Chairs Rafferty and Brennan, and esteemed members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in Gardiner andI 
represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association 
made up of both large and small businesses, here to provide you with my 
testimony in support of expanding the use of activity buses to public schools. 
It is no secret that across Maine school systems are struggling to adequately 
staff their school buses. My city has had signs up attempting to hire bus drivers for 
the last three school years. While the most obvious use for a school bus is to 
transport students from home to school and back, buses are deployed for many 
reasons. Sporting events, field trips, and other school facilities are just a few. With 
school systems struggling to employ bus drivers, to the point of expanding the 
distance a student must live from school to be a bus rider, what other programs are 
being cut or underserved that we might not hear about every day? 
Expanding activity buses to public schools has multiple benefits. First, 
smaller vehicles are easier on our roads and experience less wear and tear than 
larger vehicles. This could allow for long-term savings on investing in these 
additional vehicles. Secondly, these vehicles do not have the same licensure 
requirements as a school bus CMV. By reducing the licensure requirements the 
pool of potential applicants to fill vacancies will increase dramatically. Third, 
these smaller buses will be more efficient due to a reduced vacant seat ratio. 
The Maine State Chamber and its business members support LDl053 for its 
ability to reduce a barrier to the attendance and growth of CTE classes and centers. 
This time last year a CTE stakeholder group was brought together to discuss 
systemic barriers to CTE and provide recommendations on how we could work
together to continue to grow these courses that are so vital to Maine’s economy. 
Some top barriers you have heard from me in previous testimony this session is 
alignment with graduation requirements and the size of CTE and Industrial Arts 
teacher workforce. Another top barrier is the ability for CTE centers and sending 
schools to coordinate proper transportation. The inability to properly coordinate 
puts students at risk of missing critical leaming, rallies, sporting events, and other 
activities that create a scheduling misalignment between the sending school and 
CTE center. This inability to coordinate transportation is not a failure of the CTE 
enter or sending school but rather a symptom of an inadequate number of qualified 
bus drivers. This legislation would vastly open the number of people who could 
qualify to drive students to various school related events. It could even allow 
current school employees the opportunity to ease these pressures. 
This legislation provides an incredible opportunity for schools to transport 
students safely and properly to their appropriate classes and activities. The State 
Chamber supports giving schools this resource and flexibility to serve Maine’s 
students. I hope that you look favorably on LDl053. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.
