Testimony 3/29/2023 by Georges Nashan, RN, BSN, MS with additional 
documentation in support of: 
LD346 - An Act to Clarify the Requirements for Family Caregivers, and 
LD874 - An Act to Address the Shortage of Direct Care Workers for Children 
with Disabilities in Maine 
My name is Georges Nashan. I've been a registered nurse for over 40 years, working 
primarily in the state of Maine. I’ve worked across the state in a variety of clinical 
settings and consulting roles. I'm here as a proponent of LD346 and LD874 and I am 
hoping that it would also extend to parents with a PSS or a CNA, as has been 
identified. Availability of essential home health services for children with disabilities is 
just not adequate and the challenge of a parent becoming an RN after they have had a 
child with special needs is insurmountable.  
For those who are less well informed than you folks obviously are, I want to say: 
We are not talking about paying parents to babysit their kids.  
Let me say that again.  
We are not talking about paying parents to babysit their kids.  
These children have significant physical and emotional needs. They have extensive 
therapeutic modalities that the parents need to be both trained in and good enough at 
that they can then train the staff that do come to their home. They must be case 
managers. They must be personnel managers, deciding whether the nurse or the 
person that's taking care of your precious child is doing a safe job, whether their 
calling out frequently is a reflection of not being able to trust this person with your 
child, interacting with the agency that they're paid by to try and manage these issues. 
These are all things that I as a nurse manager for several years had to do, and that now 
my step-daughter, Andrea Dole, must do without any of that training, or pay.  
She must advocate with specialists, with various agencies, and with insurance 
companies that are maddening for everybody. She has had to travel to Portland and 
Boston multiple times a year for our grandson’s specialist visits and surgical 
procedures. These trips are often done without nursing care, because of home care 
agencies’ limitations on paying for shift hours and out of state travel. That leaves our 
daughter, without any clinical training, having to remember and interpret complex 
treatments and therapy recommendations for the nursing staff when she returns 
home. 
If you haven't treated an infant having a seizure, knowing that you must do the right 
thing at the right time and with the right amount or that child might die, then I hope 
you never find yourself in that situation. And yet our daughter and many of these 
parents are in that situation all too frequently.  
These bills would utilize existing infrastructure rather than creating a new 
infrastructure. I realize there may be some challenges for the agencies involved, but it 
would be much more efficient than creating a new program.  
This model is not new. Maine would not have to start from scratch in getting the 
necessary Medicaid waiver or developing the supporting elements. Please review the 
many supporting documents submitted outlining the successes of others who have 
gone before us. 
This is not meant as an alternative to other solutions like additional out of home care 
or residential care, although both are desperately needed. This is meant to address 
much more common needs that those programs do not meet.  
Thank you very much for your attention to the desperate needs of our families. 
Georges Nashan, RN, BSN, MS 
 
Please see the three documents attached below regarding other states’ programs that 
were referenced in Andrea Dole’s testimony. They help provide a roadmap for 
implementation.  
Family CNA Program Overview 
The Family CNA Program leverages nurse aides 
for lower acuity children and tasks, driving down 
total cost of care 
What is Private Duty Nursing (PDN)? 
Private Duty Nursing is also referred to as Continuous 
Nursing; frequently for patients requiring medical 
technology and equipment. It is meant to achieve 
the same level of care a patient would receive in 
a skilled nursing facility or hospital but at a fraction 
of the cost. (Average cost of daily PDN of ~$250 
vs $4,000+ for hospital or SNF) 
Who are the typical PDN patients? 
Medicaid in every state is entitled to provide PDN for 
Medically Fragile Pediatric patients (under 21). Some 
states also cover PDN for adults. Common diagnoses 
include Traumatic Brain Injury, Cerebral Palsy, Chronic 
Respiratory Failure, etc. Patients generally receive 4-24 
hours of skilled nursing per day, with the national 
average being ~45 hours per week. The Family CNA 
Program currently focuses primarily on pediatric 
patients only. 
The Family CNA Program is a subset of Private 
Duty Nursing (PDN) for low acuity tasks for 
Medically Fragile Children 
How does the Family CNA Program help? 
PDN Care Continuity in the home is the #1 driver of 
reduced hospital admissions. When these children have 
their care plan executed in the home every day without 
fail, hospitalizations and total cost of care plummet. What is the problem with PDN for 
Medically Fragile Children? 
Medicaid is the payor for> 80% of national 
PDN claims. The national nursing shortage 
combined with the low nature of Medicaid 
PDN reimbursement rates, makes it extremely 
difficult or impossible, to find reliable nurses 
to work these PDN hours given the substantial 
salary discount they must accept vs working 
in a hospital (hospital nurses able to make 
25% to> 100% higher wages in hospitals). 
The result is that Medically Fragile Children 
and their families often go without the home 
nursing care that Medicaid is entitled to 
provide for them. This generally leads to one of 
two scenarios when PDN is not available: 
1. Hospitals/Institutions
When PDN is not available, children often
remain trapped in hospitals and skilled
nursing facilities at ~16 X higher daily cost
than PDN
2.Unemployment/Frequent Re-Hospitalizations
If parents don't want to put child back in 
hospital or SNF, they are forced to try to cover 
the missed nursing shifts (with no proper 
training/ oversight). This has the effect of 
significantly increasing the patients overall 
total cost of care due to frequent 
re-hospitalizations. 
The Family CNA Program takes parents, relatives or family friends, and trainsthem for free 
to become CNAs. They are then hired by a Home Health Agency and are paid to take on the 
lower acuity duties of the care plan for their child. This helps the nursing shortage by freeing 
up nurses to work on higher acuity children and tasks while driving down hospitalizations 
and cost for lower acuity children. 




















Employing Family Caregivers: An Innovative Health Care Model
Kristin Carter, MD, MSCSa, Christy Blakely, MEdb, Jeannie Zuk, PhD, RNc, Mark Brittan, MD, 
MPHa,c, Carolyn Foster, MD, MSHSd,e
aSection of Pediatric Hospital Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School 
of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado
bFamily Voices Colorado, Centennial, Colorado
cAdult and Child Consortium for Health Outcomes Research and Delivery Science, University of 
Colorado, Aurora, Colorado
dDivision of Advanced General Pediatrics and Primary Care, Department of Pediatrics, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois
eMary Ann & J. Milburn Smith Child Health Outcomes, Research, and Evaluation Center, Ann & 
Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
Providing high-quality care to children with medical complexity (CMC) requires more than 
a team of skilled physicians, nurses, and therapists. Family members also play a vital role 
in health care delivery. Through the considerable amount of complex health care that they 
provide in the home daily, family members are critical to the achievement of good health 
outcomes. Yet, family caregivers are not systematically valued in their role as providers of 
essential health care, which has significant consequences for families and society.
We describe an innovative health care model of paid family caregiving in Colorado and its 
effects on Ms Christy Blakely, a parent of a child with complex health needs. Ms Blakely 
is a professional advocate for CMC who partners on research grants with the remaining 
authors, all pediatric health care providers. Together, we work to evaluate how health care 
delivery models can achieve better patient health outcomes and support family wellness. 
Here, we aim to highlight Colorado’s paid family caregiving model as one worthy of wider 
national consideration to improve the lives of children and their families.
Address correspondence to Kristin Carter, MD, MSCS, Division of Palliative Care, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of 
Chicago, 225 E. Chicago Ave, Chicago, IL 60611. kristin.carter@northwestern.edu.
Dr Carter’s current affiliation is Division of Palliative Care, Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLAIMER:  Dr Brittan receives
Dr Carter and Ms Blakely conceptualized the work and drafted the initial manuscript; Drs Zuk, Brittan, and Foster conceptualized the 
work; and all authors reviewed and revised the manuscript, approved the final manuscript as submitted, and agree to be accountable 
for all aspects of the work.
This information or content and conclusions are those of the authors and should not be construed as the official position or policy of, 
nor should any endorsements be inferred by, the Health Resources and Services Administration, the US Department of Health and 
Human Services, and the US government. The content also does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes 
of Health.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Pediatrics . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Pediatrics . 2022 June 01; 149(6): . doi:10.1542/peds.2021-054273.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
LIFE AS A PARENT OF A CHILD WITH MEDICAL COMPLEXITY
Ms Blakely
Our daughter was born in 1982 at 36 weeks’ gestation. She developed what was then called 
hyaline membrane disease and suffered oxygen deprivation, which led to cerebral palsy. She 
was beautiful and demonstrated high cognitive intelligence early in life but met no physical 
developmental milestones throughout her childhood. She required full physical care, which 
meant that she needed assistance with all of the activities of daily living, including feeding, 
bathing, dressing, toileting, transferring, and mobility.
Doing my daughter’s daily care was a struggle. Though I had a master’s degree in special 
education, I often felt as though I was certified in everything but the care of my own 
daughter. Our days started at 4 AM, and nearly every minute was filled with medical tasks, 
phone calls, or appointments. I had no option but to stop working because I could no longer 
commit to the requirements of a classroom teacher. Our second daughter, born 1 year later, 
became independent faster than most because my attention was always focused on her sister. 
For example, she learned to French braid her own hair at a very young age, and I found 
myself embarrassed when others would comment on how beautifully I had done her hair.
At age 5 years, our oldest daughter began using a wheelchair and an augmentative 
communication device. When she entered elementary school, we received the Medicaid 
Home and Community-Based Services Waiver, which allowed access to home health care 
that our private insurance did not cover. We were able to hire a certified nursing assistant 
(CNA) to come to our home in the morning to get my daughter up, showered, dressed, 
fed, and onto the bus. The idea was that I would then have time to prepare her sibling and 
myself for the day and that I could return to work. However, like other families relying 
on traditional, nonfamily caregiver CNAs, we struggled with frustrating gaps in services 
because of no-shows and overall staffing shortages that often left us without the help that we 
needed on short notice, such as a snow day that you don’t expect.
CHALLENGES FACING FAMILY CAREGIVERS OF CHILDREN WITH 
MEDICAL COMPLEXITY
Dr Carter
Though Ms Blakely’s story is uniquely her own, it is representative of the stories of many 
other families who must care for their CMC while also earning a living. CMC are children 
with 1 or more complex chronic conditions that result in functional limitations and/or 
medical technology dependence.1 CMC typically use large amounts of health resources 
through long hospitalizations, complex surgeries, and the need for multiple subspecialists. 
Although CMC comprise only 3 in 50 children with Medicaid, they account for 1 in 3 
dollars of Medicaid spending for children nationally, a massive proportion that represented 
US $1.6 billion in 2011.2
Despite this price tag, the current calculated spending on health care for CMC does not 
account for the substantial, daily, unpaid medical care provided by their family members, Carter et al. Page 2
Pediatrics . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
particularly for children with neurologic impairment and medical technology dependence. 
For example, at least half of US family caregivers like Ms Blakely who have children with 
cerebral palsy spend ≥21 hours per week providing health care at home for their children.3 
Exacerbating this trend is a chronically understaffed, underfunded, and undertrained 
pediatric home health workforce, leading to haphazard and sometimes poor-quality home 
care for this underserved population.4
As Ms Blakely’s story highlights, the need for family caregivers to provide such large 
amounts of complicated health care has significant consequences. Family caregivers often 
are not able to make time for their own health care needs and may face emotional stress and 
physical strain.5 Many family caregivers must stop working outside of the home or decrease 
their employment hours to provide this sort of care for their children,6 which frequently 
causes financial hardships for the families and detracts from the overall US workforce.
While the United States has some government policies related to unemployment, family 
and children, and disability and caregiver financial supports, many of those benefits are not 
available to parents of children with chronic conditions who are not currently employed or 
seeking employment.7 Thus, there is a critical need for our health care system to:
1. value family caregivers for the crucial role they play in keeping their children 
well each day and achieving good patient outcomes; and
2. devise creative solutions to the simultaneous problems of family caregiver under- 
and unemployment and home health care workforce shortages.
COLORADO’S PAID FAMILY CNA MODEL
Ms Blakely and Dr Carter
In 2001, families, community advocates, and Colorado lawmakers collaborated to establish 
a program within Medicaid that would allow family members, including parents, to be paid 
as CNAs for their own CMC.8 Though the program requires additional commitment and 
effort from the family caregiver, it values families’ work and has the potential to lessen their 
financial hardships and decrease the time their children are hospitalized.
To participate, the child must first qualify for CNA services through an agency-administered 
standardized assessment tool that identifies needs for activities of daily living assistance 
and medical tasks. Examples of medical needs relevant to eligibility include supplemental 
oxygen, secretion management, tube feedings, and repositioning to prevent skin breakdown.
The family caregiver must then become a licensed CNA in Colorado by completing an 
approved nurse assistant training program and must also pass a written and clinical exam. 
After achieving licensure, the family caregiver needs to be hired by a home health care 
agency that provides oversight and quality assurance. Many home health agencies seeking to 
hire the family caregiver will assist with the cost of training and testing. The pay for family 
members who serve as their child’s CNA is no different from traditional CNAs, typically 
between $13 and $17 per hour. Currently, there is no maximum number of hours that a 
parent can serve in this role.Carter et al. Page 3
Pediatrics . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Despite the expressed popularity of the program among parent-led networks, little has been 
published about this model, and many health care providers and eligible families are still 
unaware of its existence.
EXPERIENCE AS A PARENT CNA
Ms Blakely
When our daughter was born, I was taught how to place a nasogastric tube before she 
was discharged. Over the years, I acquired additional medical skills to meet her needs by 
piecing together knowledge from isolated, hospital-based skill trainings and conversations 
with medical equipment companies or other parents. However, I wished that I could have 
received more formal training to do all that I needed to do.
A friend of mine was one of the first advocates for Colorado’s paid family caregiver model, 
and she introduced me to the program. I was amazed that I could be trained as a CNA and 
could then be paid to meet my daughter’s health care needs, eliminating the unpredictability 
of traditional CNA services.
The 4-week class that I took through the home health care agency was geared toward parents 
becoming CNAs. It was scheduled at “family-friendly” hours, and the only costs were for 
the testing and licensure. The class included practical components, with several days of field 
experience. The field experience was somewhat scary because it mainly involved learning 
tasks by caring for adults, even though I really was learning so that I could care for my own 
child.
Despite the challenge, the CNA training was invaluable. It improved my ability to direct my 
daughter’s care, eased the financial burden of both under- and unemployment, and decreased 
my overall stress. Additionally, the CNA skills were transferable to situations outside of our 
home. For example, I was able to share my knowledge with friends who were caring for 
loved ones with complex medical conditions, and I felt more prepared to care for my mother 
when she entered hospice.
Through my work as a professional advocate, I have also witnessed the significant benefit 
of Colorado’s paid family CNA program for many other participants, particularly for single 
parents who can then stay home and care for their children. The program gives families 
options and flexibility.
Those options and flexibility allowed our family to successfully care for our daughter. 
Today, she lives in a home of her own with a partner who also has cerebral palsy. She is 
thriving and manages most of her own scheduling and appointments. Her physical care has 
become more complex, but we all take pride in her achievements.
PROGRAM CHALLENGES AND FUTURE NEEDS
Ms Blakely and Drs Carter, Zuk, Brittan, and Foster
To date, very few states have implemented models of paid family caregiving, which greatly 
limits the potential impact that wider adoption could have on children and families. Many Carter et al. Page 4
Pediatrics . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
states have been slow to adopt similar models on the basis of the assumption that they 
require budgetary increases. In actuality, such programs represent budget-neutral options 
because the states’ legal obligation to provide home health care benefits to eligible children 
does not change on the basis of whether family members or others are reimbursed for CNA 
services. Through the information described here and through our greater research efforts, 
we hope to contribute to a future in which every state has established a model of paid family 
caregiving.
However, parents without traditional CNA support may find themselves more isolated 
with little or no respite.9 Thus, incorporating options for respite services into paid family 
caregiver models is essential. Furthermore, as families come to rely on the income, they 
may face financial insecurity with a loss of that income as the child ages or dies. Interested 
participating family members who acquire skills and licensure though the program should be 
proactively supported in leveraging future employment opportunities as CNAs elsewhere.
ADDITIONAL WAYS TO SUPPORT FAMILY CAREGIVERS OF CMC
Ms Blakely and Drs Carter, Zuk, Brittan, and Foster
We encourage all health care providers of CMC to dedicate time with their patients and 
families to ask about life at home. Too often, we do not step back to have the important, 
if difficult, conversation about what day-to-day life entails when caring for a child with 
high medical needs and how that might be impacting the family financially, emotionally, 
and physically. When those conversations do happen, we often learn that caregivers are 
suffering, and challenges that were already immense have only been further exacerbated by 
the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic. Those conversations are the first steps in valuing 
family caregivers and assisting them in determining what programs might best support them.
Parent-led organizations and networks are also invaluable resources for helping families to 
find the combination of services that is right for them. Organizations such as Family V oices, 
Family-to-Family Health Information Centers, Parent-to-Parent, and Federation of Families 
can assist families and providers in navigating complicated Medicaid waiver information 
and have extensive knowledge of health care service eligibility and coverage. They are 
also among the strongest advocates for health care system change for CMC, including the 
expansion of paid family caregiver programs. We encourage all providers and the families 
they care for to become connected to these organizations.
CONCLUSIONS
There is a crucial need to address family caregiver under- and unemployment and home 
health care workforce shortages for CMC. Policy makers, advocates, providers, and health 
care systems should become familiar with Colorado’s paid family CNA model for potential 
adoption locally and nationally as a budget-neutral way to address those critical issues.
To learn whether your state has or is creating a paid family caregiver program, contact your 
local family-driven organizations or your local American Academy of Pediatrics chapter. 
You also can visit the National Academy for State Health Policy for suggestions about how Carter et al. Page 5
Pediatrics . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
to develop programs and policies that support family caregivers.10 Together, we can work to 
keep children out of the hospital by supporting them and their families in the fullest ways 
possible.
FUNDING:
Ms Blakely’s and Dr Brittan’s time was supported by the Health Resources and Services Administration of the 
US Department of Health and Human Services under #UA6MC31101 Children and Youth with Special Health 
Care Needs Research Network. Dr Foster is supported under #1K23HL149829-01A1 for research related to health 
care of children with medical complexity. Dr Foster is supported by the National Institutes of Health under grant 
#1K23HL149829-01A1 for research related to health care of children with medical complexity.
ABBREVIATIONS
CNA certified nursing assistant
CMC children with medical complexity
REFERENCES
1. Cohen E, Kuo DZ, Agrawal R, et al. Children with medical complexity: an emerging population for 
clinical and research initiatives. Pediatrics. 2011; 127(3):529–538 [PubMed: 21339266] 
2. Berry JG, Hall M, Neff J, et al. Children with medical complexity and Medicaid: spending and cost 
savings. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014;33(12):2199–2206 [PubMed: 25489039] 
3. Romley JA, Shah AK, Chung PJ, Elliott MN, Vestal KD, Schuster MA. Family-provided health 
care for children with special health care needs. Pediatrics. 2017; 139(1):e20161287 [PubMed: 
28028202] 
4. Foster CC, Agrawal RK, Davis MM. Home health care for children with medical complexity: 
workforce gaps, policy, and future directions. Health Aff (Millwood). 2019;38(6):987–993 
[PubMed: 31158008] 
5. National Alliance for Caregiving and AARP. Caregivers of children: a focused look at those caring 
for a child with special needs under the age of 18. Available at: https://www.caregiving.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/Report_Caregivers_of_Children_11-12-09.pdf . 2009. Accessed May 25, 
2021
6. Thomson J, Shah SS, Simmons JM, et al. Financial and social hardships in families of children with 
medical complexity. J Pediatr. 2016;172: 187–193.e1 [PubMed: 26897040] 
7. Chua C, Bull C, Callander EJ. Income support for parents of children with chronic conditions and 
disability: where do we draw the line? A policy review. [Published online ahead of print November 
22, 2021]. Arch Dis Child. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2021-322663
8. Colorado Department of Health Care Policy & Financing. Parents as their child’s Certified 
Nursing Aid (CNA). Available at: https://cdphe.colorado.gov/chronic-disease-prevention/parents-as-
their-childs-certified-nursing-aide-cna . Accessed May 25, 2021
9. Sobotka SA, Lynch E, Quinn MT, Awadalla SS, Agrawal RK, Peek ME. Unmet respite needs 
of children with medical technology dependence. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2019;58(11–12):1175–1186 
[PubMed: 31502488] 
10. Randi O, Girmash E, Honsberger K. State Approaches to Reimbursing Family Caregivers of 
Children and Youth with Special Health Care Needs through Medicaid. Washington, DC: National 
Academy for State Health Policy; 2021Carter et al. Page 6
Pediatrics . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
