Good Afternoon, my name is Heather Johnson. Thank you for having us. This is my husband Andy 
Johnson . We have three children Oliver age 10, Jack 7, and Adalin e age 5. We live in Searsport in a 
wonderful home that we love very much. At this moment, all three of our children attend the 
Cornerspring Montessori School in Belfast. Adaline is supported there with a one on one aid for a few 
short hours the mornings of Tuesday through Friday.  
 
Adaline was diagnosed with a rare genetic neurological disorder known as Pitt Hopkins Syndrome at 15 
months of age. This is characterized by distinctive facial features, developmental delay, abnormal 
breathing patterns, sleep disturbances, severe GI pain, Constipation, seizures, epilepsy, and severe 
nearsightedness. She is starting to be more ambulatory with assistance. However she is non verbal. 
Everyday since the day she was born we have been her caregivers. All day and sometimes all night. This 
is far different then raising a typical child.  
 
A day for Adaline consists of her simply waiting for one of us to come get her when she wakes. We 
proceed to care for her needs which still includes diapering.  Adaline can eat certain pieces of food with 
her hands but mainly we feed her everything she eats. She utilizes a special chair with straps, a stander, 
orthitocs to help her walk, and our bodies to facilitate her.  Bathing her is starting to get a bit tricky but 
she really loves her bath time. Adaline goes to sleep very well on her own. However, she suffers from 
sleep disturbances and often wakes many nights for long hours of the night without any explanation at 
all. In the meantime, we are also raising two wonderful thriving boys who love and adore their sister 
deeply. They are also her caregivers. 
 
3 1/2 years ago we sought out a home health agency that evaluated Adaline in our home and said she 
did qualify for services. I’m not recalling how many hours she qualified for. I do believe that was going to 
be determined once we found someone to fill the position. This position is still not filled. We also got 
Adaline set up to receive respite services also which has not been filled. We have been told on multiple 
occasions that these positions are typically filled by a family member or friend of the child.  We have 
searched relentlessly for years and we are still in the same place we were when we started.  
 
Our family is here today in support of LD874 because I simply cannot leave my job as her caregiver. 
There is no one else to care for her. I feel unsupported in the job I am doing and in my continuous effort 
to  help my child met her needs. I will never give up. It’s not even in my realm of thinking, but she 
deserves better and our family are the only ones giving it to her.  
 
Thank you.  
 
 

