3/21/2023
To Whom It May Concern:
I am a mother of a medically complex child who is 5 years old. At about four months old 
he was diagnosed with Congenital Myasthenia Gravis, a rare neuromuscular disorder. This 
disorder requires him to have a tracheostomy tube and is ventilator dependent anytime he 
sleeps and often times requires daytime ventilation when he is either ill or gets progressively 
weaker during the day. My son requires a feeding tube and has also been diagnosed with 
asthma and sinus bradycardia. 
My son qualifies for 24/7 nursing care due to his critical airway and the necessary skills it 
takes to care for his rare disease. He requires routine and emergency trach changes. He often 
goes into respiratory distress where his oxygen level drops and requires immediate 
intervention. My husband and I both work fulltime, however, we set up our home so that 
someone is always awake with our son, even while he is sleeping, so that we can monitor the 
ventilator, inhalation water, the humidification temperature, the pulse oximeter, and the 
feeding pump. There have been several occasions where the alarms set up on the equipment 
have failed- but because someone is always monitoring them, we have been able to promptly 
adjust the equipment as needed and/or give my son the extra support he needs immediately. 
We also only travel with our son in the car if someone is available to sit in the backseat with 
him, in case he goes into respiratory distress. For example, he can only attend school if a nurse 
or I am able to go with him, to ensure his medical needs are met.
This past year, my son was sick multiple times with Covid, RSV, and other viruses. He 
went into respiratory distress more times than I can count. It is vital that my son is cared for by 
either a trained medical professional, my husband, or myself. We have gone to great lengths to 
always be prepared to respond to a medical emergency.  My husband or I are always at home 
and able to assist when an emergency happens. We work opposite shifts for that to happen and 
will miss work when a nurse calls out or the hours cannot be staffed by a nurse. Currently, we 
are allotted 168 hours a week to be covered by nursing care, we currently have 74 hours a 
week covered (if the nurses show up) which means not even half of the allotted hours are being 
covered a week.  
With limited nursing care, my husband and I have missed an incredible amount of work 
hours in order to care for our son. Since December of 2018, I have used over 1,100 hours of 
Family Medical leave, this does not include the hours my husband as needed to use at his job, 
which is approximately 500 hours of FMLA. This had led to financial stress, minimal sleep, and 
not the ideal care for our son. Covid created a recent added stress and cause of decreased 
nursing hours over the past couple years. Some home care agencies require their staff to stay 
home if the client or family member is sick with Covid. As we understand why that is in place, it 
creates an incredible hardship to the parents who now either have to care for their child sick 
without any help or continue to miss work because a nurse has been exposed and cannot come 
to work. This has happened many times in our household alone and has caused a lot of missed 
hours at our jobs. We completely understand that there is a nursing shortage and that all the 
hours cannot be filled however that does not negate the fact that my son still needs skilled care 
when a nurse is not available. 
It is vitally important for parents who have to stay home and care for their children with 
disabilities be compensated when nursing hours cannot be staffed. There is a huge financial 
strain that happens when works hours are missed. Both my husband and I have stayed up over 
24-30 hours at a time, countless times, trying to work our jobs and still care for son medical 
needs when nurses call out at the last minute. This is a very hard lifestyle to sustain and has 
taken a toll on us and the care for our son. Ultimately, parents with children with disabilities 
want the best care and environments for our children to grow and thrive and if this bill were to 
pass it would greatly reduce stress, financial hardship and would allow for the best care for our 
children when nursing is not available.
Thank you for your consideration in this matter.
