Holli Corbett
Brewer
LD 874
Hello. My name is Holli. I’m a single mother to Lydia, 13, and Ian, 12. Both of my 
children are afflicted with many developmental, behavioral, and/or medical and 
physical diagnosis that affect their everyday life and require constant management 
and treatment. Lydia’s current list of diagnosis reads as follows: Ehlers Danlos 
syndrome, Dysautanomia, Mast Cell Activation syndrome, Small fiber neuropathy, 
cyclic vomiting syndrome, scoliosis, ADHD, anxiety, tachycardia, a Mitrofanoff 
stoma in her abdomen (in which she inserts a catheter to empty her bladder), and she 
has had several orthopedic surgeries due to skeletal deformities she was born with. 
She also suffers from chronic bone fractures, sprains, dislocations, and subluxations 
of her joints. Ian’s current list of diagnosis reads as follows: autism, ADHD, anxiety, 
disruptive dysregulation mood disorder, seasonal affective disorder, cyclic vomiting 
syndrome, migraines, a platelet function bleeding disorder, and a current unknown 
digestive/GI condition that is currently under investigation with his gastroenterologist 
who suspects Crohn’s disease, given his current symptoms and test results. All of my 
kid’s medical conditions are life-long and/or progressive in nature. Given my 
children’s diagnosis, we average anywhere from 2 to 8 appointments per week. Our 
appointments range from Brewer, ME to Boston, MA at Boston Children's Hospital. 
These appointments consist of doctor appointments, various therapies, medical 
testing, various treatments for their conditions, medicine management teams, chronic 
pain teams, hospital stays, and surgical procedures. We go to Boston a minimum of 
once a month and have been known to go two to three times per month, when needed.
This does not include sick appointments, injurious appointments, or emergent trips to 
walk-in-care or the emergency room.
I have two college degrees; an associate’s degree in Business Management and a 
bachelor’s degree in Liberal Arts with a minor in English and a concentration in 
writing. I am in a position in our lives where I cannot hold a full-time job or put my 
degrees to use because my time and my presence is devoted to and needed by my 
children. Don’t get me wrong, I don’t want to be anywhere else but caring for my 
kids, but this does not change the facts surrounding our situation. I can tell you from 
experience that no employer would allow me to take off the amount of time I would 
need in order to attend and travel to my children’s appointments, etc. Currently, I 
work part-time in the evenings. By working evenings, it allows me to attend my 
children’s appointments without having to take time off from work(with the exception
of traveling to Boston for appointments), as well as be home with them when they are 
sick, hurt, or cannot attend school for health related reasons. Only being able to work 
part-time, we live well below the poverty line and live paycheck to paycheck. 
Sometimes I’m not sure how I’m going to make ends meet. It is scary and frustrating. 
From before our first diagnosis, I don’t know what it is like to parent a child with no 
medical or developmental issues. I don’t know what it’s like to not worry and not 
constantly waiting for the next injury or a new medical issue to pop up. I don’t know 
what it’s like to send my kids to school and not wonder when I’m going to hear from 
the nurse again. I don’t know what it’s like going to a doctor’s appointment and being
told everything is fine. I don’t know what it’s like to have my daily call log be from 
friends and family and not a doctor’s or medical provider’s offices. However, I do 
know what it’s like counting out and organizing over 200+ pills a week for my kids. I 
do know the direct number to my daughter’s medical supply company. I do know 
which pharmacy is most likely going to have my child’s medication in stock when 
refill time comes around. I do know how to advocate for my child after being ignored 
and unheard by medical professionals. I own a blood pressure cuff and a pulse ox for 
my 13 year old daughter. These things are our normal. 

Having the support of this bill would be a life-changing event for our family. It would
allow me to focus on my child’s health needs rather than worry if I’m going to make 
rent this month because I had to take a couple evenings off because of a medical trip 
or illness. It would allow me to provide my children with things they need related to 
their illnesses and not worry if I need to rob Peter to pay Paul to do it. I could list a 
thousand reasons why this bill would benefit our family and every family like ours, 
but we would be here all day and then some. Simply said, this is needed. This is 
needed to fill the void that disrupts a families ability to care for their chronically ill 
child properly. Lastly, if you ever question whether a family could truly benefit from 
this bill, I invite you into our home to witness the day-to-day issues we experience. 
Come be a part of our family. Ask me questions. Get to know us and learn about my 
children’s conditions. Then make your decision. 
Thank you for taking the time to read our testimony. 
