l\/ly name is Jenna Payne and I am a registered nurse living in Freedom. Thank you, members 
of the Health and Human Sen/ices Committee for an opportunity to voice support for_LD 874 
and LD 346. I have experience in multiple settings, including acute care, ambulatory care and 
home health care. l would like to share some thoughts regarding my time in home health, caring 
for a very special client, James. 
The eight months l spent caring for James and essentially becoming part of his family were 
revelatory in many ways. The imposition of institutionalized models of care in a home health 
setting do not translate, as the parents and family are central to the child's care. This is a flaw of 
provision of home health care. This care includes but is not limited to seizure precautions, G- 
tube care, medication administration, post surgical care, aspiration precautions and 
incorporating OT/PT and Speech therapy recommendations in activities of daily living. All of 
these areas will continue to be dynamic and changing, requiring close attention as James 
grows. . 
l understand that James qualifies for 126 hours a week of skilled nursing care, and currently 
only has 40 of those hours covered, meaning Andrea and her family are then responsible for the 
remaining 86. lf an RN was working those hours, they would be compensated somewhere 
between $2000-2500. Families need to be compensated fairly for the skilled nursing level care 
they are providing in the absence of securing long term nursing positions in the home. The 
family should not be punished for the failures of the healthcare system to provide adequate 
support for children with special needs, nor should they be punished for the grossly underpaid 
labor of home health care nurses, which leads to burn out and high turnover rates. Andrea’s 
unacknowledged roles include manager, nurse, CNA and administrator. These roles are 
exemplified by the fact that she trained me in the nuances and unique care needs of James, 
that she covered for the lack of support from the home health agencies to catch or correct 
scheduling issues, and that she was responsible for ordering supplies necessary for delivery of 
care, which involved navigating a dysfunctional system wherein acquiring the most basic of~ 
supplies was a feat of endurance. These are but a few examples of many. She was and will 
continue to be the person responsible for James in times when skilled nursing is not available. 
All of this is unpaid labor. Andrea’s role goes far beyond parenting, as parents of typical children 
never consider things like g-tube maintenance or the complexities of caring for their child after 
double hip surgery. She is unable to seek gainful employment due to the lack of stability in 
James’s care team. This puts tremendous pressure on Patrick to meet all of the financial needs 
for a family of four. As a medical professional, witnessing the burden of labor placed on the 
family and the resulting sequelae was disturbing. Forcing parents into medical roles from lack of 
state and federal support with no fair compensation and no acknowledgement of this burden 
creates undue emotional, psychological and physical stress to an already stressful situation. lt is 
my hope to see “special circumstance nursing” expanded to include the most important 
members of the care team- the parents. I would be happy to remain part of this crucial 
conversation, and to continue to offer my nursing perspective moving fonivard. Thank you for 
your time!
