  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 29 , 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 874 – An Act to Address the Shortage of Direct Care Workers for Children with Disabilities 
in Maine  
 LD 346 – An Act to Clarify the Requirements for Family Caregivers  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information with regard to  LD 874 – An Act to Address the Shortage of Direct 
Care Workers for Children with Disabilities in Maine  and LD 346 – An Act to Clarify the Requireme nts 
for Family Caregivers . The Department is opposed to both proposals.   
 
LD 874  requires  the reimbursement of a parent providing in -home personal care services to the parent's 
child by allowing the parent to register as a personal care agency if the paren t has made reasonable efforts 
to obtain regular in -home personal care services and has passed a background check. The child must be 
eligible for the MaineCare program. An individual who is not a parent of the child must be designated as 
the employer and mu st be approved as the employer by both the parent and the Department of Health and 
Human Services.  The proposed amendment to LD 346 establishes a state -funded pilot program to achieve 
the same services as outlined in LD 874.  
 
This bill conflicts with federal regulations. Parents of minor children are not allowed to be reimbursed 
under Medicaid for providing personal care services for their children. The Code of Federal Regulations 
(42 C.F .R. Section 440.167) states (emphasis ad ded):  
(a) Personal care services  means services furnished to an individual who is not 
an inpatient  or resident of a  hospital, nursing facility, intermediate care facility for 
individuals with intellectual disabilities, or institution for mental disease th at are - 
(1) Authorized for the individual by a  physician  in accordance with a plan of treatment or 
(at the option of the State) otherwise authorized for the individual in accordance with a 
service plan approved by the  State;  
(2) Provided by an individual who is qualified to provide such services and who is  not 
a member of the individual's  family ; and  
(3) Furnished in a home, and at the  State's option, in another location.  
(b) For purposes of this section,  family member  means a legally responsible relative.  
 
The State would not be able to receive federal match to reimburse parents who provide personal care 
services to their children under Section 96 of the MaineCare Benefits Manual . The Centers for Medicare 
& Medicaid Services  has develo ped flexibilities under a limited number of vehicles for federal authority, 
 
 mostly related to Home and Community Based Services, to enable payment of family members with legal 
responsibility for a member. MaineCare does not currently cover children under t hese HCBS options. 
Alternative options for federal approval would be time intensive to explore and may not  meet the intended 
goal(s) of this bill.  
 
It should be noted that the Legislature recently repealed a requirement of the Department to establish 
this payment due to implementation and federal allowability concerns. This repeal was passed 
unanimously in PL 2023, Ch. 3  – section C -1.  
 
If you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

