526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207-480-1478      833-713-2618     www.maineddc.org  
 
 
  
 
April 11, 2023  
 
Testimony in Support  of LD 874, An Act  to Address the Shortage of Direct C are Workers for 
Childre n with Disabilities in Maine.  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
My name is Nancy Cronin , and I am the Executive Director  of the Maine Developmental 
Disabilities (DD) Council.1   Listening to the testimony  to LD 874  I realized that many of the 
families that stood before you were families of children invisible to Maine ’s service system.  
They are families o f very medically fragile children needing services covered under Section 96 .  
Services li ke Private  Duty Nursing, Certified N ursing Assistance and Personal  Care Attendanc e.  
Unlike MaineCa re sections 28 and 65 where there is a centralized referral system  for providers 
to identify children in need of behavioral heal th services, these families have to do the leg work 
themselves to find providers while caring for their childr en so they don ’t die.  Section 28 and 6 5 
have long behavior al health waitlists  and that is terrible, as I have testified be fore.  Howev er, 
the families who test ified to this bill represent  children  with  rare me dical ly fragile conditions  
that don’t even have a list to go on.    
 
Maine DD Council  encour ages the Committee to take two actions with this bill.  A mend th e bill 
to have a narrower scope for t hese families  needing Section 96 services.  They are invisible and 
this bill would provide an initial path way to getting services.  Providing reimbursement for 
these families to provide servi ces for the mselves would a lso allow a preced ent to be set for the 
 
1 Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill 
of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970.  Maine’s DD Council has been advocating with and for individuals with 
developmental disabilities for over 50 year s.  The DD Council is a federally funded, independent organization with 
members from across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and representatives of public 
and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for service s for individuals with developmental 
disabilities.  As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, capacity building and systemic change 
activities, with the goal that individuals with developmental and other disabilities of all ages are fully in cluded, 
integrated, and involved in their communities and the decisions impacting their lives.   
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council  
526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207-480-1478      833-713-2618     www.maineddc.org  
 
 
 other families w hile significantly decreasing the fiscal note.  The other action that we encour age 
is to create a c entralized referral system  for Children wit h Special Healthcare Needs.  
Specifically,  all the children that don ’t fit under Behavioral Health.  15 – 20%  of all children born 
in any given year have spe cial health care needs.   It is time to make those children w ho are very 
medically fragile visi ble to  the s ystem .  We need to know their needs.  We n eed to know who 
these children are.   
 
Ultimately , we nee d to change our system to lo ok at children developmentally as opposed to 
their  behavioral or physical challenges.  Th ese silos carved from funding streams are inefficient , 
ineffective, and harmful for o ur Maine children.  But this bill is not th at vehicle.  
 
I hope  you will consider amending this bill to narrow the scope and , perhaps, create a 
centralized r eferral system.  
 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide input  and I will make myself available  for the work  
session.  
.  
 

