To Whom It May Concern : 
Please accept this as written testimony in support of LD 874 "An Act to Address the Shortage of Direct 
Care Workers for Children with Disabilities in Maine" .  My name is Nicole McGee and I live in Yarmouth 
with my husband Todd , our daughter Lily , and our son .  Lily is 6 years old and has a rare neurological 
disorder called Rett Syndrome , which effects  an estimated 1 in 10,000 female births.  For L ily the effects 
of Rett Syndrome have been devastatin g.  I never anticipa ted the impact that Rett Syndrome would have 
on our entire family ’s lives nearly 5 years a fter the day she was diagnosed .   
Lily requ ires maximum assistance with every aspect of her life.  She has never been able to walk or stand 
independ ently , she ’s never  been able to dress herself, she ’s never been able to verbally say I love you, 
mom .  She lost the abili ty to speak during her first regression around a year old , and s he has essentially 
no purposeful use of her hands .  Lily’s second regression at 4 years old was particularly devastating.  I 
watched my child suddenly lose the ability to eat and feed herself right in front of my eyes.  She would 
drink sips of water and eat a few bites of food only to scream minutes later from the pain of her food 
going back up through her n ose.  Her eating deteriorated to the point that I had to weigh her diapers to 
ensure she was getting enough liquid, and at a particular point when it was deemed too litt le, she was 
admitted to the hospital and had a feedin g tube placed.   With the loss of her ability to eat also came a 
severe risk of choking  from food and liquid.  I wouldn ’t wish the constant fear of your child choking to 
death on anyone.   
Along with Lily ’s 4-year  regression came more seizures, more illnesses that she held onto for weeks  or 
months at a time, a  change in her ability to breathe  while sleeping , the inability to cough effectively, and 
a host of other things.   Lily’s bedroom became reminiscent of a hospital room with a n oxygen machine, a  
pulse oximeter  sensor  taped to her little toe every  night to ensure her oxygen didn ’t drop too low, a 
cough assistance machine, a n airway clearance vest, a suction machine to clear her airway when she 
chokes on her own spit, a feeding pump, wheelchai r, the list of equipment is seemingly never ending  and 
grows with each new problem.  And as if Rett Syndrome on its own hasn ’t been  enough fo r Lily and our 
family to go through, we have also dealt with a  lack of sufficient nursing staff  to assist in caring for her.  
Lily has qua lified for 60 hours of Private Duty Nursing since August 2020.  There has never  been a period 
in which all 60 of Lily ’s hours have been covered , and in fact, she has spent more of th e time since 
qualifying without any nursin g coverage at all than with nursing coverage.  Todd and I both worked full 
time jobs , he as a Deputy Sheriff and  I as a Healthcare Quality Consultant.  We often juggled schedules to 
allow for one of us to take Lily to appointments, howev er, with  the increase in Lily ’s needs and the 
constant lack of re liable and safe nursing coverage, I left my job in August of 2022.  This has meant that 
our famil y also lost a nearly six-figure  income, and that Todd now has to work a minimum of 10 hours of 
overtime a week in order for our family to afford to home , which was made wheelchair accessible by a 
grant in 20 20.  I never imagined on Lily’s diagnosis day in 2018 t hat I would no longer be  employed 
because of R ett Syndrome.   I also never imagined that a professional service such as Private Duty 
Nursing would not only b e unreliable, but also be traumatic and damaging to my child.  Over a span of 2 
years the following occurred in our home with Private Duty Nurses : 
• A nurse failed to strap Lily into her chair  and stepped away,  Lily then fell out of this chair from a 
height of nearly four feet onto her face. 
• A nurse showed u p every day for the two weeks that she worked with Lily with her 
under garments hanging out of her pants.  
• A nurse , who was a great fi t for Lily, took a job at a hospital  because the pay  and benefits were 
better  than private duty nursing.  
• A nurse quit  her one shift a week  because she no longer wanted to work extra hours  outside of 
her re gular job.   This sam e nurse also s tood by while Lily was choking and didn’t  step in to assist 
Todd and I with clearing Lily ’s airw ay. 
• A nurse stood by w hile Lily ’s feeding  tube was  accidentally  ripped out in front of a phys ical 
therapist and two equip ment representatives , handed supplies to me,  and then stepped aside  
and shoved  her hands in her pockets instead of tak ing the necessary steps to replace the feeding 
tube.    
• A nurse grabbed Lily ’s arm and left a bruise of a th umb print on her upper arm.  After  I had 
inquired about the bruise the nurse proceeded to let Lily sit in a soiled diape r for over half a day , 
didn ’t speak to Lily for t he full shift , and didn ’t perfo rm the duties necessary for Lily ’s care that 
day. 
• The final nurse that was employed in our home worked with Lily for less than a week.  On what 
would be her last day , she stole  Lily’s medical reco rd from our home which also included private 
insurance informatio n.   
After the final inciden t we made the dec ision as parents that we could no lon ger both work and care for 
Lily without the presence of reliable and trustworthy nurs ing.  We could n’t let another person hurt our 
child .  We couldn ’t let someone ignore her and let her sit in her own bodily fluids.  We couldn ’t risk 
having a nurse  care  for her t hat would let her choke to death.  
There is already such a significant burden on families like ours that often goes unnoticed, and the lack of 
nursing service s only adds to the financial, physical, and emotional burden  of having a child with a 
disability.  In other states  and other countries parents like Todd and I have the opportunit y to rece ive 
reimbursement for cari ng for their disable d child.   It is our hope that this committee , and in turn the 
State of Maine  can implement a similar program to allow families like ours to care for our children 
without going into poverty or sacrificing the  safety and health of our already f ragile children.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

