 
 
 
 
 
March 23, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, my name is Parame Limvattanalert, a resident of Maine and Assistant Director of Nursing 
Southern Region of COR Health. COR Health is a home health agency. We provide Private Duty Nursing, 
Home Care Services, Medical Staffing, Behavioral Health Professionals and Targeted Case Management 
Services throughout the State of Maine  
 
I am writing to testify in neither for nor against of LD 874 “An Act to Address the Shortage of Direct Care 
Workers for Children with Disabilities in Maine”. 
There are numerous occasions throughout the years when I received referrals from families who state they 
have been unable to find direct care workers through agencies for several years. This is due to a shortage of 
direct care workers for children with disabilities which affects parents of children who qualify for in-home 
personal care services but are not receiving these services. Parents are left leaving their paid employment to 
provide care in the absence of available direct care workers which results in economic hardship.  
The part of the bill addressing sufficient oversight still needs clarification. It is unclear who will perform the 
assessment and determine how many hours the client should qualify for in-home personal care services. 
Also, who will be supervising and providing ongoing education when families are looking for assistance and 
support since an agency will no longer be connected to these children. 
Lastly, MaineCare section 96 already has a clear procedure in place for "special circumstances nursing" 
which allows a relative, including a spouse or the parent of a minor child, to be paid to provide nursing 
services to the member under this section. This program ensures the proper review of qualifications since all 
critical requirements must be met before the start of the program. With the same structure, this could be 
expand to in-home personal care services to solve the shortage of direct care workers by allowing for the 
reimbursement of a parent providing in-home personal care services to a child and still receive support and 
resources from an agency when families need it most. 
 
Sincerely, 
Parame Limvattanalert, BSN, RN 
Assistant Director of Nursing Southern Region 
COR Health | Home Care From the Heart 
980 Forest Avenue, Suite 207 
Portland, Maine 04103 
Tel: (207) 209-0096 
Fax: (207) 560-5940                                                                                                       
 
