Polly Shyka
Freedom
LD 874
Good afternoon members of the Health and Human Services Committee. My name is Polly 
Shyka and I am calling in from Inland Hospital in Waterville where I am serving on the 
Spiritual Care Team as part of my training to become a hospital chaplain. 
I am here today to tell you a little more about the Dole Family with the hopes that you get a 
glimpse into the  many ways they struggle and thrive as a family. I hope you are inspired and 
morally obliged to consider them as you amend this bill to compensate parents for the care 
provided to their children with special Health Needs.  
James, like all children, brings light to a room. James has a glorious smile, a 
wonderful sense of humor, loves music, his friends and family, including his nurses 
and teachers, and most of all his little brother Rafe, aged 5, who loves to snuggle, 
wrestle, and play with James.  Andrea says she can imagine the brothers running 
marathons together as they get older.
James has a swallowing disorder, is non-verbal, has high tone, and requires complete 
hands-on support for all of his activities of daily living like walking, eating, toileting 
and stretching.  James receives water and medicine through a g-tube, and after many 
years of working with a dedicated team of OTs, PTs and feeding and swallowing 
specialists, James has recently learned to eat by mouth and now enjoys food 
immensely. 
James qualifies for 126 hours of nursing level care per week. However, The Doles currently 
have one very dedicated nurse, who works 40 hours a week with James when he's at school 
and a few hours on Saturday.  
The 86 hour deficit of care that James needs is covered by Andrea, as the primary care-giver.
This, in my eyes, is a superhuman task. 
The Doles have deep gratitude for the support that home nurses and the nursing 
agencies they've worked with over the last five years have provided to James and their
family.
But Committee members,  Andrea has trained and said goodbye to 17 different 
nurses, from three different agencies, over the past 5 years. 
Andrea not only performs skilled nursing tasks around the clock for James, she also 
performs all duties of case management like coordinating with agencies, specialists, 
therapists, obtains his durable medical supplies and works through all prior 
authorizations and appeals, when needed. 
Frankly, Andrea is doing too much. She just is. 
So are other Moms and Dads from around the state who are struggle from the same nursing 
staffing shortages and high turnover. 
DHHS needs to clear the way for federal medicaid funds to flow to agencies that are 
already connected to parents like Andrea. She could be paid for all of her work. I 
believe she should be. The path has been made elsewhere. 
Please, follow the example of other states that have multiple levels of certification and
compensation for families who provide consistent, in-home and medically skilled care
to their children with special healthcare needs.
Thank you for your consideration and service to our state. 

