Thomas, Karen 
From: Sarah MacCo|| <me.fit@me.com> 
Sent: Tuesday, March 28, 2023 3:16 PM 
To: HHS 
Subject: LD 874 
Follow Up Flag: Follow up 
Flag Status: Flagged 
This message oriinates from outside the Maine Legislature. 
Ms. Thomas, 
I sent this to Sen Baldacci, but perhaps it should have gone to you so that it can be sent to all HHS Committee 
members. . 
Dear Senator Baldacci, 
I am writing in support of LD 874, to be taken up tomorrow, 3/29. 
Andrea Boothby will be presenting testimony in favor of the bill. Her situation as the mother of seven year old 
James requires her to be number one caregiver who can’t hold another job or relax into any kind of certainty 
given the acute shortage of direct caregivers. Andrea is a ﬁghter, a compassionate mother and .. ..now. . .on - the 
- job - trained but not licensed expert home health care nurse as a result of 7 years of intense caregiving. 
There are long term solutions that require training programs and a change in compensation for direct care givers 
here in Maine, but for Andrea and hundreds of parents like her, a short term solution to the work she performs is 
to compensate her for it. 
Her family makes ends meet, and the compensation will do more than put food on the table, but I wonder what 
impoverished families do when one of the earners must stay home to care for a family member. Actually. I 
don’t wonder. 
I know they suffer as their children grow up in poverty, the most traumatic situation there is for children, 
resulting in long term damage to their brains and our society as we deal ineffectively with their PTSD. The 
work of Bessel van der kolk comes to mind as well as the experiment whose researcher I have forgotten -—- 
simple extra cash payments to impoverished families lift them up in the short and long term. 
Thank you for your work on the bill. 
Sincerely, 
Sarah Russell MacC0ll
1
Sarah MacC0ll Level 4 Certiﬁed Essentrics 
Instructor IDEA Elite Personal Trainer ACE Advanced 
Health & Fitness Specialist Medical Exercise Specialist 
www. Zztme. me 
207.799.2424
2
