Tammy Polakowski
COR Health Services
LD 874
March 23, 2023
RE: LD 874:  An Act to Address the Shortage of Direct Care Workers for Children 
with Disabilities in Maine
My opinion for LD 874 is neither for nor against. I would like to offer suggestions to 
improve this bill because I feel as it is written, it would be unsuccessful and  due to 
the shortage of all levels of health care providers in Maine, we recognize the need for 
a way for the parents/guardians to be part of the solution as to prevent hardships 
within the family financially.  I would like this bill to be amended as to provide a 
positive and safe impact for  Maine families  who have a child with disabilities. While
the intent of the bill is supported, I feel as though it lacks important elements that 
would ultimately prove it unsuccessful.
MaineCare section 96: Private duty nursing and personal care services 96.01-1 
outlines these as covered services provided to an eligible Member. This bill does not 
clearly define “eligible” as to who would be the assessing agency. Without the 
presence of a home health agency, the parent would not have the ability to assess for 
eligibility and request hours,  provide supervisions and trainings, create plan of care, 
maintain documents,  and follow regulations required. The med form provides a basis 
for services needed, which would be done by an RN employed by a home health 
agency.
96.01-4 Personal care services are defined as those activities of daily living, 
instrumental activities of daily living and medication administration services provided
to a member by a home health aide, certified nursing assistant, personal support 
specialist, or certified residential medication aide, as appropriate while completing 
tasks in accordance with an authorized plan of care.  
LD 874 suggests that the State reimburse parents whose qualification is a successful 
background check. I suggest that for a parent to be considered a caregiver for their 
child,
The relative must meet all of the following requirements outlined: 
•meet all licensing, training, reporting and other requirements otherwise specified in
the section; and
•be employed by a licensed home health agency; and
•abide by the requirement that an independent nurse or physician must conduct any 
required assessment and develop the plan of care; and
•implement the member’s authorized plan of care; and
•expect to continue non-reimbursed family caregiver responsibilities; and 
And the relative must meet one of the following:
-Have resigned from full/part time employment specifically to provide services to the 
member; or
-have changed from full-time to part-time employment resulting in less compensation 
to --provide services to the member; or
-have taken a leave of absence without pay from employment to provide services to 
the member; or 
-be needed to provide a safe and compliant way to meet the member’s plan of care 
because of labor conditions or intermittent hours of care.  
These requirements provide for oversight and qualifications that are missing from LD 
874. 
       There is a program currently in place called Special Circumstance nursing. It 
allows the RN or LPN parent to be a paid caregiver for their child when employed by 
a home health agency and the above requirements are met.  This bill could be 
amended to follow the Special Circumstance model and I feel it would be a safe and 
successful alternative to the bill as written. 
       I feel with modifications noted  in this testimony,  LD 874 would have the 
support needed. First and foremost we consider the safety of the children and their 
families. We also realize the hardship of not being able to send these children to 
conventional childcare programs , and for the parent to not be able to work and 
provide necessary income the family needs. 
Tammy Polakowski RN ADON-North, COR Health Services
Hermon, Maine 04401

