TESTIMONY OF 
Patrick Keliher 
Department of Marine Resources 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying 
In Opposition to 
LD 920 An Act to Allow Holders of Elver Fishing Licenses to Fish on Behalf 
of Other Elver Fishing License Holders 
Before the Committee on Marine Resources 
Sponsored by Senator Reny 
Date of Hearing: April 27, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Marine Resources, my name is Patrick Keliher, Commissioner of the 
Department of Marine Resources, and I am testifying on behalf of the Department in opposition 
to LD 920. 
LD 920 would authorize the holder of an elver fishing license to allow another elver fishing 
license holder to fish for, take, possess and sell the elvers associated with the original license 
holder's license. The license holder performing these licensed activities must be in possession 
of the other license holder's license and elver transaction card. The bill also allows the holder of 
the elver fishing license who is fishing on behalf of another license holder to take, possess or 
sell up to the combined quotas ofthe 2 licenses. 
Because of the extremely high value of elvers (often $2000+/lb), the fishery is very strictly 
managed and regulated. Each license holder has been allocated a specific quota that was 
based on their fishery history at the time the quota system was developed. Each license 
holder is issued a transaction card (often called a swipe card) for their use when selling elvers. 
This allows the Department to track landings in real time to ensure that the State stays within 
the overall quota. 
Elver season begins annually on March 22”‘ , and the 2020 elver season occurred in the very 
earliest days of the COVID pandemic. Many characteristics of the fishery, including the large 
number of participants, close contact between fishermen on the rivers and in the dealer shops, 
and the travel throughout the State were considered threats to public health at the time. 
DMR delayed the opening of the fishery and worked directly with Dr. Shah ofthe Maine CDC to 
minimize risk while allowing the fishery to proceed in a way that was protective of both the 
participants and public health in Maine. Using powers available through the declaration of 
the state of emergency, Governor Mills issued an executive order that waived enforcement of 
many of the laws regarding the harvesting and sale of elvers. Specifically, elver license holders 
were allowed to catch and sell the quota that was assigned to other license holders. In order 
to do so, they were required to have both the license and swipe card of the other license holder 
in their possession. This reduced crowding on rivers, reduced travel throughout the state, and 
protected the older and more vulnerable members of the fishery.
Because the state of emergency continued through the summer of 2021, these provisions 
remained in place through the 2021 elver season. With the conclusion of the state of 
emergency, the fishery returned to the historical practices of each license holder catching and 
selling their own catch in 2022. 
The Department believes that the deviation from the existing law was warranted during the 
unusual circumstances of the pandemic, particularly in the earliest days when so little about the 
virus was understood. However, with many aspects of life returning to normal, it is 
appropriate for the members of this fishery to return to catching and selling their own quota. 
It is a foundational aspect of Maine's fisheries that the license holder participates in the 
licensed activities, and DMR does not support deviating from this expectation as a long-term 
strategy. 
There are existing laws that allow elver license holders to transfer their quota to other license 
holders for the duration of a season if a medical issue prevents them from being able to fish. 
You have also recently supported LD 817, which allows the crew members of elver license 
holders to assist in the licensed activities, including the emptying of the fyke net under the 
license holder's direct supervision. These laws provide significant flexibility to make surea 
license holder can benefit from the value of their quota, without allowing the transfer of quota 
in perpetuity, and absentee fishing. If there is more that could be done to ensure that an elver 
harvester who is unable to fish for medical reasons can still access the income from their quota, 
the Department would be very open to making those changes. However, we do not support 
unrestricted transfers of quota in non-medical situations. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I would be happy to answer any questions you might 
have.
