Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President | Jesse Hargrove Vice President | Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org
 
 
   Testimony 
In Opposition to  
LD 317 An Act Regarding Safe Schools 
  Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
 May 24, 2023 
  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee,  
 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certified teacher. The MEA represents 
nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-12 schools as well as in our 
institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine Community 
College System, along with students in teacher prep programs as well as many retired educators. 
 
I am testifying on behalf of MEA in opposition to LD 317, An Act Regarding Safe Schools. 
 
Our opposition may seem incongruous with other positions we have. MEA is deeply concerned about 
school safety. We recognize that not all school districts, and certainly not all school buildings, are able to 
have school resource officers. And while we support ways to help enable  retired educators to return to 
positions to help address the many teaching and support staff vacancies that aren’t being filled, we see 
the position of a school resource officer as being quite different and not one that might properly be filled 
by someone who has retired. LD 317 states that the retired law enforcement officer would have 
completed the ‘State’s training standard’ within the previous year. It is unclear exactly what the ‘training 
standard’ is. The information on the Maine Department of Public Safety website1 has a chart that goes 
only to age 59 for physical fitness requirements, leading one to ask what the ‘standard’ would be for a 
retiree older than that age. Does the ‘standard’ include recent training in diversity, equity, inclusion, and 
justice (DEIJ), for example? There have been concerns in some areas regarding a lack of or insufficient 
DEIJ training and the impact this may have on our diverse student populations. Given the various 
reasons why a law enforcement officer may have decided to retire, is a retired officer well suited to what 
would be required to meet the expectations a school district would have for this position?  
 
The other measure called for in LD 317, the convening of a stakeholder group, is asking for a study; 
however, the Maine Department of Education’s School Safety Center2 is already engaging in the work 
that apparently would be the subject of the study. I have attended sessions on school safety topics 
offered by the Center, including last summer’s School Safety Summit, and can attest to the quality of the 
work being done. Furthermore, in Sec. 2., 1. of the bill, by stating that the stakeholder group would 
analyze how to ‘incentivize and encourage the use of school resource officers,’ the assumption is made 
that this is a position that all school districts are seeking to have, which may not be the case. 
 
While MEA appreciates the motivation behind LD 317 to improve the safety of our schools, we have the 
above concerns with what is proposed. We believe that the larger issues of gun safety and preventing 
gun violence need much greater attention that they are currently receiving. In addition, we encourage 
support for the measures that will also provide increased resources to meet the emotional and mental 
health needs of our students and of our communities. We encourages you to vote ‘ought not to pass’ on 
LD 317. 
 
 
 
Grace Leavitt 
President, Maine Education Association 
 
1https://www.maine.gov/dps/msp/join/requirements#:~:text=Minimum%20Qualifications&text=Educati
on%3A%20An%20applicant%20must%20be,or%20extensive%20motor%20vehicle%20records. 
 
2https://www.maine.gov/doe/safety 
 
 
