May 25, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My names is Jan Collins and I am assistant director for Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition.  I am here today to speak in opposition to LD 317 - An Act Regarding Safe Schools.MPAC’s mission is to support Maine's incarcerated citizens, their families, and friends  in their struggle with Maine's criminal justice system. Our purpose is to reduce Maine's use of incarceration by creating a criminal justice system that is ethical, humane, and restorative in nature.I bring my personal experience to this bill. Prior to working for MPAC I taught high school biology, chemistry, earth science, and physics in Maine public schools. It was only in my last two years of teaching that School Resource Ofﬁcers were introduced.I believe that SROs were introduced in the mistaken belief that they would make our schools safer. The mass shootings in Uvalde and at Marjory Stoneman Douglass HS in Florida are only two examples of school tragedies in which law enforcement was present. There are many more.SROs cannot be everywhere at all times within a school.If the presence of SROs does not prevent these nightmare scenarios, do they have some other positive impact that would validate their presence? Though SROs may be good people, they are not teachers and they are not counselors. 

In my 26 years of teaching, I never saw a student and thought to myself, “they could really use a police ofﬁcer”. However, there were many times that I wished we had more counselors, or smaller class sizes so that students could be given the time and attention they need and deserve. Aside from diverting precious resources that could be used to truly help students, SROs have other negative consequences. I excerpt this synopsis of results from the studies reviewed by the Maine Statistical Analysis Center in their 2019 report on School-Based Policing in Maine: A study on School Resource Ofﬁcers in Maine’s public schools1.There has been a sharp increase in juvenile arrests since the deployment of SROs. This effect is especially pronounced for students of color, students with learning disabilities, and students from other vulnerable populations who may be socially marginalized or economically disadvantaged. Interactions with law enforcement at school can be an alienating and humiliating experience for students. The ACLU found that schools with police presence report 3.5 times as many arrests as schools without police presence. Students who are arrested in high school are three times as likely to drop out, students who appear in court during high school are four times as likely to drop out, and students who drop out of high school are eight times more likely to end up in the criminal justice system. I urge you to oppose LD 317 - An Act Regarding Safe Schools. It does not in fact make our schools safer and can be very detrimental to our most vulnerable students. Instead, let us pledge to decrease class size and increase the supports that insure student success.Sincerely,Jan M. Collins, Wiltonjanmariecollins57@gmail.comMaine Prisoner Advocacy CoalitionPresident Franklin County Retired Educators
They carried guns and badges in Maine schools but weren’t actually cops by Erin RhodaBangor Daily NewsWhen police pin a badge to their uniform, issue tickets or clasp handcuffs around someone’s wrists, their power stems from a piece of paper: a certificate earned by completing the required training. If they are not certified, they are not law enforcement officers. In the wake of school shootings around the country, more schools nationally have brought in police officers to try to help keep students safe. In 2018, Oxford County commissioners approved hiring men armed with guns and wearing badges to work as school resource officers in local schools. School resource officers are supposed to be law enforcement officials vested with the power to make arrests, according to Maine law. But two men the Oxford County Sheriff’s Office hired, including a commissioner’s brother, weren’t actually certified as police. One went nearly four years before getting certified. The other is still not certified. The school districts requested certified law enforcement officers: Their signed contracts with the sheriff’s office said they would receive certified officers capable of carrying out any duties customarily performed by law enforcement. And the districts, Hiram-based School Administrative District 55 and Rumford-based Regional School Unit 10, were obligated to pay $42,086 per deputy to the sheriff’s office for this school year alone, under  contracts signed by Oxford County Sheriff Christopher Wainwright and Commissioner Timothy Turner. 
But unknown to the schools, what they received over the last four years does not appear to be what they paid for.  What’s more, the Oxford County Sheriff’s Office knew in March 2021 the exact steps to take to ensure it had certified law enforcement officers in area schools, according to an email laying out the process from a Maine Criminal Justice Academy training coordinator to Chief Deputy James Urquhart. Despite this, the sheriff and the two uncertified men hired as school resource officers said they believed they had more time to complete their credentialing than they actually did. It is disturbing that the agency did not ensure its officers were certified, said one national expert on school resource officers about the ordeal, which is the latest conflict for a sheriff’s office that has seen two internal investigations into different sheriffs in recent years. One of the men hired as a school resource officer, Michael Kaspereen, is still not certified as a law enforcement officer, according to the Maine Criminal Justice Academy, which trains police candidates and issues certificates. Kaspereen is primarily assigned to Sacopee Valley Middle School in Hiram, and he also covers Sacopee Valley Elementary School and the central office, according to the contract. The other, Percy Turner, who is Commissioner Turner’s brother, completed his required academy testing in August 2022, nearly four years after starting work, and is now certified. He covers Buckfield Junior-Senior High School and Hartford-Sumner Elementary School in Sumner. While both Kaspereen and Percy Turner retired after careers in law enforcement, their experience does not prevent them from having to maintain a current certification, according to the academy. Turner had been out of the force for about five years before being hired to work as a school resource officer. Kaspereen had been out for eight. Once an officer is 
away for two years, they must become recertified to make sure they are up to date on new laws and practices. “If they’re not certified, then they don’t have the powers of arrest,” said Jack Peck, the director of the academy. “If they are not certified, they should not be carrying a gun or wearing a uniform.” Sheriff’s office records obtained through a public records request show Turner and Kaspereen were issued Glock pistols in June 2020. Getting recertified is typically a faster process for people who have been police officers in the past than for those with no law enforcement background receiving their initial certification. People who are recertifying have to take Law Enforcement Pre-Service Phase I, a self-paced, online course, and then pass the Phase I exam, either in-person at the academy or proctored online at their agency, said E. Donald Finnegan, training coordinator at the academy. After completing Phase I, full-time officers who are recertifying have two options. They can pass the Phase II exam to receive a provisional full-time certification, so they can begin working. If they choose this option, they have up to six months to work before they have to pass the final full-time law enforcement certification exam. Or upon completing the Phase I exam, they can skip the Phase II test and immediately take the final exam. Kaspereen took the Phase I exam on March 18, 2022, but he did not complete any other required steps, Finnegan said. The academy also requires documentation of officers’ employment. That’s because, even if someone is certified as an officer, they have to be employed by a law enforcement agency to carry out police duties. Maine law requires agency heads to notify the academy within 30 days of a new hire. But the academy does not have the required employment records for Kaspereen. 
Every year police agencies send lists of their employed officers to the academy, but the Oxford County Sheriff’s Office has not reported Turner or Kaspereen on those reports in recent years, Finnegan said. While it does not have a notice of employment for Kaspereen, it recently discovered that one had been submitted for Turner in August. It was signed by Wainwright and back dated Turner’s start date to November 2019. (Turner actually started in November 2018, however, according to the contract and Oxford County’s administrative office.) When reached by phone, neither RSU 10 Superintendent Deb Alden nor SAD 55 Superintendent Carl Landry said they had known their school resource officers were not actually law enforcement. “He has done an excellent job for us,” Alden said about Turner. “We’ve had a very safe environment with his help … I will certainly look into it.” Commissioner Tim Turner also said he had not known that Percy Turner and Kaspereen were not certified when the commissioners approved their hire in November 2018 because checking their status is the sheriff’s responsibility. He abstained from the vote to hire his brother. He described Kaspereen, who retired in 2010 after 25 years with the Maine State Police, as a “top-notch” officer and said his current lack of certification is “a minor concern. I just want to make sure he gets his training in as fast as he can.” At the same time, “if we received a formal complaint we’d probably have to hire an investigator to look into it to see if it was negligence or an oversight, or what was it,” Tim Turner said. Oxford County has ordered independent investigations before. This month it concluded its handling of a $15,600 independent, internal 
investigation into how the sheriff treated two deputies after he asked one to show leniency in a traffic violation case. Percy Turner and Kaspereen’s time working in the schools has spanned two sheriffs. Former Sheriff James Theriault hired them in 2018, and the current sheriff, Wainwright, has renewed contracts with the school districts since then. Wainwright, Turner and Kaspereen expressed confusion about what the recertification process entailed and whether they were certified or not. After playing frisbee with students on the athletic fields behind Buckfield Junior-Senior High School on the afternoon of May 11, Turner said he hadn’t originally intended to stay in the role as long as he has but discovered he loves it. Turner spent 29 years with the state police and another eight years as a part-time officer with the Oxford County Sheriff’s Office, separating from them in 2013, before coming back to be a school resource officer. When they were hired in 2018, “as far as we knew, we were certified,” Turner said. Looking back now, he acknowledged he probably wasn’t. He and Kaspereen each said separately that a proctor at the academy told them they had two years — not six months — once they completed the Phase II exam to take the final test. “When we were finished with the PHASE II exam the Proctor asked us if we wanted to take the final full time exam at that time. We both declined. I asked him how long do I have to take the final exam?  The proctor kept saying ‘just come in anytime [and] take it’. I again asked how long? The proctor then told me I had 2 years to take the final exam,” Kaspereen wrote in an email. “Apparently that info was wrong.” 
Finnegan, with the academy, pointed out that Kaspereen did not actually take the Phase II exam. The only exam he took, on March 18, 2022, was to pass Phase I. Regardless, there is no two-year window for police candidates to continue working while they complete additional testing. If people complete Phase I and then let two years go by without completing the remaining steps, they have to repeat Phase I, Finnegan said. But there is no two-year gap between tests where people can work. Kaspereen disagreed about which exam he took. “It is most likely [the academy] misplaced the exam or did not enter the results in the database,” Kaspereen wrote. The sheriff was also under the impression there was a two-year grace period. “My understanding is he has two years from the time they take the Phase I course to complete the rest of it. My understanding was that he has done it,” Wainwright said. The sheriff then said he wanted “to be cautious and pause.” “I will get back to you and take a look,” he said. About a week later, Wainwright said the sheriff’s office was working with the academy “to straighten out any clerical errors.” “I don’t think the story will end up being as sensational as you think it is,” he said in an email. “And as always I won’t comment on any personal matters involving individual deputies at this time.” 
As an overseer of Maine police, it is possible for the academy to discipline someone for working as a police officer without a valid certification, Finnegan said. All investigations into alleged misconduct are confidential, however, so he could not say whether there is currently an investigation or not. Kaspereen said there was an investigation, however. “Apparently there is now an internal investigation ongoing at the MCJA and I will no longer comment,” he said in an email. It is not only worrying that people were working as officers without being certified to do so but that they thought they were actually law enforcement, said Mo Canady, the executive director of the National Association of School Resource Officers, which trains school resource officers, often called SROs. Both Turner and Kaspereen have taken the organization’s training, they said. “It is disturbing. It is really disturbing that someone would think they were a law enforcement officer,” Canady said. “I’m not trying to be critical, but that is not normal.” If someone claims to be a school resource officer but is not law enforcement, “they’re not an SRO. It’s as simple as that,” he said, adding that he had never heard of it happening before. “This is a perplexing situation, kind of a wild moment if you will.” It is not yet clear if Kaspereen or Turner carried out the tasks of police while they were not certified. Alden, the RSU 10 superintendent, said Turner had not arrested, summonsed or ticketed people since he joined. The superintendent for SAD 55, Landry, did not answer a question about whether Kaspereen had arrested anyone. 
The movement in Maine is for school resource officers to become more specialized. Two years ago the academy started a voluntary 40-hour training program specifically for school resource officers. “Young people are not little adults. They are physically and mentally and developmentally different, and therefore the approach to dealing with a young person needs to be taught,” said Jonathan Shapiro, director of the Maine School Safety Center at the Maine Department of Education, one of the organizations that helped develop the training. “It’s the most unique assignment. They’ve got to be highly skilled in all areas of their job,” Canady said. “When we get the wrong people in a role, it can end in a bit of a disaster.” 
Jan Collins
Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition
LD 317
May 25, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs. My names is Jan Collins and I am assistant director 
for Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition.  I am here today to speak in opposition to LD
317 - An Act Regarding Safe Schools.
MPAC’s mission is to support Maine's incarcerated citizens, their families, and 
friends  in their struggle with Maine's criminal justice system. Our purpose is to 
reduce Maine's use of incarceration by creating a criminal justice system that is 
ethical, humane, and restorative in nature.
I bring my personal experience to this bill. Prior to working for MPAC I taught high 
school biology, chemistry, earth science, and physics in Maine public schools. It was 
only in my last two years of teaching that School Resource Officers were introduced.
I believe that SROs were introduced in the mistaken belief that they would make our 
schools safer. The mass shootings in Uvalde and at Marjory Stoneman Douglass HS 
in Florida are only two examples of school tragedies in which law enforcement was 
present. There are many more.
SROs cannot be everywhere at all times within a school.
If the presence of SROs does not prevent these nightmare scenarios, do they have 
some other positive impact that would validate their presence? Though SROs may be 
good people, they are not teachers and they are not counselors. 
In my 26 years of teaching, I never saw a student and thought to myself, “they could 
really use a police officer”. However, there were many times that I wished we had 
more counselors, or smaller class sizes so that students could be given the time and 
attention they need and deserve. 
Aside from diverting precious resources that could be used to truly help students, 
SROs have other negative consequences. I excerpt this synopsis of results from the 
studies reviewed by the Maine Statistical Analysis Center in their 2019 report on 
School-Based Policing in Maine: A study on School Resource Officers in Maine’s 
public schools1.
There has been a sharp increase in juvenile arrests since the deployment of SROs. 
This effect is especially pronounced for students of color, students with learning 
disabilities, and students from other vulnerable populations who may be socially 
marginalized or economically disadvantaged. Interactions with law enforcement at 
school can be an alienating and humiliating experience for students. The ACLU found
that schools with police presence report 3.5 times as many arrests as schools without 
police presence. Students who are arrested in high school are three times as likely to 
drop out, students who appear in court during high school are four times as likely to 
drop out, and students who drop out of high school are eight times more likely to end 
up in the criminal justice system. 
I urge you to oppose LD 317 - An Act Regarding Safe Schools. It does not in fact 
make our schools safer and can be very detrimental to our most vulnerable students. 
Instead, let us pledge to decrease class size and increase the supports that insure 
student success.
Sincerely,
Jan M. Collins, Wilton
janmariecollins57@gmail.com
Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition
President Franklin County Retired Educators
They carried guns and badges in Maine schools but weren’t actually cops by Erin 
Rhoda
Bangor Daily News
When police pin a badge to their uniform, issue tickets or clasp handcuffs around 
someone’s wrists, their power stems from a piece of paper: a certificate earned by 
completing the required training. If they are not certified, they are not law 
enforcement officers. 
In the wake of school shootings around the country, more schools nationally have 
brought in police officers to try to help keep students safe. In 2018, Oxford County 
commissioners approved hiring men armed with guns and wearing badges to work as 
school resource officers in local schools. School resource officers are supposed to be 
law enforcement officials vested with the power to make arrests, according to Maine 
law.
But two men the Oxford County Sheriff’s Office hired, including a commissioner’s 
brother, weren’t actually certified as police. One went nearly four years before getting
certified. The other is still not certified. 
The school districts requested certified law enforcement officers: Their signed 
contracts with the sheriff’s office said they would receive certified officers capable of 
carrying out any duties customarily performed by law enforcement.
And the districts, Hiram-based School Administrative District 55 and Rumford-based 
Regional School Unit 10, were obligated to pay $42,086 per deputy to the sheriff’s 
office for this school year alone, under  contracts signed by Oxford County Sheriff 
Christopher Wainwright and Commissioner Timothy Turner.
But unknown to the schools, what they received over the last four years does not 
appear to be what they paid for. 
What’s more, the Oxford County Sheriff’s Office knew in March 2021 the exact steps
to take to ensure it had certified law enforcement officers in area schools, according to
 an email laying out the process from a Maine Criminal Justice Academy training 
coordinator to Chief Deputy James Urquhart. Despite this, the sheriff and the two 
uncertified men hired as school resource officers said they believed they had more 
time to complete their credentialing than they actually did.
It is disturbing that the agency did not ensure its officers were certified, said one 
national expert on school resource officers about the ordeal, which is the latest 
conflict for a sheriff’s office that has seen two internal investigations into different 
sheriffs in recent years.
One of the men hired as a school resource officer, Michael Kaspereen, is still not 
certified as a law enforcement officer, according to the Maine Criminal Justice 
Academy, which trains police candidates and issues certificates. Kaspereen is 
primarily assigned to Sacopee Valley Middle School in Hiram, and he also covers 
Sacopee Valley Elementary School and the central office, according to the contract.
The other, Percy Turner, who is Commissioner Turner’s brother, completed his 
required academy testing in August 2022, nearly four years after starting work, and is 
now certified. He covers Buckfield Junior-Senior High School and Hartford-Sumner 
Elementary School in Sumner.
While both Kaspereen and Percy Turner retired after careers in law enforcement, their
experience does not prevent them from having to maintain a current certification, 
according to the academy. Turner had been out of the force for about five years before
being hired to work as a school resource officer. Kaspereen had been out for eight. 
Once an officer is away for two years, they must become recertified to make sure they
are up to date on new laws and practices.
“If they’re not certified, then they don’t have the powers of arrest,” said Jack Peck, 
the director of the academy. “If they are not certified, they should not be carrying a 
gun or wearing a uniform.”
Sheriff’s office records obtained through a public records request show Turner and 
Kaspereen were issued Glock pistols in June 2020.
Getting recertified is typically a faster process for people who have been police 
officers in the past than for those with no law enforcement background receiving their
initial certification. People who are recertifying have to take Law Enforcement 
Pre-Service Phase I, a self-paced, online course, and then pass the Phase I exam, 
either in-person at the academy or proctored online at their agency, said E. Donald 
Finnegan, training coordinator at the academy.
After completing Phase I, full-time officers who are recertifying have two options. 
They can pass the Phase II exam to receive a provisional full-time certification, so 
they can begin working. If they choose this option, they have up to six months to 
work before they have to pass the final full-time law enforcement certification exam. 
Or upon completing the Phase I exam, they can skip the Phase II test and immediately
take the final exam. 
Kaspereen took the Phase I exam on March 18, 2022, but he did not complete any 
other required steps, Finnegan said. 
The academy also requires documentation of officers’ employment. That’s because, 
even if someone is certified as an officer, they have to be employed by a law 
enforcement agency to carry out police duties. Maine law requires agency heads to 
notify the academy within 30 days of a new hire. But the academy does not have the 
required employment records for Kaspereen. 
Every year police agencies send lists of their employed officers to the academy, but 
the Oxford County Sheriff’s Office has not reported Turner or Kaspereen on those 
reports in recent years, Finnegan said. 
While it does not have a notice of employment for Kaspereen, it recently discovered 
that one had been submitted for Turner in August. It was signed by Wainwright and 
back dated Turner’s start date to November 2019. (Turner actually started in 
November 2018, however, according to the contract and Oxford County’s 
administrative office.) 
When reached by phone, neither RSU 10 Superintendent Deb Alden nor SAD 55 
Superintendent Carl Landry said they had known their school resource officers were 
not actually law enforcement. 
“He has done an excellent job for us,” Alden said about Turner. “We’ve had a very 
safe environment with his help … I will certainly look into it.” 
Commissioner Tim Turner also said he had not known that Percy Turner and 
Kaspereen were not certified when the commissioners approved their hire in 
November 2018 because checking their status is the sheriff’s responsibility. He 
abstained from the vote to hire his brother. 
He described Kaspereen, who retired in 2010 after 25 years with the Maine State 
Police, as a “top-notch” officer and said his current lack of certification is “a minor 
concern. I just want to make sure he gets his training in as fast as he can.” 
At the same time, “if we received a formal complaint we’d probably have to hire an 
investigator to look into it to see if it was negligence or an oversight, or what was it,” 
Tim Turner said. 
Oxford County has ordered independent investigations before. This month it 
concluded its handling of a $15,600 independent, internal investigation into how the 
sheriff treated two deputies after he asked one to show leniency in a traffic violation 
case.
Percy Turner and Kaspereen’s time working in the schools has spanned two sheriffs. 
Former Sheriff James Theriault hired them in 2018, and the current sheriff, 
Wainwright, has renewed contracts with the school districts since then. 
Wainwright, Turner and Kaspereen expressed confusion about what the recertification
process entailed and whether they were certified or not. 
After playing frisbee with students on the athletic fields behind Buckfield 
Junior-Senior High School on the afternoon of May 11, Turner said he hadn’t 
originally intended to stay in the role as long as he has but discovered he loves it. 
Turner spent 29 years with the state police and another eight years as a part-time 
officer with the Oxford County Sheriff’s Office, separating from them in 2013, before
coming back to be a school resource officer. 
When they were hired in 2018, “as far as we knew, we were certified,” Turner said. 
Looking back now, he acknowledged he probably wasn’t. 
He and Kaspereen each said separately that a proctor at the academy told them they 
had two years — not six months — once they completed the Phase II exam to take the
final test. 
“When we were finished with the PHASE II exam the Proctor asked us if we wanted 
to take the final full time exam at that time. We both declined. I asked him how long 
do I have to take the final exam?  The proctor kept saying ‘just come in anytime [and]
take it’. I again asked how long? The proctor then told me I had 2 years to take the 
final exam,” Kaspereen wrote in an email. “Apparently that info was wrong.” 
Finnegan, with the academy, pointed out that Kaspereen did not actually take the 
Phase II exam. The only exam he took, on March 18, 2022, was to pass Phase I. 
Regardless, there is no two-year window for police candidates to continue working 
while they complete additional testing. If people complete Phase I and then let two 
years go by without completing the remaining steps, they have to repeat Phase I, 
Finnegan said. But there is no two-year gap between tests where people can work. 
Kaspereen disagreed about which exam he took. 
“It is most likely [the academy] misplaced the exam or did not enter the results in the 
database,” Kaspereen wrote. 
The sheriff was also under the impression there was a two-year grace period. 
“My understanding is he has two years from the time they take the Phase I course to 
complete the rest of it. My understanding was that he has done it,” Wainwright said. 
The sheriff then said he wanted “to be cautious and pause.” 
“I will get back to you and take a look,” he said. 
About a week later, Wainwright said the sheriff’s office was working with the 
academy “to straighten out any clerical errors.” 
“I don’t think the story will end up being as sensational as you think it is,” he said in 
an email. “And as always I won’t comment on any personal matters involving 
individual deputies at this time.” 
As an overseer of Maine police, it is possible for the academy to discipline someone 
for working as a police officer without a valid certification, Finnegan said. All 
investigations into alleged misconduct are confidential, however, so he could not say 
whether there is currently an investigation or not. 
Kaspereen said there was an investigation, however. 
“Apparently there is now an internal investigation ongoing at the MCJA and I will no 
longer comment,” he said in an email. 
It is not only worrying that people were working as officers without being certified to 
do so but that they thought they were actually law enforcement, said Mo Canady, the 
executive director of the National Association of School Resource Officers, which 
trains school resource officers, often called SROs. Both Turner and Kaspereen have 
taken the organization’s training, they said. 
“It is disturbing. It is really disturbing that someone would think they were a law 
enforcement officer,” Canady said. “I’m not trying to be critical, but that is not 
normal.” 
If someone claims to be a school resource officer but is not law enforcement, “they’re
not an SRO. It’s as simple as that,” he said, adding that he had never heard of it 
happening before. “This is a perplexing situation, kind of a wild moment if you will.” 
It is not yet clear if Kaspereen or Turner carried out the tasks of police while they 
were not certified. Alden, the RSU 10 superintendent, said Turner had not arrested, 
summonsed or ticketed people since he joined. 
The superintendent for SAD 55, Landry, did not answer a question about whether 
Kaspereen had arrested anyone. 
The movement in Maine is for school resource officers to become more specialized. 
Two years ago the academy started a voluntary 40-hour training program specifically 
for school resource officers. 
“Young people are not little adults. They are physically and mentally and 
developmentally different, and therefore the approach to dealing with a young person 
needs to be taught,” said Jonathan Shapiro, director of the Maine School Safety 
Center at the Maine Department of Education, one of the organizations that helped 
develop the training. 
“It’s the most unique assignment. They’ve got to be highly skilled in all areas of their 
job,” Canady said. “When we get the wrong people in a role, it can end in a bit of a 
disaster.” 
