 
 
 
 
1 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE , ESQ.  
 
Ought Not to Pass - LD 317 
 
An Act Regarding Safe Schools  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON EDUCATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS  
 
May 24 , 2023 
 
Senator  Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and members of the Committee 
on Education and Cultural A ffairs , good afternoon . My name is Michael Kebede , 
and I am policy counsel for the A merican Civil Liberties Union ( “ACLU ”) of Maine, 
a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties in 
Maine .  On behalf of our members , I am here to testify against  LD 317, a bill that 
would strengthen an inherently harmful system.  
If enacted, this bill would, among other things,  require the Maine 
Department of Education (“DOE”) to convene a study on “ how to incentivize and 
encou rage the use of school resource officers in schools .” This bill would also exempt 
certain retired police officers from the ban on carrying and shooting a gun in 
schools. Not only is this bill unnecessary, but it would also take Maine further down 
a failed path.  
The ACLU has long advocated for the removal of police from schools. That is 
because police are generally ill equipped to address the mental and behavioral 
health challenges that often underpin student misbehavior. Kids will be kids, 
regardless of whe ther they are in the presence of a cop, counselor, or social worker. 
But the presence of an armed, uniformed police officer in a school could mean the 
difference between a kid’s fight being seen as criminal conduct, and reported to the 
local district attor ney, or their fight being treated with the appropriate behavioral 
  
 
2 
 health intervention. The very presence of police in schools has meant that student 
behavior is criminalized at higher rates.1  
As a result, the School Resource Officers (“SRO”) system does not work. SROs 
simply do not make students safer. The only study ever conducted of Maine’s SRO 
system confirms this conclusion.2 Other studies have shown that SRO presence in 
schools doesn’t even make students feel safer.3 Students of color feel especial ly 
vulnerable in the presence of SROs.4 This is unsurprising, given that studies have 
shown that SROs disproportionately discipline students of color and students with 
disabilities.5 When in schools, police officers do what they are trained to do, which is 
detain, handcuff, and arrest. This leads to greater student alienation and a more 
threatening school climate.  
Moreover, SROs compete for scarce school funds with counselors and social 
workers. For example, the Portland School District – the largest in M aine – spent 
approximately $130,000 per year on its two SROs until July of 2020. This despite 
the shortage of counselors, psychologists, and social workers in the district’s public 
schools. In the summer of 2020, citing this fiscal burden, and the SRO prog ram’s 
harmful impact on students of color and students with disabilities, Portland’s school 
board ended its SRO program.  
Schools are not, and should not be, a place that funnels youth to prison. 
Schools should be places of enlightenment and growth, where students feel safe and 
 
1 See Matthew Theriot, School Resource Officers and the Criminalization of Student Behavior , 37 J. 
of Crim. Just. 280, 280 (2009); Kim Brooks et al., School House Hype: Two Years Later, Justice Policy 
Inst. & Children’s Law Center, Inc . (2000).  
2 School -Based Policing in Maine: A Study on School Resource Officers in Maine's Public Schools , 
Univ. of S. Maine, Muskie School, Cutler Institute, October 3, 2019,  at 12  [hereinafter Cutler Institute 
Study ] available at  https://usm.maine.edu/publicaffairs/first -ever-report -maines -school -based -policing -
released -usms -cutler -institute .  
3 Theriot, M. & Cuellar, M. (2016). School resource officers and students’ rights . Contemporary 
Justice Review, 19 (3), 363 –379; Tillyer, M.S., Fisher, B.S. & Wilcox, P. (2011). The effects of school 
crime prevention on students’ violent victimization, risk perception, and fear of crime: A multilevel 
opportunity perspective . Justice Quarterly, 28 (2), 249 -277. 
4 Morris, M.W., Epstein, R., & Yusuf, A. (2018). Be Her Resource: A toolkit about school resource 
officers and girls of color . Center on Poverty and Inequality, Georgetown Law; Lacoe, J. (2015). 
Unequally safe: The race gap in school safety . Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice, 13, 143 -168. 
5 Cutler Institute Study at 12.  
  
 
3 
 supported. They should be a place where students are free from physical and 
psychological harm. This bill would strengthen this harmful system by  requiring 
the DOE to study incentives to increase the SRO presence in Maine schools, an d by 
making it easier for retired police officers to become an SROs.  
We urge you to vote ought not to pass .  
 
 
