Senator I ngwersen, Repre sentative Pluecke r, Member s of the Committ ee:
My name is Roberta  Manter, I  live in Fay ette, and I  am the founde r of Ma ine ROADWay s, which
is an ac ronym for Residents and O wner s on Abandone d and Discontinued Way s.  At last count I
had conta cts from pe ople on discontinued roa ds in 260 Maine towns, in many  case s sever al per
town.  I  am also a f arme r.  I am writing  neither f or nor a gainst L D 108 bec ause I  really don’t have
enoug h information about wha t the L ogger Rela tions Advocate w ill be expected to do, but I  do
have inf ormation which may  help this Comm ittee re fine the job de scription.  
I am hoping  the Advoca te’s duties will include ac ting a s a Mediator  or Arbitra tor betwe en
loggers and members of  the public.  I  have se en how e ffective mediation ca n be at g etting
opposing pa rties to find mutually  agreeable ter ms, at a much lowe r cost than c ourt ac tion.  There
is a g reat need f or such a  service , so if this bil l will provide it or fac ilitate it, I ’m all for it.  (The re
could per haps be a  connec tion between this prog ram a nd the Coopera tive Ex tension’s
Agricultural Me diation Progr am which c urrently addre sses disputes involving fa rmland or f orest
land in production.)
One of  the fre quent complaints I  get throug h Maine ROADWay s is that a logg ing ope ration has
used an a bandoned or  discontinued road tha t someone else de pends on for  access to their home,
and has da maged it.  These r oads often r emain “public e aseme nts,” which mea ns that the reside nt
has no rig ht to prevent a nyone else  (including  a log ging ope ration) f rom using the  road. 
Howeve r, these r oads ar e no long er ma intained by  the public, so it is up to t he abutter s to try  to
keep the  road pa ssable.  What qualifies as pa ssable for  a log ger ma y be nowhe re ne ar what is
acceptable f or a r esident on that roa d.
A few years ago, the L egislature passe d an ame ndment to 17 MRS  3853-D that now ma kes it a
class E Crime to dama ge a public e aseme nt with a motor vehicle.  A t the same time, the
Legislature instituted 23 MRS  3029-A, whic h allows an a butter to sue a pe rson who dama ges a
public ease ment, and, if they  preva il, recove r their leg al fees.  Unfor tunately , the first solution
depends on f inding someone  to enforc e it, which has pr oved diffic ult.  The second r equire s
having  enoug h funds to bring  a lawsuit in the first plac e on the hope  that those funds may be
recovere d in the end.
What we have  seen ha ppen re peate dly is that the logg er may rake  the roa d when the log ging
opera tion is done, but that does not necessa rily restore  it to the same condition as it was bef ore. 
Often the  underla yment has bee n crushe d, leaving  two perma nent hollows down the leng th of the
road w hich pre vent ra inwater  from dra ining of f to the sides.  Or sur face gravel may  have be en
presse d into the mud undernea th, or may  have be en wa shed aw ay on hills where the r unoff
couldn’t esc ape f rom the ruts.  Culverts may  have be en cr ushed.  Even if  the log ger rakes the
road w hen the ope ration is done, this sort of linge ring damag e may  not be obvious except to the
person who ha s been ma intaining the r oad.  The re are also questions of how passable the  road is
for a passeng er ve hicle while the log ging ope ration is in prog ress, a nd the long  term conse quence
of getting mud pa cked into one’ s whee l wells, brake  system, suspension, exhaust, etc.  
Another c oncer n I have a s a fa rmer is the use  of hay  fields as skid y ards.  We do hay ing on othe r
people’ s fields, and seve ral times we ha ve run into plac es whe re someone  had their w oods
logged adja cent to the ha y field.  Part of the  field wa s not visibl e from the house, and the  logg ers
used that par t of the field a s a skid y ard.  The  following  summer when w e showe d up to do the
haying, w e found the  field littered with log ging sla sh.  After  spending  days trying to f ind all the
chunks of wood hidde n under the  hay, we be gan the ha ying ope ration, only  to have hidden pie ces
of slash ca tch in the hay ing e quipment and damag e it.  I n one ca se, it broke the ma in roll in our
mower/c onditioner, and re placing  it with a used part would ha ve cost a s much as we  had paid f or
the whole mac hine used.  A de lay due to broke n equipment ca n mean that r ain moves in befor e
the hay  can be  baled, a nd the whole c rop is lost.  
In another  case  the skidders a nd log tr ucks left r uts in the field that interfe red w ith the hay ing
equipment.  Also, there  was such a  thick lay er of wood chips in the field that it killed the g rass
and produc ed a love ly crop of  wildflowers.  G orgeous, but no g ood for a nimal fee d.  The fie ld
had to be f ertilized and re- seede d, and it took a couple of  years to start producing  a good hay  crop
again.  
I realize that log gers ne ed to be a ble to make a  living too, but they  should not be able to do so at
the expense of other s.  A log ger relations advoc ate, if tra ined as a  profe ssional mediator or if
working  toge ther with prof essional mediators, c ould go a  long w ay towards g etting pa rties with
opposing inter ests to understand e ach othe r’s concer ns and work out mutually  agreeable ter ms.
Thank y ou,
Roberta Ma nter, Maine  ROADWay s (Residents &  Owner s on Abandone d & D iscontinued Way s)
