 
 
Russell  Black  
Senator, District  5 THE MAINE SENATE  
131st  Legislature  3 State  House  Station 
Augusta,  Maine  04333  
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Russell Black  
 
In Support of LD “108 “An Act to Establish a Logger Relations Advocate”  
 
Public Hearing: Monday, January 30, 2023  
 
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Plue cker, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation, and Forestry.  
 
My name is Senator Russell Black, and I am a State Senator representing Senate District 5, which includes a number 
of towns in Franklin and Somerset County.   I am here to speak in support of LD “108 An Act to Establish a Logger 
Relations Advocate”  
 
As of 2017, logging and trucking contracts in Maine  employed over 3900 people directly and were indirectly 
responsible for the creation of an additional 5400 jobs.  
 
Logging companies are suffering immensely because of lost market opportunities, increased operational costs and 
increased bureaucratic requir ements.   They need assistance that is specific to their businesses to assist with efficiency 
and profitability.   Currently, there is no one in public service at the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry that is dedicated specifically to the their needs, similar to landowners, foresters and farmers.  
The Maine Forest Service has at least 25 licensed foresters on staff but no one from the logging industry to 
assist with logging issues.   Licensed foresters have tremendous knowledge on forestry po licy.  
The Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife has a landowner advocate that works to educate 
landowners but also to advocate on their behalf.   The Department of Agriculture Conservation and Forestry 
has a mission to assist farmers directly and doe s a very good job at it.   DACF needs a similar position to 
work with the logging community directly.   
The logging community should have an advocate that works to protect the best interest of logging 
companies but can also assist with issues pertaining to l ogging companies in a private and confidential 
manner.  
The Department has district foresters, enforcement foresters and an urban forester, but none from logging 
industry that understand their problems and needs. Most loggers only see some from the Departm ent when 
there is a problem or a violation, such as forgetting to send the harvest survey at the end of the year. They 
will find you at a family picnic on a Sunday afternoon.  
Thank you for your consideration.   I would be pleased to answer any questions yo u may have.  
 
 
 
 

