Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeh‘ Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Melrose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chapter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Mulliken Court 5% PO Box 836 e Augusta, ME 0433241836 Telephone: 207526-0005 Email: inio@mainewoodlandownersorg s Website:wwwmainewoodlandowners org MAINE 
3991a/iL ‘lQ COMMUNITY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Tom Doak 
Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 108 
"An Act to Establish a Logger Relations Advocate Within the Maine Forest Service" 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Tom 
Doak, I am the Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today neither 
for nor against LD 108, "An Act to Establish a Logger Relations Advocate Within the 
Maine Forest Service." 
This bill directs the Maine Forest Service to establish a logger relations advocate 
within the Bureau to serve as a liaison to the public. 
We are not sure what a logger advocate would do or why it is needed. The Maine 
Forest Service has a variety of stakeholders including loggers, foresters, landowners 
and the public that they are equally responsible for. They provide support, education, 
and outreach to all of these stakeholder groups. Our experience is the Maine Forest 
Service provides exceptional outreach to the full range of forest interests. 
Establishing a logger relations advocate position within the Maine Forest Service 
creates an imbalance at the Maine Forest Service by favoring one stakeholder group 
over another. If a logger relations advocate position is created in the Maine Forest 
Service, wouldn’t it follow that another advocate position should be created for 
foresters and one for landowners as well? What about wood using mills and 
businesses? 
While the Maine Forest Service assists all sectors of the forest, often the stakeholders 
have competing interests. Many of these competing interests are business/ ﬁnancial 
related. Generally, mills want to buy wood as cheaply as possible, loggers want to be 
paid as much as possible, landowners Want to contract logger services as cheaply as 
possible, and foresters Want loggers to pay landowners as much as possible because 
customarily they are paid a percentage of what a landowner receives from the loggers 
or mill. It does not seem appropriate to have an advocate within the Maine Forest 
Service for one stakeholder group. If any of the constituents feel underserved, they 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - lRC 501(c)(3)
have the ability to address that concern with the Director, who We have always found 
approachable, even if we disagree. 
All of us who rely on the Maine Forest Service would like more from them, but they are 
underfunded for the mission they have. If there are additional resources to be provided them, we 
believe it should support the overall mission, and not just one sector. We defer to the Department 
regarding their operational needs. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I’d be happy to answer any questions now or at 
the Work session. _
