Testimony in opposition to L.D. 672-An Act to Establish Youth Deer Hunting Weekend
John M. Glowa, Sr., China, ME
March 27, 2023
My name is John M. Glowa, Sr.  I reside in China, ME. I am testifying on my own behalf.
I have provided legislative testimony to this committee for nearly forty years.  I have testified 
in opposition to many Sunday hunting bills.  This bill is nothing more than a Sunday hunting 
bill. It has little to do with providing children the opportunity to kill on weekends when they 
aren’t in school.  Its radical extremist proponents have stooped to a new low by using children 
to do their dirty work.  We know that allowing ANY Sunday hunting will open the floodgates to 
unlimited Sunday hunting.  For decades, the radical extremists have tried to get their foot in 
the proverbial door.  Now they are using children in hopes that a smaller, more innocent foot 
will succeed where theirs didn’t.
If this approach fails, we can expect them to use the elderly or disabled to open the Sunday 
hunting door.  They will stop at nothing.  Maine people, Maine wildlife, and Maine workers 
deserve one day a week without the threat of being shot.  A bullet fired by a five year old is 
just as deadly as one fired by a fifty year old.
The proponents of this bill will surely argue that it’s just one day.  We know what their agenda 
is.  It is to allow hunting 365 days a year.  The less experienced members of this committee 
need to understand that voting in support of this bill will lead to just that.  Allowing any 
hunting on Sunday will ultimately have multiple negative consequences in addition to the 
killing of wildlife and potential killing and wounding of humans.  It will force the Dept. of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife to either decrease law enforcement during the weekdays or increase 
staff, equipment, maintenance, gasoline, etc.   If passed by the legislature, this bill and others 
that are sure to follow will ultimately lead to a significant increase in the workload of the 
Maine Warden Service and a commensurate increase in costs to the public.  The proponents of 
this bill have no idea of what’s inside the Pandora’s box they want to open up.   
To the new IFW committee members, oversight of fishing, hunting and trapping in Maine is a 
very dirty and very serious business.  Make no mistake about it.  The unrelenting attacks on 
wildlife and wildlife advocates is no less than a war, a war I have been fighting my entire adult 
life.  L.D. 672 is the latest offensive by the radical extremists inside and outside the Maine 
legislature, in this war.  
Thank you.
