TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 672 
"An Act to Establish Youth Deer Hunting Weekend" 
Presented by Representative MASON of Lisbon. 
Cosponsored by Senator BLACK of Franklin and Representatives: COSTAIN of Plymouth, 
GUERRETFE of Caribou, HALL of Wilton, JACKSON of Oxford, NUTl'lNG of Oakland, POMERLEAU 
of Standish, WOOD of Greene, Senator: TIMBERLAKE of Androscoggin 
DATE OF HEARING: March 27, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Judy Camuso, Commissioner of the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in opposition to L.D. 672. 
This bill allows the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to establish a youth deer 
hunting weekend instead of one day. 
While the focus of this bill would expand opportunity for youth deer hunters it allows hunting 
on Sunday. We would like to offer background information on recent work and the outcome of 
a survey on Sunday hunting in Maine for those here that were not a part of the discussion the 
last few years. 
During the first regular session of the 130"‘ Legislature (2021) two bills were introduced to the 
lFW Committee, LDs 1212 and 1033. LD 1212 proposed to allow Sunday hunting in the Northern 
portion of the state while LD 1033 proposed to allow Sunday hunting on private property with 
written permission of the landowner. The topic of Sunday hunting has been a heated social 
debate for years and in fact some type of Sunday hunting bill has been proposed nearly every 
Legislative session. 
The Department testified in opposition to both bills maintaining concern that some landowners 
may close their property to hunting and other recreational activities if any form of Sunday 
hunting were made legal. While the agency realizes there could be potential for economicI 
growth and additional opportunity to hunters, at the same time, we recognize that many 
landowners prefer to have Sunday as a day that they can enjoy their land and allow others an 
opportunity to recreate.
The Department is sensitive to the concerns of private landowners. Maine is more than 90% 
privately owned, without the support and generosity of our private landowners, our outdoor 
recreational opportunities and the ability for the Department to manage wildlife populations 
would be severely limited. Our staff, particularly our Landowner Relations Program are 
committed and focused on the needs of landowners, and we are proud of the relationship we 
have built with many of the landowners in Maine. 
Instead of passing the bills as written, the Legislature passed LD 1033 as a Resolve and directed 
the Department to establish a stakeholder group with broad representation in interest and 
geographies to examine Sunday hunting in Maine. The group was also asked to develop and 
complete a survey relating to Sunday hunting, if the department received adequate outside 
funding to pay for the survey. It then directed the department to report the findings and 
recommendations of the stakeholder group to this Committee. The committee was authorized 
to report out a bill related to Sunday hunting during the 130*“ Legislative session. 
The stakeholder group was formed, a neutral person was hired to facilitate the 2 in-person 
meetings and 4 ZOOM meetings that were held from early September through December 2021. 
Members of the public were able to listen in and provide comment at the end of the meetings 
Responsive Management, a private research firm was contracted to develop a survey with the 
stakeholder group. Group members provided direct feedback on the issues discussed and 
helped develop the questions for the survey 
The survey was conducted by Responsive Management during late December 2021 and 
the following statistics are high level outcomes at the end of the survey as the question of 
support or opposition to Sunday hunting was asked at the beginning and end of the survey: 
0 Among the general population, support for Sunday hunting increased from 34% to 38%, 
and opposition increased a percent (54% to 55%). 
~ Among hunters, support increased from 69% to 72%, and opposition decreased from 
23% to 22%. 
0 Among landowners in each region: North/East Region: support increased from 33% to 
35%, and opposition decreased from 62% to 61%. Central: support decreased from 33% 
to 32%, and opposition increased from 61% to 62%. o South: both support (13%) and 
opposition (81%) remained the same 
Although the department is always looking for ways to recruit more hunters youth participation 
has been on the increase for the last 20 years (an increase of approximately 9000 licenses), so 
we stand by the outcome of the Sunday hunting survey results conducted in 2021. This means 
that we are not supportive of allowing Sunday hunting in any fashion at the risk of losing 
opportunity to recreate on private land. 
l would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
