Pamela Vose
UNION
LD 672
TO: Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,
March 27, 2023
My name is Pamela Vose and I am a resident and landowner in Union.  
I am submitting testimony against LD 672 - An Act to Establish Youth Deer Hunting Weekend
I would like to start out by saying that I am not anti hunting and appreciate the 
traditions of hunting passed on by generations in my family.  One of those traditions 
is no hunting on Sunday.   
I am a landowner who purchased land for the purpose of raising registered Morgan 
horses and have spent much money over many years in the state economy to do so.  
As lifelong Mainers, my family and I have always understood and supported hunting 
and made accommodations during deer  season to protect our animals even though 
this added significant costs and was a less than desirable environment for them. 
During deer season, Sunday was the one day that we could allow our animals their 
normal routine and full use of all of our property without worry.    
Once again the spectre of Sunday hunting has returned.  This time in the guise of 
adding another hunting day for our youth.   To look at this bill in any other light is 
short sighted.  Once hunting on Sunday is allowed for any reason, the precedent is set 
for the approval of Sunday hunting for all. 
Stacker.com (October 2021) compiled a complete list of the states with the most registered 
hunters using 2020 data from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.  This was the relative data 
for the state of Maine which I found interesting: 
   Percent of residents with paid hunting licenses: 11.5%
   Total paid hunting license holders: 154,580
The US Census for 2020 showed the population of Maine to be 1,362,359.
Please keep these numbers in mind when you are considering this, or any bill, 
attempting to introduce Sunday hunting.   The majority of citizens in Maine, who do 
not hunt and are not represented by a large well funded lobby, deserve the right to 
enjoy our beautiful state recreating or working safely on our own property one day a 
week during deer season  
I strongly urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on this attempt to sneak in Sunday 
hunting masquerading as a youth hunting bill. 
Pamela Vose
Union, ME

