Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Melrose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chapter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Ernest Carle 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Muliiken Court a PO Box 836 Q Augusta, ME 043320836 eTelephone: 2OF626~0005 Email: inlo@mainewoodlandownersorg e Website: wwwmainewoodlandowners org VIAINE 
COMMUNITY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Tom Doak 
Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
In Opposition to 
LD 672 
"An Act to Establish Youth Deer Hunting Weekend" 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, my name is Tom Doak, I am 
the Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today in strong 
opposition to LD 672, " 
An Act to Establish Youth Deer Hunting Weekend." 
The bill, as its title suggests, establishes a youth deer hunting weekend instead of justa 
youth deer hunting day. This change would, naturally, include allowing kids to hunt 
on a Sunday. Hunting on Sundays has been prohibited since 1883 in Maine. This is 
by my count the 39th attempt in 46 years to try and overturn the ban on Sunday 
hunting. 
One of the arguments for allowing hunting on Sunday is that many hunters work or 
have children or grandchildren in school activities on Saturday, so they need the 
opportunity to hunt on Sunday. Just as many woodlot owners work on Saturday or 
attend school activities with their children as well. Sunday may be the only daya 
woodlot owner can fully enjoy their own property with their family. 
As an organization we support hunting and always have. I am a hunter and many of 
our Board Members are hunters as well. Landowners have often supported the 
expansion of hunting opportunities in Maine. Hunting opportunities have grown 
tremendously in the last several years. We now have spring and fall turkey hunting; 
the muzzle loading season has been expanded; we have added youth hunting days; an 
increased archery season; bonus deer permits; coyote hunting at night; and, a southern 
Maine moose hunt and many others. 
While it might seem harmless to add a day to youth hunting day on Saturday to make 
it a full weekend, allowing Sunday hunting on one day for youth would open the door 
to other efforts to overturn the Sunday hunting prohibition in Maine and We are 
strongly opposed. In fact, hunters don’t even support the idea of youth hunting on 
Sundays in Maine. In the 2022 survey commissioned by the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife at the request of the legislature, hunters were asked whether 
they would support or oppose Sunday hunting in Maine under speciﬁc scenarios, 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - lRC 501(c)(3)
including a scenario where Sunday hunting was for youth only. More hunters opposed this 
option than supported it. Speciﬁcally, 35% either strongly or moderately supported the idea and 
44% either moderately or strongly opposed the idea. The general public was even more resolute 
in their opposition with only 28% strongly or moderately supporting the idea, and 62% 
moderately or strongly opposing the idea. Landowners also overwhelmingly opposed the idea. 
Of those in the South Region of the state only 3% strongly or moderately supported youth 
hunting, and 93% moderately or strongly opposed the scenario. 
One additional consideration to keep in mind is that there is no single issue that would change 
the relationship more dramatically between Maine landowners and hunters than Sunday hunting. 
Sunday hunting, in any form, will result in loss of access to private lands and not just for hunting 
but other recreational activities as well. The same 2022 survey showed that of the landowners 
surveyed 44% of those who do not currently post their land say they would be more likely to 
restrict access to hunting on their land if Sunday hunting were allowed. 
For these reasons we oppose this bill and urge the Committee to vote ought not to pass.
