Senator Lafountain, Representative Landry and esteemed members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife committee, my name is Tyler Brown and I am speaking today neither for 
nor against LD 672, an act to establish Youth Hunting Weekend. 
 
I had the privilege of being a member of the stakeholder's group that worked to create a 
survey at the behest of the 130th legislature examining the issues surrounding hunting on 
Sunday. The group was composed of representatives from Maine sporting groups, Landowner 
organizations, MEDIFW, legislators, hunters and landowners. This group worked with the 
internationally renowned wildlife policy research firm Responsive Management to create an 
unbiased and thorough investigation into the issue of Sunday hunting, providing the first in 
depth look across three demographic groups, hunters, landowners and the general population 
among three distinct regions of Maine. 
 
I would highly encourage the committee to read this survey and have provided some 
key points and research for your consideration.  
 
In regards to support or opposition to Sunday hunting, 69% of hunters are in support 
with 23% oppose, within the general population 34% are in support with 54% opposed and 
amongst landowners 25% support with 71% opposed. It is prudent to note that there is a 
subsection composed of landowners that own 100,000 acres or more with 20% in support and 
80% opposed. 
 
Concerning the access of private land that we enjoy here in Main, the survey found that 
65% of hunters, 61% of the general population and 60% of landowners do not currently post 
their land. Another question found that 64% of the landowning general population, 78% of both 
landowning hunters and non-hunting landowners allow hunting access. The final and most 
concerning metric was that 32% of the general population, 21% of hunters and 44% of 
landowners responded they would be more likely to restrict hunting access should Sundays be 
opened to hunting. 
 
Finally I wish to share with you some research I conducted comparing Maine's hunting 
days to other New England states. Amongst the four seasons for whitetail in: 
 
Maine: (79) days for expanded archery, (49) for statewide archery, (24) days for firearms,  
 (1) day for Maine resident day, (12) days for black powder.  
 
New Hampshire : (92) days for archery in some zones and (85) in others, (26) days for firearms,    
        (11) for black powder (Note: Starts and ends before Maine’s season) 
 
Vermont:  (76) days for archery, (16) for firearms and (11) for black powder.  
 
Massachusetts:  (48) days for archery, (12) for shotguns only and (18) for black powder.  
 
These metrics show that Maine has similar season lengths for the majority of the hunting 
seasons compared to our neighboring states. This data infers the question of whether or not 
opening Sunday is necessary, given the potentially damaging results to landowner relations and 
Maine's land access traditions. I humbly ask that we weigh these concerns very carefully when 
considering the proposals heard today and utilize all of the information available when making 
policy decisions that will affect future hunting opportunities here in Maine. 
 
Thank you all very much for your time in considering my testimony. 
