January 30, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment  and Natural Resources  
 
RE: LD 9 – An Act to Establish Processing Time Limits for Permit by Rule 
Applications Under the Site Location of Development  Laws  
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Environment and Natural Resources , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  
and I am the Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in 
Maine. I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 9, An Act to 
Establish Processing Time Limits for Permit by Rule Applications Under the 
Site Location of Development Laws.  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization 
dedicated to conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided 
by science, we create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s 
toughest challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We use a 
collaborative approach that engages local communities, governments, the 
private sector, and other partners.  The Nature Conservancy has  been lead ing 
conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 12th largest landowner 
in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We also work across 
Maine to restore  rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the Gulf of Maine 
to rebuild groundfish  populations, and develop innovative solutions to address 
our cha nging climate.  
 
LD 9 would give the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) 
flexibility in establishing a timeline for review of applications for any future Site 
Law permit by rule. This will allow for implementation of a robust permit by rule 
in the future.  
 
The Nature Conservancy has focused on supporting policy frameworks that can 
build the clean energy we need in a way that is compatible with our natural and 
working lands. We have followed and supported the intent of the DEP’s 
proposed permit -by-rule for distributed generation solar projects to expedite 
Site Law permitting for projects that avoid core forest habitat and wildlife 
corridors. Passage of LD 9 would create the enabling conditions necessary to 
continue exploring and ultimately implem ent this idea.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to  testify in support of LD 9. I’m happy to answer 
questions at any time regarding this bill.  
