Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
Neither For Nor Against
LD 9- An Act To Establish Processing Time Limits for Permit by Rule Applications Under the Site 
Location of Development Laws
January 30, 2023
Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham and I submitting testimony neither for nor against 
LD 9, An Act To Establish Processing Time Limits for Permit by Rule Applications Under the Site 
Location of Development Laws, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the 
interests of municipal government before the Legislature. The positions of the Association are established 
by our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards 
of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts.
Municipal officials and planning boards rely on site plan reviews conducted by the state to aid 
making local decisions or supporting local regulatory requirements in municipalities that have historic 
development and thus increased federal permit obligations to protect or remediate historic degradation of 
important natural resources. Review time limits work in balance with these needs and may be an indicator 
of a lack of investment in this vital state service when they cannot be met appropriately.
A key part of any development review process is to make sure that review and compliance task at 
the state level either supports the local needs, provides an additional check with dedicated expert services 
and is timely but thorough —not just a rubber stamp—that ultimately shifts the burden of compliance 
enforcement of rules and regulations to the local level. This is becoming more important to manage out-
of-state developers who are unlikely aware of local resource protection obligations or have experience in 
states that fund such reviews more robustly, either through contractor licensing or uniform stormwater 
management regulation. 
In rural areas where planning boards are often volunteers with limit specialized expertise, state 
level site plan review provides a standard for review that includes expert eyes not otherwise available to a 
part-time volunteer town office, including consultation with other state level experts to protect wildlife 
and prevent habitat fragmentation. Development in these areas is often just under the acreage limit to 
prevent such a greater level of state site plan review, leaving all rules regarding such a review to the local 
community. For instance, incentives for solar developers saw an explosion in rural development that left 
parttime planning boards on the hook to evaluate the impact of 19.5 acres of solar farm installations 
intentionally designed to prevent the higher level of site plan review that occurred at 20 acres, and 
arguably had similar environmental and habitat implications.
As the committee reviews the response time changes indicated in the language of the bill, 
officials ask that you carefully think about not only how timeline pressures may indicate the need for 
increase in department resources but also how changes to them may hinder or shift a burden on to the 
local process instead. As municipal land and resource regulatory review requirements will not disappear 
regardless of the department involvement in review, lowering the automatic approval timeline or 
removing the state involvement in a review, may result in slower development permitting, not hasten it. 
Municipalities must be certain they have met all federal regulatory requirements regardless. Officials 
thank you for your thoughtful deliberation of this important topic.
