HoUsE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
,,§,'Z,_., 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
M‘?Z§;;jE§;§ ﬁil Aucusm, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
' 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Ann Fredericks 
I603 Main Street 
Sanford, ME 04073 
Phone: (207) 40 l—4 141 
AnnMarie.Fredericks@legis]aturemaine. gov 
March 9, 2023 
LD 541 “An Act to Create Parity in the Taxation of Medicine ” 
Honorable Chairs: Senator Grohoski and Representative Perry and the 
esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, my name is 
Representative Ann Fredericks of Sanford and l urge you to support LD 541 and 
remove the sales tax on medicinal cannabis. Prescription medications are not 
taxed. Please stop the disparate taxation of this medication. 
Maine has two Cannabis Programs: The Adult Use program which some call the 
recreational use program and the Medicinal Cannabis Program. l will speak 
exclusively about the medicinal cannabis program, which was operationalized in 
2009. Plant based medicine utilized: to treat medical conditions, for its 
therapeutic effects, for symptom relief, as treatment for a medical diagnosis. I 
am a Nurse Practitioner, my daughter is a Registered Nurse and we havea 
medical cannabis facility, named Vetted. We evaluate and educate patients so 
that they select the right cannabis medication for their ailment. Similar to 
prescribed medication, this medicine is titrated and individualized to alleviate 
symptoms. 
District 143 Sanford (part)
Many people have discontinued their conventional medications due to the 
undesirable side effect profile which may include weight gain, loss of libido, 
urinary retention or feeling “out of it" “in a haze” and manage their condition with 
the plant based medicine cannabis. THC is the compound in cannabis, which has 
brought the stigma, at high doses it can be psychoactive and cause impairment. 
THC at the proper dose though can be an effective sleep aid, pain reliever, anti- 
spasmodic and anti-anxiety agent without inducing impairment. 
Medicinal cannabis has many product formulations some with low or no THC. 
There are compounds beyond THC, called oannabinoids in cannabis, which 
result in no high, no cognitive impairment and have an abundance of healthful 
effects. To name one: 
CBG: anti-inflammatory, anti-anxiety, lowers pressure, neuroprotective, 
inhibits tumor growth' 
Patients are effectively managing their medical conditions with this plant 
medicine in lieu of pharmaceuticals and it is dispensed via a med card nota 
prescription.C 
Effective Dec 2, 2022 President Biden signed into Law the Medical Marijuana 
and Cannabidiol Research Expansion Act, which allows for human studies and 
more. Scientific information about the medicinal effects will allow patients more 
treatment options. Epidolex is an FDA approved prescription cannabis 
medication to treat the seizure condition of Lennox Gestaut syndrome, Dravet 
Syndrome or tuberous sclerosis. Cannabis is proven medicine. 
The #1 condition treated with cannabis is pain, chronic pain. Cancer pain, spinal 
pain, fibromyalgia, endometriosis and migraines. Many pain sufferers seek to 
avoid opiates and manage their condition with cannabis medicine. Pain sufferers 
District 143 Sanford (part)
often have secondary conditions as a result of the pain such as anorexia and 
depression. Medicinal cannabis can treat pain while stimulating appetite and 
improve mood. 
Under the Maine Medical Use or Cannabis Act Title 22, Chapter 558-C,a 
certified medical provider (MD, NP, PA) may issue medical cannabis certification 
(medical cannabis card) to patient that is “likely to receive therapeutic or palliative 
benefit from the medical use of marijuana to treat or alleviate the patient’s 
medical diagnosis or symptoms associated with the diagnosis. ” The private and 
confidential assessment of the patient’s medical history and discussion regarding 
the indication for medical cannabis results in the issuance of a medical cannabis 
certification on state issued tamper resistant paper. This process ensures 
restrictive access to medicinal cannabis. 
ln FY 21, Office of Cannabis Policy revenue for Medicinal Cannabis was 
approximately 20 million dollars from taxation and an additional 3.5 million dollars 
from fees. Expenditures for the Medical Cannabis program was approximately 
1.7 million dollars. The Medical Cannabis program will be sustained without the 
20 Million dollars of taxation revenue. Bill 541 proposes to discontinue the 
taxation on medicinal cannabis, and using FY 21 figures that equates to 20 
Million in taxation but l assert this revenue is not a permanent loss for the state’s 
economy. Mainers will NOT go home and stuff their mattresses with this money 
but they will put it in their pockets and buy goods and sen/ices from the current 
market. The revenue will be returned. 
There are many other states whom do not have a sales tax on medicinal 
cannabis: CT, FL, MA, MN, NH, NJ, NY, UT ,VA, VM, WV, this is not a novel 
concept 
District 143 Sanford (part)
In closing Bill 541 is a win/win. lt aligns taxation of medicines, it cuts taxes for 
medical cannabis patients, it allows those Mainers to return that revenue in 
goods & services of their choosing and the Maine economy has no loss of 
revenue. . 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, please focus on the 
needs of the most vulnerable Mainers and out taxes. 
Taxation without Representation was a battle cry of the American Revolution and 
borne the Declaration of Independence. Medical Cannabis patients are taxed 
without a say. My say is to urge you to pass Bill 541 “An Act to Create Parity in 
the Taxation of Medicine ” .' 
District 143 Sanford (part)
