Derek J Shirley 
24- Cambell Shore Rd. 
Gray, I\/laine, 04039 
gettinghighwithcats@gmail,com/ rolshirlev@gravmaine.org 
i\/larch, 9th, 2023 
igjig An Act to Create Parity in the Taxation of Medicine 
I am neither for nor aqainst LD 541 
Good afternoon Senate Chair and Representative Chair and respected 
members of the Taxation Committee Board, 
My name is Derek Shirley. I am a medical cannabis patient, a proud cannabis 
felon for four ounces of flower. I have represented cannabis patients in 
multiple states to help patients fight for what we think/feel are basic human 
cannabis rights. And I am here today to speak on LD 541. 
When I first saw this bill I thought; “well this is a no brainer, of course i support 
this” but then i started to think about it. Let's start with the obvious PROS, 
cannabis patients won't be charged sales taxes, but in reality, most cannabis 
shops and stores have the taxes figured into the price for patients OR some 
places offer discounts for checking in online, leaving a review etc, and more 
times than not that discount is 10% off their purchase, which is about 2 times 
the amount of the 5.5% sales taxes. Also it probably should add nurse 
practitioners and other people that can prescribe cannabis currenly this bill 
states “5. Medicines. Sales of medicines for human beings sold on a doctor's 
prescription... ” 
Cons- So no sales tax in the states largest cash crop? Let that sink in. Thatsa 
HUGE hole to ﬁll and I think some caregiver businesses especially are worried 
that they will come up with new ways to ﬁll that negative loss. 
For example, this session LD 365: An Act to Support Compliance and Establish 
Graduated Sanctions Under the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Act is going 
through the VLA committee right now. What's to say the department (Office of 
Cannabis Policy) won't overreach and overstep their authority to write fines to 
businesses to make up for the loss of sales tax to the state. Then in turn, 
nickel and diming the small farmers out of business, then in turn affecting 
patients ‘ access to medicine.Another fear patients and caregivers have if you 
take sales tax away legislators and lawmakers will care less about the medical 
program, and in turn adult use will get more focus when it comes to protecting 
rights 
So I guess the main fear/con is if that sale tax is completely lost, how will the 
state respond to said loss?
