To:  Senator Hancock and Representative Perry and members of the Taxation Committee
Fr:  Dr. John M. Jemison, Jr. – Extension Professor, University of Maine
Re: Act to Create Parity in the Taxation of Medicine
I am writing today to express my support for the “act to create parity in the taxation of 
medicine”.  I have four primary reasons for supporting this legislation:  1) pharmaceutical 
medications are not currently taxed in Maine; 2) cannabis is the source of a prescription 
medication available in Maine for children with Dravet’s syndrome; 3) ten other states with 
medical cannabis programs do not tax medical cannabis sales; 4) those adults maintaining their 
medical cards after adult-use legalization do so seeking medical relief not recreation.
I appreciate the efforts on the part of Ann Fredericks and others to bring this bill forward to the 
taxation committee.  I am a professor at the University of Maine, and I have worked with 
cannabis conducting resinous hemp research over the past few years. I also teach a cannabis 
short course PSE 262 at the University of Maine titled “An Introduction to Cannabis Production 
and Science”.  I strongly believe in the value of cannabis as medicine and maintain a medical 
cannabis card.  I teach my students to respect the plant’s medicinal value, and how 
cannabinoids and terpenes and other plant compounds function together to treat specific 
medical conditions.  
Today medications are not taxed in the state of Maine.  I'm very supportive of this as 
medications prescribed by doctors aren't voluntary.  People need these for their health, and as 
such our citizens shouldn't be taxed to remain healthy.  Why should medical cannabis be taxed 
if we don't tax pharmaceutical medications?  If one is buying cannabis at a medical dispensary, 
the purpose is for medical relief, and a medical card is required to enter the establishment.  
Otherwise, a person can go to an adult-use storefront and purchase recreational cannabis.  To 
obtain a card, you must have a qualifying condition, and reapply annually.  I get my card from 
the Cannacare Docs of Maine at $75/year, but with this I get medical advice and direction about 
what culitvars are better for specific medical issues.  So, I’d argue that cannabis purchased from 
a medical grower or dispensary is medicine; it really seems unfair to tax this source of 
medication and not pharmaceutical medication.
Children with chronic/untreatable seizure disorders such as Dravet’s syndrome have received 
very positive medical outcomes using cannabis (CBD) medication. This drug has received 
pharmaceutical approval from FDA, and the medication is called Epidiolex.  Cannabis is grown in 
greenhouses, the flowers harvested, and the medication is extracted, purified, and dissolved 
into a sesame oil with strawberry flavoring for the patient’s medication.  We don't tax Epidiolex 
purchased at a pharmacy; we should not tax cannabis purchased at a dispensary. 
Ten states: MA, VT, NH, CT, MD, MN, OR, SD, UT, and VA do not tax medical cannabis, and of 
those ten, four do not have an adult-use/recreational cannabis market to tax.  I have to believe 
their state taxation committees went through these types of discussions and determined it 
would be unfair to tax medical cannabis and not prescription drugs.  Lastly, since medical 
cannabis requires a provider certified card, the cost of which is borne by the patient and taxed 
by the state, to tax medical cannabis purchases seems to be a double hit.  We should rely on 
recreational sales for taxation purposes.
Lastly, in many states, people seeking adult-use recreational cannabis have taken over most of 
the cannabis market sales since legalization.  People seeking recreational cannabis don’t need 
cultivars with specific combinations of cannabinoids, terpenes, and flavonoids to treat certain 
medical conditions.  People growing for the medical market do so because they want to 
produce medicine for their patients.  Many of our medical growers growing at the smallest 
scale select cultivars to grow specifically for a patient’s personal need.  Other medical patients, 
looking for treatment of specific ailments, obtain their medical card, and go to medical 
dispensaries where they can find medical growers and staff that are much more knowledgeable 
about cultivars containing specific cannabinoids and terpenes for a given medical conditions.  
Budtenders at adult-use stores do not regularly have this kind of training and information.  I 
think Maine has developed a fair taxation protocol for adult-use cannabis sales; since most 
cannabis sales will likely go through adult-use store fronts, I believe the state will not lose 
appreciable tax dollars by not taxing medical cannabis.  If the committee were concerned that 
this would happen, I doubt there would be uproar if the tax on adult-use recreational cannabis 
were increased a small amount to make up any potential loss of tax income.  
Thank you for your time reading this.  If you have any questions, please don’t hesitate to 
contact me.  Jemison@maine.edu   2079449190.  
John Jemison
Orono
LD 541
I wish only to submit my thoughts to this bill and not testify.  thank you ... Please find
my opinions in the attached file.  
