TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Thursday, March 9, 2023 
LD 541 — “An Act to Create Parity in the Taxation of Medicine ” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
providing testimony at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against 
LD 541, “An Act to Create Parity in the Taxation of Medicine. ” 
This bill would broaden the sales tax exemption for medicines sold ona 
doctor’s prescription to include sales of cannabis for medical use pursuant to the 
Maine Medical Use of Cannabis program (“MMCP”). Cannabis sold pursuant to 
the MMCP is currently subject to sales tax at either the 5.5% general rate or, for 
certain edible cannabis products, the 8% prepared food rate. Adult use cannabis 
and cannabis products are subject to sales tax at the rate of 10%. Ten states, 
including Massachusetts and Vermont, do not tax cannabis for medical use. 
To qualify for the existing exemption for medicines, medicine must be sold 
on a doctor’s prescription. Cannabis is sold pursuant to the MMCP whena 
qualifying patient receives a written certiﬁcation from a medical provider. Due to 
the differences between a prescription and a written certiﬁcation, cannabis sold 
pursuant to the MMCP does not appear to meet the requirement of being sold ona 
doctor’s prescription necessary to receive the sales tax exemption.
1
If the legislative intent is to exempt sales of medical cannabis from the sales 
tax, that result would be better achieved by changing the word “including ” on line 
five of the bill to “and;” or, by enacting a separate exemption for cannabis sold 
pursuant to the MMCP. 
The preliminary average annual revenue loss resulting from the exemption 
of cannabis and edible cannabis products sold pursuant to the MMCP over the next 
three calendar years is approximately $12.3 million. This proposal would also 
require an application or effective date for the ﬁrst day that sales of cannabis sold 
pursuant to the MMCP would be exempt from the tax. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
2
