      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
March 21, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1050, Resolve, Directing the Department of Labor to Request a Federal Waiver to Allow 
Presumptive Work Eligibility for Asylum Seekers   
 
Senator Tipping, Repres entative Roeder,  and members of the Labor and Housing Committee , my 
name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine or CHOM .  
CHOM’s  small staff  works collaboratively to house Maine’s most vulnerable people and advocate s 
on their behalf.   I also chair the Maine Homeless Policy Committee, the Maine Continuum of Care 
Board of Directors, as well as the ESAC Long Term Stayers Committee.    
 
I am testifying in strong support of  LD 1050, which would direct the Commissioner of Labor to 
request a waiver from the United States Department of Homeland Security, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services to allow an asylum seeker in the State, if the asylum seeker 
has applied for asylum and has not been denied, eligibi lity to work in the State for the 6 -month 
period immediately after the asylum seeker has applied for asylum while awaiting a final 
determination on the asylum seeker's application and for the time period while an asylum seeker's 
work permit has expired and is pending renewal by the Federal Government.  
 
Non- citizens seeking Asylum are among those most likely to begin working as soon as they are 
able.  However, the mandatory federal waiting period to obtain a work permit for people seeking 
asylum is lengthy a nd a large barrier to attaining self -sufficiency.  
 
People want to work and contribute to the community which has helped them rebuild their lives.  
Until asylum seekers are able to work, they have no means to support themselves but for vital 
safety net programs.  Demonstrated patterns suggest that this population is likely to need very little 
assistance after obtaining work status.  As such, this population is enriching our state and our 
nation.  To ensure Maine’s vitality, and to solve for Maine’s current w orkforce crisis, we must 
continue creating and sustaining a welcoming community that embraces diversity and shows 
humanity and respect for those who seek a new life here.   
 
Requesting a waiver from the federal government to allow asylum seekers the ability to work for 
the 6 -month period immediately after applying for asylum while awaiting a final determination 
makes good sense.  This will afford  a vulnerable population eager to work the ability to do so while 
simultaneously bettering Maine’s workforce cris is. 
 
However, in the interim it is imperative that Maine continue to provide assistance for people seeking asylum and other immigrants as it is a relatively small investment today that will pay great 
dividends into our future.  There are various bills that the legislature will be considering over the 
coming months that would prohibit or substantially hinder asyl um seekers from utilizing critical 
safety net resources.  These bills include, but are not limited to:  
• LD 454, An Act to Establish a 180- day State Residency Requirement for General Assistance 
Programs; and  
• LD 668, An Act to Protect Maine Taxpayers by Requi ring a Person to Be a United States 
Citizen to Receive General Assistance Benefits and to Ensure Municipal Compliance with 
Federal Immigration Laws . 
 
Assistance through anti -poverty programs such as General Assistance increases the likelihood of 
stability and a successful transition, while people get their feet on the ground and wait for permission to work from the federal government.  I urge the Committee to support LD 1050 and 
oppose any bills which seek to reduce access to important, life -saving safety net resources for the 
population seeking in asylum in Maine.   
 
There are also unintended consequences of having this population land in Maine’s homele ss 
shelters.  Please see the attached op ed.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Dylan O'Neil  
Asset Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
1 / 3By Cullen Ryan February 19, 2023Commentary: End homelessness and welcome asylum
seekers – Maine can do both
pressherald.com /2023/02/18/commentary-end-homelessness-and-welcome-asylum-seekers-maine-can-do-both-2/
Portland is about to open its new homeless service center . It promises to have everything
needed to end homelessness quickly and ef ficiently for single adults. It should be a
remarkably collaborative and ef fective shelter , something poised to help solve one quarter of
all homelessness in Maine.  
Except now , it might not.   
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Cullen Ryan  is executive director of the Portland-based nonprofit Community Housing of
Maine.
This service center was designed to serve mostly circumstantially homeless single adults. It
will also serve a smaller group with serious and persistent mental illness and/or other
complexities that make their homelessness more challenging to solve. All the right
ingredients are there to meet the full spectrum of need and provide quick exits to housing.   
2 / 3But Portland’ s Oxford Street Shelter has recently morphed to address a new need; the
current shelter is serving as the de facto asylum seeker resettlement program for the state of
Maine. The shelter has become a holding tank.  
Although Maine desperately needs af fordable housing, asylum seekers are not homeless
because of that. They are blocked from employment and housing due to federal laws. They
have already proven their resiliency and overcome tremendous adversity . Serving them as
homeless misses the mark.
At the root, these are people migrating to Maine in search of peace and work. There is plenty
of both. 
Maine has an enormous workforce shortage. There are 44,000 unfilled jobs and 24,000
people unemployed . That means Maine needs 20,000 new workers. And here they are –
newly arrived, talented, willing and motivated. They would enter our workforce except for one
thing. Our federal law requires complex paperwork followed by a six-month waiting period
before employment. And during what becomes eight to 12 months, this population is not
eligible for any federal assistance. People arrive and patiently wait.
Our federal delegation has been working in the House and the Senate to fix this, but
Congress has yet to pass one of the many bills our delegation has sponsored. That leaves
Portland in a conundrum.   
This can be solved. 
The state and federal government could collaborate to create an asylum seeker resettlement
program including temporary living space, connections to work sectors and support from
immigrant service programs like the Immigrant Legal Advocacy Program. That way , our state
could welcome this willing workforce and fast-track it into the many employment sectors
desperate for workers. Gainful employment would position asylum seekers to pay for
housing and make a peaceful living in Maine. But Maine does not have any such program.   
Portland is, without question, doing the right thing to meet the temporary needs of the asylum
seeker population. But we must also recognize these are skilled survivors who follow all the
rules and dutifully line up to secure a bed, inadvertently displacing populations we had
intended to serve in the new Homeless Service Center . Some 60% of Oxford Street Shelter ’s
current population are asylum seekers. The city expects that will approach 100% very
quickly; there is a long line at the border of people practiced at enduring hardships – and
ready and willing to work.   
The unintended consequence is that Maine’ s most challenged homeless populations are
now landing outside, unsheltered and at tremendous risk because Portland can’t meet the
needs of both populations simultaneously , at least not without more help.   
3 / 3The new , well-designed center for serving people experiencing homelessness might not do
what we hoped it would; we may see displacement overwhelm other parts of Maine, more
people outside, more encampments and people very visible on the streets, right as it opens.
And people will look at this and say: W ell, that new service center didn’t work, did it? That,
sadly , might thwart other wise investments in ending homelessness.   
We should welcome arriving asylum seekers as a wonderful opportunity , and we should help
this population establish itself quickly and successfully . And we should end homelessness.
We need a two-track system to do both. By throwing asylum seekers into the overwhelmed
homeless arena, we fail both populations.   
« Previous
Commentary: I was shot in the Southern California desert. Why? That’ s the wrong question.
Next »
Susana Hancock: As Maine’ s winters retreat, we risk much more than skiing
© 2023
