93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • 
Westbrook
Testimony in Support of LD 1050-Resolve, Directing the Department of Labor to Request a Federal 
Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility for Asylum Seekers
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing
March 21, 2023
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Committee on Labor and Housing,
My name is Eamonn Dundon, and I am the Director of Advocacy of the Portland Regional Chamber of 
Commerce. We represent 1,300 businesses in our region who employ over 65,000 Mainers. We are 
submitting this written testimony today to express our organization's strongest support for LD 1050. 
We have a tremendous and acute challenge in Maine, providing services through overwhelmed 
municipalities and charitable organizations to the thousands of New Mainers that have arrived here in the 
last few years due to the pandemic and failures in federal immigration policy. We also have an unimaginable 
opportunity to stem demographic declines and grow the economic pie for all Mainers. The one missing 
piece is a bridge to actualize this apparent and ready solution for this unyielding and growing challenge. 
This legislation represents a way to build that bridge. 
Last week we hosted our monthly Eggs & Issues breakfast on the topic of welcoming New Mainers into 
the workforce1. The panel, which included Danielle West from the City of Portland, Tim Matheney from 
South Portland Public Schools, Mufalo Chitam from the Maine Immigrants Rights Coalition, and Luke 
Holden from Luke’s Lobster, described to us the enormous burden that has been placed on our 
municipalities, school districts, and service providers who are having to address failures of a national scale 
at a local level. All of them were unanimous in their support for welcoming these communities to our state, 
but they were similarly united in their frustration with a lack of state and federal systems to support their 
good work. For instance, we heard that the average family that has been sheltered in a hotel over the last 
few years has cost over $14,000 in public assistance monthly. This type of support is unsustainable. 
Luckily, we have a solution. New Mainers want nothing more than to bring their professional and life 
experiences to bear in Maine’s workforce, but as you well know they are prevented from doing so due to a 
misguided and uninformed federal law that handcuffs our ability to grow our workforce. Luke Holden, from 
Luke’s Lobster, is one example of an employer who has tried to rise to this challenge with his Lift All Boats 
initiative which gives New Mainers the opportunity for exposure to our heritage lobster industry. There are 
hundreds of more employers like Luke who would be similarly welcoming if this federal barrier was 
removed. We must give those employers that chance. 
We are supportive of legislation sponsored by Senator Collins, Senator King, and Representative Pingree 
to find a long-term fix to this gap in federal law, but we need to attempt every route to bring immediate 
relief to New Mainers, municipalities and organizations supporting them, businesses who are desperate to 
hire them, and the entire workforce of Maine which needs to grow. This avenue, while admittedly a long 
1 Recording of the event: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JosI-
XE4zG4&ab_channel=PortlandRegionalChamberofCommerce 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • 
Westbrook
shot, gives us that chance. We thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers, and we ask for your 
expeditious approval of this important legislation. 
 
