W I LD B L U E B E RR 
MAINE‘ <1’ 
Eric Venturini, Executive Director of the Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine 
Testifying Ought To Pass, LD 1050, Resolve, Directing the Department of Labor to Request a Federal 
Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility for Asylum Seekers 
Senator Michael Tipping, Representative Amy Roeder, and members ofthe Committee on the Labor and 
Housing, my name is Eric Venturini and I am the Executive Director ofthe Wild Blueberry Commission of 
Maine. In this role, I strive to represent the diverse voices of Maine's 485 wild blueberry producers. I am 
testifying before you today in support of this legislation because there are not willing workers in Maine 
today to fill wild blueberry producers ’ workforce needs. 
Labor challenges have been on the top of the Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine's priority list since 
2022, and in a series ofthree grower listening sessions that we hosted across the State last year, 
producers consistently ranked "Addressing Labor Challenges," as their top priority. 
Most producers pay $15 to $20/hour for seasonal work, well above the State minimum. Despite this, 
they cannot attract and maintain a reliable workforce. Farms and food producers hire workers who do 
not show up during critical windows. Good agricultural land is going unharvested. Acreage designated 
for agriculture in Maine is shrinking. The success of Maine's agricultural industries is stymied by the lack 
of a reliable workforce. yS 
We applaud recent State effortsl to improve infrastructure and increase the resiliency of Maine's food 
supply, but without an accessible workforce to maintain that infrastructure, operate machinery, harvest 
crops, and clean, process, and pack wild blueberries, these efforts will be wasted. 
Yet, as we speak, there are over a thousand asylum seekers in hotels in Portland, Maine, who are willing 
to work to support themselves and their families —yet they are not allowed to. Many estimate that the 
number of entrants could increase significantly in the coming yea rs. 
If the State is able to request a Federal waiver that allows presumptive work eligibility for asylum 
seekers, these individuals can support themselves and their families as soon as they arrive, reduce the 
tax burden, and by increasing the number of people in Maine looking for work, help Maine agricultural 
to remedy its workforce crisis. 
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have. 
1 The Agricultural Infrastructure Investment Program (AIIP), a competitive grant program run by the Department of 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry in 2022, injected almost $20 million dollars in Maine farms for basic 
infrastructure improvements. 
:>_..¢ . _3.
