   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1050 , “Resolve, Directing the Department of Labor to Request a Federal 
Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility for Asylum Seekers ” 
James Myall, Economic Policy Analyst  
March  21, 2023  
 
Good afternoon,  Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is James Myall; I’m an Economic Policy Analyst at the Maine 
Center for Economic Policy. I’m here to testify in support of LD 1050  “Resolve, Directing the Department 
of Labor to Request a Federal Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility for Asylum Seekers .” The 
current bar on employment for asylum seekers and other immigrants creates needless hardship of 
individuals and holds back  our economy, particularly at this time of low unemployment. We support 
both a change in federal law, and the intention of this bill to get a waiver from that law until it is 
changed.   
Immigrants are a great asset Maine’s economy. Mainers who have arrived from other countries work in 
every area of our labor force, from health care to hospitality. Many contribute in other ways, as 
volunteers and generally as community members. Research shows that immigrants are a key 
component of a healthy and vibrant econom y.1 Immigrants are known to drive innovation,2 and start 
businesses at higher rates than native -born Americans.3 
Over the past twenty years, immigrants to Maine have been younger, more educated  and more likely to 
be employed than native -born Mainers  (see Table 1).  In other words, immigrants have many of the 
characteristics our employers and economy are looking for. We need to be welcoming these new 
arrivals and helping them to succeed . Instead, our current system bars  asylum -seekers from 
employment , desp ite the fact that many are eager to do contribute to our economy and support 
themselves financially.  
In addition to the impact on our economy, the current rule creates a real hardship for those impacted. 
The obvious financial difficulty of not being able to earn money through employment  results in 
increased hunger, difficulty finding housing, and problems  accessing health care. What’s more,  the 
inability to work leads to  isolation,  depression,  and other mental health problems that add to the 
trauma many asylees already experienced in their home countries.4 
As I’m sure m any of you are aware, th is personal and famil ial hardship is especially acute right now, with 
many new arrivals in Portland who are str uggling to find shelter  without any federal or state assistance.  
LD 1050 would relieve Maine, its  residents, and its economy from the burden of this unnecessar ily 
restrictive law.  
I urge you to vote “ought to pass” on the legislation. Thank you for your time. I’m happy to answer any 
questions.  
 
 
Table 1: Recent Immigrants to Maine are Young, Educated , and Fill Critical Jobs  
 Native -born Mainers  Immigrants since 2000  
Median age  44 years  30 years  
Share with a college degree  25%  30%  
Employed (16 and older)  60%  67%  
     Works in hospitals  4% 5% 
     Works in care facilities  2% 3% 
     Works in hospitality  7% 10%  
Source: MECEP analysis of US Census Bureau, American Community Survey data, 2017 -2021 using the 
Integrated Public Use Microdata System (IPUMS).  
 
 
Note s 
 
1 For a summary see “The Effects of Immigration on the United States Economy,” University of Pennsylvania, June 
27, 2016. https://budgetmodel.wharton.u penn.edu/issues/2016/1/27/the -effects -of-immigration -on-the-united -
states -economy   
2 Jennifer Hunt and Marjolaine Gauthier -Loiselle, “How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?” American 
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (April 2010): 31 –56.  
https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/mac.2.2.31    
3 Dan Kosten, “ Immigrants as Economic Contributors: Immigr ant Entrepreneurs ,” National Immigration Forum . July 
11, 2018. https://immigrationforum.org/article/immigrants -as-economic -contributors -immigran t-entrepreneurs/   
4 Human Rights Watch, “At Least Let Them Work: The Denial of Work Authorization and Assistance for Asylum 
Seekers in the United States .” Nov 13, 2013. https://www.hrw.org/report/2013/11/12/least -let-them -
work/denial -work -authorization -and-assistance -asylum -seekers -united   
