Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Support  
LD 1050: Resolve, Dire cting the Department of Labor to Requ est a Federal Waiver to Allow 
Presumptive  Work Eligibility for Asylum  Seekers   
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Labor and Housing Committee  
March  21, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Labor and Housing Committee,  
 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly ev ery public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.  
 
I am here to testify on behalf of the MEA in support of LD 1050, Resolve, Directing the Department of 
Labor to Request a Federal Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility for Asylum Seekers.   
We have concerns what is called for in this resolve may be c ontrary to federal law and therefore pre -
empted, but we certainly support the underlying issue of allowing asylum -seekers present in Maine to be 
eligible to work sooner than what is currently allowed.   
 
Asylum -seekers come to this country seeking a better life.  Many are fleeing horrible conditions.  They 
may have been threatened, their basic security may have been at risk.  Many make the frightening 
decision to pick up, journey to someplace different, in search of a better life, anywhere they can find it.  
Many experience harrowing journeys and develop further scars of trauma along the way.  
   
And yet when they arrive in the United States, they are then forced to live from charity and the good will 
of others.  Church groups, civic groups, tireless individual s – all come together to try to provide help, 
guidance and a friendly face to new families searching for peace in a new land.   
 
Throughout southern Maine, we are seeing an increase in asylum -seekers among the student population 
and public schools are being  tested with new challenges.  But perhaps the biggest challenge is the 
housing insecurity many of these students face as families are shuffled around between hotel rooms, 
apartments, church basements, gymnasiums.  As students move so might the responsibili ty of the public 
school.  Allowing asylum -seekers to work sooner will only help address the housing insecurity felt 
broadly among asylum -seekers.  Allowing asylum -seekers to be authorized to work sooner than six 
months will not solve housing insecurity for  this population, but it will certainly help bring stability to 
some of the students public schools are trying hard to help.   
 
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
 
There are bills in Congress to address this issue.  Senator Collins has sponsored The Asylum Seeker 
Work Authorization Act of  2023 to allow asylum -seekers to see work permits  30 days after arrival.  
Senator Angus King is a co -sponsor. 1  And Congresswoman Pingree has sponsored similar if not 
identical legislation in the House. 2  We are hopeful our delegation can help usher this through Congress 
and we encourage legislators supportive of LD 1050 to share their support of this federal legislation with 
their elected leaders in Washington, DC.    
 
While it takes some time for asylum seekers to adjust to being in their new home, our state is stronger 
for the new perspectives and experiences they bring to our communities and schools. By eliminating the 
wait to work, we can make their transition to Mai ne smoother.  
 
Thank you for your time and your service to the people of Maine.  I will do my best to a nswer any 
questions you may have.   
 
 
1 Please see, Portland Press Herald, February 4, 2023, found here:  Maine lawmakers renew push for faster work 
permits for asylum seekers - Portland Press Herald  
2 Please, Press Release from the Office of Congresswoman Chellie Pingree, March 1, 2023, found here:  
Congresswoman Pingree Renews Push to Speed Up Asylum Seeker Work Authori zation Process | U.S. 
Representative Chellie Pingree (house.gov)  
