 
 
 
Testimony for the Labor and Housing Committee  
March 21 , 202 3 
 
Regard ing LD 1050 : Resolve, Directing the Department of Labor to Request a 
Federal Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility for Asylum Seekers:  
 
 
Good afternoon , Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder , and distinguished members 
of the Labor and Housing Commit tee. Thank you so much for the opportunity to speak 
today.  My name is Kristen Farnham .  I am Vice President of Legal Affairs and 
Advancement at Spurwink . I am here to speak in support of LD 1050 .  At Spurwink, we 
provide behavioral health and educational services to children, adults, and families 
across Maine. Last year, we served over 8,1 00 Maine people  affected by trauma, mental h ealth 
challenges, substance use disorders , developmental disabilities  and autism , so they can l ead healthy, 
engaged lives in their communities .   
 
There are three things  that are among the most cited factors  for what makes life meaningful , according 
to a 2021 study by the Pew Research Center .  First is family : seeing our family flourish and spending 
time with family.  The second is work :  supporting oneself and one ’s family and being a productive part 
of the community and economy.  The third is material  well-being:  having your basic needs met and 
having enough to support one’s family.   These three elements are obviously intertwined and each 
impacts the other s.   
 
LD 1050  supports asylum seekers in their ability and desire to work  and therefore in their  pursuit of a 
meaningful life.  Spurwink wholeheartedly supports  the policy shift that would enable recent immigrants 
to work in the 6 months while their asylum applications are processed.  
 
There are two perspectives from which Spurwink supports LD 1050:  client need and workforce 
development .   
 
First, LD 1050 creates opportunity for the vulnerable populations that we serve.  Across our programs, 
we serve the behavioral health needs of recen t immigrants.  I n particular, this p opulation is served by 
our Shifa ME refugee program, which works with adults, children and cultural brokers to provide trauma 
therapy.  We are serving approximately 200 children and their families , primarily in Le wiston, 
Saco/Biddeford, Portland, Westbrook and expanding to Brunswick.  We serve mostly Congolese, 
Rwandan, Somali, Afghan and Iraqi  refugees . 
Second, LD 1050 helps to address the behavioral health workforce crisis.  The hiring of workers is a 
key challenge at Sp urwink, as it is across the state .  We currently have about 100 open positions.  
Currently, about one -third of our workforce is comprised o f recent immigrants , and it is a workforce that 
is highly valued at Spurwink.  This bill would open a larger potential applicant pool  and potentiall y offer 
some relief to the workforce challenge .     
 
Thank you for considering LD 1050 and for working collaboratively with the federal government to 
widen the path to a productive and meaningful life for asylum seeke rs.   

