188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
     
 
Testimony of Matthew Marks in Support of  LD 1050  
“Resolve, Directing the Department of Labor to Request a Federal Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility for 
Asylum Seekers ” 
Joint Committee on Labor and Housing 
March  21, 2023 
 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing my name  is Matthew Marks,  I am a Principal at Cornerstone  Government  Affairs,  and here  today  to speak  on 
behalf  of my client  The Associated  General Contractors  of Maine.  AGC  Maine  is a statewide  commercial  construction  
trade  association  and a Chapter of AGC  America which  was founded  in 1918 with  27,000 contractors,  suppliers,  and 
service  providers.   
 
The failure  of federal policy  advancement  places  asylum  seekers  in a situation  where  they  cannot  seek  employment  as 
they  wait  for the US Government  to process  their  paperwork.  Today  it’s estimated  that 8,000  to 10,000 people  are living  
in Maine  and not eligible  to work.  AGC  Maine  has long  supported  reforms  that address  barriers  to solving  this challenge  
and supported  Federal legislation  to correct  the situation.   
 
As companies  work  tirelessly  to solve  workforce  challenges,  among  our ongoing population  challenges  it is shortsighted  
to keep  workers  sidelined . While  that challenge  is difficult,  the families  who  are living  here  should  be given  the chance  to 
support  themselves  and their  families  who  are part of our community.  The US Immigration  and Customs  Service  allows  
for asylum  seekers  to apply  for a work  permit  known  as “Employment  Authorization  Document,”  (EAD) 150 days  after 
they  have  applied  for asylum.  An individual  can apply  for an asylum  application  decision  may  be made  180 days  after 
application.   
 
According to TRAC , a nonpartisan,  nonprofit  data research center  affiliated  with  the Newhouse  School  of Public  
Communications  and the Whitman School  of Management , both  at Syracuse  University,  the latest  available  data  reveal  
that the number  of asylum  seekers  waiting  for asylum  hearings  in the U.S. has now  reached  at least  1,565,966 
individuals.  About  half of this total,  or 787,882,  are waiting  for hearings  before  judges  in the Immigration  Courts  housed  
in the Department  of Justice.  The other  half,  or 778,084  asylum  seekers,  are waiting  for hearings  before  United  States  
Citizenship  and Immigration  Services  (USCIS)  asylum  officers  who  are housed  in the Department  of Homeland  Security . 
 
While  this resolution  might  not correct  the issue,  it is imperative  action  continue  to elevate  the discussion  and assert  
that Maine  is actively  seeking  solutions.  The costs  of assisting  asylum  seekers  continue  to rise as meal  costs, housing,  
and medical  expenses  rise with  our recent inflation  impacting federal,  state,  and local  budgets.  But the true  cost here  is 
we have  families,  skilled  workers , and people  who  want  to be part of Maine’s  workforce,  support  their  families , and be 
integrated  with  our communities.   
 
I urge  the Committee to pass  this resolve  and send  a unified  message  to correct  this problem.   
