Testimony in Support of LD 1050:
“Resolve, Directing
the Department of Labor to
Request a Federal Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility for Asylum Seekers”
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as director of
policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a nonpartisan,
non-profit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic freedom in
Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 1050.
We commend Sen. Brakey for sponsoring this bill, and we commend Chellie
Pingree, Maine’s First District Representative to the US Congress, for sponsoring the
Asylum Seeker Work Authorization Act at the federal level.
1
Both of these proposals seek
to cure the same issue: many asylum-seekers are being housed in Maine, which requires
massive local resources to accommodate, but these people must wait many months
before they can legally earn a living.
Just last month, officials with the City of Portland warned they are facing a
financial cliff dealing with the more-than-550 asylum-seekers who have arrived since
the beginning of this year.
2
Whether accomplished via a change to federal law or through LD 1050, this small
policy change would pave a path for asylum seekers in Maine to land a job and support
their families much sooner than they can today.
This would relieve pressure on the state’s labor market, injecting hundreds, if not
thousands, more workers into Maine’s workforce to fill positions in crucial industries
which have gone unfilled for multiple years. This would help stabilize costs for
employers, allow some businesses to plan for the future, and provide asylee families
with income to support themselves and their communities while they attempt to get
settled in their new homes.
Please deem LD 1050 “Ought To Pass” and provide a pathway for New Mainers
who want to work and support their families. Current rules are nonsensical, so this
Legislature should do all that it can to correct them. Thank you for your time and
consideration.
2
https://www.mainepublic.org/business-and-economy/2023-02-28/portland-officials-warn-the-city-is-facing- 
a-cliff-as-it-struggles-to-house-asylum-seekers
1
https://pingree.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=4501
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

