                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1050  - Resolve, Directing the Department of Labor to 
Request a Federal Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility for Asylum Seekers  
March 21 , 2023  
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder , and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing , my name is Ninette Irabaruta , and I am the Director of Public Policy and Advocacy  at United Way 
of Southern Maine (UWSM).   I am here today on behalf of UWSM  to express our suppor t for LD 1050 : 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Labor to Request a Federal Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility 
for Asylum Seekers .  
I have a deep personal connection to this matter.  My journey to Maine  began on January 7, 2012, when I 
landed in DC and later that day found myself on a Greyhound bus traveling to Portland , Maine. I arrived on the 
morning of January 8 . I arrived in Maine legally having sought asylum . I was only 21 years old and alone. I was 
afraid of the unknown  but also had faith that guided me throughout my journey. No one had told me that I 
would be arriving in the middle of the winter, with snow everywhere, and the cold that I ha d never experienced. 
However, this was minor compared to wha t I had gone through.  
I imagine  that not many  people  in this room have survived gen ocide, or survived a brutal civil war, or survived 
multiple  political cou p d’états , or survived human  (or women)  rights abuses – I have . I am standing here today 
because the federal  and Maine  state governments  allowed me not a second or third chance, but a sixth chance 
to live. I have never taken that for granted.  
Many asylum seekers come here for many reasons, and today the humanitarian crisis of asylum seekers is 
due mostly to social and political events that have caused  instability  in their home countries .  
I would not be here today if I didn’t believe in the power of a second chance. Most of the asylees  who come 
here want to work and start providing for themselves and their families right away , while  also minimizing the  
burden that is weighing on local municipalities . This is a win -win for the Maine economy. We know that there is 
a hug e workforce shortage in our state, and we have a  unique  opportunity to use the needed skills asylum 
seekers bring into the cities and towns where  they settle.  
In 2018, the New American Economy released a report that showed the significant role immigrants – asylum 
seekers included, play in Maine’s economy. The report highlighted  immigrants in Portland, ME  metro area 
contributed $1.2 billion to the area’s GDP in 2016 and paid $133 million in federal taxes and $62 million in state 
and local taxes.1 Given their income, immigrants contributed significantly to state and local taxes, including 
property, sales, and excise taxes levied by state or municipal governments.  
Immigrants can grow Maine's economy through tax-based  expansion, increased demand for goods, and 
business creation. Immigrants are more than twice as likely to start a business than their native -born 
counterparts.2 
For these reasons, United Way of Southe rn Maine  (UWSM)  supports LD 1050 . We understand that the re is no 
such waiver in existence at the  federal government ; however, it is important that the Maine Legislature send a 
message to Congress . If somehow  the federal government waiver is approved,  it would help the asylees to 
start earning money and provide for themselves and their families. Such support could  lead to a financially 
stable outcome for their lives now and in the future.  
We r espectfully encourage  you to support and pass LD 1050 : Resolve, Directing the Department of Labor to 
Request a Federal Waiver to Allow Presumptive Work Eligibility for Asylum Seekers . 
Thank you for your leadership and service . 
 
1 https://research.newamericaneconomy.org/report/new -americans -in-portland -maine/   
https://map.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/locations/maine/   
2 Immigrants: An Important Part of Maine's Economic Developmen t Strategy   
