My name is Jason Woollard, I am a 5"‘ generation Maine potato farmer, a resident of Mars Hill 
and the Chief Financial Officer of McCrum Family Holdings. 
I am here today in support LD 150 
On March 24"‘ 2022 our family business suffered a catastrophic fire at our Belfast production 
facility that destroyed the entire building and all of the processing equipment. 
2years prior to this loss, our family completed the construction of a French Fry manufacturing 
facility in Washburn. The construction of this facility came at a cost of $75,000,000. 
To complete this project, we applied and were approved to participate in a program called “The 
Major Food Processing and Manufacturing Facility Tax Credit Program" This program is an 
integral part of our Financing package for our French Fry Production facility in Washburn. 
LD 150 in an important bill that allows us, with the approval of the DECD, to adjust our initial 
employee baseline due to the catastrophic event that our family business suffered. This 
baseline adjustment will allow our business to annually qualify for Pine Tree Zone benefits and 
The Major Food Processing Tax Credit. Both of these programs allow us to grow and invest in 
Maine. 
Because of the state's assistance and our business investment, l am happy to report that the 
new facility in Washburn has had a significant positive impact on Aroostook County and the 
State of Maine. These impacts have exceeded our projections and expectations. I would like to 
share a few highlights with you. 
We had anticipated that by August of 2022, that we would have 2 shifts operating with a total 
of 45 employees. We were able to exceed that goal and are now operating 4 shifts and have 
118 full-time employees. 
We are currently producing 140 million pounds of french fries annually. 98% of these french 
fries are sold outside of the State of Maine and all the revenue is brought directly back to 
Malne,’with much of it cycled back into our local economy. That is money that is going back to 
farmers, transportation c0mpanies,lequipment dealers, pallet manufacturers and, most 
importantly, our employees.V 
To give you a couple of examples of this: 
-During the last 12 months we have purchased over $26,000,000 of potatoes from Aroostook 
County Farmers. This is the equivalent of over 6,000 acres of potatoes, or 12% of the potato 
acres in Maine. 
-We ship approximately 3,500 tractor trailer loads of french fries annually. These trucks will 
transport french fries from Washburn to many destinations across the US. We work witha 
local trucking company, Thompson Transport, in Mapleton that handles much of our freight.
When we opened our facility, they had 3 tractor trailers and 7 employees. Their currents 
numbers include 38 tractor trailers and 50 employees. 
These are just a few of the positive impacts that we have seen from our facility being built in 
Aroostook County. This project has been an exciting challenge for our family. We are very 
proud of the fact that we are Aroostook County potato farmers that had a dream to createa 
value-added product from a natural resource grown in Maine. 
Thank you for your time and I will be happy to answer any questions now or at the work 
session.
