ate 
- 
STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT or ECONOMIC 
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
JANET T. MILLS HEATHER JOHNSON 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
February 14, 2023 
Testimony of Phoenix McLaughlin 
In support of LD 150 
An Act to Allow Incentive Continuity Following a Catastrophic Occurrence Under the Pine 
Tree Development Zone and Major Food Processing and Manufacturing Facility 
Expansion Tax Credit Programs 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement, and Business, my name is Phoenix McLaughlin, and I am 
the Tax Incentive Policy Manager for the Department of Economic and Community Development. 
I am here today to testify in support of LD 150. 
This bill, initiated by the Department, pertains to the Pine Tree Development Zone (PTDZ) 
program and the credit for major food processing and manufacturing facility expansion. Both 
programs are predicated on a participating company increasing employment and ensure this by 
setting a baseline employment number at the time of application. The company must maintain that 
employment base while also adding jobs in order to beneﬁt from the programs. 
Currently, neither statute has active provisions that allow for adjusting that baseline number in the 
event of a-disaster or accident that might destroy a facility, such as a ﬂood, hurricane, or ﬁre. 
Unfortunately, one of Maine’s key potato processors experienced a major ﬁre that destroyed one 
of its facilities. The ﬁre has had many terrible effects, of course, but one unintended impact is that 
the company would no longer be eligible to participate in the PTDZ or food processing facility 
credit programs because of the baseline employment loss. The affected facility was not the one for 
which the company was receiving State incentives for expansion ——that facility was unaffected- 
but it made up the bulk of the company’s baseline employment. 
Our understanding is that the primary intent of the baseline employment provision is to ensure 
participating companies are creating jobs, not to take away beneﬁts in the event of a disaster. This 
bill draws from an earlier provision in PTDZ statute, now expired, that allowed for a baseline 
employment adjustment in the event of a “catastrophic occurrence ” . It would update the language 
to be applicable to today’s situation, as well as any future catastrophes, and place similar language 
in the statute for the credit for major food processing and manufacturing facility expansion. 
We believe this is the appropriate response to help the affected company and workers move 
forward. Thank you for your time, and I am happy to answer any questions. 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION ~ AUGUSTA - MAINE ~ 043330059 
PHONE: (207) 624-9800 - FACSIMILE: (207) 287-2681 
WWW.MAINE.GOV/ DECD
