ii1~.f~.=;}i;*.==-ii:- . “%5 
=\_ P. 
Q‘ ti~ 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 150 
An Act to Allow Incentive Continuity Following a Catastrophic Occurrence Under the 
Pine Tree Development Zone and Major Food Processing and Manufacturing Facility 
Expansion Tax Credit Programs 
Presented to the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Tuesday, February 14, 2023, 1:00 pm 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members ofthe Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Troy Jackson and l represent Aroostook County in 
the Maine Senate and have the great honor of serving as Senate President. l am here today to 
present LD 150, An Act to Allow incentive Continuity Following a Catastrophic Occurrence 
Under the Pine Tree Development Zone and Major Food Processing and Manufacturing Facility 
Expansion Tax Credit Programs. 
The two tax credits referenced in the title of the proposed legislation were designed to 
encourage business growth and investment in l\/laine. The programs include provisions that 
incentivize good-payingjobs and increasing employment. Together, the programs have proven 
to be good for workers, rural communities and our overall economy. However, recent 
catastrophic events have highlighted the need to update both programs to ensure the 
incentives remain in place in the event of some sort of natural disaster. lt would seem cruel to 
take away these credits when an unexpected major catastrophic event suddenly causesa 
business to fall out-of-compliance with the eligibility criteria for the program. 
For example, l’m sure this committee is familiar with the debilitating fire that demolished the 
Penobscot McCrum plant in Belfast. At the time of the fire, the Belfast plant employed 138 
people. The fire was so large that everyone within a quarter mile radius of the plant was asked 
to shelter in place. Firefighters arrived from numerous nearby communities, yet all that 
remained after the flames were extinguished was smoke and ash. 
Stale House (207) 287-1500 * Cell (207) 436~0763 * Fax (207) 287-5862 * To/I Free I-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Senatonlacksozvl @gmaz'l. com * Web Sire: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
Today, an empty lot commemorates the once vibrant facility. What's worse is that this natural 
disaster has nowjeopardized the very incentives that have fueled the success of a family- 
owned business, representing five generations of potato farmers and employing numerous 
Mainers. 
This catastrophe obviously disrupted the number of employees McCrum has on its payrolls. 
Both the Pine Tree Development Zone and the Facility Expansion Tax Credit rely on increasing 
employment numbers from the time of application. LD 150 will allow for an adjustment in the 
baseline number of employees in the case of an accident or disaster that might destroy a 
facility. Without this updated provision, McCrum and its workers will be unfairly penalized for 
extreme circumstances outside of their control. 
Thank you for your time and attention. l ask you to join me in support of LD 150 to ensure that 
businesses and workers in Maine can feel supported during times of disaster or unforeseen 
accidents. lam happy to take any questions from the committee.
