northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1191 An Act Regarding Transparency of Medical Billing 
Testimony in Opposition 
April 24,2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee, my name Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am here today 
providing testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member organizations 
speaking in opposition to this bill.  Northern Light Health member organizations include 10 
hospitals located in southern, central, eastern and northern Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air 
and ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, primary and 
specialty care practices and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  Ninety three 
percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern Light Health service area.  Northern 
Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s largest employers with more than 10,000 
employees statewide. 
 
The federal hospital price transparency regulation became effective January 1, 2021, and 
requires each hospital operating in the United States to make public its standard charges for 
the items and services it provides. Hospitals are required to make their standard charges 
public in two ways: 1) a consumer-friendly display comprising at least 300 shoppable 
services, which can be satisfied through the release of a shoppable services file or by 
offering a price estimator tool, and 2) a comprehensive, machine-readable file. 
 
Northern Light Health is in compliance with the regulation with a web page designed to 
provide the public with access to price transparency information, online price estimates, 
access to a financial counselor for assistance with price estimates and links to machine 
readable files for each member hospital.  The price estimator tool helps individuals plan for 
the costs of health care services including treatments, tests and procedures.  If the price 
estimator does not provide pricing information for the service the individual is looking, the 
financial counselors are available to help them.  The site also includes a link to Compare 
Maine to access price transparency tools from the Maine Health Data Organization.   
 
This bill states that the health care practitioner or the laboratory providing health care must 
inform patients of the cost prior to the provision of services.  We support price transparency 
and have built the structures to support this. We believe that patients should access the 
cost estimating information already accessible to then vs placing the burden on the 
practitioner. 
 
Section 2 of the bill prohibits a health care entity from billing a responsible party for the first 
time for a medical service that occurred one year earlier.  When responsible parties are 
billed for health care services the bill is sent after the insurance carrier has paid Northern 
Light Health for the insurer portion and the remaining co-pay and deductible balance is 
billed to the patient.  Bills to insurers generally go out within a week or so of the service 
date.  The delay occurs when the insurers deny payment or request more information and 
our staff respond to endless requests for information or must pursue appeal processes to 
get the bills paid.  Ensuring timely bills to patients requires the insurers to stop the 
 unnecessary delays in payment and administrative burdens to get a claim paid so we can 
then send the final bill to the patient. 
 
