 
131th Legislature  
State of Maine  
Senate District 18    
Senator Richard A. Bennett 
                                                 3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
Office (207) 287-1505 
Cell (207) 592-3200  
Richard.Bennett@legislature.maine.gov 
 
 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
  
 
Testimony of Senator Richard Bennett before the  
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services 
April 24, 2023 
LD 1191, An Act Regarding Transparency of Medical Billing 
 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I 
have the honor of serving 14 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate.  I am here to 
introduce LD 1191, “An Act Regarding Transparency of Medical Billing.” 
 
Medical bills have long been a concern for citizens of this country.  In fact, according to a June 
2022 investigation from Kaiser Health News and NPR, more than 100 million people in the U.S. 
have health care debt.  That includes about 40% of all adults.i   
 
Many times, patients are not aware of the cost of a procedure that will fall on them to pay.  Even 
those with insurance sometimes end up with an enormous out-of-pocket cost.  The 128th 
Legislature passed the “right to shop” bill, sponsored by then Senator Rod Whittemore.  That 
legislation requires health insurance companies to offer plans that allow patients to shop for 
comparable services and choose the most economical.  If a patient receives care for less than the 
average cost to their insurer, both the patient and the insurance company split the savings.  
Senator Whittemore’s legislation was an important first step to lowing healthcare costs.  I believe 
my bill is an appropriate second step.  
 
The legislation before you today will require a health care practitioner or laboratory to inform 
patients of the cost of their care. Some providers already do this in Maine, but many unhappily 
do not. While clearly not solving all problems in health cost, I believe this is an important step 
for you to consider with the number of other measures before this committee.  
 
Secondly, it prohibits a health care entity from billing a responsible party for the first time for a 
medical service that occurred more than one year earlier, thereby preventing many “surprise” 
bills.  I think it is important to note that the second provision is a benefit some, including all 
persons on the Legislature’s health plan, currently receive.  Included in our health plan is a 
section regarding the time limit for filing claims.  It reads, “The Contract Administrator must 
receive proof of a claim for reimbursement for a Covered Service no later than 365 days after 
that service is received.” 
 
The Federal Government has taken steps to help with this issue including passing legislation 
related to price transparency and surprise billing.  The Transparency in Coverage rules require 
 
 health plans to have an Internet self-service tool that allows patients to check the cost-sharing for 
particular services.  The No Surprises Act requires health care providers and facilities to provide 
a good faith estimate of expected charges for scheduled services.   
 
I commend the Federal Government for their action, but believe Maine should also take action to 
protect Maine people.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  I urge the committee to pass this legislation in our ongoing 
effort to protect our constituents from crippling medical debt.   
 
 
i Werner, Anna. “Investigation Finds 40% of All Adults in U.S. Struggle with Health Care 
Debt.” Www.cbsnews.com, 17 June 2022, www.cbsnews.com/news/health-care-debt-40-percent-
us-adults/. Accessed 19 Apr. 2023. 
 
