 
Written Testimony of Ann Marie Kane
Greetings Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services.
My name is Ann Marie Kane (also known as “amk”) and I’m the full-time caregiver for my 
mom.  I am testifying today in support of LD300.
- My mom has vascular dementia.  In 2020, she fell at her assisted living facility.  Because 
of her balance issues, she could not stay where she was.  I was not working due to the 
covid crisis so I started looking for a place for us to live that June.
- We moved in together November 2020.   
Due to a lack of qualified workers, we get 
no relief at home.  We now rely heavily for 
relief on the adult day program that 
Southern Maine Agency on Aging (SMAA) 
offers in Biddeford at the Sam L Cohen 
Center.
- My typical caregiving day runs from about 7 
am to 8:30 pm.  I manage all personal care, domestic, financial, administrative and 
family-related concerns.  For business out of the home, I must take her with me.
- Subsequently, I must bring all the supplies necessary if there is an unexpected event.  
- Yesterday morning, for example, I ensured all items were replenished in my ‘go’ bag, 
including snacks, a beverage, extra clothes and supplies for her as well as items in case of 
emergency.  Before 9 a.m., I  had to clear the snow off the car, make breakfast, help mom 
get cleaned up and dressed, warm up the car. get her wheelchair set up to bring her to the 
car …so that she could make it to her 9:40 Physical Therapy appointment. 
- After PT, I drove her to Southern Maine Agency on Aging’s adult day program at the 
Cohen Center.
- While she was there, I took care of laundry, grocery shopped, picked up medications, 
brought groceries home and talked to a friend for support.  And, suddenly 4 hours had 
passed.In support of LD 300 – An Act to Promote, Grow 
and Sustain Adult Day & Respite Programs in 
Maine
Submitted via Testimony Portal on March 16, 2023
- Adult Day Programs are critical to our care economy infrastructure.
- While at the Cohen Ctr, mom has space from me, time to ‘hang out’ with 
“contemporaries” and still be around caring professionals.  She was spared having to sit 
in the car and wait for me to do errands.
- Some major challenges caregivers face include preventing burnout and watching our 
loved ones suffer with limited opportunities for interaction with others. 
- We grieve daily watching our loved ones slowly decline .  We will eventually experience 
an entirely different grief when they pass.   It is emotionally draining, physically 
grueling, and taxing on our souls.
- When mom attends the Adult Day program, she gets to break out of her everyday 
struggles, meet new people, work on skills and activities with a sense of freedom.
-Your support of LD 300 will ensure that more caregivers, and more individuals, are 
given a desperately needed BREAK in their days, so that we can continue to care for 
our Loved Ones.
