Wm ggncraiior ﬁ 
Testimony of Jeff Johnson, Vice President, Home & Community Based Services for Spectrum 
Generations] Bridges Home Services 
To Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Favor of LD 300 -An Act to Establish Pilot Initiatives to Promote, Grow and Sustain Adult Day Care 
and Respite Programs in Maine 
Delivered in person on March 16, 2023 
Thank you, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services for this opportunity today to testify in favor of LD300: An Act to Establish 
Pilot Initiatives to Promote, Grow and Sustain Adult Day Care and Respite Programs in Maine. 
Spectrum Generations is a provider of Adult Day services, serving consumers in Waterville, Skowhegan, 
Belfast, and the Augusta area. Adult day programming plays a crucial role in providing support to older 
adults with physical and cognitive disabilities in Maine, particularly in rural areas. Our program offersa 
variety of services, such as medical care, nutrition, socialization, and therapeutic activities, which can 
significantly improve the quality of life for both older adults and their caregivers. Caregiving can havea 
negative impact on the economy, as it can force family members to take time off from work or reduce 
their work hours to provide care for their loved ones. This can result in lost wages, decreased 
productivity, and missed opportunities for career advancement. Leaving older adults with disabilities 
alone while their caregiver goes to work can also be dangerous. Without proper supervision, older 
adults may be at risk for falls, medication errors, and other accidents. Additionally, loneliness and social 
isolation can lead to depression, anxiety, and other mental health issues. Caregiving can be a stressful 
and demanding job, especially when trying to balance it with other responsibilities, such as work or 
raising children. This can lead to burnout, fatigue, and other health problems. Adult day programming 
can provide respite for caregivers, giving them time to focus on their own needs and recharge their 
batteries. 
Currently, Adult Day service providers in Maine are reimbursed through a fee-for-service model. The 
fee-for-service model used by MaineCare can create significant barriers for opening new or maintaining 
existing adult day services in Maine. Under this model, providers are reimbursed based on the number 
of services they provide to Medicaid beneficiaries. ln fact, three factors impact this model significantly; 
reimbursement rate, census, and attendance. The fee-for-sen/ice model makes it difficult for providers 
to plan and budget effectively, and when the providers are unable to maximize rate, census and 
attendance, it makes it difficult to keep the program operational. During the last fiscal year, Spectrum 
Generations provided Adult Day services to twenty-one (21) section 26 Adult Day Health consumers 
across our four (4) locations, roughly 16% of our overall capacity of one hundred and thirty (130). The 
combined attendance rate for those consumers, based on their MaineCare authorized hours of service 
at those locations was; 31%, 39%, 30%, and 35% respectively. Based on these statistics, Spectrum 
Generations would have been unable to continue providing Adult Day services without other agency 
revenue sources. However, we believe that through changes in payment model, adult day services will 
have more opportunity to sustain and potentially grow, keeping these vital sen/ices available to Mainers
We recommend a potential pilot of a PMPM (per-member-per-month) reimbursement model for adult 
day services in Maine. Under this model, providers would receive a fixed payment per Medicaid 
beneficiary per month, rather than being reimbursed on a fee-for-service basis. This would provide more 
predictable source of revenue for providers and help to ensure that there are sufficient resources to 
support the needs of Medicaid beneficiaries who require adult day services. Under the existing model, 
providers experience fluctuations in revenue due to changes in reimbursement rates, changes in the 
number of consumers who need services, or by the consumer's attendance. By contrast, a PMPM 
reimbursement model would help providers to better plan and budget for their services. By providing a 
stable source of revenue, providers may be more willing to invest in new facilities, hire additional staff, 
and expand their services to meet the needs of Medicaid beneficiaries. We suggest that the potential 
PMPM pilot is based on the consumer's authorized hours, the facility's license (medical vs. non-medical 
program), and geographic location. PMPM payment models (and per-member-per-week) are currently 
used successfully by organizations offering child day care sen/ices, and we believe a similar model for 
adult day care is needed. This bill also establishes an advisory committee of stakeholders to design and 
recommend a potential pilot program, and Spectrum Generations would be excited at the opportunity 
to be a part of it. 
Other components of LD300 include a marketing campaign to raise awareness of these vital services, as 
well as interim funding to support providers as a new payment model is designed. We are also in favor 
of these aspects of the bill. Adult Day services are a necessary component to long-term care which 
provides needed respite for caregivers particularly those who remain in the workforce. We encourage 
your support in favor of LD 300. 
Thank you for your time.
