 
 
 
Testimony of Aroostook Agency on Aging  in Support of An Act to Establish Pilot Initiatives to Promote, 
Grow and Sustain Adult Day Care and Respite Programs in Maine  
 
Good morning , Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer  and members of the Health and Human Services  
Committee . My nam e is Joy Barresi Saucier, of Mars Hill , Maine, offering testimony in support of LD 300 
in my role as Executive Director of the Aroostook Agency on Aging . 
All people need to connect with others at all stages of life . This connection gives us energy, which keeps 
us living at our best . Adult Day Service provides  a safe  place for those with chronic disease or memory 
loss to enjoy the day and interact with others . While participants  are at the program, caregivers can  
receive support or just take a much -needed  break . 
The Aroostook Agency on Aging provide s an Adult Day Respite program , which serves on average             
4 consumers daily, 4 days per week.   Last fiscal year, the revenues generated  did not  even  support the 
cost to staf f the program.  With the approved forthcoming rate change  under the current fee-for-service 
funding model , the program will still not be able to cover all expenses wit h the Agency required to 
subsi dize the program at  approximately $50,000 per year , which is uns ustainabl e. 
We know that the rural nat ure of our service region  overlays additional operational  and reimbursement 
challen ges.  The most significant two challenges be ing transportation  barriers and  the lack of eligibility  
for reimbursement  from state sources due to multifactor eligibility or exclusion due to participation  in 
another st ate funded service.    The current model  does not pay for participants  who fail to attend 
leaving providers w ith no means of cover ing assoc iated expense s. For the majority of the population of 
Aroostook , private pay for this service  is not an option.  
For this reason, we support th is bill which will establish  pilot  initiatives to promote, grow, and  sustain  
adult day resp ite models in Maine.   We know that Adult Day programs improve the physical, emotional , 
and social outcomes  of participants , decrease length of stay in hospitals, and delay and decrease the 
likelihood  of nursing facility admissions.   We a lso know that caregivers are challenge d to simultaneously 
remain in the w orkfo rce and care fo r their loved one.  
In Aroostook County, Alzheimer’s  Disease is now one o f the top 5 leading  causes of dea th in Aroostook .  
Based on Alzheimer’s  Association of Maine statistics , approximately  1,294 Aroostook residents over the 
age of 45 ha ve subjec tive c ognitive decline and  1,629 residents are living with Alzheimer ’s Disease.   
We need to develo p and maintain  innovative comm unity support  struc tures that allow o lder people to 
age safely and compassiona tely in their homes and home communit ies.  Adult Day programs are a key 
component of  this goal.  
We appreciate you r support  as we work together to continue to meet the needs of older adults living 
independently in the great State of Maine . 
Joy Barresi Saucier  
Executive Director , Aroostook Agency on Aging  
joy.b.saucier@aroostookaging.org  
