61 Winthrop Street * Augusta, ME 04330 
~ 
l\-'iatii1t: ?t<>t‘|;;_i1“ t fare 
oivYBunst3I/QN ‘Pt"o3;i'am 
LD 300 An Act to Promote and Sustain Adult Day and Respite Programs in Maine 
IN SUPPORT 
March 16, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Laura Harper, and l am a Senior 
Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. l am here today to present testimony in support of this 
bill on behalf of the Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program. 
The Ombudsman Program provides statewide advocacy services for residents of nursing 
homes, assisted housing (residential care and assisted living) and for recipients of home care. 
Additionally, the program provides assistance to patients in hospitals who experience barriers in 
accessing the long-term sen/ices and supports they need when they are ready for discharge. 
This legislation requires the implementation of a pilot program that will explore alternative 
models for funding adult respite care other than fee-for-service, implementing the most 
promising model or models. It requires a multi -media campaign to promote the service and the 
establishment of an advisory committee. 
Adult Day Programs are an important support for older and disabled adults who need the 
services these programs provide and want to remain in the community. This model can also be 
a vital support to family caregivers who are employed as well as providing needed respite. 
Attendance in Adult Day Programs can lower the utilization of emergency department visits and 
hospitalizations. (Gerontologist, Volume 57, June 2017) Additionally, attendance in an Adult Day 
Program may delay admission to a long-term care facility. 
Examples of the impact of attendance in Adult Day Program: 
o An older man was taking care of his wife with Alzheimer's at home. He struggled with 
her care not being sure about how to respond to her symptoms. He reached a point that tmsoo-4ee~022e = Fax 2o?~e21-0509 
g MLTCOP@t\1iaineOmhudsrnan org
he felt he could no longer care for her at home. He put her on a waiting list for residential 
care admission. Fortunately, he was referred to an Adult Day Program. His wife attended 
the program where the staff helped to provide him with information about how to provide 
care for her. This also gave him time to rest. When an opening became available in the 
residential care facility, he refused it because of the support he was being given. 
~ A daughter employed full time was able to keep her father at home only because of the 
support of an Adult Day Program. 
- A woman living alone in a rural area struggled to remain at home. Family members who 
lived nearby checked in on her. She had experienced falls and had difficulty maintaining 
her weight. She began attending an Adult Day Program where she benefited from social 
activities, medication administration, and help with her diet. Her condition improved. 
There was no question that the support she received in the Adult Day Program was the 
primary factor in keeping her home. 
As Maine moves fonivard to increase access and options for home and community-based 
services, it is critical that Adult Day Programs be expanded. Currently, there are 29 licensed 
programs located in southern, central and coastal areas. (Adult Day Services in Maine: Benefits, 
Challenges, and Opportunities, Elizabeth Gattine JD, Eileen Griffin JD, Kimberly l. Snow MHSA, 
BA, Cutler Institute at USM, 2022) Local access to these programs is important as well as 
addressing the challenges of transportation, a lack of awareness of these programs and the 
cost for individuals who do not qualify for MaineCare or state funding. This legislation proposes 
an excellent opportunity to consider the expansion of greatly needed services. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
wv-/w_maineornbudsmanorg
