Southern Maine 
@~ AG ING SER\/lNG OUR COMB/lUNlTlES FOR so YEARS 
Testimony on Behalf of Needs Expressed by Older Adults in Southern Maine 
In Support of LD 300: An Act to Promote, Grow, and Sustain Adult Day Services and 
Caregiver Respite Programs in Maine 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services: 
Thank you for your leadership. 
l'm Megan Walton, the CEO of Southern Maine Agency on Aging. l am here today on behalf of 
thousands of older adults in Southern Maine and their caregivers. 
Many of you recently visited us at Southern Maine Agency on Aging's Sam L, Cohen Center in 
Biddeford. lf you haven't had a chance to take a tour and view our adult day program in person, 
please let us know. We would love to host you for one of our upcoming community-wide tours 
and share information about the needs of individuals that we are witnessing. 
The five area Agencies on Aging in Maine are here to serve individuals ofthe greatest social and 
economic need — and that means older adults living with dementia, low-income individuals, 
BIPOC communities, and rural communities. 
In Maine, 14% of seniors are threatened by hunger; 22% of seniors self-report ”fair to poor 
health"; 27% of seniors live alone; 30% of seniors have a disability; and 10% of seniors 
experience falls with injury in any given year. 
Southern Maine Agency on Aging serves York and Cumberland counties — one of the largest 
concentrations of older adults of any area in the country; we're home to almost 40% of the 
State's older adult population, over 100,000 residents aged 65+. 
Maine has a tremendous opportunity to lead the nation. We can and should be setting the 
example for the best adult day care programming in the country.
We are absolutely thrilled about this bill and the Committee MUST consider it as a top priority 
this session. That's because adult day programs work. 
Take Frank, whose wife Ruthie attended our adult day program several days each week for 
about three years. When they moved to Maine from Massachusetts, Frank and Ruthie: 
- Took a caregiver course to get familiar with what was coming, what they needed to 
prepare for, and how to access resources 
- Met other families and individuals who attended the day program - they builta 
community with others who were experiencing what they were at the time 
- And learned from the staff and volunteers - practical tips and information on caregiving 
for a loved one with dementia 
~ Frank says "My wife got such great attention, and l, as her caregiver, got such great 
support...everyone wanted to make a difference in the lives of the people they took care 
of on a daily basis. lfind being here in Maine so special, and l give so much credit to you 
for how you got us to settle in and become a part of such a wonderful community of 
people.” 
The DEMAND for adult day services is there. lf we can fund these pilots and if you support 
LD300, we will absolutely fill the adult day programs. We are ready to rock and roll and bring 
these programs to life. We just need to know that the State of Maine is ready to makea 
commitment as well. 
The pandemic has rapidly increased the degree of social isolation on older adults, further 
jeopardizing the social, mental, and physical health ofour population. There is a critical need for 
increased community resources that help older adults remain independent and stay connected 
in their communities, rather than needing to move older adults into high cost long-term care 
and skilled nursing facilities. 
I can't wait to work with you to make Maine's adult day programming the best in the nation. 
Thank you for your support! 
With warmest regards, 
Megan Walton, CEO 
Southern Maine Agency on Aging 
207.396.6501 office/ 617.833.9898 mobile 
mwalton@smaaa.org 
wwvi/.smaaa.org
