Janet T. Mills Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
Governor Con1missioncr ’s Ofﬁcc 
_-é- ,_Jl:- 
Q], ll State House Station 
Jeanne M. Lambrcw, Ph.D. M m9_(~‘1l"ml Street 
Commissianer Augusta, Marne 04333-0011 
Tel: (207) 287-3707; Fax: (207) 287-3005 
'l"l‘Y: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) 
March l6, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Meyer, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services: _ 
This letter is Written to provide the Committee with information regarding LD 300, An Act to Promote, Grow 
and Sustain Adult Day & Respite Programs in Maine. The Department is neither for nor against this bill. The 
Department supports efforts to make adult day services more consistent, appealing to individuals and available 
in Maine. However, the proposed language we understand is being proposed for this concept draft presents 
several challenges. 
Currently, there are 29 licensed Adult Day centers statewide. Adult Day services are provided through 
MaineCare Section 26, Day Health Services, and for those not eligible for MaineCare, through OADS state- 
funded Section 61, Adult Day Services program. Rates for Section 26 were increased on January l, 2023, 
pursuant to P.L. 2021 Ch. 398, Part AAAA, and OADS is in the process of amending its Section 61 state- 
funded contracts to provide the same rate increase. 
The Department has begun mapping the continuum of Long Tenn Supports and Services (LTSS) by county, 
assessing both current capacity and expected future demand. Adult Day Services are among the services being 
mapped. 
The Department agrees the current model of Adult Day Services could benefit from redesign, however the bill 
would be very challenging to implement as drafted. The bill requires interim payments for missed attendance 
while an alternative payment model is developed for a pilot program, with a marketing campaign to promote 
the service and evaluation to assess its effectiveness, all within two years. It proposes doing so in both 
MaineCare (Section 26) and a state-funded program (Section 61). Obtaining necessary federal authorization 
for the MaineCare portion could take a year or longer, depending on the desired features. Those features 
would ideally be developed with stakeholder input prior to seeking federal approval. 
We would be pleased to work with the sponsor and Committee to develop an alternative initiative to improve 
adult day services under the Department ’s HCBS Improvement Plan. The plan is authorized and funded under 
Section 981? of the American Rescue Plan Act, and the initiatives within it do not require General Fund 
appropriations. 
Sincerely, 
PW1 if €u/w»c/ 
Paul Saucier 
Director, OADS
