 
P.O. Box 5257 Augusta, ME 04332 | 207 -204-8800 | www.mparx.org   
 
February 16 , 202 3 
 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair  
Representative Anne Perry, Chair  
Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee  
 
RE: Testimony in support of LD 275- "Resolve, to Require the Maine Board of Pharmacy to Review 
Work Practices and Treatment of Pharmacists"  
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health Coverage and Financial Services 
Committee:  
My name is Amy Downing , I am  a resident of Smithfield and  the Executive Director of the Maine 
Pharmacy Association. We are a statewide association primarily made up of individual pharmacists , 
pharmacy technicians and students . Our members are employed by both large national chain 
pharmacies , health care facilities, compounding pharmacies  and Maine -based independent pharmacies. 
I am testifying today in support of LD 275.   
Over the last 3 year s, the profession of Pharmacy and the role of Pharmacists has change d 
exponentially , and our organization changed as well. W e went from being an organization best known 
for providing the required continuing education credits to our members, to being the organization that 
worked day and night with the Maine CDC and our national partners to pr ovide the most up -to-date 
information on COVID -19 testing , the Executive Orders that impacted Pharmacy,  and eventually the 
vaccine rollout.   
Pharmacists are a critical part of our health infrastructure  and the last three  years have really brought 
that to light. In the early days of the pandemic , many doctor’s offices closed , but pharmacies remained 
open.  Pharmacists rose to the occasion of helping in this public health crisis of a pandemic and they did 
that as trusted he althcare professionals  in their communities . 
We recognize there are added stresses and burnout within the profession of pharmacy but this is true 
for so many professions, doctors, nurses and dentists included and even outside of the healthcare 
system, it’s  happening in our schools with teachers.  We do feel like things are getting better then they 
were  two years ago  or even last year . And while our association supports conducting a survey by the 
Maine Board of Pharmacy , we did  want to point out  there is an ongoing national survey that was 
recently completed . Maine  was included in the data collection, and the results break out specific data 
related to M aine .  
APhA, The American Pharmacists Association , has a well-being index for Pharmacy personnel.  They 
started this survey in April of 2020 , and information is collected monthly.  They use a measurement 
known as ‘state distress percent’, and the higher the percentage, the higher the workplace stress. As of 
January 6, 2023, as it relate s to state distress percent, Maine is the lowest  of all 50 states and  two 
territories  (52 out of 52) at 18.46% . Nevada  is the highest on the list  with 60.49%  distress level. 
Additionally, compared to our fellow New England states, as of January 2023, CT is 4th highest , MA is 9th, 
NH is 3rd, RI is 34th, and VT is 35th . 
We are happy to work with our national partners to access this report and share with the committee 
ahead of your work session if you would find that helpful.  And if we can be a resource in any other way 
prior to the work session please reach out.  

Thank you for your time and I am happy to  try and  answer any questions you may have.  
 
 
Amy Downing , IOM  
Executive Director | Maine Pharmacy Association   

