Mail body: Draft 
Sent iiommy Chairpeisom Peny Bailey, and members of Health Coverage, Imurance, and Financial Services Corrmittee 
Good Aﬁemoon 
My narre is Gary Manzo. I ama resident of Windham 
I am proud to say that I enjoyed 43 years as a practicing registered phamacist. 
It was a tough decision, but in Septenber 2021 I decided to retire. I felt the pressures of quotas and goals were putting a strain on my ability to do 
my job safely. The stress of doing my job, conpounded with increasing workload demands was too much I realized that the professionl loved so 
I1’llCl1 was no longer ﬁin or rewarding It was time. 
I have often equated my prolession to a juggler. It's like trying to keep all the balls in the air. Only the balls are 
Patient Coumeling 
Prescription Review 
Processing Prescriptions 
Checking Interactions 
Allergies 
Filling Presciiptiors 
Third Party Issues 
Dealing with Prescnbers 
Dispensing 
Helping Custonms 
Inventory 
And more. 
Most of the tim-2, you will have rmre tlnn one of these balls in the air. All it takes is a sirrple distraction Then you drop a ball Only ~in lite, asa 
phanmcist, we can't drop a ball That ball is a patient! If you are lucky, it's a labeling mistake that doesn't end in anything tragic. But it could be 
catastrophic- even fatal As a phamncist, we go to work praying we never drop a ball It's a lot of pressure. With increased workloads and 
diminishing help, it will only be a rmtter of tine beibre the ball drops. 
Back in the 70's, the local pharmacist worked in phanmcies that were staﬂed with Pharrracist and assistants to deliver the services. Olten times 
there were multiple Registered Pharmacists working together to deliver their sen/ices. The pharmacist would charge his customers he professional 
fee to cover expenses as a business. 
Then, along cane the chain drug stores, controlling third parties, diminished tees. Corporate pharmacies were working with diminished proﬁts. This 
forces them to demand cuts to prevent revenue loss. These cuts mean less help. These cuts n"ean more pressure to do nnre with less. Which 
rmans it will only be a matter of time before you drop the ball! YOUR PATIENTS HEALTH 
In 2013, I started a new position I renenber with my interview with the Distlict Manager that there was a position open in Brumwick. He 
advised Ire that it was a store with no technician help. He advised rre that I should ﬂoat and in time move into the position After six IIDHILIE 
ﬂoating and a broken ankle I nnved into the Brunswick pharrracy- still without technician help. It was a slower volume store, but I was "Chief 
Cook and Bottle Washer" . I was responsﬂale for: 
Greeting 
Processing 
Filling 
Courneling 
Register Tramactions 
Literally the only enployee- all awhile trying to do the daily tasks necessary to keep the pharmacy operatioml; 
Answering Phone 
Calling Dr.s
Calling "lhird Parties 
Processing Drug Orders 
Processing prescriptions 
Sometines doing 3 or rmre tasks at once. 
In June 2018, Alice- my signiﬁcant other- was diagnosed with cancer. In Septenber, my Phanracist in Charge (PIC) was suﬂering ﬁ'om severe 
pain and went out on medical leave. With the PIC out with medical leave- we had an inﬂux of ﬂoaters. "the daily workload tasks were not getting 
done because they were untamiliar with the stores dynamics- they just ﬁlled prescriptions. I was in a high pressure situation-nying to balance an 
increasing workload and wonying about not being able to be by Alice's side while she was undergoing her battle with cancer. 
Sadly, I made a labeling en‘or( eventually another labeling en'or). Thankfully, they were noticed and there was no hann to the patients. When my 
District Manager (DM) came in to counsel me, We were discussing ways to prevent thb ﬁ-om happening He acknowledged that the loss of the PIC 
resulted in backup of tasks not being conpleted. I was just about to ask for technician help when the DM nentioned that we were not ﬁlling enough 
prescriptions to meet the quota tbr a technician He also mnﬁomd something about the conpany being ﬁscally down and they were not in the 
position to add a technician I was enban"assed for my errors and decided not to say anything. I regret not saying anything to this day. 
During COVID 19- I was trying to ﬁll prescriptions and running out vaccines- still with no help. In late 2020 we eventually added a part tine 
technician 
Pmretired now. Why should I care? I am here to advocate for my conterrporaries. So they get to go to work, without tear of losing their job, for 
fear of nttrics, or even worse, a tragic mistake. I know there are many voices out there who Willnot be heard in these chanbers for fear of 
corporate retrrbutiors/ terminations. 
Ifs tint to stand up and protect my profession We can't aﬂord to drop the ball. 
Thanks for the opportunity to stand before you and be heard. 
Respectiully~ 
GaryWManzoRPh
