. -91- at 
_ HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
gt AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Kevin O>C(mne" TTY: Marne Relay 711 
7 Sites Lane 
Brewer, ME 04412 
Home: (207) 735-6978 
Kevin.OConnell@legislature.maine.gov 
February 16, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Kevin 0’ConneIl introducing 
LD 275, Resolve, to Require the Maine Board of Pharmacy to Review Work Practices and 
Treatment of Pharmacists 
Before the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee. I am Representative Kevin O’Comrell, and I represent House District 20, which 
is most of the City of Brewer. I am here today to introduce LD 275, Resolve, to Require the Maine Board of 
Pharmacy to Review Work Practices and Treatment of Pharmacists. 
The resolve before you today does just What the title suggests: It directs the Maine Board of Pharmacy to 
conduct a study to review the work practices and treatment of pharmacists. 
I bring this legislation forward following conversations with a constituent, who is a pharmacist. He shared with 
me that pharmacists and pharmacy technicians are overworked, understaffed and dealing with a great amount of 
workplace stress. He emphasized to me that this stress impacts the safety of every patient, which is a concern 
that should be taken seriously. 
In looking into the matter, I have found that other states have recently taken a look into the workplace practices 
and patient safety within pharmacies, including West Virginia, Ohio and Tennessee. In 2019, the American 
Pharmacists Association conducted a national workforce study of pharmacists, with nearly 5,500 responses 
across the country. While some of the data collected could be useful in evaluating the concerns you’ll hear 
today, I believe that Maine-based data and data collected after the height of the COVID-19 pandemic would be 
most useful. 
After the Board of Pharmacy conducts their study, they would be required to report back to this committee in 
early December of this year. This committee may then report out a bill based on the ﬁndings of the study. 
My hope is that the Board of Pharmacy, through the study, would gather data on phannacists ’ perceptions of 
stafﬁng, workload conditions and workplace safety. I also hope that the study would include responses froma 
variety of settings, including but not limited to community pharmacies, inpatient and outpatient hospitals and 
long-term care facility pharmacies. 
Thank you for your time and attention this afternoon. I would be happy to answer any questions you have for 
me, but the pharmacists here today may be better suited to provide speciﬁcs.
