Leslie Ohmart
Brewer
LD 275
Dear Rep. O'Connell,
I am a retired pharmacist.  I owned a local pharmacy from 1969-1998 then worked for 
Hannaford until my retirement in 2010.  I received my license in 1967.  I served on the Board 
of Pharmacy and was president of the Maine Pharmacy Association. I worked for Hannaford 
prior to the heavy workload that was added when pharmacists were allowed to give 
vaccinations.
During my time at Hannaford, the stores I worked in were fairly well staffed, though 
there were times it was difficult to take a meal or restroom break.  After retirement I 
spoke with pharmacists at different chains about their extra workload that came with 
many more duties including vaccinations.  As vaccinations became more prevalent, I 
asked if they were receiving more tech help to accommodate the extra workload.  The
almost universal answer was no.  They were told to fit it into their current schedule.  
At one time pharmacists were being asked by management to fill prescriptions within 
15-20 minutes.  I have noticed at the pharmacy I currently use they do say a refill will 
be ready the next day so that has relieved some pressure.
When I was on the board, RiteAid had many difficulties staffing its pharmacies.  
Many were not open on a regular schedule creating a problem for patients to receive 
their medications in a timely manner.  RiteAid filed an application to open a 
pharmacy somewhere in the Kittery-York area.  I asked if they can't staff their current
pharmacies, can we deny a license for a new store?  Many of us believed not having 
enough staff was a danger to the public.  We were told by the AG assigned to the 
board that this was a business decision and that we could not deny the license on that 
basis.
I was disappointed that the board opposed your resolve to investigate the workload 
issue.  In my opinion, the board should be protecting the public. This issue affects the 
health and welfare of the public. If the board feels they are not adequately staffed to 
examine this issue, provisions should be made to acquire the necessary staff.
I hope your resolve does pass.
Sincerely,
Stan Tetenman, Poland
998-2767

