 
P.O. Box 261 Augusta, ME 04332 | 207-204-8800
February 15, 2023
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair
Representative Anne Perry, Chair
Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee
RE: Testimony, LD 275 Resolve, to Require the Maine Board of Pharmacy to Review Work 
Practices and Treatment of Pharmacists
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health Coverage and Financial 
Services Committee:
My name is Matthew Marston, I am a resident of Hampden and the Legislative Liaison on the Maine 
Society of Health System Pharmacists Board of Directors. Today I am submitting testimony on 
behalf of the Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists, an organization that has more than 300 
members statewide and primarily represents individual Pharmacists, Technicians and students who 
practice in a health-system setting. I am testifying today in support of LD 275.
Health System’s in Maine have long provided work environments that support our missions of 
improving the health and well being of the communities that we serve.  Our pharmacy teams place 
medication safety and the practice of evidence-based medicine as our highest priority both inside 
and outside of hospital settings.  In order to deliver upon this promise, it takes safe working 
conditions that allow for thorough medication utilization review to take place and thoughtful 
interaction with our patients and other healthcare providers.
Throughout the pandemic pharmacists have been called upon to do more.  Pharmacists have 
hosted COVID vaccination clinics, implemented point of care testing, been called upon to review 
patients in order to prescribe and dispense antivirals within the pharmacy for those needing 
treatment for COVID-19.  Pharmacists have proven time and again the value that we can provide 
our communities and how we can improve convenient access to care.  However, all of the work that 
pharmacists had prior to the pandemic in providing patients with their medications and education 
surrounding how to take them still needs to be done in additional to all of the new tasks that have 
been added.  These mounting pressures have left communities with reduced pharmacy hours and 
unexpected store closures from staff leaving their positions creating challenges for Maine residents 
in accessing their medications.
Reimbursement for pharmacy services both nationally and in the State of Maine have been in a 
steady decline for years shrinking the margins that pharmacies have to work with despite the 
increasing demands for services and rising costs both in supplies, cost of pharmaceuticals, and 
wages for pharmacy technicians in a challenging labor market.  This has created extremely difficult  
work environments for pharmacists working in the retail pharmacy setting that are frequently 
expected to do more with less.  Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists fully supports the 
Maine Board of Pharmacy conducting an assessment of working conditions in Maine.  We would 
propose amending the bill to allow adequate time to survey licensed pharmacists and pharmacy 
technicians in Maine by requesting that the report is completed by January 31, 2024 and suggesting 
that the Board consider providing an online survey for all licensed Pharmacists and Technicians that 
 
P.O. Box 261 Augusta, ME 04332 | 207-204-8800
can be completed during the renewal of their pharmacy license to maximize feedback from our 
pharmacy professionals in with a low cost to achieve these results.
Soliciting this information and evaluating these conditions in the context of how the pharmacy 
profession has changed over recent years will be critical in informing how conditions may be 
improved in our State to protect the health and wellbeing of our patients and the pharmacy 
professionals that serve them.
The Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists would be happy to work with the committee in 
any way we can on LD 275. Please reach out if we can be of service.
Kind Regards,
Matthew Marston, PharmD, MBA, BCPS, BCOP
Legislative Liaison| Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists
