March 23rd, 2023
To:
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Honorable
Members of the
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
From:
Alex McMahan
Lewiston, Maine 04240
Subject: Support of LD 978
I’m here today to passionately
support LD 835.
“Income taxes are paid because the taxpayers are afraid of offering resistance to the tax
gatherers. They know that any disobedience or resistance is hopeless."
-Ludwig von Mises
If polled, some people may say they are ok with the concept of income taxes. However if you
ask the same people if they would prefer to keep the portion of their
o w n
income that goes to
income taxes or give it to the government, you will likely get a different answer.
Income taxes are essentially a penalty for hard work. The harder you work and the more money
you earn, the higher your fees for making that money. By design, there is a direct correlation
between the amount of value you bring to society and the amount of fees you pay to the state
for that value you bring to society.
Many people are aware of this when it comes to the upper class or the upper middle class,
however it pertains to people of all income levels. If somebody makes $20 an hour, and the total
withholdings that come out of their check are approximately 20%, they end up taking home $16
an hour. A six hour shift then goes from $120 take-home to $96. This may not seem like much
of a difference, but think about the psychology of $19.99 versus $20. Small amounts make big
differences in the psychology of personal finance.
Some people are only interested in picking up a shift if they can take home more than $100.
Now, entirely because of taxation, a whole shift that would have been picked up is not picked
up. Through the act of income tax, we are quite literally incentivizing people to work less. We
are incentivizing people to bring less value to society. This is wrong - full stop.
This is only the tip of the iceberg when it comes to everything that’s wrong with income tax. I
could go on about the complexity and ambiguity, huge size and instability, vertical inequality,
horizontal inequality, lack of privacy, denial of due process, shifting the burden of proof, no trial
by jury in a tax court, unreasonable searches and seizures, and forced self-incrimination,
however that conversation would take much longer than the three minutes I’m allotted, so I
decided to focus primarily on the simple fact that we are holding our workforce back.
Maine wouldn’t be the first state to do away with income tax. Nine states currently do not gather
income tax, nearly 20% of our nation, including our neighbors to the west. In a time where every
Chamber of Commerce meeting in the state touches on the current challenges in the workforce,
Maine needs to immediately take action to cease fees for individual productivity.
Thank you for your time and consideration. Please make history and end the act of taking
Mainer’s much-needed hard-earned money.
Respectfully,
Alex McMahan

