1 
 Testimony of Jeff McCabe   
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989   
 
In Support  
o LD 667:  An Act to Impose a Tax Surcharge on Certain Incomes  
o LD 843:  An Act to Improve Income Tax Progressivity by Establishing a New Top Individual 
Rate  
Opposing  
o LD 835:  An Act to Phase Out the Income Tax  
o LD 971:  An Act to Establis h the Income Tax Relief Fund for Maine Residents  
 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
March 23, 2023 
  
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, members of the Committee on Taxation, I’m Jeff McCabe, director of politics and legislation for the Maine Service Employees Association, Local 1989 of the 
Service Employees International Union. Maine Service Employee s Association represents over 13,000 
workers across the state, including workers in all three branches of Maine State Government.  
  Across the state , Maine is facing  a crisis in being  able to provide key services that Maine people count 
on. There is no longer any place in the State of Maine that is  not facing staffing shortages in the public 
sector.  Just this week , Limestone staffing shortage s led to the closure of the town office ; 
read the story 
here . W hile l ack of investments in key services and wages  can cause inconvenience, it also puts the 
elderly, children and other at risk. We have seen: staffing shortages at MaineDOT impact ing the ability 
to keep roads plowed ; staffing shortages at the Maine Department of Public Safety ’s Regional 
Communications Centers a ffect ing response time and leading to retention issues ; and ongoing high 
turnover among human services caseworkers at Maine DHHS. Such recruitment and retention problems are widespread among all departments of Maine State Government, and they must be addressed in order to ensure the delivery of quality public services throughout our Great of Maine.  
 
We pay taxes for critical services that benefit all of us . Our public schools and colleges , roads and 
bridges , public safety, parks, clean water  and the safety net protecting our children and s eniors  are just 
a few of the services we all count on . The revenue s we raise through taxes ideally would provide the 
conditions for Maine communities to be places where we can all live, work, raise our families and, 
someday, retire with dignity  in our own homes. This would be accomplished by ensuring that those who 
have benefit ed the most in this economy make tax contributions toward  public  investments that pay it 
forward for future generations of Maine workers, families and retirees.  
 
The 2011 tax cuts that mostly benefited the wealthy  exacer bated all of these challenges, and the burden 
for paying for those cuts fell disproportionally on low to middle income working families, and on our 
members  We are concerned that proposals to further cut taxes would compromise Maine’s capacity to 
uphold its commitments to Maine people and our communities now and in the future. Cutting taxes 
now would c reate shortfalls in more challenging economic times  – which is exactly when resources are 
needed the most to sustain vital programs for Maine people and communities and to ensure continued 
investment in our schools and communities. It’s also important to note those calling for tax cuts now never want to raise them in times of shortfalls to meet the needs  of Maine people .  
 
2 
 Instead of cutti ng taxes, we respectfully ask you to keep  Maine’s financial house in order both in good 
times and bad.  
 
Our members are still struggling to dig out of the hole after the tax cuts  in 2011  both personally, and in  
their services that were  and continue to be suffering from understaffing, insufficient supports, and sub -
standard wages.  In fact, with the rising cost of living, our members are actually falling further and 
further behind.  
  Instead of cutting taxes, please ensure that  profitable corporations and the wealthy pay  their share. 
Please ensure that expensive tax programs like the property tax freeze and others are reigned in and 
helping those who need it most. We also believe more disclosure is long overdue; disclosure would help 
compl ete the picture.  
Again, we look forward to continuing to work with this committee, the 131st Maine Legislature and the administration on solutions to address these critical issues and any others central to the lives of Maine’s public service workers, acti ve and retired, and to the people of Maine who count on quality public 
services.     
Below you will find  stories by members of our union and other  workers in our bargaining units speaking  
about the challenges they face in delivering quality public services  today . Also included is a link to an op-
ed column about the delivery of quality public services in Maine . 
 
Thank you and I would be glad to answer any questions.  
 
Member testimonials about lack of investments  
 
“Please ensure that the State seriously address the known 15% average pay gap across state employees 
with regional peers; please ensure that the State prioritize the safety of their staff and patients; please ensure that the State operates the hospitals with equity, opportunity, and fairness.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Dorothea Dix Chapter President James Bailey, who works as a licensed social worker for 
Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center in Bangor  
Share on FB . Website
. 
  “This is not a normal social work job. I have had my life threatened, I’ve been spit at, almost hit by a vehicle driven by an angry client, and I am verbally abused and harassed on a regular basi s. We have 
such high turnover in this job because nobody wants to be treated this way and get paid peanuts. It’s time that our pay reflects the incredibly challenging work that we do.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Sophia Spiller, who works as a Human Services Caseworker for Maine DHHS, 
testifying in support of addressing understaffing, impossible caseloads and the State Employee Pay Gap  
Share on FB . Website
. 
  “Our division, (Maine Forest Service) is uncompetitive with the private sector in our hiring process and employee retention. For example, just recently we had two great forester position openings located in the central and southern Maine area that only revealed one qualified candidate. Granted the employee 
3 
 market is unprecedented at this time but it shows the reluctance of the workforce considering being a 
public servant.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Randy Lagasse, who works as a forester for the Maine Forest Service, in testimony 
in support of ending th e State Employee Pay Gap  
Share on FB . Website . 
  
“We are not able to recruit because the starting pay is too low, we are not able to retain employees 
because the increases are minimal but the work is overwhelming. The Judicial Branch needs to evolve and start pay at a higher rate, create opportunities for all employees to grow and evolve rather than stay in a stagnant environment.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Rhonda Ouellette, who works in the Judicial Branch’s criminal division of York 
County Superior Court, in testimony on the urgent need to address understaffing and better compensate Judicial Branch workers.  
Share on FB . Website
. 
  
“In the last 3 years at the Dry Mills State Fish Hatchery in Gray, Maine, we have had significant turnover 
and were shorthanded for an extended period of time. The most difficult aspect of this is training employees just to have them leave for better pay elsewhere! Retention is at an all-time low and recruitment is very difficult at this time.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Mike Andrews, who works at the Dry Mills State Fish Hatchery, in testimony in 
support of ending the State Employee Pay Gap  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
“The work that my coworkers and I do is so important to so many of our fellow Mainers; we offer stability during challenging times, a lifeline out of pove rty, and a safety net for those who are down on 
their luck. But we need to be paid fairly for the work we do and we need to invest in making sure we retain qualified staff like myself.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Darcey Boucher, who works as an eligibility specialist for Maine DHHS, in 
testimony in support of ending the State Employee Pay Gap  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 “We here at Disability Determination Services definitely have a hiring and retention problem. Of our 35 case deciders, we only have 8 that have been here more than 7 years, and  the rest have 3 years or less. 
Since 11/2020, we have lost 27 Examiners and Adjudicators, most of whom were new employees who did not stay long.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Ronnette Partridge, who works as a disability claims adjudicator for Maine DHHS, 
in testim ony in support of ending the State Employee Pay Gap  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
“During my years of state service, I have seen high to impossible caseloads, lack of resources, lack of 
support from management, and lack of  training to support the job. I have seen people leave because 
4 
 they have found jobs that have better benefits and/or salary as well as less stress due to more 
manageable job duties.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Amy Hill, who works as a human services caseworker for  Maine DHHS, in 
testimony calling on the Maine Legislature to end the State Employee Pay Gap  
Share on FB . Website . 
 
“The State needs to take steps to close the pay gap and ensure that all workers are being compensated 
well for the important work they do. Without an investment in our state workers, we will continue to face recruitment and retention problems, and they’ll likely get worse in the future.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Cynthia Oakes, a planning and research associate for Maine DHHS, in testimony to 
the Legislature’s Appropriations and Health and Human Services committees  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
“Since I assumed this supervisory position in March 2022, I tried to recruit for the vacant environmental 
engineer position which requires the successful candidate to have a ‘professional engineer’ license issued by the State Board of Licensure for Professional Engineers. None of the applicants was qualified for the position; hence, we could not move forward with interviews and fill the position. Unfortunately, 
this is a common occurrence.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Kerem Gungor, who works as a senior environmental engineer for the Maine DEP 
Bureau of Land Resources, in testimony to the Maine Legislature’s Appropriations Committee and 
Environmental and Natural Resources Committee  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
“I feel as though I’m not making what I am worth for the work I do, and it is not a pleasant feeling. ANY 
job that I can find in the public and/ or private sector starts at more than I currently make,  will provide 
me with full benefits and a paycheck year -round. I don’t want to leave my position, but I’m starting to 
feel as though I have to if I want to still be able to provide for my family.”  
--Anthony Holzhauser, who works as a seasonal conservation aide for the Maine Department of Marine 
Resources, in testimony before the Maine Legislature’s Appropriations and Marine Resources 
committees  
Share on FB . Website . 
 
“Although today we no longer have a hiring freeze or pay raise freeze, the issue of inequity in our pay 
and staff retention still persists. It is hard to find high -quality candidates when they see the pay they will 
be offered.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Cynthia Barre, who works for the Maine Bureau  of Insurance, in testimony before 
the Maine Legislature’s Appropriations Committee  
Share on FB . Website . 
 
“These services take a caring, passionate and driven provider. However, employees cannot pour from 
any empty cup. With staffing shortages, many of our CDS staff members are feeling overworked and 
5 
 unable to provide the quality of services they wish they could or lack the resources to do so, or are being 
asked to work outside of their originally tasked job.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Hannah Whitmore (shown with her daughter), a service coordinator for Child 
Development Services  
Share on FB . Website . 
 
“Several of my colleagues have left the department to return to jobs either in Maine schools where they 
can earn similar pay with greater time off, or to the private sector for higher pay. I am writing this to you to express my sincere concern….”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Kellie Bailey, a regional education representative for the Maine Department of 
Education  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
“I am writing this to you to express my sincere concern with how my colleagues are contemplating, at 
alarming rates, the desire to leave state government service to return to the private sector because of wage disparity.”  
-- Staci Warren, a supervisor for the Maine Department of Education  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
“Please consider the immense impact a strong, resourced, and staffed Maine DOE would have on the 
districts, schools, educators, families, and students in this state. I urge legislators to continue to invest in our learning systems that begin and end with the health and wellbeing of the Maine Department of Education.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Rita Pello, who works as a Title 1 coordinator for  the Maine Department of 
Education  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
“We are experiencing a significant brain drain from the Department (of Education), because at the end 
of the day, the wages do not compare. Colleagues have reluctantly left their dream jobs at the state, for other positions that pay 50% more and have a school year schedule. Folks who have years of historical knowledge and context for the department – something that is few and far between, and so crucial – 
are realizing it’s not worth it to continue working at these salary levels given their expertise.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Amelia Lyons, who works as a regional educational representative for the Maine 
Department of Education  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
“Adjuncts are teaching in these positions without healthcare options, paid time off, sick pay, or 
guaranteed employment. The title of adjunct, once used for  temporary employees just helping out here 
and there, is now largely the only position available to us. On top of that we work two, three, and in the 
case of one adjunct I spoke with last week, four other jobs to supplement our income. If we want to attract instructors to these schools the only way to do that is to offer actual careers, and stop relying so heavily on adjuncts.”  
6 
 --MSEA -SEIU Adjunct Faculty Chapter President Katrina Ray -Saulis 
Share on FB . Website . 
 
“There are regular job postings for rehabilitation counselor, career center consultants, occupational 
safety specialist, and customer service representatives to name a few because qualified individuals are 
not applying due to the low wages. There are numerous employees that have or will be retiring in the next few years. These positions need to be filled with qualified individuals and that will only happen if wages are competitive.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Eichel -Crinion Chapter President Winifred Malia, a principal economic research analyst 
with the Maine Department of Labor  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
“I’ve been with MaineDOT  for seven years. I work seven days a week in order to pay my mortgage, 
health insurance, child care and just day -to-day bills – heats, lights and stuff. I have a second job to make 
ends meet.”  
--MSEA -SEIU Member Brian Markey, an assistant technician for MaineDOT  
Share on FB . Website . 
 
"There’s a real problem with recruiting and retaining MaineD OT workers, and it’s mostly because of the 
State’s low pay. The fact is, the State just can’t get the people to come in or stay at these jobs because 
of the low wages. This problem is getting worse, not better."  
-- MSEA -SEIU Member Dave Boudreau, a transportation worker II for MaineDOT  
Share on FB . Website . 
 
“It’s past time that the State ends the State Employee Pay Gap. It’s the right thing to do – and it’s also  
necessary for the State to recruit and retain qualified workers for the kinds of positions the BMV is 
seeking to fill right now. That’s why I respectfully ask that you include funding in the proposed State 
Budget to end the State Employee Pay Gap.”  
--Ramo na Welton, MSEA -SEIU past president, MSEA -SEIU Motor Vehicle Chapter vice president and an 
auditor II for the Maine Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV) within the Maine Department of Secretary of 
State  
Share on FB . Website . 
 
"Our members look forward to working with all of you to ensure a State budget that funds quality 
services and treats fairly the workers who provide them and the retirees who have dedicated their 
careers to public service in our Grea t State of Maine. As you craft this budget, please take to heart the 
Governor’s words from Jan. 10: 'Our greatest asset….is our people.'”  
-- MSEA -SEIU President Dean Staffieri, in testimony calling on state legislators to fund ending the State 
Employee Pay  Gap 
Share on FB . Website . 
7 
  
"I feel strongly that an investment in our institution brings a good return on investment for our state. I 
implore you to keep the additional funding for Maine Maritime Academy in the budget."  
-- MSEA -SEIU Director and Maine Maritime Systems Integration Specialist Jake Adams in support of 
additional funding for Maine Maritime Academy  
Share on FB . Website . 
 
"The current budget surplus presents an opportunity for the current Legislature and governor to make 
some small amends for past actions even though the improvement will not come close to making public 
employees whole."  
-- MSEA -SEIU Retiree Member Rob Peale  
Share on FB . Website . 
 
"While I certainly appreciate the (supplemental) budget that Governor Mills put forward, containing a 
'one-time' increase for our retirees, one -time fixes simply are not enough and fail to increase the base 
on which the next COLA can be calculated. This results in our retirees falling further and further behind. I am asking that you fund a full cumulative COLA in the biennial budget."  
-- MSEA -SEIU Androscoggin Valley Retirees Chapter Preside nt Penny Whitney -Asdourian  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
"Not only did the LePage administration reduce the COLA cap from 4% to 3% they also added a $20,000 
cap on the amount of pension benefit that would be COLA eligible. Then they froze the COLA for three years. This was nothing more than financial terrorism for Maine’s state worker and teacher retirees. The frozen COLAs added three more years of falling further behind financially."  
-- MSEA -SEIU Retiree Director Steve Butterfield  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
“Right now the State has a budget surplus, so I’m asking you to fund a State budget that ends the State 
Employee Pay Gap. You should also know it’s the low wages for State workers that is making it hard for the State to recruit and retain workers. Funding a State budget that ends the State Employee Pay Gap will go a long way toward making sure the services are there that Maine people count on every day.”  
-- MSEA -SEIU Member Gary R. Brooks, a building custodian for the Maine Department of Defense, 
Veterans and Emergency Services  
Share on FB . Website
. 
“The current pay gap has become so extreme that there will be no hiring college graduates struggling with student loans on top of the increased price of living. The phrase ‘do more with less’ will not fill positio ns or allow workers to keep up with demands as people leave for well-deserved retirements."  
-- MSEA -SEIU Member Connor Smith, a procurement analyst II for the Maine Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services  
Share on FB . Website
. 
 
8 
 Op-Ed:  
“Throughout all departments of Maine state government, state workers are overworked and underpaid. 
It’s more important than ever that the governor and Legislature work together to fund, complete and 
implement the long-overdue reclassification and compensation study for Maine state government.”  
--Cynthia Phinney of the Maine AFL -CIO and Eliza Townsend of the Appalachian Mountain Club, in an op -
ed, Funding for natural resources must be a priority , in the Bangor Daily News  
Share on FB . 
 
