Page 1 of 2Michael McNaughton
MDOC #129306
807 Cushing Road
Warren, ME, 04864
March 23, 2023
Attention: Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee
Subject: L.D. 835
This letter is written today in support of L.D. 835.
Death and taxes are inevitable; they are both only the provenance of government. A 
monopoly on the power of violence and the power of taking… these are the tools of 
authoritarianism. America constitutionally abolished slavery underneath the founder of the 
Republican party, President Abraham Lincoln. This is also an undisputable fact. 
So, why does slavery still exist? Why did America murder itself to abolish slavery as a 
practice just to institutionalize it as serfdom? How many are aware that serfs were literally 
defined as tenants in feudal law?
Isn’t this the power of language—to hide actions behind the illusions of narrative?
Our current feudal tax structure impedes progress for Maine. L.D. 835 includes a series 
of incremental reductions that would help mitigate the circumstances of abolishing the income 
tax and its adoption would create a pathway into the future of sovereignty for both Mainers and 
the State of Maine.
Or, maybe we could instead discuss a new “Missouri Comprise”… I see it now, the State 
of Maine in District 1 and the Republic of Maine in District 2.
How strange a turn of the narrative in American history though; tax rebels retreating from 
slave owner… I think I’ve heard that story before.

Page 2 of 2Serf, n 1. A slave, bondman.  2. A person in a condition of servitude or modified slavery, 
distinguished from what is conventionally referred to as ‘slavery’ in that the services due to the 
master, and his power of disposal of his ‘serf’, are more or less limited by law or custom. 
In most of the typical examples of serfdom, the serf was ‘attached to the soil’ (adscriptus 
glebæ), i.e. he could not be removed (except by manumission) from the lord's land, and was 
transferred with it when it passed to another owner. This feature is often assigned as the 
distinctive mark of ‘serfdom’ as opposed to ‘slavery’, and is popularly apprehended as an 
essential part of the notion.
Citation:
"serf, n." OED Online, Oxford University Press, March 2023, 
www.oed.com/view/Entry/176408. Accessed 23 March 2023.
