1TESTIMONY OF
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
Hearing Date: March 23, 2023
LD 835 – “An Act to Phase Out the Income Tax”
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 835, “An Act to Phase 
Out the Income Tax.”
This bill proposes to phase out the Maine individual and corporate income 
taxes over a period of five years with the tax completely phased out in tax year 
2028.  This would result in an estimated revenue loss of approximately $2.5 billion 
by fiscal year 2026-2027.  In addition, beginning with fiscal year 2024-25, the 
Maine Bureau of the Budget would be required to reduce the budget for each 
department of State Government each fiscal year in proportion to the reduction of 
income tax revenue.
The individual and corporate income taxes are an important part of Maine’s 
tax structure – preventing an overreliance on revenue from property and sales and 
use taxes.  In addition, the income tax is progressive, which helps make Maine’s 
overall tax system one of the most progressive in the country.  
The individual income tax is also the delivery mechanism for many 
important refundable credits, including the Earned Income Tax Credit, the Property 
Tax Fairness Credit, the Sales Tax Fairness Credit, and the Dependent Care Tax 
2Credit.  These refundable credits are targeted to low and lower-middle income 
households, which further increases the progressivity of Maine’s state tax system.
There are options that can be developed to improve Maine’s income taxes 
without eliminating this important source of revenue. 
The Administration also notes that there are important technical issues with 
the bill as currently drafted.  Estimated administrative costs are nominal and can be 
absorbed by the Bureau.  However, any reduction in the Agency’s budget, as 
described above, will significantly impair the ability of the Division to timely 
process income tax returns and issue applicable refunds.
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.
