HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
51$?‘ (207) 287-1400 
Amy Roeder TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
45 Blackstone Street 
Bangor, ME 04401 
Residence: 207-370-5517 
Amy.Roededg ﬁlegislaturcmaine.gov 
March 23, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Amy Roeder Presenting 
LD 827, An Act to Allow Employees to Request Flexible Work Schedules 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing. My name is Amy Roeder, and I represent House District 23 which includes a portion of Bangor. 
Today, I present to you LD 827, An Act to Allow Employees to Request Flexible Work Schedules. 
LD 827 proposes that an employee of a public or private employer would be able to request a ﬂexible 
work schedule for up to six months at a time and would ensure that the schedule continues in six-month 
increments, unless the employer provides written notice to the employee stating otherwise. 
While employers do not have to agree to a ﬂexible work schedule request, they should not be allowed to 
discipline those who are just trying to balance work alongside their many responsibilities, including 
ﬁnding child care and caring for themselves or a loved one who is ill. 
Not all employers can offer more ﬂexible work arrangements due to the nature of the work, but there are 
benefits for employers who are willing and able to provide ﬂexibility to employees. There are many 
surveys that allude to increased worker productivity for those who can work from home on a part or 
full-time basis, one of them coming from a Stanford experiment involving call center workers. According 
to the results of the experiment, working from home led to a 13% performance increase, of which about 
9% was from working more minutes per shift due to fewer breaks and sick days and 4% from more calls 
per minute, attributed to a quieter working environment. Home workers also reported improved work 
satisfaction and experienced less turnover. ‘ 
In the past few years, our collective lives have changed drastically. It’s time that we recognize this as it 
relates to our workplaces. 
Thank you for your consideration. I’m happy to answer any questions you may have. 
1 
1 rugs -.voz"l;ing front home ‘-.vork? Eviéeiicc frorn_a Ciiizicse *.‘Xl3Cl'l _!lllC§ll » Staniorcl Conifer on l’ovcz'%v and iiieqiiziiity 
District 23: Pait of Bangor
