 
Phone: (207) 624-7761        TTY  Relay : 711      Fax:  (207)  287-4414   
www.maine.gov     
 
     
   
March 23, 2023 
  Re: L.D. 827 – An Act to Allow Employees to Request Flexible Work Schedules   
 Senator Tipping, Representative R oeder , and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing:   
This written testimony is submitted by  Breena D. Bissell, Director of the State of Maine 
Bureau of Human Resources, on behalf of the Administration , which is neither for not against 
L.D. 827, yet  seeks to provide information to ensure a thorough understanding of the options for 
flexible schedules and tel ework already in place in Maine state government .  
First a clarification: though L.D. 827 indicates its intent is to allow an employee to 
request a flexible work schedule, the definition of ‘flexible work schedule’ provided in the 
language of the bill extends beyond flexing one’s work hours or ‘schedule’ to include allowing an employee to work completely or partially at a location other than the place of employment. Under Maine state government’s definitions, the bill proposes to allow both flexible schedul es 
and flexible work locations (i.e. telework ). Each is addressed separately in this document. 
Flexible Work Schedules  
 Maine state government  has had a Human Resources Memorandum on A lternate Work 
Schedules in place since 1983, afford ing employees the ability to request such alternate work 
schedules as staggered work hours, flexible work schedules or flex- time, and compressed work 
weeks. The current Human Resources Memorandum 2-08 on Alternate Work Schedules replaced 
the 1983 version and was updated  to include that the employer’s response to a request must be STATE OF MAINE  
BUREAU OF HUMAN RESOURCES  
4 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE   04333-0 004 
ADMINISTRATIVE & FINANCIAL SERVICES  
 
KIRSTEN  LC FIGUEROA 
 COMMISSIONER  
 
JANET  T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR  BUREAU OF HUMAN RESOURCES  
 
BREENA D. BISSELL  
DIRECTOR 
SERVING THE PUBLIC AND DELIVERING ESSENTIAL SERVICES TO STATE GOVERNMENT  
 
2 provided timely and in writing ; and to provide an appeal process  for reconsideration of an 
employee’s denied request. Additionally, the bargaining agreements between the State and 
MSE A include language that the parties accept  the HR Memorandum on flexible work 
schedules .  
Telework  
The executive branch published a Ba seline Telework Policy in 2021, and some 
department  specific policies were  created from this  baseline. These policies afford employees the 
opportunity to request to telework on a r egular or occasional basis  at an agreed upon telework 
site. Employees submit requests electronically; managers approve, modify, or decline requests; 
and an appeal process is provided. T he bargaining agreements between the State and MSEA 
include the following language in the Telework article:  
Telework policies will be adopted or modified in accordance with the Work Rules article 
of this Agreement. An employee may request to telework by submitting a request in writing, which 
shall include electronically, in accordance with their agency’s telework policy. The requested 
telework may be approved, denied, or modified consistent with agency policy.  
If the employee is not satisfied with the initial determination in response to their telework 
request, and the agency policy does not expressly provide for an appeal process, then the employee can request reconsideration by the appointing authority or designee by submitting a request for 
reconsideration in writing, which shall include electronically, within ten (10) workdays of receiving 
the initial determination. The appointing authority or designee shall review the request for reconsideration and reach th eir own determination, within thirty (30) workdays, on whether the 
request can be approved as is, approved in a modified form, or cannot be approved. The appointing authority or designee shall notify the employee in writing, which shall include electronically, as soon as their determination is reached.  
3 The decision of the appointing authority, designee, or the agency representative charged 
by policy with rendering the decision on appeal, shall be final and not subject to the Grievance 
Procedure article of this Agreement.  
Employees who telework must comply with the provisions of their agency’s teleworking 
policy. 
By policy, the State’s t elework requests are authorized for a year  and reviewed annually, 
which is a less  frequent review than  the 6 months required by L.D. 827. Also  by policy, telework 
authorization may be adjusted or terminated in response to a request from the employee or by the 
employer. 
 The latest data on the State’s telework dashboard  indicates 31% of employees (3,125 of 
11,280) are teleworking an average of 2.98 days per week. Another 1,279 telework requests are 
pending.  
Discipline  
 L.D. 827 as written states  an employer “may not discipline an employee who requests a 
flexible work schedule.” I believe the intent of this sentence is that an employer may not discipline an employee for submitting a request  for a flexible work schedule and/or telework. 
Clarification of this language may be necessary to ensure misconduct unrelated to submitting a 
request for a flexible work schedule and/or telework is  appropriately addressed by an  employer.  
 Thank you for your time and consideration. I am happy to provide additional information 
and be available to you at the work session. 
