827 — Flexible Schedule DRAFT 
Senator Tipping 
Representative Roeder 
Members ofthe Labor and Housing Committee 
Re: LD 827, An Act to Allow Employees to Request Flexible Work Schedules 
My name is Debra Hart and I am a resident of Manchester, Maine. lam testifying in 
opposition to LD 827 on behalf ofmy clients, the Dirigo Electric Cooperative, which are 
Maine's consumer-owned electric utilities. They include Van Buren Light & Power, Houlton 
Water Company, Eastern Maine Electric Cooperative, Fox Island Electric Cooperative, 
Madison Electric Works, Isle Au Haut, Kennebunk Light & Power District and Brunswick 
Landing and the electric utility at Brunswick Landing. 
We believe several of the Dirigo members would come under the definition ofa private 
employer and some under a definition ofa public employer, which would likely include 
municipal and township employees. Regardless, we believe they would all be impacted by 
this legislation were it to pass. 
Utility employees, both those that work on infrastructure and lines, plus those that work 
in-house cannot accomplish their duties on a flexible work schedule or at a location other 
than the place of employment. During the recent pandemic, these utilities were deemed 
essential, and they worked throughout that time, as they always do, at times required to 
maintain or restore power. Most of these small utilities have limited staff to do 
bookkeeping and billing functions and customers ofthe consumer-owned utilities often 
have the option of paying their bills at the office. They may have questions about a bill that 
they want help with or need to set up a payment arrangement. These are not functions that 
can be accommodated remotely. Line workers and other utility personnel also cannot 
work remotely, and although they are often required to work hours outside ofa normal 
work week, those are hours needed to restore power or respond to any number of 
emergencies or accidents. 
For all these reasons, we respectfully request that you have an exemption for employees of 
public utilities. 
Thank you. I'd be happy to answer any questions or provide you with additional 
information should you need that.
