w I Lo B L u E a E n RY 
COMMISSION os 
.’ 
Eric Venturini, Executive Director of the Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine 
Testifying Neither For Nor Against, LD 827, An Act to Allow Employees to Request Flexible Work 
SchedulesI 
Senator Michael Tipping, Representative Amy Roeder, and esteemed members of the Committee on the 
Labor and Housing, my name is Eric Venturinl, and I am the Executive Director of the Wild Blueberry 
Commission of Maine. In this role, I strive to represent the diverse voices of l\/Iaine ’s 485 wild blueberry 
producers. I am testifying before you today Neither For Nor Against this legislation. 
Agriculture is seasonal in nature and when the crop is ready, it must be harvested. If for any reason, the 
crop is not harvested, the farmer‘ , and downstream value-add businessesz that rely upon that supply 
will have zero income for an entire year. When the berries are ready, they must be han/ested by the 
farm and its employees, or there will be no farm or farm employees. 
The harvest schedule is largely dictated by mother nature. For example, a week of ram means no 
harvesting. However, a sudden break in the clouds and a short spell of moderate weather could require 
all hands~on deck while the good weather lasts. I'm sure you can understand that flexible work 
arrangements in this business are generally not realistic. 
The inherent seasonality of farming, and the critical importance of harvest season to the farm business, 
makes it very difficult for farmers to support any increase in uncertainty, any increase in risk, to their 
business operations during the harvest. . 
This bill as written leaves the decision of whether or not to approve a request for a flexible work 
schedule with the employer. This bill does not impose a laundry list of considerations that an employer 
must follow, document, and store, when making these decisions. These two components make this bill 
much more tenable, and I thank the sponsor for including this flexibility. . 
I ask the committee to consider the question, should this bill, as written, include agricultural employers? 
Considering the seasonal nature and inherent unpredictability of work schedules during the growing 
1 Total Maine wild blueberry farm gate income in 2021 was $80.3 million according to USDA National Agricultural Statistics 
Service (NASS) at the New England Field Office, May 9"‘ , 2022 News Release. 
2 
Downstream economic impacts account for about 70-75% of the value of the crop in any given year and we estimate an 
annual total direct and indirect contribution to the Maine economy of $250 M, approximately $180 M of which are indirect 
impacts that include downstream businesses. Data from a 2009 Wild Blueberry Association of North America — US, unpublished 
Economic Impact Study.
season, should this bill apply to agricultural employers? 
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to try to answer any questions that you may have 
mu N E‘ 
5784 York ComplexSuite 52 ' 
Orono, l\/IE 04469-5784 - 
207-581-1475 - 
vvbcm@maine.edx
