188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
   
 
March 23rd, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping, Senate Chair  
Representative Roeder , House Chair  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 RE: AGC Maine’s Opposition to LD 827 “An Act to Allow Employees to Request Flexible Work Schedules”  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing my name  is Matthew Marks,  I am a Principal at Cornerstone  Government  Affairs,  and 
sending this on behalf of my client  The Associated  General Contractors  of Maine.  AGC  Maine  is a 
statewide  commercial  construction  trade  association  and a Chapter  of AGC  America  which  was founded  
in 1918 with  27,000  contractors,  suppliers,  and service  providers  nationwide .  
 
The construction  industry  is largely  dependent  on fieldwork  with  conditions  subject  to weather,  
regulat ions,  and specifications  of the project.  The season  can be compressed,  often  placing  burdens  on a 
changing work  environment.  Some  regulations  or even  local ordinances  specify  when  tasks  can occur,  
curtailing  work  during some  periods  of time  and extending work  when  allowed . That  might  vary  by 
region  and often  changes  the approach  by the job. Recently  that has become  problematic  as contractors  
have  adjusted  for night  work  when  required  by both  public  and private  owners . Certainly , during a six-
month  period  of time , the work  could  change  drastically.   
 
Specifically , the definition  states  in section  “A. "Flexible work schedule" means a work arrangement in 
which an employee works completely or partially at a location other than the place of employment or 
works hours different than the regular hours of the position. ” In the construction industry, the place of 
employment is a moving target. The hours can depend on the delivery of materials, access to the site, and material specifications requiring the completion of work . For example, the delivery of concrete, or 
asphal t where they are fluid products where time is directly associated with the successful placement.  
 When fieldwork  occurs  at night, on weekends , or early morning it’s common that support workers in the 
construction office will be required to be present. Tho se support positions vary, including safety, human 
resources, finance, mechanics,  purchasing, and other technical positions. During weather events , it 
might require both field and office staff to be present. The industry is best served when the entire team  
is present for their operations, including the safety of personnel.  
 Additionally, a company could allow flexibility during periods o f the year for some positions but that can 
change with new contracts. In the section  describing the duration  we also have concerns  “2. Request; 
duration. An employee of a public or private employer may request a flexible work schedule for up to 6 
months . An employer may not discipline  an employee who requests a flexible work schedule. ”  In the first 
sentence, six months assumes construction work conditions have consistency in volume and needs, 
188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741 which is rarely the case. It’s also not clear in the last sentence if this probit s disciplinary  action for any 
reason if someone requests flexible w ork-although I’m sure that was the intent . For example, if the 
employee violates an offsite work policy or other policy in the company’s handbook  it should be in 
conformance with their policy  and not tied to their request for a flexible work schedule.  
 
Generally,  the industry  has a mix of approaches  to employees  working  offsite.  In some  positions , the 
tasks  allow  for remote  work  or a blend.  It’s our opinion  this should  be left to the individual  company  to 
determine the process.   
 
We are happy  to answer  any questions  and thank  the Committee  for considering  our initial concerns.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Matt  Marks,  Principal  
Cornerstone  Government  Affairs  
mmarks@cgagroup.com  
207-530-3001  
