MAINE s 1 A. T 12 
CHAMBER 
i 5 r\Y/iiil iiiéi 
Lille \»‘()i¢i’e Q/" ./l./I411 ‘ /it /)1/\llIc as 
Testimony of 
Peter M. Gore 
Government Affairs Consultant 
Maine Street Solutions 
On behalf of the 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
in opposition to 
L.D. 827, An Act to Allow Employees to Request Flexible Work Schedules 
March 23, 2023 
Sen. Tipping, Rep. Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing, my name is Peter Gore, and l am a Government Affairs Consultant with Maine Street 
Solutions, and l am here on behalf of my client, the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a 
statewide business association representing both large and small businesses speaking to you 
today in opposition to L.D. 827 An Act to AI/ow Employees to Request Flexible Work Schedules. 
LD 827 would allow employees to request a flexible work arrangement involving hours 
worked or work location, for up to 6 months in duration, with the "reasonable expectation" of 
automatic renewal if approved initially by the employer. The proposal applies to private 
employers with one or more employees but does not appearto apply to municipalities or 
schools or anyone other than an employee of the executive or legislative branch of the state. 
The bill does not say whether an employer may or may not grant the request; no guidelines are 
included as to grounds to approve or deny the request. There is nothing to indicate what might 
happen if the request is denied, for instance, is there is an appeal process? The entire proposal 
is open ended. 
Even prior to the pandemic, employers willingly worked with their employees to comply 
with flexible work arrangements. Certainly during, and after the height of the pandemic, 
flexible work schedules became the norm for many workplaces. The advent of employees 
working from home became normalized, due to both public health and practical reasons. Now 
that COVID has become more "endemic" in our society, employers have begun the process of 
reintegrating their workers back into their traditional office spaces. However, flexible work 
schedules are still common and accepted in many cases. As such, we question the need for LD 
827. 
in addition, the Chamber has concerns over the practical issues with the bill, and real- 
world application. For example, a business is experiencing a slow period. An employee 
requests an adjustment to their schedule so that they can arrive at work 10 minutes late and 
stay an extra ten minutes on the back end so that they can get their child to school. The 
78 State bueet Suite 101 E Augusta. Maine 043306630 E1 tel (207) 623-4568 H fax (207) 622-7723 P1 website: w\\»wv.mainechambeizorg H e-mail: i11fo@11mi11u.l1a1nber org
MAINE s; A if iii 
CHAMBER .... of_ 
Q’ ll ii 
) ;\./l, M ii iii’ 
. {.1 ii‘, 
'/he i‘ ./2/U1 (g,fl§//T1///r ﬁ />2/x//m.\'.-. ‘ 
employer agrees to the change as long as things remain quiet, wanting to be flexible. Two 
months later, business picks up and they need the employee to be at work at the regular time, 
not 10 minutes late. We are concerned the employer cannot require the employee to revert 
back to their old schedule because of the 6-month duration portion of the bill, unless the 
parties jointly agreed to a different schedule. What was once an employer trying to help an 
employee now potentially becomes a staff shortage that places greater pressure on the 
remaining workers. In addition to complicating the workplace environment. 
It is also not clear who will enforce the new law? Will it be the role of the DOL, a private 
right of action, and what will be enforced besides the no retaliation provision of the bill? 
The Chamber believes flexible work arrangements are already available and even 
relatively common in the post pandemic workplace. While businesses are brining workers back 
to the office, many are also allowing flexible hours and remote work as options in addition to 
onsite work. Practically speaking, the fact is some jobs lend themselves to flexibility more than 
others. Where it is possible, employers are working to accommodate their workers for 
productivity purposes, but also for recruitment and retention as well. We do not believe we 
need a new law to mandate what is already happening voluntarily. It is for these reasons we 
are opposed to LD 827, and we would urge you to give it a unanimous ought not to pass. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our concerns. I would be pleased to 
answer any questions you might have. 
28 Smtc Street, Suite 101 fﬂ Augusta. Maine 0433()~5630 tel (207) 623~4568 El fax (V207) 622-7723 B website: \\'WW.l]11\lll8Cl]Z\H1b €1‘.0l'g E1 e~mail: i11fo@n1ainccl1amber.o1'g
