 
 
 
 
 
  
15 University Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330  
207-623-9511  
  
 
March 23, 2022  
 
Honorable Michael Tipping, Senate Chair  
Honorable Amy Roeder, House Chair  
Joint Legislative Committee on Labor and Housing  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re:  Testimony in opposition to LD 827, An Act To Allow Employees to Request Flexible 
Work Schedules  
 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing : 
 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA)  appreciate the o pportunity to provide  
testimony in opposition to LD 827. 
 
About MWUA.   MWUA  is a nonprofit association based in Augusta that provides support for 
water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water 
through educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and 
national level. The Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities 
in Maine as members.   
 
Discussion.  LD 827 would give employees a statutory right to ask for a flexible work  schedule 
for up to six months at a time. MWUA believes that this expansion of employee statutory rights 
is not warranted.  Employees already can ask for a flexible work schedule from  their employers 
– there is no statutory prohibition from doing so.  
 
In this period of low unemployment, it is common for employers to offer or accommodate work 
hour and /or location flexibility to recruit or retain employees.  Businesses permit w ork hour 
and location f lexibi lity based upon the specific needs and challenges  of the business .   The work 
arrangements between employee and employer , in the realm of flexible work schedules , is best 
left to be worked out between the employer and employee  rather than codifying additional 
statutory employee protections . Instances such as this are extremely rare,  and we believe other 
labor protectio ns such as the Maine Human Rights Act and U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission laws sufficiently protect employees who request special work arrangements . In our 
view, this bill proposes a solution where there is no problem to fix .   
 
Employers spend co nsiderable resources ensuring compliance with existing State and federal  
employment statutes and  regulations.  Imposing additional statutory burdens on employers 
Letter from  MWUA re LD 827 
March 23, 202 3 
Page 2 
 
 
without a clear  and general  demonstrated  need, only serves to increase the cost of doing 
business in Maine wit hout meaningful benefit.  
 
Conclusion. The proposed statutory protections for employees are not needed .  We ask you to 
oppose this legislation and vote ought not to pass . 
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
 
Roger Crouse,  
Legislative Committee Chair, Maine Water Utilities Association  
General Manager, Kennebec Water District  
 
cc:  Bruce Berger, Executive Director  (MWUA)  
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counse l 
 
