 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 827 
 
AN ACT TO ALLOW EMPLOYEES TO REQUEST FLEXIBLE WORK SCHEDULES  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee on Labor and Housing, I am  Steven  
Bailey, executive director of Maine School Manag ement Association,  testifying on behalf of the legislative 
committees  of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents Association in 
opposition to L.D. 827.  
 
Our associations oppose this bill because it is impractical and more impor tantly does not support the needs of 
students w e are obliged to serve as public schools.  School da ys are defined in statute as follows:  
 
Title 20 -A, ยง4801. School days  
 
The following provisions shall apply to school days.  
 
Number.   A school administrative unit shall make provision for the maintenance of all of its schools for at least 
180 days a year. A t least 175 days shall be used for instruction. In meeting the requirement of a 180 -day school year, no 
more than 5 days may be used for in -service education  of teachers, administrative meetings, parent -teacher conferences, 
records' days and similar activi ties. 
 
A. The commissioner may reduce or waive the minimum number of days required on application from a school 
board. The commissioner may authorize an equival ent number of hours to be substituted for days for a limited 
time period upon application from a s chool board. The application must be supported in writing with a 
statement of the reasons for the request.  [PL 2009, c. 87, ยง1 (AMD).]  
 
School leaders work t o accommodate the people they employ when it comes to schedules, but our first 
obligation is to our students.  Those schedules are a local decision and that decision must remain a local 
decision and be in the best interest of the students we serve.  
