Ca) 
MAINE ENERGY l"‘lARKETEl-15 ASSOCIATION 
TESTIMONY of Megan Diver 
Vice President 
Maine Energy Marketers Association 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT AND BUSINESS 
In Support of LD 755 
An Act to Promote Higher Blends of Biofuel by Regulating the Sale or Transfer of Biofuels 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business Committee (IDEA), my name is Megan Diver, I am the Vice President of the 
Maine Energy Marketers Association (MEMA). 
MEMA is a trade association composed of approximately 300-member companies and over 5,000 direct 
and 5,000 indirect people working in energy delivery and servicing businesses delivering heating oil, 
biofuels, motor fuels, propane, pellets and kerosene and offering service and installations on the 
equipment that operates these fuels. In addition, our members own and operate 70% of Maine's 1,300 
convenience stores, throughout Maine and employ approximately 10,000 Maine people and sell more 
than one billion gallons of gasoline and diesel fuel each year. We provide education and training to the 
heating, ventilation, air conditioning, weatherization, and energy auditing trades for hundreds of Maine 
citizens annually through our courses at our own training facility MEMA Technical Education Center 
(MTEC) in Brunswick. 
I submit testimony in support of LD 755 and appreciate Senator Daughtry sponsoring this legislation for 
the industry. 
The intent of Public Law, Ch. 124 passed in the 126th Legislature was to disclose and provide 
documentation of the amount of biofuel in certain blended products at the time of sale. It allowsa 
buyer of these blended products to rely on the information contained in this documentation and 
relieves the buyer of liability arising from this reliance. 
On the surface the existing law appears to cover blends up to B20. However, we have heard from 
members that legally they need clarification on the current language of the law. The current law does 
not include the usage of B20. Since under existing law they include #2 heating oil in "all" references to 
diesel fuel, it would be impossible to separate the D7467 B20 specifications for diesel fuel and the D396 
specifications for B20 heating oil. 
LD 755 would replace the current definitions with more accurate definitions (used in other states). The 
language also allows for renewable diesel (which is not blended), which is currently used in other states, 
primarily as on-road fuel, but which many expect will start making its way to the Northeast for heating 
use as demand increases. 
I urge the Committee to support LD 755 to clarify existing law. Thank you. 
25 Greenwood Road, P.0. Box 249 Brunswick, HE 01l0II~024 ‘J l Z07-729-5298 l Mainetnergyharlietersxom
