1
  131st Legislature
Senate of 
Maine 
Senate District 23 
Senator Mattie Daughtry
Assistant Majority Leader
3 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0003
Office (207) 287-1515
Testimony of Senator Mattie Daughtry introducing
LD 755, An Act to Promote Higher Blends of Biofuel by Regulating the Sale 
or Transfer of Biofuels
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
and Business
March 10, 2023
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Mattie 
Daughtry, and I proudly represent Senate District 23, which includes Brunswick, Freeport, 
Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, and part of Yarmouth. Today I am pleased to introduce 
my bill LD 755, “An Act to Promote Higher Blends of Biofuel by Regulating the Sale or 
Transfer of Biofuels.”
Today I’ll keep my testimony brief because I know that Megan Diver with the Maine Energy 
Marketers Association (MEMA) will go into more detail and explain why this bill is necessary. 
As I understand it, current statute does not clearly cover biofuel blends up to B20. For those who 
aren’t familiar, biodiesel is a renewable, biodegradable fuel manufactured domestically from 
vegetable oils, animal fats, or recycled restaurant grease. B20 is a common blend because it 
represents a good balance of cost, emissions, cold-weather performance, materials compatibility, 
and ability to act as a solvent. Engines operating on B20 have similar fuel consumption, 
horsepower, and torque to engines running on petroleum diesel. Most importantly, biodiesel 
offers greater greenhouse gas benefits than conventional diesel fuel. 
According to some in the industry, it has been impossible to separate the B20 specifications for 
diesel fuel and the B20 specifications for heating oil. The bill before you would revise the 
current definitions to include more accurate definitions. It would also allow for renewable non-
blended diesel, which the industry believes will soon be used for heating in the Northeast. As we 
all know, heating our homes has been expensive this winter. Before we really ditch conventional 
diesel fuel and heating oil and switch to cleaner biofuel blends, let’s clarify the law now.
I thank you for your time, and I would request that you please direct your questions to Megan 
and the other experts who will be testifying next.
2
Mattie Daughtry
Assistant Senate Majority Leader, Senate District 23
Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, and part of Yarmouth
