 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services   
 
In Opposition to LD 1382 , An Act to Establish the Guiding Public Health Principles of Focused 
Protection for Pandemics of a Highly Infectious Respiratory Disease  
 
Hearing Date:  April 24, 2 023 
 
Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and members  of the  Joint Standing Committee on  
Health and Human Services , my name is Dr. Isaac Benowitz , and I am the  State Epidemiologist 
and Chief Medical Officer at the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC ) 
in the Department of Health and H uman Services . I am here today to provide testimony in strong 
opposition to LD 1382, An Act to Establish the Guiding Public Heal th Principles of Focused 
Protection for Pandemics of a Highly Infectious Respiratory Disease .  
 
This bill  establishes  principles of focused protection for a pandemic of a highly infectious 
respiratory disease for public health authorities to follow . It addresses population health, needs of 
certain  populations, and balancing priorities across multiple diseases . It describes  the importance 
of considering short -term and long -term consequences, of transparency in communications , and 
of respecting individual autonomy.  
 
The Maine CDC applies widely -accepted best practices related to population health, prevention  
and transparent communications in our infectious disease control work. Our existing  legal 
authority provides necessary  discretion to take pr ompt action to protect the public’s health  using 
the best available evidence , coupled with community engagement  to ensure we understand and 
account for the community’s needs . 
 
The Maine CDC strongly opposes all points in LD 1382. This bill hamper s existing authorities to 
control highly infectious respiratory diseases  including measles, influenza, tuberculosis, and 
emerging cond itions , by requiring specif ic types  of evidence and considerations prior to 
implementing actions to protect the public’s health. Meeting the specific requirements within the 
proposed legislation will delay or completely stop Maine CDC’s response, potentially resulting 
in the loss of lives.  
 
For your consideration, the Maine CDC offers the following comments on the most concerning 
proposals of LD 1382 that will impact the Department’s authority to establish procedures for the 
control, detection, prevention , and treatment of communicable, environmental , and occupational 
diseases, including during times of an emergency that threatens the health of the State’s 
population (22 MRS § 802).  
 
 
 - Lines 27 -31 of the proposed legislation , if enacted as law,  will eliminate Maine CDC’s 
ability to require vaccinations i n certain settings such as schools , healthcare facilities, and 
correctional facilities. Maine CDC has great respect for personal autonomy, and only 
imposes requirements in settings where they are needed to protect the health of vulnerable 
populations. In t he community setting outside of these congregate  settings, an individual can 
decide whether to get a vaccine without posing the same level of risk of harm to vulnerable 
members of society or preventing others from learning in schools or healing in healthca re 
facilities.  
 
- Lines 18-21 inhibits Maine CDC from making public health recommendations that affect 
services  or activities  that some community consider essential  by requiring that the public 
health advice address the needs of each population in the State within the cultural, religious, 
geographic , and other contexts of the population. LD 1382 further states i f a population in the 
State believes that places of worship are essential, the n the  public health advice should 
consider places of worship as es sential in determining the advice . When issuing State 
advisories , the Maine CDC  cannot  ignore information about infectious disease risk for a 
certain group of people merely because that group  view s an activity as essential ; it is also 
necessary to  factor the level of risk to the health, safety and economic needs  for the State as a 
whole. Maine CDC advisories  regarding public health risks  consider the federal 
interpretation of ‘essential’ to encompass a range of operations and services that are typi cally 
essential to continue critical infrastructure operations . 
 
In summary, the Maine CDC  opposes LD 1382  in order to preserve core public health authority 
to respond to highly infectious respiratory infections , on a state wide le vel. The Committee is 
asked to recognize  Maine’s highly successful response to COVID -19 which would  not have been 
possible if this legislation had been in place.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter  and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from the Committee , and I will be available to participate in the 
work session.  
 
 
 
