Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and HHS Committee Members 
/7.1 if 2@ I 
am speaking in support of LD;7/1/and In the fearful early days of Covid, it might be 
argued that there was reason to fire loyal healthcare workers. But with what we know now, it 
is inexcusable. By the manufacturers ’ own written report, they did not test the jab for 
preventing infection and transmission. Indeed, probably all Committee members know of 
individuals who were fully boosted who got the infection. I certainly do. Even the Governor, 
it's reported, had Covid twice. 
Why, then, does it make sense to further the healthcare crisis and put lives at risk in Maine?I 
have several friends tell me that they had a 5 hr wait in the ER. And reports of short staffing 
abound at hospitals in this state. 
I believe government's role is to protect the rights of citizens —and not harm them. Make no 
mistake about it, the exclusion of religious and philosophical exemptions does great harm.. 
Not only does it harm those who don't get a chance to work in their career field in Maine, but 
it harms other vulnerable citizens. Those with medical needs depend on our hospitals to 
provide well-staffed care. 
Further, it does harm to the concept of ‘informed consent. ’ How are medical institutions to be 
trusted if they turn their backs on an established principle on which medicine is based? It is 
up to the patient to weigh risks and benefits of any medication or procedure. That is not in the 
sphere of administrators or doctors. That decision is to be made without coercion. 
I am also in support of LD 59 for the above reasons. It is universally acknowledged the Covid 
19 does not pose a significant threat to youth. However, the reported adverse effects- — 
including unprecedented athletes dying in the game or practice —- are very concerning and 
should be a matter for intense investigation. 
l_also support LD 1382. That we need legislation saying that fear tactics will not to be used or 
residents may not be forced to accept an intervention just shows how far we have come from 
transparency and respect for the individual. 
- /Y6K 
I sincerely ask you to do right by the residents of Maine today: vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 1.71’, 
aeé, 59 and 1382. 
la 01 
Kathleen Szostek 
Dixfield, ME
