Senators and Committee members. l am speaking today in favor of Bills LD 172, 
601, 1598, 1547, 59 and 1382. ‘'
" 
My name is Lisa Miller. l am a Select Board Member for the Town of Weld, a Fire 
Fighter and a Registered Nurse. Not only has the removal of vaccine exemptions 
affected me personally, its making it very difficult for the Town of Weld to- 
maintain its EMS License. 
I want to ask you all a couple of questions.V 
You took an oath to uphold the United States Constitution and the Maine 
Constitution. Do you believe in the First Amendment and Article One? TheseV 
guarantee citizens the inherent and unalienable rights among which are to be free 
and independent. Do you believe in these?' 
How do you feel about being lied toabout vaccines? The wordslsafe and effective 
were beat into our consciences day and night. ln an interview last July, former 
White House Covid-19 Response Coordinator to the Trump administration, 
Deborah Birx stated that they knew the Covid-19 vaccine would neither prevent 
transmission or protect against infection. in fact, the very definition of the word 
vaccine was changed by the CDC in 2021 from "producing immunity" to 
"producing protection" . The American people were lied to; given false information 
about the efficacy and safety of this and other vaccines.' 
A'
T 
Former Vice President at Pﬁzer, Dr. Michael Yeadon, who has over 32 years of 
experience in pharmaceutical research, expressed his deep concerns over the 
experimental use of #COVlD19 vaccines. He testified in Jan 2022 at the 86"‘ 
session of the German Stiftung Corona Ausschus, and stated what he called the8 
Covid Lies. lwill sum them up... 
1. The virus is extremely lethal 
2. The PCR test is accurate and reliable 
3. Masks will protect you 
4. Lockdowns will slow the transmission of the virus
5. There is asymptomatic transmission r 
6. They lied and told us there were NO TREATMENTS for this respiratory virus 
7. There is no natural immunity 
8. Covicl-19 Vaccines are safe and effective 
The vaccine industry has not conducted legitimate placebo-controlled tests on 
their products. 
The Estimated 2022 US Vaccine Damage Report which looks at data from people 
ages 16-64 showed that we had 300,000 excess deaths, 26.6 million vaccine 
injuries and 1.36 million people disabled by vaccines, along with an added6 
financial cost to the taxpayers of $147.8 Billion. 
The American public has been lied to, coerced, censored and threatened. 
As a Select Boand Member for the Town of Weld, l like to add that the removal of 
vaccine exemptions has also harmed people living in small towns in Maine, like 
Weld. Our Fire Dept. is having a difficult time obtaining medical first responders 
because of the vaccine mandates. We have a paramedic with over 20 yrs. 
experience that isn't allowed to respond to medical calls. We have Fire Dept. 
members willing to serve as medical responders, but our hands are tied until 
exemptions are reinstated. 
Lastly, l will ask, is this what you want for Maine? Communities suffering,» 
individuals stripped of their ability to serve in the medical community and thrown 
into financial hardship, medical professionals leaving the state to obtain work 
elsewhere. 
its time to reinstate vaccine exemptions.
Whv did CDC change definition for ‘vaccine’? Agency explains I Miami Herald 
_Qs_0eb9:a_h léirxsale;he.1<newL.CQ!tQ1a;cJne.§;1:g;_u@_eg;me1scQseas;i.afeQtqnD,..EQ2<ii§ews 
Dr Mike Yeadon's kev testimonv — Part I: The Eight Covid Lies lthepeoplesvoiceorg) 
On March 28*“ , 2023 Edward Dowd (who has previously given US Congressional Testimony on 
Dec.7, 2022, author and Founding Partner of Phinance Technologies) released the Estimated 
2022 US Vaccine Damage Report. He used source data from the Society of Actuaries and the US 
Bureau of Labor Statistics to identify trending safety signals. 
For Americans age 16 to 64- 
Estimated Human Cost: 
26.6 miilien Injuries 
1.36 million Disabilities 
398K Excess Deaths 
Estimated Economic Cost: 
lniuriesz $89.9 billian 
Disabilities: $52.2 billion 
Excess Deaths: $5.6 billion 
Total $147.8 billion
04/23/2023 
Dear Honorable Members of the Legislature, 
l thank you for your attention in this matter. l am a small-town ﬁre chiei who has ten members 
in my fire department. Currently we have our EMS License with one active EMT and one 
inactive. We also have a registered nurse. Of these three, only one can respond to medical calls. 
Over the past few years with the changes we've had to make due to mandates, the world has 
come to know these changes with views that have separated us. Not only has bipartisanship 
faded politically, our religious and philosophical views should, in my opinion, be respected and 
considered. ln a world of so many opinions, it's difﬁcult to agree. 
The act of agreeing to disagree is becoming more past tense. The welfare of all people of this 
great country is at stake if we can't do this. 
l am an independent and open-minded individual who listens and takes advice and with all due 
respect, l’m conﬁdent the we all are trying to accomplish these traits, although difﬁcult it may 
be. 
Maine EMS laws, immunization requirements, mandates and the EMS organization (including 
any non-transporting EMS services, such as many of these srnail-town ﬁre departments) require 
medical responders to be vaccinated for Covid-19. This is the same for employees of healthcare 
facilities on a larger scale. 
Religious and philosophical exemptions have been removed for influenza and Covid-19 in the 
state of Maine as of 2021. 
If you have non-medical personnel with the minimal requirements needed to administer 
Narcari, who are pessilaly uiwaccirrated and can still administer the drug, how is that acceptable 
and different than going to a medical call? 
The complexity of this issue of available medical responders with required immunizations has 
become a huge problem. if l could change things, l would try to ﬁnd solutions to allow people to 
serve in public safety medical responding regardless of medical, philosophical, or religious 
beliefs. There are ways around this that will work, and can work safely. 
l urge you to work diligently on this. i am sure many of you are ﬁrst responders, or know people 
who are. 
in our day to day lives, we are asked to risk our lives and safety to ensure the safety of others. 
The risk factors of having non-vaccinated personnel responding to calls are lower than the risk 
factors of living in a small town with the nearest ambulance usually 20 minutes or more away 
with little or no medical responders available.
The average EMR eaeerse £5 56 beers in keegtkx feélawed by e neatéemal test. The avemge EMT 
merge is ene semeeéez in ieegzh, the Q? seeeéé-iewe de§1artment ’s eeeseeneé 
werking fulltime §ebs eisewhere, with famiéies te feed and simuitaneeusig respcnding ts calls 
when a=:e§§a§:§e, its net an easy task ta recmiz mere is maize these sa£.s"§ﬁces_ 
l ask that yea else ceesiéiet the faster Qf em’ aging genukatien in this state‘. The avenge ege in 
Maine was abeut 45 years of age in 2929. Net enty are we faced web previding services to an 
aide: poeulation, it's a double-edged swam in the way that we are ﬁnding it mare difficult to 
recruit younger p8Qp!€ that are avaiiable to provide services. 50, mar responders are getting 
older. 
in chasing, I ask that you consider and be creative. As a ﬁre ehiei t knew what we are faeéng. 
immunizaiioes, aitiaough with ihe intention ea‘ protecting ail, they are not for everyone. if we 
can ﬁnd ether creative and safe saiuticms it week! be wise. 
I thank yon far hearing this matier. 
Sincerely, 
Chief Corey Huichinsen 
Weid Fire and Rescue
