	
	
      	Maine	Mayors	Coalition	Testimony	in	Support	of	LD	1664	An	Act	to	Increase	Reimbursement	Under	the	General	Assistance	Program	Senator	Baldacci,	Representative	Meyer	and	distinguished	members	of	the	Joint	Standing	Committee	on	Health	and	Human	Services,	the	Maine	Mayors	Coalition	testifies	in	support	of							LD	1664,	An	Act	to	Increase	Reimbursement	Under	the	General	Assistance	Program.	The	Maine	Mayors	Coalition	is	a	nonpartisan	group	representing	the	mayors	of	ten	Maine	communities	–	Auburn,	Augusta,	Biddeford,	Lewiston,	Portland,	Rockland,	Saco,	Sanford,	South	Portland	and	Westbrook	–	and	more	than	260,000	residents.	The	Coalition	advocates	on	behalf	of	our	citizens	and	municipalities	for	policies	that	recognize	the	vital	services	Maine	cities	provide	and	the	positive	impact	Maine	cities	have	on	our	state.	The	Coalition	seeks	to	work	in	partnership	with	state	and	federal	elected	officials	to	meet	the	needs	of	Maine	people.			Our	most	immediate	concerns	are	providing	essential	support	and	housing	to	people	who	need	it	now.	As	you’re	well	aware,	the	General	Assistance	program	provides	a	lifeline	for	many	who	find	themselves	in	dire	financial	situations.	This	has	been	especially	true	over	the	last	several	years	when	more	people	than	ever	relied	on	the	program.	You	know	the	reasons	–	the	impact	of	the	pandemic,	lack	of	housing	supply	and	rising	costs	of	homes	and	rents,	and	skyrocketing	prices	for	food,	fuel,	energy	and	other	essentials.			Among	those	turning	to	General	Assistance	are	individuals	and	families	seeking	asylum.	The	program	was	not	originally	designed	to	support	asylum	seekers,	and	by	federal	law	they	are	not	permitted	to	obtain	work	authorizations	for	180	days.			We	appreciate	the	support	provided	by	the	state	and	federal	governments	these	last	years.	With	those	funds,	including	rental	assistance	and	emergency	shelter,	winding	down,	we	expect	to	see	even	more	people	turn	to	the	General	Assistance	program	and	as	well	to	our	own	cities	where	more	services	are	available.			Increasing	state	reimbursement	for	General	Assistance,	from	70%	to	90%,	would	greatly	help	to	alleviate	some	of	the	pressures	being	placed	on	our	municipal	budgets.	We’re	in	the	process	now	of	finalizing	our	budgets.	Like	you,	we	must	balance	the	competing	interests	of	what	our	citizens	need	with	what	we,	and	they,	can	afford.	To	that	end,	we	have	been	scrutinizing	every	program	and	expenditure	in	an	effort	to	keep	our	cities’	property	taxes	as	low	as	possible.		LD	1664	will	certainly	help	us	in	our	efforts	while	continuing	to	provide	critical	assistance	to	those	who	truly	need	it.	We	urge	you	to	vote	ought	to	pass	on	this	bill.	Thank	you	for	your	time.	
