MA|NE MUN |C| PAL l-800—l+52—8786(in state)
i 
T 
(T) 207-e23~s42s 
ASSOCIATION S2NiZE was (F)20,_624_m29 
60 Community Drive l Augusto, ME 0lr33O~9h86 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 298 - An Act to Study the Shared Use of the Public Right of Way 
April 18, 2023 
Sen. Chipman, Rep. Williams and distinguished member of the Committee on Transportation, my 
name is Rebecca Graham, and I am providing testimony in support for LD 298, An Act to Study the 
Shared Use of the Public Right of Way, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association (MMA). 
MMA represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature and receives its 
policy positions at the direction of our 70 member Legislative Policy Committee made up of elected and 
appointed municipal officials elected by their peers to serve from each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. As 
such, the positions of the Association are reﬂective of the balance necessary to achieve state policy goals 
for the impacts of legislation on communities of varying resources and populations. 
Public rights of ways or public easements exist in many forms as a result of historic deﬁnitions, 
road turn backs at various points in history, and legislative attempts to address them that unfortunately 
create more issues than they solve. The public right of way forms more than just the sidewalk or side of 
the road spaces likely envisioned as the heart of this study. However, the committee should be aware that 
because of multiple attempts to address right of way issues in the past, issues and complaints about these 
spaces ﬁnd themselves in court on a regular basis as attorney ’s attempt to uncover at which point in time 
the right of way was established, it’s width, and allowable activities and even whether or not it exists 
based on the resource it was attached to and point in history it was deﬁned. In fact, a large portion of 
maintained roads are simply a public easement “blanket” over private ownership. As such, 
To address the constant attempts to ﬁx sections of law that are interconnected with civil remedy, 
criminal penalties, and ownership right that often create more problems than they solve the State and 
Local Government Committee established the Abandoned and Discontinued Roads Commission last 
session to comprehensively review and identify areas of statutory confusion around the public rights on 
easements that remain on these roads and how they intersect with public use, the maintained public rights 
of way and allowable uses for such spaces. Many of these issues can be compounded by the way in which 
this committee choses to deﬁne new classes of motor vehicles that has been excluded from these areas 
under their current deﬁnition to limit damage to roadbeds maintained by private parties for unfettered 
public use. 
An examination is currently underway by the Commission to understand how the terms “public 
way” , “private way” and “public easement ” are used throughout Titles 12, 23, 29-A, 17-A and 33 M.R.S. 
among others, and how to apply them correctly or change the deﬁnition based on the intent, and new 
allowable uses. For this reason, municipal ofﬁcials as that any study committee established by LD 298 not 
only include municipal officials, but also work in tandem with the Abandoned and Discontinued Roads 
Commission who have a deep understanding of the issues around public easements and public rightson
town ways and discontinued or abandoned roads now used for recreational purposes. A balance of rights 
in these spaces and their associated costs are necessary to avoid more “tragedies of the common” like 
abandoned poles, and abusive uses with little associated support for their maintenance. Ofﬁcials thank 
you in advance for considering these additional partners in this eﬁbrt should you move forward with LD 
298.
