Brigid Black
Saco
LD 1906
Hello,
 My name is Brigid Black. I’m 36 years old, and I live in Saco, Maine with my wife 
Mattie Black and our 15-month-old son, Bennett Nathaniel Black. 
I’m here to voice my support of this bill that would provide a confirmatory adoption 
process in Maine.
Mattie and I first met in 2014 and got married in 2018. We knew we wanted to start a 
family together, so we began to discuss family planning in 2020. 
We conceived our child with the assistance of a known sperm donor and Mattie 
carried a full-term pregnancy. Bennett was born on January 29, 2022 in Portland, 
Maine. Both of us are named as parents on his birth certificate, and both of us have 
raised our son together. Bennett has my last name.
After last year’s Dobbs ruling and with Roe being overturned, Mattie and I became 
scared and wondered if Obergefell v. Hodges could be next. We immediately took 
steps to secure my parental rights, as I am Bennett’s nonbirthing parent.
Throughout the process of the second parent adoption, the judge assigned to our case 
overstepped in multiple ways. We were both asked to do background checks, even 
though it wasn’t required for both parties. And even though our sperm donor 
agreement was properly executed, our donor became involved and had to complete an
affidavit in support of my parentage. It was frustrating and insulting. 
I do not want others to have to go through this demoralizing process. If this proposed 
bill were to pass, it would spare other nonbirthing parents from background checks, 
fingerprinting and inappropriate questions from judges. 
Nonbirthing parents like me participate in all aspects of our children’s conception, 
care and development. From changing their diapers and giving them medicine to 
reading them books and rocking them to sleep, we are full and equal parents and 
caregivers just as our birthing spouses are, and we shouldn’t have to jump through so 
many hoops to adopt our own children.
Let’s please join our fellow Americans in Colorado, New Hampshire, California, 
Maryland, and New Jersey and create a simplified adoption process for nonbirthing 
parents to go through.
Thank you. 
