 
 
254 Commercial Street, #245  133 New York Avenue, Suite C 
Portland, Maine 04101  Huntington, New York 11743 
(207) 200-6780  (631) 840-7967 
janene@mainereproductionlawyer.com 
 
 
       May 16, 2023 
 
Senator Ann Carney, Chair 
Representative Matt Moonen, Chair 
Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
 
RE: LD: 1906: An Act to Enable Confirmatory Adoption 
 
 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Committee on Judiciary: 
 
I am a family formation attorney practicing in Maine, New York, and New Hampshire, 
and a resident of Cumberland Foreside, Maine.  On behalf of my clients, myself, and all Maine 
children conceived through assisted reproduction, I am asking for your support of LD 1906: An 
Act to Enable Confirmatory Adoption.  This bill would protect Maine children conceived through 
assisted reproduction and provide greater security for LGBTQ+ parents by offering a streamlined 
process to confirm their parental rights. 
 
I have had the privilege of guiding many LGBTQ+ couples as they grow their families 
through assisted reproduction.  The Maine Parentage Act created a number of paths to 
parenthood through assisted reproduction and surrogacy regardless of gender identity, sexual 
orientation, marital status, or genetic connection to the child.  In Maine, both parents of a child 
conceived through assisted reproduction may include their names as parents on the child’s birth 
certificate.  But birth certificates are not confirmations of legal parentage.  The legal parentage of 
the non-gestating or non-genetic parent is tenuous, based on consent to assisted reproduction, 
and the marital presumption, if the parents are married.  What happens if the United States 
 
Oleaga Law LLC          Page 2 
 
 
Supreme Court decides to take Dobbs1 one step farther?  What happens if Obergefell2 is overturned 
next?  Without an adoption order, the most marginalized families remain the most vulnerable.     
 
Today, when LGBTQ+ couples conceive through assisted reproduction, the non-gestating 
or non-genetic parent has the option to secure their parentage through a stepparent or second 
parent adoption.  The United States Supreme Court has ensured that full faith and credit extends 
to adoption orders and compels all states to recognize a valid adoption order obtained in another 
state.  See V.L. v. E.L., 577 U.S. 404, 136 S. Ct. 1017 (2016).  As many of my clients will share, the 
Maine stepparent or second parent adoption process can be lengthy, invasive, and unsettling.  At 
a minimum, the non-gestating parent is required to complete a background check and 
fingerprinting as part of the adoption process.  I have experienced Maine judges requesting far 
more than the minimum, including consent to adoption from the sperm donor, who is not a legal 
parent and therefore cannot provide consent.  Many of my clients have been in the position of 
weighing their desire to push back against what is unfair and inappropriate against their desire 
to ensure their parentage is legally recognized.  LD 1906 would provide guidance to parents 
pursuing confirmatory adoptions and judges presiding over the same. 
 
Without an order of adoption, parents of children conceived through assisted 
reproduction, and especially LGBTQ+ parents, remain vulnerable both inside Maine and beyond 
Maine’s borders.  Should these parents be challenged by any hostile agency or organization, or 
should they travel to another state less inclined to acknowledge their parentage, the non-gestating 
parent faces uncertainty regarding their rights to their child.  In 2023 we have witnessed courts 
in Oklahoma and Pennsylvania strip the non-gestating parent of their parental rights in the 
absence of a formal adoption order.  Both couples in these cases are LGBTQ+. 
 
The focus of Maine’s adoption law statutes are the best interests of the child.  The passage 
of LD 1906 would be consistent in this regard.  It is in the best interest of every child for their 
parents to confirm what they know to be true: that they are the legal parents of the child they 
planned for and conceived through assisted reproduction.  Every parent has the right to legal 
recognition of the bond between them and their child, regardless of genetic connection.  Every 
child has a right to the security in knowing the people they call their parents are also recognized 
by the world as their legal parents.  I urge you to support LD: 1906 for the benefit of all Maine 
children conceived through assisted reproduction, and the parents who belong to these children. 
 
 
       Sincerely, 
       /s/ Janene Oleaga 
       Janene Oleaga     
      
 
1 Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization (No. 19-1392, 597 U.S. ___ (2022)). 
2 Obergefell v. Hodges, 576 U.S. 644 (2015). 
 
Oleaga Law LLC          Page 2 
 
 
 
