4,, , HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
£1; AUGUSTA, MAINE 043330002
_ (207) 287 1400 
Matt Moonell TTY: State Relay 7ll 
53 Thomas Street #3 
Portland, ME 04102 
Matt Moonen@legislature.mainegov 
LD 1906: An Act to Enable Confirmatory Adoption 
Testimony of Rep. Matt Moonen, Portland 
May 17, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Carney and honorable members of the Ioint Standing Committee on 
Iudiciary. I am here today to present LD 1906: An Act to Enable Confirmatory Adoption. 
Your first question is probably "what's that?" The short answer is that it's a fast—track 
adoption process for people who are already legally established parents to get an adoption 
order from a court. Your next question might be "why would anyone want or need an 
adoption order for the kids they are already the legal parents of?" The short answer is that 
discrimination and bias still persist in other parts of the country, and this is a sad but 
necessary additional layer of protection. 
As you all know, the Maine Parentage Act, adopted unanimously in both chambers in 2015, 
was a comprehensive rewrite of Maine's family law to recognize the multiple ways that 
families can be formed, including assisted reproduction. 
So let's say a lesbian couple in Maine has a child through assisted reproduction using donor 
sperm. Under our law, both women are the legal parents of the child by virtue of the 
marital presumption and their having consented to assisted reproduction. As a result, both 
of their names will be placed on the birth certificate and their parental rights are secure 
within Maine's borders. 
Unfortunately, that might not be true in other parts of the country. One example is a trial 
court case out of Oklahoma, now on appeal, in which two women planned to build their 
family through assisted reproduction. They used a known sperm donor, and both were 
clear that the donor was not a parent. They married before birth, and because the child was 
born into a marriage, both women were on the birth certificate due to the marital 
presumption. After the parties broke up, the birth mother disputed the parentage. The trial 
court stripped the non-birth mother of her parentage, stating that Oklahoma's parentage 
statutes hadn't been updated and were not gender-inclusive and as a result didn't apply to 
District ll7: Portland (part)
protect her parental rights. The court went on to say she should have adopted if she wanted 
to secure her parentage. 
Similar situations have happened in Idaho and Pennsylvania. 
From my perspective, that decision to strip a mother off of her child's birth certificate was 
horrifying and discriminatory, and I hope it will be overturned on appeal. Nevertheless, 
there is a reason that the court mentioned adoption: the Supreme Court has ruled that an 
adoption order valid in one state must be given full faith and credit and be recognized in all 
other states. So adoption can be an additional layer of protection for Maine families who 
might face discrimination in another state. 
In most cases, adoption involves a child who is not known to the family. As a result, 
adoption typically requires an intensive process to ensure the child will be well cared for, 
including a home study, notice to the child's birth parents, criminal record checks of the 
potential parents, and a waiting period to ensure that the new family is a good fit for the 
child. This type of traditional adoption is what many people use to establish a parent-child 
relationship. 
These additional steps aren't appropriate for people who are already parents to their 
children. They can extend the time it takes to secure a confirmatory adoption and can make 
such an adoption entirely out-of-reach for some families because of cost. This leaves 
children and families vulnerable. 
This bill adds to Maine law a “confirmatory adoption" process so that families who are 
seeking adoption to confirm, not establish, a parent-child relationship have easier access to 
adoption. The bill is narrowly drafted and applies only to children born through assisted 
reproduction and to parents who are already parents under Maine law and need an 
adoption decree for additional security. For those families, passage of this bill would mean 
that the adoption process is streamlined; parents would not have to wait for six months, do 
a home study, or provide notice to others because they are already the sole legal parents. 
Other states are acting to allow better access to adoption de.crees for families facing 
discrimination. Similar confirmatory adoption statutes have passed in New Hampshire, 
Virginia, Colorado, California, Maryland, and New Iersey, and just last week similar 
legislation passed the Rhode Island state senate unanimously. 
A confirmatory adoption law would provide a clear and simple process to be fairly applied 
across Maine. I urge you to give this bill swift passage, and I thank you for your time and 
attention.
