 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  
 
May 17, 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney, Chair  
Representative Matt Moonen, Chair  
Committee on Judiciary  
State House, Room 438  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: LD 1906 - An Act to Enable Confirmatory Adoption - OTP  
 
Dear Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and  Members of the Committee on Judiciary:  
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders (GLAD) , along with  EqualityMaine  and Maine AAP , 
strongly supports LD 1906 . We thank Representative Moonen for bringing forth this important 
bill that promotes security for children . A legal parent -child relationship is core to the stability 
and well -being of a child because of the many rights and respon sibilities that this relationship 
conveys. Maine has long been a leader in ensuring that all children have the ability to be secure 
in their family and therefore to thrive throughout their lives. LD 1906 continues Maine’s 
leadership in protecting children and families.  
 
For children born through assisted reproduction, one or both of their parents might not be 
genetically related to them because of use of donor gametes.  For these children, it is important 
to secure their parentage through a  court judgment, such as an adoption decree,  to avoid any 
attempts to undermine their parent -child relationship. Adoption decrees are court judgments that 
are easily recognizable and receive respect in all jurisdictions. Adoption decrees are sometimes 
referred to as the “g old standard” of parentage protection for children. This bill is a common -
sense provision that makes the adoption process more streamlined and efficient  for these children 
and families who need an adoption decree to confirm  an existing parent -child relationship.  
 
As you know, GLAD  is a nonprofit  organization working within New England and nationally 
to promote equality and justice -based  on sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, and 
HIV status. GLAD supported the  comprehensive Maine Parentage Act, passed in 2015, which 
clarified the law of parentage here and served as an impetus for other states  to improve their 
protections and was used by the Uniform Law Commission to update their model act known as 
“The Uniform Parentage Act.”  Protecting core family relationships is central to GLAD’s work . 
 
All children in Maine  need and deserve a secure legal relationship with their  parents , 
meaning  legal recognition of the bond between them .  LGBTQ co -parents and different -sex 
parents who use assisted reproduction , both in Maine  and elsewhere, continue to face the reality 
that other states  may discriminate against them and not recognize their legal status as parents  
because of a lack of genetic connection between parent and child . For this  reason, these parents  
often seek to complete adoptions of children born to them through  assisted reproduction in order 
to obtain a court decree that will be respected in all jurisdictions  as a matter of full faith and 
2 
 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org  credit . Case law recog nizes that adoptions, including by LGBTQ  couple s, must  be respect ed as 
valid adoption decrees of sister states. See V.L. v. E.L., 577  U.S. 404, 136 S. Ct. 1017 (2016) 
(per curiam)  (same -sex couple’s adoption) . 
 
Maine would be in good company enacting this bill to support better  access to adoption.  
Confirmatory adoption bills have been passed in recent years in California, Colorado, Maryland,  
New Hampshire , New Jersey,  and Virginia . See, e.g., Cal. Fam. Code § 9000.5; Colo. Rev. Stat. 
§ 19-5- 203.5; Md. Code Ann., Fam. Law § 5 -3B27; N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 170 -B:4; N.J. Stat. § 
9:17-71; Va. Code Ann. § 63.2 -1241.  A similar bill is now pending in Rhode Island.  
 
LD 1906  advances Maine’s  vital interest in the security of legal parent -child  
relationships. It s treamlines the existing adoption process for couples who planned for and built 
their families through assisted reproduction .  If a parent is already a parent under Maine law and 
seeks an adoption to confirm their relationship, they do not have to complete a home study, 
which is expensive, lengthy, and invasive, or a waiting period, or other requirements better suited 
to an adoption of a child from another family . Whenever a couple has a child through  
assisted reproduction , one parent will not be or may not  be genetically connected to their child, 
thus putting some parents in the odd situation of having to adopt their own children. This is a  
situation more commonly faced by non -LGBTQ parents , but not only . 
 
Maine’s  adoption process necessarily contains a detailed process to ensure that a child’s 
best interests and safety are advanced by coming into a new home.  Despite the efforts of 
adoption practitioners and courts to facilitate adoption through various motions to waive the 
adoption requiremen ts, having to seek waiver of the requirements involves time and expense, 
and it would provide better and more equitable  access to adoption for the process to better fit the 
needs of these children and families.    
 
The bill before the Committee streamlines  the adoption process for LGBTQ parents who  
are already legal parents but seek to confirm their parentage. It removes the requirements of  
notice, since they would be the parties receiving notice, home study  since the child was born to 
these parents and has been residing with them since birth , and the six -month waiting period  since 
no good comes from delay  where the parents planned carefully to build their family .  However, 
in its discretion, the court may fo r good cause find a reason to maintain  those provisions in a 
particular case . thereby maintaining discretion in the courts  to ensure the adoption is in the 
child’s best interests .  
 
Passage of this  bill will provide a more efficient and consistent process for families who 
have used assisted reproduction and donor gametes to create their families and who must adopt 
their own children for the purpose of  securing a court decree of parentage to protect against 
discrimination.   For example, a trial court in Okla homa recently stripped a non -biological parent 
of a child born through assisted reproduction of her parental rights during a divorce process.  The 
trial court found that the marital presumption did not apply to this child because the parentage 
statutes wer e not updated to include LGBTQ parents. As a result, a child lost one of his long -
standing, loving parents. If the parties had completed an adoption, his parentage would have 
been secured. Maine families travel and relocate, and we want to be sure they hav e security 
wherever they are, including in states like Oklahoma.   
3 
 
 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108  glad.org     
Additionally, after consulting with stakeholders , we would suggest some minor 
amendments , which are attached . The proposed amendments seek to ensure that, structurally, this 
type of  adoption appears in Part 3 of the adoption chapter along with  other types of adoption like 
foreign adoption so that confirmatory adoption is comparable and on par with other types of 
adoption in Maine. The proposed amendments also provide a court with mor e time to complete 
the adoption process  (60 days instead of 30) .   
 
Through this act, Maine  would address an urgent need for parents in the state to  
secure their parentage through adoption without unnecessary barriers and would provide  
important protection s for children. We strong ly support LD 1906.  If you have any further 
questions or need additional information, please do not hesitate  to contact us. 
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Sincerely yours,  
Patience Crozier, Esq.  
Director of Family Advocacy  
pcrozier@glad.org
 
Mary L. Bonauto, Esq.   
Senior Director of Civil Rights and Legal St rategies  
257 Deering Ave., Suite 203  
Portland, ME 04103  
 
 
131st Maine Legislature  
An Act to Enable Confirmatory Adoption  
L.D.  
LR2151, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page 1 An Act to Enable Confirmatory Adoption  
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  
Sec. 1.  18 -C MRSA Art. 9, Pt. 3, Section 316  is enacted to read:  
Section 316  
CONFIRMATORY ADOPTION  
1.  Definitions  
As used in this section , unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the following 
meanings.  
A. Assisted reproduction.   "Assisted reproduction" has the same meaning as in Title 19 -A, section 
1832, subsection 3.  
B.  Confirmatory adoption.   "Confirmatory adoption" means an adoption proceeding that involves a 
child born as a result of assisted reproduction and an individual who did not give birth to that child and is a 
parent or presumed parent.  
C. Donor.  "Donor" has the same meaning as in Title 19 -A, section 1832, subsection 5.  
D.  Marriage.   "Marriage" means the legally recognized union of 2 people or any legal relationship that 
provides substantially the same rights, benefits and responsibilities as marriage and is  recognized as valid 
in the state or jurisdiction in which it was entered.  
E.  Parentage.   "Parentage" has the same meaning as in Title 19 -A, section 1832, subsection 14.  
F. Presumed parent.   "Presumed parent" has the same meaning as in Title 19 -A, secti on 1832, 
subsection 16.  
2. Grounds for confirmatory adoption  
A parent who did not give birth to or a presumed parent of a child born as a result of assisted reproduction 
may file a petition for confirmatory adoption of the child in accordance with subsection 3. 
3. Petition for confirmatory adoption  
This section establishes the requirements for filing a petition for confirmatory adoption.  
A. Complete petition.   A complete petition must include:  
(1). A petition for adoption signed by all of the petitioners;  
(2). A copy of a petitioner's marriage certificate, if applicable; and  
(3). A declaration signed by the petitioner giving birth and a petitioner who did not give birth:  
(a) Explaining the circumstances of the child's birth through assisted reproduction;  
(b) Attesting to a petitioner's consent to assisted reproduction;  
(c) Attesting that no competing claims of parentage exist; and  
(d) A copy of the child's birth certificate.  Deleted: 5 
Deleted: PART 5
Deleted: §9-501
Deleted: Part
Deleted: 1
Deleted: 2
Deleted: 3
Deleted: 4
Deleted: 5
Deleted: 6
Deleted: §9-50
Deleted: 9-50
Deleted: §9-50
Deleted: 1
Deleted: A
Deleted: B
Deleted: C
Deleted: 1
Deleted: 2
Deleted: 3
Deleted: 4
131st Maine Legislature  
An Act to Enable Confirmatory Adoption  
L.D.  
LR2151, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page 2 B. Notice to donor not required.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, if a petitioner 
under this section conceived through assisted reproduction using a donor, the court may not require notice 
of the adoption to the donor.   
C. Consent to adoption.   This subsection estab lishes requirements regarding consent to a confirmatory 
adoption.  
(1). If a petitioner under this section conceived through assisted reproduction using a donor, the court 
may not require the donor's consent to a confirmatory adoption.  
(2). The submission  of a complete petition under this section must be considered by the court as notice 
and written consent to adoption and the court may not require any additional notice to or consent by a 
petitioner.  
4. Proceedings  
Unless otherwise ordered by the court  or required by federal law , for good cause shown and supported 
by written findings of the court demonstrating good cause, for purposes of evaluating and granting a petition 
for confirmatory adoption pursuant to this section , the court may not req uire: 
A. In-person appearance.   An in -person hearing or appearance;  
B. Child protection investigation.   An investigation by the Office of Child and Family Services within 
the department;  
C. Criminal history record  check.   A criminal history record check ; 
D. Missing children registry.   Verification that the child is not registered with a register for missing 
children; or  
E. Residency.   A minimum residency period in which the child has lived in the home of the petitioners.  
5. Court order  
In order to grant a petition under this section , the court must find:  
A. Married petitioners.  For petitioners who are married, that the individual who gave birth and that 
individual's spouse were married at the time of the child's birth and the child was born through assisted 
reproduction; or  
B Unmarried petitioners.   For petitioners who are unmarried, that:  
(1). The individual who gave birth and the other petitioner consented to the assisted reproduction;  
(2). There are no competing claims of parentage;  
(3). Notice is not required to be provided to any other person with a claim to parentage of the child; and  
(4). Consent to the adoption is not required by any other person with a claim to parentage of the child.  
The court may not deny a complete petition solely on the grounds that the petitioner's parentage is already 
presumed or legally recognized.  
The court shall issue an order under this section within 60 days of receipt of the complete petition.  
6. Con struction  
When adjudicating competing claims of parentage or determining the best interest of a child in a 
circumstance in which parentage is presumed or legally recognized, a court may not consider as evidence 
information that the parties did not petition  for confirmatory adoption under this section . Deleted: 2
Deleted: 3
Deleted: A
Deleted: B
Deleted: §9-50
Deleted: Part
Deleted: 1
Deleted: 2
Deleted: 3
Deleted: 4
Deleted: 5
Deleted: §9-50
Deleted: Part
Deleted: 1
Deleted: 2.
Deleted: A
Deleted: B
Deleted: C
Deleted: D
Deleted: 30 
Deleted: §9-50
Deleted: Part
131st Maine Legislature  
An Act to Enable Confirmatory Adoption  
L.D.  
LR2151, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page 3 SUMMARY  
This bill establishes a confirmatory adoption proceeding that involves a child born as a result of assisted 
reproduction and an individual who did not give birth to that child and is a parent or pr esumed parent.  
