Monday, April 10, 2023	 My name is CJ Tilton, I am an avid hunter and landowner in the State Of Maine.  I’m writing this testimony in regards to the following bills:  LD 1241 HP0789, LD 1166 HP0738, LD 626 HP0403. I am in support of all three bills and the act to allow Sunday hunting.  
	 I speak for myself and many others when I say there is quite a few of us hunters that work 40+ hours a week and are only able to get in the woods on Saturdays.  Myself and others spend countless time and money dedicated to the pursuit in the fall and after waiting most of the year until hunting season it seems to come and go within a short amount of time.  I hear arguments against Sunday hunting due to the thought that we will have to lose other days during the season to gain Sundays.  Those arguments also include the thought that deer populations in speciﬁc will suﬀer if given an extra day a week during the deer season. 
	  For anyone who has entered into the anterless deer permit lottery within the last couple years knows how abundant the resource is in central and southern Maine.  You have individual hunters claiming 1-3 extra bonus tags to harvest anterless deer depending on the WMD.  According to MDIFW, “We have routinely been 25% or more below doe harvest objectives in central and southern Maine over the last two or more decades.” (https://www.maine.gov/ifw/blogs/mdifw-blog/importance-regulated-doe-harvest). In theory if we’re, “25% or more below doe harvest objectives” and “are exploring alternative methods of allocating antlerless harvest opportunity to better meet harvest objectives” you’d think opening Sunday hunting would allow hunters with more of an opportunity to harvest anterless deer.  
	 So you may be thinking well that’s good for central and southern Maine, but what about northern Maine.  The proceeds from the fees associated with the antlerless deer permit fee’s go directly to the purchase and management of deer wintering areas mostly in northern Maine.  Therefore in my opinion, the more tags that get issued with more participation on Sundays will only lead to more funds to be directed straight towards habitat improvement and conservation where deer are fewer and far between. 
	  I was listening to the committee public hearings on April 10th, and heard another argument saying that landowners would like a “day of rest” and a day to be able to enjoy their land without the “threat” of hunters in the woods.  It’s my perspective that as a land owner in the state of maine you hold the responsibility to allow or deny the use of your land to others.  Bottom line is if you want a “day of rest" or a day to enjoy your land “safely” go ahead!  Take steps to inform hunters that they need permission to hunt on your land, and if you don’t want them there for whatever days inform them.  In the same breath if I want to utilize my land for hunting or allow other hunters on my land, I should be the one making that call if the law allows.  
	 Something else I heard was that these bills to allow Sunday hunting are only eﬀecting a small group of hunters that are fortunate enough to own land in the state.  About 90% of Maine is privately owned, so I understand how someone could think that it’s unfair to the people who don’t own land.  To be honest I think that’s an excuse, every year before the hunting season begins I’m looking over maps and searching property owners names, phone numbers and addresses to seek permission to hunt.  In the oﬀ season I oﬀer my help to the landowner in a way of saying thanks.  More often then not I’m granted permission.  My point is, if you work hard enough and dedicate enough time, it’s not hard to ﬁnd land to hunt in the state.  
	 I think allowing hunting on Sunday only beneﬁts revenue and the resource, I know hunters personally that live in Maine but only hunt in New Hampshire given the fact they can hunt on Sundays, essentially a loss in revenue that could go to Maine.  Im sure that’s a small amount in total but we should be focused on the best interests of the resource and the people who contribute to said resource.  
	 Lastly, I would like to say Maine is a destination for outdoorsman to say we’re one of only two states in the country that doesn’t allow Sunday hunting is ridiculous.
			
	 	 -CJ Tilton 
