BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 1166 
"An Act to Allow Sunday Hunting by Landowners on Their Land" 
Presented by Representative HALL of Wilton. 
Cosponsored by Senator BLACK of Franklin and Representatives: COSTAIN of Plymouth, LAVIGNE of 
Berwick, MORRIS of Turner, PAUL of Winterport. 
DATE OF HEARING: April 10, Z023 
Good morning Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the lnland Fisheries and 
Wildlife Committee. I am Judy Camuso, Commissioner of the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in opposition to L.D. 1166. 
This bill allows landowners who own land of 5 acres or more to hunt wild animals and wild birds on that 
property on Sundays. The Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife is directed to establish rules to 
implement these provisions.' 
During the first regular session of the 130"‘ Legislature (2021) two bills were introduced to the IFW 
Committee, LDs 1212 and 1033. LD 1212 proposed to allow Sunday hunting in the Northern portion of 
the state while LD 1033 proposed to allow Sunday hunting on private property with written permission 
of the landowner. The topic of Sunday hunting has been a heated social debate for years and in fact 
some type of Sunday hunting bill has been proposed nearly every Legislative session. 
The Department testified in opposition to both bills maintaining concern that some landowners may 
close their property to hunting and other recreational activities if any form of Sunday hunting were 
made legal. While the agency realizes there could be potential for economic growth and additional 
opportunity to hunters, at the same time, we recognize that many landowners prefer to have Sunday as 
a day that they can enjoy their land and allow others an opportunity to recreate. 
The Department is sensitive to the concerns of private landowners. Maine is more than 90% privately 
owned, without the support and generosity of our private landowners, our outdoor recreational 
opportunities and the ability for the Department to manage wildlife populations would be severely 
limited. Our staff, particularly our Landowner Relations Program are committed and focused on the 
needs of landowners, and we are proud of the relationship we have built with many of the landowners 
in Maine. 
Instead of passing the bills as written, the Legislature passed LD 1033 as a Resolve and directed the 
Department to establish a stakeholder group with broad representation in interest and geographics to 
examine Sunday hunting in Maine. The group was also asked to develop and complete a suwey relating 
to Sunday hunting, if the department received adequate outside funding to pay for the survey. It then 
directed the department to report the findings and recommendations of the stakeholder group to this
Committee. The committee was authorized to report out a bill related to Sunday hunting during the 
130"‘ Legislative session. 
The stakeholder group was formed, a neutral person was hired to facilitate the 2 in-person meetings and 
4 ZOOM meetings that were held from early September through December 2021. Members of the 
public were able to listen in and provide comment at the end of the meetings Responsive Management, 
a private research firm was contracted to develop a survey with the stakeholder group. Group members 
provided direct feedback on the issues discussed and helped develop the questions for the survey. 
The survey was conducted by Responsive Management during late December 2021. The following 
statistics were notable outcomes of some of the survey questions: 
The key question in the survey, support for or opposition to allowing Sunday hunting in Maine, was 
asked early in the questionnaire before additional information was provided over the course of the 
survey. 
v About a third of the general population (34%) support Sunday hunting, while a majority (54%) oppose. 
0 Over two thirds of hunters (69%) support, compared to 23% who oppose. 
¢ A third of North/East and Central Region landowners (33% each) support Sunday hunting, while 62% 
and 61%, respectively, oppose. Opposition is very high among South Region landowners, with only 13% 
who support and most (81%) who oppose. 
Landowners were asked, if Sunday hunting were allowed, if they would be more likely to allow 
hunting access, more likely to restrict access, or more likely to allow the same level of access. Of 
particular interest are those who currently allow hunting access but would be more restrictive. 
0 Looking at the landowner sample, 44% of those in the sample who do not currently post their land say 
they would be more likely to restrict access to hunting on their land if Sunday hunting were allowed. 
The Administration does understand that Sunday hunting could provide economic growth and additional 
opportunity to hunters. The Department is sensitive to the concerns of private landowners. With Maine 
being more than 90% privately owned and without the support and generosity of our private 
landowners, our outdoor recreational opportunities would be severely limited as shown by the survey 
results. 
Currently Saturdays are the Maine Warden Service's busiest days regarding calls for service in the fall 
(Sept. 1 — December 15). Cails for sen/ice on Saturdays are on average a minimum of 61% greater than 
the other 5 days of the week. We expect another weekend day of hunting would be more like a Saturday 
and wardens would see significant increase in calls for service. 
After speaking with a few states we can offer the following points: 
instituting Sunday hunting affects migratory bird hunting including waterfowl hunting, which is 
regulated by aframework provided by the US Fish and Wildlife Service. Currently nonhunting Sundays 
in Maine can be compensated for by adding a hunting day at the end of the season, thereby increasing 
the overall length of the season. Migration occurs over a period of time and having an extended season 
allows hunters to access different species and hunting conditions across the state. For this reason, some 
states have limited Sunday hunting to deer hunting. A shortened season would require the Department
to change the waterfowl seasons as they currently exist. This change is not something that can be 
instituted immediately and would likely require a year after passage of a bill to coordinate the changes 
with the USFWS. 
The states we spoke with have not documented an increase in harvest as a result of Sunday hunting. 
Neither have any states documented an overall increase in participation due to Sunday hunting, 
although some new studies are underway to examine this issue. 
Although the department is always looking for ways to support landowners, we stand by the outcome of 
the Sunday hunting survey results presented to this Committee in 2022. This means that we are not 
supportive of allowing Sunday hunting in any fashion at the risk of losing opportunity to recreate on 
private land.
