It is my understanding that a concept being touted against allowing Sunday hunting in the state 
of Maine is the idea that Maine is somehow unique in it’s acknowledgment of a shared land 
ethic that allows public access to unposted, or “open” private lands. This public access to 
private lands provides an invaluable means to further hunting opportunities , and through that to 
facilitate sound wildlife management policies. I was approached about this topic, and I 
appreciate the opportunity to address you.   
 
As of 2020, twenty -three states had established that citizens had a right to hunt and fish while 
only twenty -two states have a prohibition on access that requires permission on all lands 
whether posted or not:  
https://www.findlaw.com/realestate/land -use-laws/select -state -laws-on-hunting -and-
trespassing.html  
 
As you can see, Maine is not so unique as some may believe. While the content of those 
provisions varies across jurisdictions, the constitutional language in Vermont stands out. Our 
state constitution, written in 1777, states that “The inhabitants of this state shall have liberty in 
seasonable times, to hunt and foul on the land the y hold and all other lands not inclosed, and in 
like manner to fish in all boatable and other waters (not private property) under proper 
regulations to be made and provided by the general assembly.” ( § 67) 
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/constitution -of-the-state -of-vermont/  
 
Vermonters have always enjoyed a constitutionally protected right to hunt, and I have been 
unable to find any documentation that hunting on Sunday was ever prohibited here. Prohibitions 
against Sunday hunting are largely rooted in colonialism and the desire of early Puritans to 
compel attendance at church. In most states, these blue laws have fallen away. Maine is one of 
only eleven states that restrict hunting on Sundays, and is in fact nearly unique in prohibiting it 
entirely; sharing that distinction with Massachus etts alone.   
https://safariclub.org/sunday -hunting -restrictions/  
 
Conflicts do not occur in Vermont as a result of the fact that hunting is allowed on Sunday. For 
that matter, contrary to the incessant outcry from anti -hunting activists, conflicts in general are 
minimal. I suspect that you have the same voices beating a drum that proclaims there is some 
inherent conflict between hunting and other outdoor activities, but that is simply false. As of 
2021, New Hampshire had recorded only two hunting -related injuries to non -hunters in 35 
years. Over the previous decade, annual hunting -related injuries in New Hampshire averaged 
2.9 per year, 55% of these were self -inflicted, and many of them were related to falling from tree 
stands.   
https://forestsociety.org/forest -journal -column/its -hunting -season  
 
There is room for all upon our shared land scape, and I would submit that laws prohibiting 
citizens who hunt from enjoying their lifestyles on a Sunday are discriminatory at their very root, 
and bear no more attention than that it will take to repeal them. Hunting is not somehow inferior 
to other a vocational uses of the landscape, and such prohibitions become even more 
inappropriate when they impact public lands or prohibit citizens from hunting their own lands.   
 
Finally, and I realize this is anecdotal, despite having taken a very nice buck in 201 2 (the one 
year I hunted Maine), I have not returned, as when I choose to travel, I can hunt New York or 
New Hampshire and enjoy a full weekend there for my efforts. Maine is well known , including by 
my constitu ency , for its ability to produce impressive examples of the most popular gam e animal 
in America  -the white -tailed deer. Revenue from hunting tends to find its way into rural 
communities that are often more economically depressed than urban areas. With deer hunters 
alone spending billions of dollars annually on their passion, how m uch potential economic 
revenue is Maine missing out on due to this outdated restriction?   
https://www.fishwildlife.org/applica tion/files/3815/3719/7536/Southwick_Assoc_ -
_NSSF_Hunting_Econ.pdf  
 
Best Regards,  
 
Mike  
  
Mike Covey  
Executive Director   
Vermont Traditions Coalition  
(802) 461 -3786  
 
