Pamela Vose
Union
LD 1166
April 10, 2023
TO: Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
My name is Pamela Vose and I am a resident and landowner in the town of Union.  
I am submitting testimony against LD 1166 An Act to Allow Sunday Hunting by 
Landowners on Their Land 
I would like to start out by saying that I am not anti-hunting and appreciate the 
traditions of hunting passed on by generations in my family. One of these traditions is
NO SUNDAY HUNTING.  
I speak as a citizen and landowner who appreciates, uses and has a need to be in the 
woods during deer hunting season and finds the ever-expanding firearms season to be 
a concern.  There are many of us who have other reasons to be out in our beautiful 
Maine woods during the fall and cannot do so safely during deer hunting season.  We 
are as important as hunters and deserve consideration.
 
This is yet another attempt to sneak in Sunday hunting, this time in the guise of a 
landowner rights bill.   What about the rights of landowners who own adjacent 
properties who will be denied the right to safely enjoy or work on their property the 
one day a week that is now and always has been off limits to hunting?  Bullets do not 
stop at property lines.  
For those of you unable to “read the room” and who would appreciate a word to the 
wise. let me offer my two cents.   The majority of landowners and citizens of the state
of Maine are getting very tired of these repeated attempts to sneak Sunday hunting 
into the law.  Hunters have six days a week to hunt during one of the best times of the 
year to recreate or work in the woods.  The rest of us have but one day, and once 
again, a loud, well-funded minority is looking to take this one day away from us.   
Should this ever occur, posted property and hunting by written permission only is just 
around the corner.
   
I strongly encourage you to vote Ought Not to Pass on this bill. 
Pamela Vose
Union, Maine

