TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN OPPOSITION TO  L.D. 626, L. D. 1166  & L.D. 1 241 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  
April 10, 202 3 
 
 
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry,  and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony regarding :  
 
-- LD 626, An Act to Preserve Maine's Sporting Heritage and Enhance Sporting Opportunities for Maine's Youth by Allowing 
Maine's Youth to Hunt on Sunday  
-- LD 1166, An Act to Allow Sunday Hunting by Landowners on Their Land  
-- LD 1 241, An Act to Allow Sunday Hunting with a Bow and Arrow or Crossbow  
 
Honestly, I cannot un derstand why we have to re -visit Sunday hunting every legislative session .  These on -going attempts  
to legaliz e Sunday hunting  are short -sighted, as they threaten the  privileged  access  to private land that all Maine citizens , 
including  hunter s, currently enjo y. Six days a week is more than enough opportunity for th e 10% of Maine residents who 
hunt to participate  in this  activity .  The 90% of Maine taxpayers who do not hunt  deserve to keep their one weekend day of 
peace.    
 
Residents who voluntarily open their land up to hunters are not the only  citizens impacted by  hunting activities  on the land in 
question .  Citizens who live on bordering land or in the general vicinity of land open to hunting, are subject to  many 
challenges - gunshot noise s, stray bullets  or arrows , exposure to injured wildlife , safety concerns for pets  and livestock , and 
the trespass of unaccompanied hunting dogs  on private property .   
 
Due to Maine’s open season on coyotes, some  residents are subjected to hunting disturbance six days a week all year long 
with Sunday being their only day of ceasefire .  Six days a week of this type of intrusion is more than sufficient . 
 
If the committee is  going to consider passing Sunday hunting in any form , then  to balance the scales of fairness to 
landowners,  it should also repeal Maine’s implied right -to-access  policy and make it  necessary to obtain landowner  
permission to hunt on private  property  100% of the time .  Hopefully, it does not come to that, and th is committee does  
the right thing by continuing its tradition of maintaining hunting -free Sundays in our state.   
 
We all deserve one day a week of respite .  Especially the animals.   Please vote “ought not to pass” on L.D. 626, L.D. 1166 
& L.D. 1241 . 
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
  
Susanna Richer  
Portland, ME  
