. 9?» 
aq5 
" ' 
-*5 ~.> <» ;&. 
Y 
3, 
ta as 
Eric L. Bral<ey 13 ls‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 561, “An Act to Require a Military 
Service Member’s Agent with Power of Attorney to Be Legally 
Responsible for Paying Bills During the Member's Deployment" 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
February 27, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs: I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New 
Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Thank you for your presence today as I present L.D. 561, An 
Act to Require a Military Service Member’s Agent with Power of Attorney to Be Legally 
Responsible for Paying Bills During the Members Deployment. 
This bill originates with the request of an Auburn constituent who I spoke with last year while 
knocking on his door. As he tells me, when he joined the armed services as a yotmg man, he was 
required to sign over power of attorney to another person to receive his paychecks and pay his 
bills during deployment. He signed that power over to his now ex-wife, only to discover when he 
came home that she spent every dollar he earned and never paid a single bill. As such, after 
risking his life for his country, this veteran has nothing to show for it except a mountain of debt. 
After hearing from him, I spoke with retired Sergeant Aaron Rollins of the Madison VFW for 
additional perspective. He told me this is a story all too common, which has contributed to the 
epidemic of veteran suicides. 
From these conversations, we have developed two policy proposals, both contained within this 
legislation: 
1. Establish in state statute that an individual with power of attorney for a deployed service 
member is legally obligated to pay their bills during the time of deployment. 
2.I 
Require the Maine National Guard to hold insurance to make whole service members 
who fall victim to fraud of this type. 
At a minimum, there should be civil — if not criminal —~ penalties for defrauding our service 
members in this fashion.'
Further, if our service members are mandated or pressured into these power of attorney 
arrangements by any branch of the military, those branches should take ﬁnancial responsibility to 
ensure defrauded service members are made whole. I hate to single out the Maine National 
Guard, as they are only one of many branches of our armed services, but they are the only branch 
this legislature has direct authority over. If we want to ensure our service members are protected 
against power of attomey fraud, we should begin there and set a good example that can be 
emulated among the various federal branches of our military. 
I will note that, since submitting this legislation, I have been contacted by a representative of the 
Maine National Guard who tells me that power of attorney contracts are not currently required 
and actively discouraged. If this is true today, I am glad to hear it. That said, I have heard too 
many veteran stories to recommend dropping this aspect of the legislation without additional 
assurances and clariﬁcation. 
I anticipate that someone from the Maine National Guard will be here today to testify. I hope the 
committee will ask the following questions. If power of attorney contracts are no longer required, 
were they required in the past? If so, when did that change and why? Are fonns for power of 
attorney still presented to newly registering service members? If so, what measures are in place 
to ensure those service members know this is optional ‘? Finally, if signing over power of attomey 
is actively discouraged today, as I have been told, how is it actively discouraged? 
Thank you for your time and attention to this legislation. I know that no one here wants to see 
our service members fall victim to power of attomey fraud, and I hope we can take steps to 
ensure this no longer happens.
