STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
4- .‘;* HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE ' 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
Office‘ (“'07) “$7-I440 sT\TE REPRESENTATIVE * ' ‘" 
C ll: 30' 460-6967 
BILLY BOB FAULKINGI-IAM - 
Fix,( 
(10?) 337_]449 
HOL RE REPUBLICAN LEADER ‘E-Mail: \\'iIliaii1.Fz|i1|kingI1an1(Qlegisluule mama: 
April 4, 2023' 
Testimony in Support of LD 1093 
“An Act to Create a Seasonal Gas Tax Exemption and Rate” 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of Joint Standing Committee on 
Transportation. _I am Representative Billy Bob Faulkingham and I am here to present my bill LD 
1093, ,“An Act to Create a Seasonal Gas Tax Exemption and Rate”. 
Mainers are facing an historic level of inﬂation that is causing the price of goods and services to 
increase at a signiﬁcant rate. In addition to inﬂation, the cost of electricity has had multiple 
increases over last couple of years. This is extremely concerning to me and I am not sure how- 
much longer Mainers on ﬁxed incomes are going to be able to weather the storm. 
My bill removes the imposition of the excise tax on internal combustion engine fuel, except for 
fuel bought or used for the purposes of propelling jet or turboj et-engine aircraft, from 
Thanksgiving Day until the following May lst, armually. The thought behind this is to give 
Mainers a break during the winter months when they are struggling to pay higher electric bills, 
oil bills, and heating their homes.’ 
Not everyone is fortunate to have the means to afford all of these dramatic increases in electricity 
and inﬂation, but we can ﬁnd ways to offset them, so our constituents are not choosing whether 
to heat their homes or pay for groceries. I know that this seems anecdotal to many of you on the 
committee, but people are really struggling. I want to fnd ways to make living in Maine easier 
for everyone. I don’t want to see people forced out of their homes because of all of these 
economic increases. 
This bill might not be a savior for everyone, -but I want to do everything I can to keep money in 
my constituents ’ pockets to help them get through the tough winter months here in Maine. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have.' 
Respectfully, 
Representative Billy Bob Faulkingham
