n TESTIMONY or 
DANIEL D’ALESSANDRO, ASSOCIATE TAX POLICY COUNSEL 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Hearing Date: April 4th, 2023 at 1:00 PM 
LD 1093 — “An Act to Create "a Seasonal Gas Tax Exemption and Rate” 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the 
Transportation Committee — good afternoon, my name is Daniel D’Alessandro,' 
Associate Tax Policy Counsel in the Department of Administrative and Financial 
Services. I am here today at the request of the Administration to testify Against 
LD 1093, “An Act to Create a Seasonal Gas‘ Tax Exemption and Rate.”
t 
This is a complicated proposal to shift the burden of the motor fuel excise 
taxes to tourists that will exacerbate the increase in fuel prices thatcommonly1 
occur over the summer months. Most tourists drive to Maine from otherS 
Northeastern States which would allow them to fuel up in lower cost states to 
avoid an increase in the relative price of Maine motor fuels. 
This bill would raise the excise tax on internal combustion engine fuel — or 
“gasoline ” — to 40¢ per gallon. The proposal would then annually suspend the 
imposition of the excise tax from Thanksgiving until May lst. The bill would 
neither raise nor suspend the rate of excise tax imposed on gasoline used to propel 
jet or turboj et engine aircraft; the tax rate of 3.4¢ would continue to be imposed on 
those gallons year-round. 
The Committee should note that while the gasoline taxes are separately 
~. 
enumerated from the taxes imposed on distillates, or diesel fuels, within the Maine 
Revised Statutes, L.D. 1093 would still impact those fuel taxes signiﬁcantly. The 
1 '1
\
lz 
excise tax rates imposed on certain low-energy fuels, including propane and 
natural gas, are based upon the rate imposed on gasoline. Consequently, increasing 
the gasoline tax rate to 40¢ per gallon would result in a similar increase to the rate 
imposed on those other low-energy fuel products. As the suspension is speciﬁc to 
taxes imposed on gasoline, the impacted low-energy fuel products would not 
beneﬁt from a similar period of suspension. 
The statute requires an inventory tax to be imposed or refunded when the tax 
rate changes. The inventory tax would be due from gasoline distributors, 
wholesalers, importers and retail dealers upon the ﬁrst ofﬁcial increase to 40¢ per 
gallon, but the bill should be clariﬁed as to whether the suspension period begin 
and end dates would also trigger inventory tax requirements. 
The tax suspension would also complicate the fuel refund programs, 
including the Off-highway, Political Subdivision, and Retail Dealers’ Gasoline 
Shrinkage (or “RDGS”) programs. The RDGS refund program, for example, 
statutorily requires that applications “be made semiannually within 90 days after 
June 30th and December 31st respectively. ” The Committee should consider 
aligning these refund provisions to the proposed dates of suspension. 
The State has monthly federal reporting requirements regarding the volume 
of gasoline and distillate fuels sold or distributed in the State. In order to continue 
to meet those reporting requirements, gasoline distributors would still be expected 
to ﬁle their Gasoline Distributor tax returns and schedules during the suspension 
period; gasoline gallons would be reported as untaxed. MRS strongly recommends 
changing the start date of the suspension period from “Thanksgiving ” to the ﬁrst 
date of a calendar month. Additionally, the bill requires an effective or application 
date for the ﬁrst increase to 40¢ per gallon. -’
2
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
billgrepresentatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
