 
 
 421 Aviation Way  
Frederick, MD 21701  
 
T. 202-737-7950  
F. 202 -273-7951  
 
www.aopa.org  
 
 
 
 
 
3 April  2023 
 
Joint Committee  on Transportation  
C/O Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
TRANSMITTED BY ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION  
Email : TRA@legislature.maine.gov    
 
Re: LD 1093 – An Act to Create a Seasonal Gas Tax Exemption and Rate . 
 
Chai rs Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Joint Committee on 
Transportation,  
 
My name is Sean Collins and I am the Eastern Regional Manager for the Aircraft Owners & 
Pilots Association  (AOPA) , a certificated commercial pilot and resident of Brewer, Maine .  We 
are the world’s largest aviation memb ership organization representing the general aviation 
interests of hundreds of thousands of aircraft owners and pilots across the country, including 
1,500  from the state of Maine .  On behalf of these members , AOPA opposes LD 1093, an act to 
create a seasonal gas tax exemption and rate, however, we would withdraw our opposition 
with an amendment to exclude all aviation fuel s, (both jet and aviation gasoline) , from 
changes to the motor fuels tax.          
 
Maine’s system of airports includes 69 public -use airports, only 25 of which a re eligible for 
funding from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).   The industry generates approximately 
$950,000 annually from taxes on aviation fuel  which supports 3 full-time aviation staff positions , 
(a Director, an Engineer, and a Planner) , the management contract for the Augusta State Airport 
(AUG), and insurance for the two state -owned airfields.  Nearly 60% of all aviation  fuel tax 
revenues ( $550,000 ) are earmarked for the management  contract with the  city of Augusta , which 
the majority of aircraft owners and pilots across Maine do not  regularly  use.    
 
LD 1093 is focused on highway revenue and seeks to give Mainers a break on fuel taxes during 
our coldest mont hs, and then increase the tax by 30% of the current rate  to 40 cents  per gallon , so 
as to coincide w ith tourist season from May through November .  The nature of living in the 
northeast is that Maine pilots tend to do most of their flying during the tourist  months as well .  
This means for most pilots, the ‘seasonal  benefit ’ is lost to them rendering the proposal perceived 
the same as any other rate hike .  Therefore, AOPA respectfully requests an amendment to delink 
aviation gasoline from the  defin ition of motor fuels for purposes of taxation.  Otherwise, AOPA 
must oppose all legislation seeking  to increase the tax on aviation fuels until such time as a true 
state aviation capital infrastructure program is established to better utilize aviation  fuel ta x 
revenues.   
  
 
 
Joint Committee on Transportation  
3 April 2023 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
A I R C R A F T   O W N E R S   A N D   P I L O T S   A S S O C I A T I O N  Thank you for your time and consideration of this important matter.  A OPA is committed to 
ensuring the safety, future viability, and development of general aviation as an integral part of a 
national transportation system.   We welcome any opportunity to serve this Committee and the 
Legislature as a resource on all matters im pacting general aviation.   
 
I can be reached for questions by calling (301)695 -2090 or by email at  sean.collins@aopa.org . 
 
 
Sincerely,   
 
Sean M. Collins, AOPA  
Eastern Region al Manager  
 
 

