 
 
John Massey, CPA 
 RE: LD No. 1063 -“An Act to Provide Equita ble Tax Treatment to State-licensed Cannabis 
Businesses”  March 30, 2023 
 
My name is John Massey, I am a tax manager at  One River CPA’s wher e I specialize in the 
cannabis industry, specifically taxation. Our firm has numerous clients in the medical and adult use cannabis sector. I am testifying today on behalf  of my adult use client’s best interests. 
 
I remember the first tax season following the start of the adult use program, looking up the 
subtraction modification rules and being surprised and disappointed that the adjustment was only 
available for medical entities. I assumed at the time that it was not legislative intent to preclude 
adult use entities from taking the same subtraction, but  that the law had been written prior to the 
existence of the adult use program. I thought the la nguage would be amended to include the entire 
industry over time. 
 Even with all my experience, I am unable to r eason why adult use companies are being penalized 
from a tax stand point, while medical compani es (who are often times selling quite literally the 
same product), benefit from the modification. I find it contradictory of the State to allow legalization of cannabis only to turn around an d penalize operators. Expenses are not allowed on 
federal returns because cannabis businesses are traffi cking a federally illegal substance – if what 
they are trafficking is fully legalized, licensed  & regulated in Maine however, why then can’t 
businesses deduct their ordinary and necessary expenses?  Cannabis companies already operate in a hyper scrutinized environment because of federal 
regulations. The excessive nature of 280E makes maintaining operational cash flow very difficult. 
In preparation for this testimony; I reviewed a current client’s return. This was an (adult use 
retailers) tax return that show ed book income of $225k, a 280E adjustment of $1.1 million and 
taxable income of $1.6 million. That company pa id $125k in Maine income taxes on $225k of 
book income – a 56% effective tax rate in the st ate. That same company paid $340k in federal 
taxes, which is 150% of book income. The owners  paid themselves $20k out of the business that 
year because of the need to reserve any and all free cash for tax payments. 
 Cannabis companies do not get enough credit for th e ancillary business they create. The cannabis 
industry has been economically beneficial for the st ate of Maine, and it behooves the State to help 
this industries. Included in the 280E adjustment  I mentioned earlier, is $530k in wages for over 
20 employees. Meaning that my client created 20+ jobs in the state, but is not allowed a tax 
deduction for the cost of those jobs.    Additionally, Cannabis companies spending in the local community is enormous. They pay contractors, security companies, lawyers, accountants, supply & equipment stores, etc. – and 
often times are not allowed a state deduction for th e money they spent here to run their business. 
 The industry is currently facing rising costs of  operating while simultaneously experiencing a 
shift downward in what they can retail their product for. As a CPA who specializes in the 
industry, I can see first-hand the financial bur den 280E places on Maine businesses. If the intent 
of the legislature is to maintain a prosperous and financially sustainable industry then it is my 
belief that needs to decouple from federal regul ations in regards to 280E and allow its local 
business to deduct their expenses.   
 
   
