TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: March 30, 2023 
LD 1063 — “An Act to Provide Equitable Tax Treatment to State-licensed Cannabis 
Businesses ” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Daniel D’Alessandro, Associate Tax 
Policy Counsel in the Maine Revenue Services, Ofﬁce of Tax Policy. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Not For Not Against LD I 063, “An 
Act to Provide Equitable Tax Treatment to State-licensed Cannabis Businesses. ” 
For taxable years beginning on or after January l, 2023, this bill proposes to 
extend the Maine cannabis business expense deduction to cannabis manufacturing 
facilities, cannabis establishments and cannabis testing facilities. The deduction 
would be allowed in proportion to those cannabis business expense deductions 
disallowed on the taxpayer ’ s federal income tax return under Internal Revenue Code 
(IRC) section 280E. The bill applies to individual, ﬁduciary, and corporate income 
taxes. 
IRC section 280E disallows federal deductions and credits related to the 
illegal sale of drugs. However, based on case law, certain drug-related business 
expenses used in calculating the cost of goods sold are federally deductible. 
Maine’s current law is based on the federal prohibition of cannabis sales. 
Since Maine legalized the sale of cannabis products and allows business expense
1
deductions for medical cannabis caregivers and registered dispensaries, providing 
equal treatment to adult use cannabis businesses would be a reasonable tax policy. 
The Administration also notes the following technical concems: 
0 For clariﬁcation, since registered caregivers and registered dispensaries 
are included in both existing law and the proposed provisions, the 
existing law in Sections 1 and 2 of the bill should be sunset so as to apply 
to taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2018 and before January 
1, 2023. 
0 It appears unnecessary to separately reference “testing facility ” (lines ll 
and 24 of the bill) as that term is included in the deﬁnition for “cannabis 
establishment ” in 28-B M.R.S. § l02(29). 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is a revenue loss of $1 million per 
year starting in ﬁscal year 2024. However, this estimate will change as the 
cannabis sector continues to mature. 
The estimated administrative costs are $188,839 for ﬁscal year 2024 and 
$249,000 for ﬁscal year 2025. Because these expenses are not audited by the IRS, 
two new Senior Tax Examiner positions would be required, beginning October 1, 
2023, to audit a portion of the affected returns to verify eligibility for, and the 
amount of, the deductions claimed. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
2
