Wabanaki Alliance Testimony ln Support of LD 229: An Act to Compensate Tribal Governments for 
Basic Training for a Law Enforcement Ofﬁcer Hired by Another Government Agency Sponsored by 
Representative Jim Dill 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Honorable Members of the Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety my name is Representative Aaron Dana from the Passamaquoddy Nation and 
member of the Wabanaki Alliance Board of Directors. I am here today to speak in favor of LD 229 and am 
thankful for the opportunity to advocate for this important change for our tribal public safety 
departments. This bill was requested by the Penobscot Nation and our board has decided to fully 
support it as it affects all the tribal communities and the safety of our citizens. 
LD 229 would ﬁx an issue that has caused hardships and disruptions in the operations of our police 
departments. We have a duty to our tribal citizens and others residing in our nations to keep our people 
safe. One piece of this puzzle is to have adequately staffed and trained public safety departments. As you 
will hear and read from other testimony in more detail, there is a troubling pattern of officers being hired 
in our police forces and receiving their training that we pay for then leaving for positions at other 
departments for higher pay or better beneﬁts. This leaves us in situations where we are severely lacking 
in coverage and properly prepared ofﬁcers; the consequences of which can be extremely negative when 
you also ﬁgure in the ongoing issues we are always facing like the opioid epidemic, domestic and family 
violence, and maintaining our status and jurisdiction as sovereign tribal governments. 
I urge you to vote ought to pass and am happy to take any questions. Thank you for taking the time to 
hear from tribal nations as to how to better protect our communities and thank you Representative Dill 
for your leadership on this. While the tribal state relations have been strained in many ways, it is good to 
ﬁnd ways to come together and work towards solutions for the good of all of Maine, our sacred 
homeland. 
Thank you.
