     
 
                        
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
 
May 17, 2023  
  
Submitted Electronically  
   Senator Joseph Rafferty , Chair  
Representative Michael Brennan , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural  Affairs  
c/o Legislative Information  Office  
100 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333  
  
Re:  Neither For Nor Against -  LD 98, An Act to Update the Special Education Laws  
 Dear Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and members of the  Joint Standing Committee 
On Education and Cultural Affairs : 
 My name is Ben Jones  and I am a Managing Attorney at Disability Rights Maine, Maine’s  
protection and advocacy agency for individuals with disabilities.   Thank you for the opportunity 
to offer testimony neither for nor against  LD 98, An Act to Update the Special Education Laws.  
The following organizations have signed onto this testimony: the Autism Society of Maine, the 
Center for Community Inclusion and Disability Studies, Disability Rights Maine, the Maine Developmental Disabilities Council, and the Maine Parent Federation.   
 While we support most of the language in LD 98, we are providing this testimony  to suggest that 
the Committee take another look at Sections 2 and 3 of the B ill.  Some brief background might 
be helpful prior to discussing two potential concerns with LD 98.  On January 21, 2021, Maine DOE issued Administrative Letter 1 which is attached to this testimony
1, and which concluded 
that: 
                                                           
1 It is also available here : https://mainedoenews.net/2021/01/21/administrative -letter -change -in-the-ending -age-for-
special -education -eligibility -effective -immediately/  . 
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs  
May 17, 2023  
Page 2  
 
 
In 2018, the Court of Appeals for the First Circuit held that students are entitled to FAPE until age 22 (the so- called “federal standard”) where the state provides  
public education in the form of adult education to students who are under age 22 but older than the state “age out” for pK -12 education.  K.L. v. Rhode Island 
Board of Education, 907 F.3d 639 (2018).  The First Circuit concluded that for purposes of the IDEA, “public education” contains three basic attributes: (1) “a significant level of state or local government fun ding, (2) the public 
administration or oversight of the educational services” and (3) the education of students “up to the level of academic proficiency associated with the completion of secondary school.”  Id. at 642, 644. 
 Maine’s adult education system me ets the First Circuit’s definition of “public 
education” as it receives significant state and local government funding, is administered by the Department of Education and local public entities (primarily school administrative units either alone or in colla boration), and provides 
coursework that allows students to complete and receive their high school diplomas.  As such, there is little question that the same result would be reached by the First Circuit if Maine’s statutes were challenged.  
 After consulting with counsel, the Department has concluded that terminating 
eligibility to a free, appropriate public education at the end of the school year in which a student turns 20 pursuant to 20- A M.R.S. § 5201(1) years is inconsistent 
with the IDEA as interpreted b y the First Circuit in  K.L. v. Rhode Island Board of 
Education, 907 F.3d 639 (2018).  
 
In our view, this was the correct decision.  And in any event, this is the law unless and until either the First Circuit reverses itself or the Supreme Court holds otherw ise.  As a result, we 
believe the following statement is accurate, whether or not LD 98 passes as written, gets amended, or fails: In Maine, a student with a disability (as defined by the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act) who is eligible to rece ive special education services, is entitled to a 
free and appropriate public education (FAPE)
2 until one of two things happens: 1) they receive a   
  
                                                           
2 The definition of a FAPE was most recently determined by the Supreme Court in Endrew F. v. Douglas County 
Sch. Dist. RE -1, 137 S. Ct. 988, 1000 (2017). There are many good resources to aid in understanding this decision, 
including the following:  
1. Endrew Decision Creates Important New Opportunities for Students with Disabilities , Bazelon Center for 
Mental Health Law (2017), available at: 
https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.copaa.org/resource/resmgr/docs/accessible_2017/Endrew_paper_LH__9- 8-
17-1.pdf  
2. Questions and Answers  (Q&A) on U. S. Supreme Court Case Decision Endrew F. v. Douglas County 
School District Re -1, United States Department of Education (2017), available at: 
https://sites.ed.gov/idea /files/qa -endrewcase -12-07-2017.pdf   
 
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs  
May 17, 2023  
Page 3  
 
 “regular high school diploma” that is “fully aligned with State standards”
3; or 2) they turn 22 
years old, at which time they have aged out of IDEA services.  
 We are writing briefly to address the provisions of LD 98 that appear designed to update Maine statutes that implement the Individuals with Disabilities Act to reflect this changed interpretation 
of the law.  Section 1 and Section 4 of LD 98 both make a si mple change to the age, from 20 to 
22.  But Section 3 of the bill takes a different approach and is likely to create confusion 
regarding requirements under federal law.  
 
We suggest that the Committee amend the bill to strike the following proposed language  in 
Section 3 : “by means of appropriate educational programming, including transitional programs. 
Educational programming may be full- time or part- time and must be equitable to that provided to 
typically developing same age peers. Transitional programs inc lude the delivery of special 
education services by qualified individuals.”  There is no need to do anything more than was done in Sections 1 and 4 – change the number from 20 to 22. 
 We are concerned that this language (“must be equitable to that provided typically developing same age peers”) is already being interpreted by schools to mean that the requirement to provide a free and appropriate public education is somehow lessened for students aged 19, 20 and 21.  Families have reported that, in the time sin ce this bill was proposed, schools are taking the 
position that they are only required to provide the amount of service that is provided to students without disabilities through adult basic education classes and so they are proposing removing students from  full time special education programs and instead offering just a couple hours of 
educational experiences per week.  
 But there is only one standard for a free and appropriate public education (FAPE).
4  And LD 98 
cannot and will not change that5 since it is  federally defined.  The nature of the right to a FAPE 
does not change arbitrarily based on the age of the student.  In addition, the proposed language in  
                                                           
3 See: 34 C.F.R. 300.102 (“the term regular high school diploma means the standard high school diploma awarded to 
the preponderance of students in the State that is fully aligned with State standards, or a higher diploma, except that 
a regular high school d iploma shall not be aligned to the alternate academic achievement standards described in 
section 1111(b)(1)(E) of the ESEA. A regular high school diploma does not include a recognized equivalent of a 
diploma, such as a general equivalency diploma, certificate of completion, certificate of attendance, or similar lesser credential.”)  
 
4 See Footnote 2 for more information about the FAPE standard under the IDEA.  In addition, the IDEA statutory 
definition of a FAPE can be found at 20 U.S.C. 1401(9)(“ The term “free appropriate public education” means 
special education and related services that —(A) have been provided at public expense, under public supervision and 
direction, and without charge; (B) meet the standards of the State educational agency; (C) include an appropriate 
preschool, elementary school, or secondary school education in the State involved; and (D) are provided in 
conformity with the individualized education program required under section 1414(d) of this title.”)  
 
5 Unless of course Maine wanted to raise the standard for a FAPE –  Maine can exceed the federal floor but not dip 
below it.  
 
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs  
May 17, 2023  
Page 4  
 
 Section 3 is inserted into language taken directly from federal law that outlines the requirement and legal presumption that children with disabilities receive their education “to the maximum 
extent appropriate” in integrated settings.
6  This is a core federal requirement.  And by inserting  
state language that is vague and undefined7 into a core requirement of the IDEA, there is a very 
real risk that any resulting confusion will result in compliance issues at the local level.  The 
Committee should consider simplifying LD 98 by removing this proposed language.  
 
Finally, Section 2 of the bill changes longstanding language addressing the requirement to 
provide equal educational opportunities to children with disabilities, instead proposing to use the phrase “for an appropriate education” throughout.  It is not clear why this change is being 
proposed and little to no attention was paid to it in written testimony, but the use of the word ‘appropriate ’ might cause some confusion regarding the understanding of what constitutes a 
“free  and appropriate public education” which, as discussed above, is a term of art under federal 
law.  We suggest that Section 2 of LD 98 be deleted. 
 We will be at the work session and would be happy to discuss this further if that would be helpful.   Sincerely , 
 Cathy Di onne, Executive Director, Autism Society of Maine  
Alan Cobo- Lewis, Director, Center for Community Inclusion and Disability Studies , University 
of Maine  
Ben Jones, Managing Attor ney, Disability Rights Maine  
Nancy Cronin, Executive Director , Maine Developmental Disabilities Council 
Carrie Woodcock , Executive Director , Maine Parent Federation  
                                                           
6 See: 20 U.S.C. 1412(a)(5)(A)(“ To the maximum extent appropriate, children with disabilities, including children 
in public or private institutions or other care facilities, are educated with children who are not disabled, and special 
classes, separate schooling, or other removal of children with disabilities from the regular educational environment occurs only when the nature or severity of the disability of a chi ld is such that education in regular classes with the 
use of supplementary aids and services cannot be achieved satisfactorily.”  
7 The inserted language (“by means of appropriate educational programming, including transitional programs. 
Educational program ming may be full -time or part -time and must be equitable to that provided to typically 
developing same age peers. Transitional programs include the delivery of special education services by qualified individuals.”) raises many questions, including: what do es appropriate educational programming mean? Is this 
equivalent to a free and appropriate public education?  What are transitional programs?  Where are they defined? 
What is the definition of a full -time program –  40 hours/week? 30 hours?  What is the defi nition of a part time 
program? And do schools get full per pupil funding for students in part time programs? If so, do they get full 
funding for a student in a part time program of 2hrs per week? What does it mean for programming to be equitable 
to same ag e peers without disabilities? Why is this placed in the middle of language related to the least restrictive 
environment? Does it change those requirements? Etc.  
ADMINISTRATIVE LETTER: Change in the Ending Age for Special ... https://mainedoenews.net/2021/01/21/administrative-letter-change-in-th...
1 of 7 5/17/2023, 4:54 AM
ADMINISTRATIVE LETTER: Change in the Ending Age for Special ... https://mainedoenews.net/2021/01/21/administrative-letter-change-in-th...
2 of 7 5/17/2023, 4:54 AM
ADMINISTRATIVE LETTER: Change in the Ending Age for Special ... https://mainedoenews.net/2021/01/21/administrative-letter-change-in-th...
3 of 7 5/17/2023, 4:54 AM

