MSAD #51
The Schools of Cumberland and North Yarmouth, Maine
Jeffrey Porter,
Superintendent of Schools 
Scott Poulin
, Director of Finance, Human Resources
& Operations 
Julie Olsen, Ed.D,
Director of Instructional Support 
Carla Fancy,
Assistant Director of Instructional Support 
Susie Robbins,
Director of Academic Services 
Dirk Van Curan,
Director of Technology Services
January 30, 2023
To:
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee
From: Carla Fancy , Assistant Director of Instructional Support, MSAD #51
I wanted to share concerns regarding the proposed LD 98: An Act to Update the Special Education
Laws. While I support appropriate IEP  services for students with disabilities as a strong advocate for these
students, I have some concerns with the lack of clarity for who is eligible for extended eligibility until age 22
and the F APE standard. Already , I have witnessed delays by parents and outside case managers in pursuing
adult services which are negatively impacting students. I do support the following:
●
Pupil evaluation to individualized education program team; Hearing impairment, including
deafness to Deafness, including Hearing Loss; and Deaf and Blindness to Deaf-Blindness to
align with current and best practices
●
Equal educational opportunities to equal opportunities for an appropriate education to highlight
appropriate educational programming
●
Addition of “by means of appropriate educational programming, including transitional
programs” to highlight appropriate transitional programming for post-school outcomes
●
Addition of “educational programming may be full- or part-time”. The current language in LD
98 is strong and permits full- or part-time programming. Because programming must be
determined by IEP  teams and set forth in student IEPs, programming for adult students, aged
20-22, can be completely individualized in length and structure.
I have grave concerns about these proposed changes:
●
Lack of clarification of a free appropriate public education (F APE) standard. There is no educational
programming for adult students without disabilities, aged 20-22.
●
Lack of funding for general education programming; LD 98 states educational programming “must be
equitable to that provided to typically developing same age peers” and “must be educated with
children without disabilities” however there is no funding for general education programming for
students who fall within the extended eligibility age span nor are there clearly defined educational
opportunities for adults aged 20-22 without disabilities
●
Lack of funding through MaineCare for adult students falling within the extended eligibility age range
as the Maine DOE may not continue to fund this.
E n g a g e
•
E m p o w e r
•
I n s p i r e
www.msad51.org 
∘
 357 Tuttle Road, PO Box 6A, Cumberland, ME 04021 
∘
 Phone 207.829.4800 
∘
 Fax 207.829.4802

●
Perception of eligible adult students for extended eligibility to age 22. The conversations I have had
with the DOE assumes a very small number of students would be eligible but the proposed language
is written to extend eligibility for any student with a disability who has not yet earned a high school
diploma. LD 98 is broader than assumed, and the costs have been underestimated.
●
I have grave concerns about deferring adult services. There is no mention of DHHS continuing to
provide services for students with disabilities aged 20-22. Already , case managers are advising
families that their child can stay in school until age 22 and therefore, should delay seeking adult
services. This delay is not in the best interest of the student who is ready to move onto post-secondary
options prior to age 22.
Please consider these concerns for LD 98. Those of us who have devoted our careers to educating students with
disabilities work tirelessly to ensure that students get the required services and support needed. We need clarity
to do the good work that we do daily and program appropriately for student post secondary transitions.
Respectfully submitted,
Carla Fancy

