 
 
Senator Rafferty  
Representative Brennan  
Members of the Educational and Cultural Affairs Committee  
 
RE: LD 98 An Act to Update the Special Education Laws   
 
My name is Carrie Woodcock I am the parent of two children with different abilities (disabilities) and 
the Executive Director for Maine Parent Federation (MPF). As a point of clarification, I am personally 
and intentionally using the term different abilities as opposed to disabilities to acknowledge that every 
individual has different abilities. MPF is the federally funded Parent Training and Information Center 
(PTI), Family to Family Health Information Center (F2FHIC) and Statewide Family Network. We assist 
families of children with different abilities to navigate all systems of care including schooling. I am 
submitting this testimony in support of LD 98 An Act to Update the Special Education Laws, specifically 
the extension of a Free and Appropriate Education for those with different abilities to the age of 22.  
 
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is the federal law providing special education 
to individuals ages 3 through 21. L.D. 98 proposes to extend the Maine Unified Special Education 
Regulations (MUSER) from the age of 20 to the age of 22, bringing Maine into alignment with the IDEA.  
Additionally, it would bring Maine into compliance with a recent 2nd circuit ruling A.R. versus CT State 
Board of Education ( No. 20-2255, 2021 WL 2833031 July, 2021) and 1st circuit decision K.L versus 
RI Council on Elementary and Secondary Education (907 F.3d 639, 652-653 (2018)) .  In both these 
rulings the court upheld that denying a public education until the age of 22 to students with different 
abilities while providing adult education to individuals without different abilities in the same age range 
a violation of the IDEA. In response to these rulings, because Maine falls into the same category of 
providing adult education, and to avoid litigation of their own the Maine Department of Education issued 
an immediate letter of action instructing all schools to extend a Free and Appropriate Public Education 
to students with different abilities to the age of 22.  
 
L.D. 98 does not delay eligibility for services under Maine’s adult waiver programming through the 
Office of Aging and Disability Services (OADS). Individuals can still apply for eligibility at the age of 
17.5. If determined eligible they can participate in Adult Case Management and be placed on the waitlist 
for services while still participating in their public education. If their number on the waitlists comes up 
prior to completing their public education they will be able to take advantage of some of the waiver 
services while still enrolled in public education. It is true that some services may require a decision to 
terminate their public education in order to participate. That is a personal decision made by the individual 
and their supports.  
 
MPF believes that every student regardless of ability deserves the same right to a Free and Appropriate 
Public Education. The access to public education for individuals with different abilities through the age 
of 22 can increase more positive outcomes by increasing opportunities for independence through 
employment and post-secondary experiences.  It is for these reasons that MPF strongly urges the 
committee to support LD 98. 
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
Carrie Woodcock  
Executive Director  
Maine Parent Federation  
