Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members ofthe Joint Standing Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs. We are here today representing the State Advisory Panel. Established 
under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), the State Advisow Panel (which is made up of 
parents, educators, and interested stakeholders) is charged to provide policy guidance with respect to 
special education and related services for children with disabilities in Maine. In that capacity, we are here 
today to speak in support of L.D. 98, An Act to Update the Special Education Laws. 
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act provides for special education up to the 22"“ birthday. L.D. 
98 proposes to bring Maine into alignment with that age limit. It is our understanding this proposed 
alignment is to bring Maine into legal compliance. Maine currently offers a Free and Appropriate Public 
Education up until the 22"“ birthday to all students through Adult Education. L.D. 98 will assure that 
students with disabilities will have the same access to their Free and Appropriate Public Education as is 
explicitly written in the IDEA. 
Through our Panel's work and membership, we are keenly aware of the importance in ensuring that all 
young people in Maine — including those with disabilities — exit high school ready to pursue meaningful 
opportunities in post-secondary education, employment, and independent living in their communities. 
We know that for some young people with disabilities, the option to receive special education services up 
to age 22 will make the difference in their ability to successfully prepare for adulthood. Currently, several 
initiatives are underway that will strengthen the resources available to schools to better support these 
transitions. 
L.D. 98 also updates language, removing terms that are no longer in use and in some cases considered 
hurtful to people with disabilities. We support those changes. We also support of expanding the eligibility 
for Career and Technical Education to age 22, to match the age limit for access to special education 
services. This is a necessary change to ensure equity of access to Career and Technical Education 
opportunities for students with disabilities. 
In closing, we thank you for your consideration of this information and we encourage you to support this 
bill. 
Thank you, 
Members of the IDEA State Advisory Panel 
Libby Stone—SterIing, Carrie Woodcock, Christine Sullivan, Courtney Angelosante, Susan Hogan, Valerie 
Mattes, Howard Wright, Jim Roberts, Joy Lin, Connor Archer, Holly Day, Amelia Lyons, Colette Sullivan
