MEMORANDUM 
TO: Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
FROM: Eric Herlan, Esq. Dnimmond Woodsum 
RE LD 98 
DATE? January 31, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Eric Herlan and I am an 
attomey working for the law ﬁrm of Drummond Woodsum in Portland, Maine. 
I have represented public schools in Maine for 35 years with a focus on disability law and 
special education. I am providing testimony neither for nor against LD 98, but instead to 
call issues of importance to the attention of the Committee. 
Point One: The First Circuit May have Gotten it Wrong on age eligibility. 
The Supreme Court has ruled that duties must be clearly stated in federal laws that are 
passed pursuant to Congress ’s spending power authority -- those laws are like a contract 
between the federal govemment and the state, and the contractual duties must be clear. 
This is called the Rule of Clear Statement. See Pennhurst State School and Hospital v. 
Halderman, 451 U.S. 1, 17 (1981). The Supreme Court has applied the Rule of Clear 
Statement to IDEA cases. See Arlington Central School Board v. Murphy, 548 U.S. 291, 
292-96 (2006); Board of Education of Hendrick Hudson School District v. Rowley, 458 
U.S. 176 , nn. 11, 26 (1982). 
LD 98 is proposing to increase the age of student eligibility up to 22, and only for 
students with disabilities, not for anyone else. The reason for this is a belief that this 
outcome is required by a ruling of the First Circuit Court of Appeals in 2019. See K.L. v. 
Rhode Island Board of Education, 907 F.3d 639 (lst Cir. 2019). The First Circuit ruled 
that because Rhode Island offers public education to adult students up through and 
beyond age 22, then the State must offer a FAPE to disabled students beyond that age. 
But no one argued to the First Circuit the “Rule of Clear Statement ” in K.L. v. Rhode 
Island Board of Education, nor did that Court address that Rule. Clearly the law is 
ambiguous on whether the availability of adult education should be a factor in 
determining the age of eligibility, as seen in that Court’s 2-1 vote on the issue.
1
MEMO 
January 31, 2023 
Page2 
Point Two: LD 98 will apply to far more students that are being discussed. 
The dialogue arotmd LD 98 assumes that this law covers a small number of students with 
serious disabilities. But this is not accurate. The law will extend eligibility for any 
student with a disability who has not yet earned a high school diploma. Schools will 
continue to have to serve, or attempt to serve, any student who may have stopped 
attending school regularly, but has not dropped out. The new age eligibility would 
expand the school’s special education “child ﬁnd” obligation to include students without 
diplomas who may assert that they have not received a diploma because of an 
unrecognized disability. 
Point Three: If the Legislature Enacts LD 98, Give the IEP team the authority to 
decide. 
If the Legislature is going to approve the age change, the Legislature should leave it fully 
up to the IEP team what programming would look like for students between the ages of 
20 and 22. In that age range, there is no comparison available for length of school day 
and quantity of service that those students should receive. The best comparison is adult 
education, and in adult education there is huge variability, depending on the student. 
This should be the model here, if a change is to be made. The IEP team can make those 
decisions, rather than the State Legislature, and then the decisions will be made based on 
the individual student. 
On this point, the current language in LD 98 is strong. It permits full or part time 
programming. Because programming has to be decided by IEP teams and set forth in 
student IEPs, this means that programming for these older students could be completely 
individualized in length and structure. 
Point Four: D0n’t Let Adult Services Kick the Can Down the Road 
There is nothing in LD 98 that makes clear that adult services in DHHS must continue to 
serve persons with disabilities between the ages of 20 and 22. Without any mandate for 
DHHS, the worry is that they will simply defer support for these people until the latest 
possible time, which would then be 22 rather than 20. Simply deferring the support 
system that will apply to adults with disabilities for two more years is not good 
preparation for the rest of their lives.
2
