1State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Testimony of Erin Frazier, Director of Special Services and Inclusive Education, Birth to 22
In Support of: L.D. 98
An Act to Update the Special Education Laws
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Sponsored by: Representative Brennan
January 31, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Educational and 
Cultural Affairs Committee:
My name is Erin Frazier, Director of the Office of Special Services and Inclusive Education, and 
I am here today on behalf of the Department in support of L.D. 98, An Act to Update the Special 
Education Laws. This bill is needed in order to update Maine statute to reflect a 2018 First 
Circuit Court ruling, clarify equal opportunity, and update language related to special education 
practices.  
In 2018, First Circuit Court ruling K.L. v Rhode Island Board of Education that interpreted the 
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) to extend to the twenty second birthday. This 
bill aligns Maine statute Title 20-A MRSA §7202 with that ruling and the current practice of 
extended eligibility in Maine since January 2021 when the Maine Department of Education 
(MDOE) issued Administrative Letter #1.  LD 98 also changes the age of eligibility for special 
education and participation in career and technical education courses by adults who are enrolled 
in special education from under 20 to 22 years of age.
To support schools with the cost of extended eligibility the Fiscal Team at the Department will 
include students aged 20 through 22 in the child count process and school administrative units 
will receive funding for special education through the general funding formula starting in FY 24. 
To address funding support for the current year, the Office of Special Services and Inclusive 
Education (OSSIE) team has set aside funding to support the provision of programming for these 
students.
LD 98 clarifies that equal opportunity for special education means the equal opportunity for an 
appropriate education in the least restrictive environment. Not every student identified for special 
education will require eligibility to the age of 22. When a student meets graduation criteria the 
school administrative unit’s obligation to provide FAPE ends. During the 2021-22 school year, 
there were approximately 95 students attending educational programming between the ages of 21 
and 22.  During that same school year there were 2,486 12th grade students, to show the 
comparative difference of how many students may participate in extended opportunities. Special 
education programming may look very different from a typical educational experience beyond 
2the student's 20th birthday and is focused on transition goals and preparing for post-secondary 
educational and employment goals.
Additional updates in special education terminology are included in this bill to support the most 
current thinking and practice in the field. The term “pupil evaluation team” is replaced with 
“individualized education plan team.”  Several special education category terms have been 
updated as well. The proposed amendment to this bill addresses an important update to special 
education terminology changing “severe emotional disturbance” to “emotional disability.”  This 
change in practice, widely supported across the nation, attempts to destigmatize the term and 
support more current thinking and research on disabilities related to mental health. A wide range 
of stakeholders have been involved in conversations around this topic and many have 
championed for more equitable language. Revising 20-A MRSA §7001, sub-§1-B(2) and §7258, 
sub §1-B to reflect the included changes in terminology would align the statute with national 
standards and field practice.
For these reasons, the Department of Education is in support of L.D. 98, An Act to Update the 
Special Education Laws with the amended language.  I am happy to answer any questions, and I 
will be available for work sessions on this bill.
