Falmouth Public S choolsDistrict A dministr ationDANIEL S. O’SHEA51 Woodville RoadGENE J. KUCINKAS, JR.Director of Finance and Oper ationsFalmouth, Maine 04105Directorof Special E ducation(207) 781-3200Helen HogbackFax: (207) 781-5711Jennifer Kelly
Executi ve Admin Assistant/www.falmouthschools.orgDirector of LearningHuman R esour cesGRETCHEN McNULTYSuperint endent of Schools
January 30, 2023
To: Senator Pierce and members of the Educational Committee
From: Gene Kucinkas, Jr. Falmouth Director of Special Education
LD 98
My name is Gene Kucinkas, Jr. and I am the Director of Special Education in the Falmouth
School District.
I want to be clear at the start that I now and always have been in support of timely and
appropriate services for children and adults with disabilities and I support many aspects of LD
98, however, I do have concerns with the lack of funding for general education programming,
lack of clarity of the Free Appropriate Education (FAPE) standard, recent perception of who may
be eligible for extended eligibility to age 22, and delayed pursuit of adult services with the
extended eligibility to age 22.
I am completely supportive of the important changes regarding deaf education and aligning
those guidelines with current and best practices. I also support the individualization of the
process of applying this legislation. My concerns lie in the lack of clarification of the law and the
lack of funding. As you are aware, over the past several years staffing issues have arisen in all
areas of special education. By not funding this “new” legislation and not providing guidelines
about what FAPE means with this legislation, the law will result in under or inadequately funded
services for many of our most vulnerable adults.
This law is critical to support some of our young adults, however, it needs funding, clarification
and several other corrections, prior to being approved and handed over to the overburdened,
understaffed special education field.
Respectfully yours,
Gene Kucinkas, Jr.
Director of Special Services
Falmouth Schools
Guided by values and committed to excellence
