MSAD #51
The Schools of Cumberland and North Yarmouth, Maine
Jeffrey Porter,
Superintendent of Schools 
Scott Poulin
, Director of Finance, Human Resources
& Operations 
Julie Olsen, Ed.D,
Director of Instructional Support 
Susie Robbins,
Director of Academic Services 
Carla Fancy,
Assistant Director of Instructional Support 
Dirk Van Curan,
Director of Technology Services
Comments On Proposal LD 98
January 28, 2023
To:
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee
From: Julie Olsen, Director of Instructional Support MSAD #51
These comments are being submitted to outline concerns regarding the proposed LD 98: An
Act to Update the Special Education Laws.  As a Director of Instructional Support for a southern
Maine district, I support appropriate IEP  services and programming for all our students with
disabilities and therefore support many components of the language changes outlined in LD 98. My
concern lies in the lack of clarity of the F APE standard and clarity around who is deemed eligible for
extended eligibility to age 22.  I feel this language delays parents and outside case managers in
pursuing adult services.  The language pieces I strongly support in the proposed legislation are:
●
Changing pupil evaluation to individualized education program team; Hearing
impairment, including deafness to Deafness, including Hearing Loss; and Deaf
and Blindness to Deaf-Blindness.  These all  align with current and best practices
in the field.
●
The addition of “by means of appropriate educational programming, including
transitional programs.” This emphasizes the need for appropriate transitional
programming for post-school outcomes to continue to occur for all students.
E n g a g e
•
E m p o w e r
•
I n s p i r e
www.msad51.org 
∘
 357 Tuttle Road, PO Box 6A, Cumberland, ME 04021 
∘
 Phone 207.829.4800 
∘
 Fax 207.829.4802

●
The addition of “educational programming may be full- or part-time”. This current
language in LD 98 is strong and permits full- or part-time programming. It is
critical that programming be determined by IEP  teams and set forth in student
IEPs and this language allows IEP  teams to continue to do this job.  This
language allows  programming for adult students, aged 20-22, to be completely
individualized in length and structure.
As a Special Education Administrator for 15 years, I have significant concerns with the
rest of language changes around extended eligibility in LD 98.  It is unclear in this
legislation what a free appropriate public education (F APE) standard is for our 21-22 year
old students.  LD 98 states educational programming “must be equitable to that provided
to typically developing same age peers”, however there is no educational programming
for adult students without disabilities, aged 20-22.  I, and others in the field, assume this
refers to Adult Education programming, yet LD 98 is unclear . Second, there is a lack of
funding for general education programming. LD 98 states educational programming
“must be equitable to that provided to typically developing same age peers” and “must be
educated with children without disabilities” however there is no funding for general
education programming for students who fall within the extended eligibility age span nor
are there clearly defined educational opportunities for adults aged 20-22 without
disabilities.  Schools are underfunded and this is yet another underfunded initiative if we
do not account for the regular education expenses.  Third, there is a lack of funding
through MaineCare for adult students falling within the extended eligibility age range.
Currently the Maine Department of Education is providing funding for special education
services, however there is concern of how long this specialized funding will last.  If
schools need to absorb these costs with no MaineCare support, that is yet another
financial hit.  Fourth, I am concerned about the ongoing messaging that this law covers
only a very small number of adult students with a high level of need.  This is
not
the case.
The law will extend eligibility for any student with a disability who has not yet earned a
high school diploma. Schools will continue to have to serve, or attempt to serve, any
student who may have stopped attending school regularly , but has not dropped out. The
law would also reach any student who may have earned a high school diploma, but the
family has filed a legal claim saying that the student’ s goals have not yet been suf ficiently
met.  The new age eligibility would expand the school’ s special education “child find”
obligation to include students without diplomas who may assert that they have not
received a diploma because of an unrecognized disability; the reach of LD 98 is much
broader than assumed, and therefore the costs are more extensive than assumed.  As a
director I am already seeing situations of this in my district.  Lastly , I am gravely
concerned that we are deferring adult services with LD 98.  This legislation does not
address the need for adult services in DHHS to continue to serve adults with disabilities
between the ages of 20 and 22.  Without any mandate for DHHS, there is significant
concern that adult services will simply defer support for adults aged 20-22 until the latest
possible time, which would then be 22 rather than 20. This deferment is already
happening in real cases with real students during IEP  team meetings. Simply deferring
adult services and the support system that will apply to adults with disabilities for two
more years is not in the best interest of our students.  I think we need to ask the
question, “how can we better fund and  prepare our adult service programs?”
I would like to reiterate that I feel passionately about educating all our students and ensuring
that they get what they need when they need it.  My hope is that we can work together to better
ensure proper and timely adult services.
Thank you for your consideration of these concerns and I am available to answer any
questions or follow ups on this testimony .
Respectfully submitted,
Julie Olsen, Ed.D
207-829-4835

