LD 98: An Act to Update the Special Education Laws 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs. 
My name is Dr. Kathryn Hawes. I am Director of Special Services for MSAD 6 which are the Bonny Eagle 
Schools. I am providing testimony neither for nor against LD 98. 
For the past 28 years, I have worked in Maine’s public and private schools on behalf of all students, especially 
those with disabilities. I fully support the provision of appropriate IEP services and thoughtful planning and 
preparation for post-secondary goals for all students. I am in support of many of the language changes proposed in 
LD 98. Relative to the language of extended eligibility until age 22, I understand the Rhode Island ruling (K.L. v. 
Rhode Island Board of Education, 907 F.3d 639 (2018) and the Maine Department of Education Administrative 
Letter that followed in January of 2021. However, I am concerned about the unintended consequences of these 
that are negatively impacting our schools, families, and adult students. I believe that some of the language in LD 
98 provides much needed clarity while other language falls short. Let me share with you how this is playing out in 
our schools. 
For the past two years, since this Administrative Letter, there has been much dialogue about its interpretation. 
Initially, this was said to apply to a very small number of students. Hearing from the Maine Department of 
Education that it would apply to just 69 students statewide l, and many Directors across the state, did the math and 
ﬁgured we might have a student who we consider for this option every 8-10 years. This made sense as many of us 
have faced a unique situation in which a student needs just one more graduation credit, a transition activity, ora 
little more focused instruction to be ready for their post-secondary placement but ages out in June of their 20th 
year. Further, a closer reading of the Rhode Island ruling clariﬁed that the requirement is because, like Maine, 
Rhode Island offers publicly funded Adult Education services, thereby expanding the expectation for similar 
publicly-funded services for students with disabilities until the federal IDEA standard of their 22nd birthday. Like 
same-aged peers in adult education, focused instruction toward speciﬁc skills or activities. 
From January 2021 through last week, I have found myself in many IEP meetings on behalf of 19 and 20-year-old 
students, slated to graduate in 2022, 2023 or 2024, who are seeking to remain at the high school for another 2 
years. Since they are meeting graduation credits, we turn to their post-secondary transition plans. We ask parents 
and adult case managers how things are progressing in securing funding for, and placement in, adult services. The 
response is that adult case managers are advising parents not to get their adult students on waiting lists for funding 
and / or placements because they and the parents have decided that the student will stay in school until their 22nd 
birthday. When asked what skills the student needs to work on, the response is more of the same. When asked 
how much time is needed, the expectation is always a full school day, full school week, for 2 more years in the 
high school. Many of these students have already been in high school for 6 years. Their peers have moved on and 
there is no genera] education funding for these students. Further, it remains unclear how long we will even receive 
specialized funding for the special education programs of these students. They have received excellent educational 
programs and are ready to move on to post-secondary settings.
Special purpose private schools have provided services to our high-cost out of district students and prepared them 
for their next setting. They are ready to assist these adults through the transition and then to accept younger 
children who have been on waiting lists for these services. There is no MaineCare funding after age 20 to pay for 
the behavioral health care poition of the already costly tuition so that cost will be passed on to local taxpayers. 
I believe the following language in LD 98 will be helpful to students. families, and schools in Maine: 
O “Educational programming may be full or part time.” This language allows programming for adult 
students, aged 20-22, to be completely individualized in' length and structure as determined by IEP teams 
and set forth in student IEPs. Since there is no comparable length or structure for students ages 20-22, 
aside from Adult Education, which is variable and individually focused. 
I believe that clariﬁcation is needed in the following areas of LD 98: 
0 Clariﬁcation or acknowledgement and funding to support the true number of students who will have 
extended eligibility: Discussions around LD 98 have focused on a very small number of students with low 
incidence disabilities. This is Qthe case. As written eligibility will be extended for any student with an 
IEP, anyone suspected of having a disability to whom the school will have a “child ﬁnd" obligation. 
students with IEPs who stop attending by have not dropped out of school, etc. This is a much more 
extensive and costly obligation. 
0 Clariﬁcation ofthe free. appropriate public education (FAPE) standard: LD 98 states educational 
programming “must be equitable to that provided to typically developing same age peers" , however there 
is no clarity in the bill as to the educational progra|n(s) that serves typically developing same age peers. 
An assumption can be made that Adult Education is an equitable educational opportunity, however LD 98 
is unclear on this point. 
0 Clariﬁcation around least restrictive environment: LD 98 states students must be educated with 
children without disabilities" however there is no general education funding or programming for adults 
who fall within the extended eligibility to age 22. 
0 Addition of language around the obligation of DHHS and adult service providers in planning for and 
supporting people ages 20-22 with disabilities. Simply deferring the transition is not in the best interest of 
students, families, or schools. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Kathryn Hawes, Ph.D.
