GORHAM SCHOOLS 
Fhpsw & Inyw. 
January 31, 2023 
Dear Senator Rafferty,-Representative Brennan, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, 
I am writing neither for nor against LD 98. An Act To Update the Special Education Laws. As Director of 
Special Services for the Gorham School District and President Elect of Maine Administrators of Services for 
Children with Disabilities (MADSEC), I am in agreement with these proposed changes, except in regards to the 
change of the eligibility age to 22 given the lack of clarity that we in the ﬁeld are already experiencing with this 
proposal. I understand that there is a federal standard at play due to a First Circuit Court decision in regards to this 
age out of services change, but I ask that the legislation direct DHHS to support that this change is not to postpone 
students from accessing adult services, but that it gives an opportunity, if the IEP team has data to support the need, 
for the school to support a smooth transition to those services by providing transition exercises. 
At this time, districts across Maine have already had meetings with families in which the adult service providers are 
stating they expect students to be in school full time until the student turns 22 and will not be putting them on 
appropriate service lists until then. Continuing need for education should be an IEP team decision based on 
transition planning that focuses on moving a student forward into their adult life, not an expectation that any student 
with an IEP will access full time school until they tum 22 just because. 
0 This act is aligning to a court decision that looks at programming commensurate to adult education, which 
should mean a focus on a particular skill or goal to assist in community access to vocational opportunities, 
not full time school that would have an adult student in high school setting for 7-8 years 
0 The extended service time should be based on supporting a smooth transition to adult services, not a two 
year period of pushing off age appropriate services outside of the school 
0 Students would not have same aged non-disabled peers within a school setting 
0 I currently have students with signiﬁcant disabilities who are 20 years of age and they are 
preparing to graduate this spring. It has been difficult for them to remain in their high school for 
two years longer than the same aged peers they grew up with. They no longer have the peers in 
their school that knew them, supported them and included them at lunch or in class. They have 
expressed that they are bored alter 6 years of high school and, even with a bit of fear for the 
unknown changes in their future, they are ready for the next step. The parents of one of the 
students had to push their adult service providers to get him on the necessary waiting list fora 
needed service as the providers were pushing them to keep him at school for a longer period of 
time, but were unable to determine what the purpose of continuing their education would be for 
that student. 
0 Special Purpose Placement Schools 
o Already there is a 9-12 month waiting list for most special purpose placements in the state; if adult 
students are expected to continue in these placements for an additional two years, then 
I those lists will become much longer and will not have openings for the needed services 
to younger students 
I these schools will lose funding or will have to increase tuition signiﬁcantly on sending 
districts
0 they currently bill Mainecare for services at Mainecare rates, which will only 
cover a student until age 20 years; these Mainecare rates help cover overhead 
costs 
0 they will then have to bill districts for those services they can’t bill Mainecare 
for any longer, increasing costs for the districts and will either have to also 
increase tuition for districts to cover overhead costs or risk closure 
My colleagues will share many other points of need for clarity in regards to purpose and FAPE, funding source 
issues, as well as worries on increased child ﬁnd responsibilities and litigation for schools. Please consider all of 
these concerns. Schools cannot continue to take on all responsibilities for all things - we are running out of 
resources and do not have the staff in Special Education to take on the students we already have. We ask that you 
direct DHHS to continue to service students into the appropriate adult services as they are ready to leave high school 
and we can use this act to partner with them to ease the transition as would be determined by the IEP team. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. l am available to answer any questions if needed. 
Sincerely, 
K7” Kathy Hamblen 
Director of Special Sewices, Gorham 
President Elect of MADSEC 
(207) 222-1008 
Kathy.Hamblen@gorhamschools.org
