STATE OF MAINE 
_g £2; i DEPARTMENT or LABOR 
54 STATE HOUSE STATION n’ ~-'| 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0054 ‘U‘{" ,1‘E‘ p, 
JANET T. MILLS LAURA A. FORTMAN 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Libby Stone-Sterling, Director, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation 
Maine Department of Labor Bureau of Rehabilitation Services 
Before the 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
In support of L.D. 98 "An Act to Update the Special Education Laws" 
January 31, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Libby Stone-Sterling and I am the Director of the Division 
of Vocational Rehabilitation at the Maine Department of Labor's Bureau of Rehabilitation Services. The 
Bureau of Rehabilitation Services works to provide full access to employment, independence, and 
community integration for people with disabilities. I am here to testify in support of L.D. 98, An Act to 
Update the Special Education Laws. 
Through its Division for the Blind and Visually Impaired (DBVI) and the Division ofvocational Rehabilitation 
(DVR), the Bureau of Rehabilitation Services (BRS) serves thousands of students who receive special 
education services through an Individualized Education Program (IEP) each year. Services to these 
students include Pre-Employment Transition Services (Pre-ETS) that, in coordination with schools, assist 
students with disabilities to learn about the world of work and prepare for post-secondary education, 
employment and independent living. Vocational Rehabilitation (VR) provides opportunities for students 
to explore jobs in their communities though activities like employer tours, job shadows, and paid work 
experience. VR counselors also provide guidance and counseling to students and families and work with 
them to create an Individualized Plan for Employment (IPE) that serves as a road map to the young 
person's employment goals. This plan is ideally intended to build on the transition planning included in 
the Individualized Education Program (IEP) and VR counselors often participate and give input in IEP and 
other school meetings to support transition planning. 
PHONE:(207)623 7900 TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX:(207) 287 5292 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.
L.D. 98 will strengthen that collaboration by aligning the age eligibility for special education services with 
that for Pre-Employment Transition Sen/ices. With a VR counselor assigned to every Maine high school, 
our staff are ready to work closely with our education partners to leverage VR resources and create new 
opportunities that will strengthen preparation for post-secondary education, employment, and 
independent living. With many students with disabilities seeking career pathways that include Career and 
Technical Education (CTE) and Pre-Apprenticeship, we are also supportive of this bill's expansion of 
eligibility for CTE to age 22. There is a growing understanding of the importance of language and we 
appreciate that this bill will remove language like ”Hearing lmpairment" that is considered offensive to 
many in the Deafand Hard of Hearing community. 
Thank you for your consideration of this information. I am available to attend the work session if that 
would be helpful. 
pg.2
