Testimony for LD 917 
 
March 28, 2023 
 
Good afternoon Committee Members, 
 
Thank You for the opportunity to speak today on LD 917. My name is Thomas Luttrell and I am 
the City Manager for the City of Rockland.  In 2022 the Rockland City Council decided to put 3 
bond questions to the citizens of Rockland asking them to borrow $32,400,000 for road and 
sidewalk improvements, stormwater projects and to fund the closure of the city landfill.   
On November 8, 2022 the voters overwhelmingly approved the three bonds, Roads and 
Sidewalks 2360 yes 736 no, Storm Water Projects 2275 yes 796 no, land fill closure 1866 yes 
1158 no.  Unfortunately, after the bonds were approved at the polls our bond council noticed 
that the ballot question had omitted the treasurer statement therefore, we could not borrow 
the approved funds.  The omitted statement was to set forth the total amount of bonds of the 
municipality outstanding and unpaid, the total amount of bonds of the municipality authorized 
and unissued and the total amount of bonds of the municipality contemplated to be issued if 
the submitted questions are ratified.  Statement was also to include the estimated cost of 
interest on the bond amount to be issued, the total cost of principal and interest to be paid at 
maturity and the declaration that the validity of the bonds and the voters ratification of the 
bonds may not be affected by any errors in the forgoing estimate.  The treasurer’s statement 
was completed but never added to the ballot question, it is attached for your review.  This 
oversight has led me here today to ask the legislature to validate the issuance of bonds by the 
City of Rockland.   
These funds are needed as our roads are crumbling to disrepair.  Our storm water system is 
being overwhelmed and flooding properties along Lindsey Brook which handles most of our 
storm water flow.  The landfill is at capacity and needs to be closed by December 2024 per 
agreement with DEP.  Your approval today will allow the City to start the much-needed repairs 
throughout the city this summer and fall to get Rockland back to being the beautiful area that it 
is.   
 
 
 
 
TREASURER'S STATEMENT PURSUANT 
TO 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5772(2-A) ACCOMPANYING 
REFERENDUM QUESTIONS PROVIDING FUNDING FOR 
ROAD AND SIDEWALK REPAIRS AND INPROVEMENT, LANDFILL CLOSURE, 
AND STORM WATER PROJECTS 
 
The undersigned Treasurer of the City of Rockland hereby certifies that: 
 1.  The total amount of general obligation bonded indebtedness of the City of Rockland 
currently outstanding is $9,414,119. 
 2.  The total amount of general obligation bonds of the City of Rockland authorized, but 
unissued, is $ 0. 
 3.  The total amount of general obligation bonds of the City of Rockland contemplated to 
be issued if the Bond Ordinances are ratified is not in excess of $32,400,000, plus for costs of 
issuance. 
 4.  The anticipated interest rate on the bonds is between 1% and 6%.  Assuming the issuance 
of the full $32,400,000 of bonds to be authorized (but not accounting for cost of issuance), level 
principal payments over a 30-year term and an average interest rate of 3.0%, the interest cost 
associated with the borrowing would be $16,106,987, which would result in a total cost of principal 
and interest to be paid at maturity of $48,506,987. 
The foregoing represents an estimate of costs associated with the financing and such estimates will 
change due to market conditions.  The validity of the voters' ratification of the bonds shall not be 
affected by any errors in the foregoing estimates.  The ratification by the voters is nevertheless 
conclusive and the validity of the bond issue is not affected by reason of any variance of actual 
costs from the estimates provided hereinabove. 
 
 
        CITY OF ROCKLAND 
 
 
 
        By:  Susan J. St Clair   
                  Its Treasurer 
 
 
