District 42: Rockland, Owls Head, North Haven and part of Matinicus Isle
Valli Geiger 
1 Green Way
Rockland, ME 04841
Phone: (207) 956-1565
Valli.Geiger@legislature.maine.gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002
(207) 287-1400
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
March 28, 2023
Testimony of Rep. Valli Geiger presenting
LD 917, An Act to Validate Certain Proceedings Authorizing the Issuance of Bonds and 
Notes by the City of Rockland
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government
Good Afternoon Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and esteemed members of the State and 
Local Committee. My name is Valli Geiger and I represent House District 42 which includes 
Rockland, Most of Owls Head and the Islands of North Haven, Matinicus, Criehaven and the 
Muscle Ridge.
I sponsored this bill, LD 917, An Act to Validate Certain Proceedings Authorizing the 
Issuance of Bonds and Notes by the City of Rockland, on behalf of City Manager Tom 
Luttrell and all five members of the Rockland City Council.
LD 917 provides a legislative remedy to an inadvertent error made when three general obligation 
bonds went out for referendum on November 8, 2022. The voters of the city ratified and 
approved the three bond ordinances that authorized the city to issue its general obligation bonds 
and notes to finance road and sidewalk improvements, permanently close the city landfill and 
finance storm water projects.
The Maine Revised Statutes, Title 30-A, section 5772, subsection 2-A requires that any question 
submitted to the electors for ratification of a general obligation bond be accompanied by a 
statement signed by the treasurer of the municipality. This statement must include the total 
amount of bonds of the municipality outstanding and unpaid, authorized and unissued and 
contemplated to be issued if the submitted questions are ratified, the estimated cost of interest on 
the bond amount to be issued and the total cost of the principal and interest to be paid at maturity 
and finally, a declaration that the validity of the bonds and the voters’ ratification of the bonds 
may not be affected by any errors in the foregoing estimate.
Due to an inadvertent oversight, the three bond ordinance questions were submitted to the voters 
without the above signed statement. This absence could affect the marketability of the bonds or 
notes to be issues by the city in connection with the projects.
The legislature can provide a remedy to this oversight and declare these facts to create an 
emergency within the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation 
as immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety.
In order not to delay the moving forward of these bond issuances, we request that this legislation 
move forward under the emergency clause, allowing it to take effect immediately if approved.
Thank you. The Rockland City Manager, who will follow me to offer testimony, is available to 
answer any questions I cannot on this matter.
