TESTIMONY OF 
CHASE HEWITT, STAFF ATTORNEY FOR THE OFFICE OF TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Wednesday, April 26, 2023, at 1:00pm 
LD 1 168 — An Act to Achust Motor Vehicle Excise Tax Rates 
LD 1381 — An Act to Create Fairness in Maine's Motor Vehicle Excise Tax by 
Basing the Tax on the Sale Price 
LD 1486 — An Act to Exempt Tractor Trailer Trucks from the Excise Tax 
LD 1524 — An Act to Eliminate the Excise Tax on Recreational Vehicles and 
Permit Municipal Adoption of Fees to Cover the Cost of Municipal Services to 
Campgrounds and Recreational Vehicle Parks 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee - good afternoon, my name is Chase Hewitt, Staff Attorney for the 
Office of Tax Policy, Maine Revenue Services. I am testifying at the request of the 
Administration Against LD 1168, An Act to Adjust Motor Vehicle Excise TaxA 
Rates." LD I381 —An Act to Create Fairness in Maine's Motor Vehicle Excise Tax 
by Basing the Tax on the Sale Price; LD 1524 — An Act to Eliminate the Excise Tax 
on Recreational Vehicles and Permit Municipal Adoption of Fees to Cover the 
Cost of Municipal Services to Campgrounds and Recreational Vehicle Parks; and 
Neither For Nor Against LD J 486 — An Act to Exempt Tractor Trailer Trucks ﬁ~om 
the Excise Tax. 
The 123"‘ Legislature charged Maine Revenue Services with convening a 
study group to review the structure and administration of the motor vehicle excise 
tax; resulting in the report titled “The Structure and Administration of the Motor 
Vehicle Excise Tax.” The members of the Study Group were unanimously of the
1
opinion that the only fair and consistent way to impose the excise tax is to base it 
on the MSRP, as is done currently. The report goes on to state that basing the tax 
on purchase price would “build tremendous inequity into the system, primarily 
because different purchasers are able to negotiate different prices for the same 
model vehicle, but also because it is not always possible to verify the validity of 
purchase and sale agreements. ” 
Because individual complaints frequently relate to the high initial year tax 
rate of 24 mils, the study group spent much of its time considering ways in which 
the Legislature could reduce the top rate without causing a signiﬁcant reduction in 
municipal revenues. The former Administration proposed LD 1521 to the 128"‘ 
Legislature, which would have reduced the rate of the vehicle excise tax for the 
first and second years and increased the rate for the following four years ina 
revenue neutral manner. 
Turning to the specifics of the bills before you today, LD 1168 changes the 
excise tax on motor vehicles and camper trailers from a 6-year phase-down of the 
tax from 24 mills to 4 mills to a 10-year phase-down of the tax from 35 mills to 10 
mills and exempts from taxation the first $15,000 of the vehicle's value that is used 
to calculate the tax. The Administration raises two concerns with the proposal as 
written: First, Maine residents may interpret the proposal as a registration 
exemption for vehicles worth less than $15,000, or to mean that such vehicles 
could be registered free of charge. Second, the new rates would result ina 
relatively signiﬁcant increase in excise tax for vehicles with a suggested retail 
price over $25,000. For example, the owner of a $35,000 car would owe around
45% more in vehicle excise tax over the new l0-year phase down period than they 
would during the same period under existing law. 
LD 1381 requires that the excise tax on vehicles, special mobile equipment 
and camper trailers registered in the State be based upon purchase price instead of 
the mal<er’s list price. Current law also requires the State to reimburse a 
municipality for the difference in the amount of excise tax that would have been 
collected by the municipality on each commercial motor vehicle or bus using the 
mal<er’s list price instead of the actual purchase price, and this bill applies that 
requirement to all vehicles registered and taxed by the municipality using the 
actual purchase price. 
The types of commercial motor vehicles described in the bill only include a 
portion of those described in Title 29-A. As such, it is unclear how other types of 
commercial motor vehicles should be treated. Additionally, it is unclear whether 
the “purchase price” is the purchase price paid by the current owner or the ﬁrst 
owner in the case of a used vehicle. 
LD 1524 provides a motor vehicle excise tax exemption for certain 
recreation vehicles (RVs) and permits municipalities to impose fees on exempt 
RVs and campgrounds or parks that host those RVs. The fees must be calculated 
to produce annual revenues that would offset the revenue lost by the municipality 
due to the excise tax exemption. The bill also authorizes municipalities to imposea 
fee on campgrounds for permission to construct or to lease land to another person 
or entity to use docks, ﬂoats, piers, boat lifts and riprap that occupy space that is 
within 100 feet from the shoreline of a great pond.
3
It’s not clear whether a nonresident who registered their RV in their home 
state would be subject to the proposed fee because they would be exempt under 
both 36 M.R.S. section l483(l5) and the newly created section l483(17). 
Additionally, towns may be unable to create a fee schedule that would accurately 
offset the excise tax revenue loss because they may not know what portion of their 
current excise tax collections are tied to these particular types of RVs and because 
the fee is based on usage and other factors that will not be known in advance. 
Finally, LD 1486 exempts trucks and truck tractors registered for more than 
26,000 pounds from the excise tax. The proposed deletion of the ﬁrst phrase in 
section l482(1)(3) would impose excise tax on Class A special mobile equipment 
manufactured prior to 1996, which are currently exempt. 
The exemption proposed in section l482(8) of the bill would be more 
appropriate in section 1483 (Exemptions) rather than section 1482 (Excise tax). 
Vehicles exempt from excise tax under section 1483 are also exempt from personal 
property tax pursuant to section 655(l)(K) -— raising questions of Business 
Equipment Tax Exemption (BETE) applicability and State reimbursement of lost 
revenue. In addition, many other states offer excise tax reciprocity; it is possible 
that an excise tax exemption for the targeted vehicles in the bill could lead to 
another state imposing their excise on those vehicles for the privilege of using their 
roads, even if the vehicle is registered in Maine. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
4
