Department of the Secretary of State 
i, 3;’ 1.-., J’ ‘I 
~< 
Bureau of Motor Vehlcles 
“’' 
Catherine Curtis 
Shenna Bellows Deputy Secrelary of Stale 
Secretary of Slate 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
April 26, 2023 
Testifying In Opposition To L.D. 1486 
“An Act to Exempt Tractor Trailer Trucks from the Excise Tax” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, 
my name is Shenna Bellows, and I am the Secretary of State and chief motor vehicle ofﬁcer. I am 
speaking today in opposition to L.D. 1486. 
This bill exempts trucks and truck tractors registered for more than 26,000 pounds from paying excise 
tax. Currently, paying excise tax is a prerequisite to registration. If this bill passes, the municipalities 
will lose a considerable amount of money leaving them to ﬁgure out how to make up for that lost 
revenue. 
Currently, the Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV) manages an Excise Tax Reimbursement Program 
(ETR). The ETR program as described in motor vehicle statute, ‘ allows municipalities to charge excise 
tax based on the sale price of a commercial vehicle or bus, that is registered for over 26,000 pounds, 
instead of charging excise tax based on the Manufacturer ’s Suggested Retail Price (MSRP). This 
allows the registrant to pay a lower excise tax. However, this results in lost revenue to the town. 
For these vehicles, BMV will reimburse each town for the lost excise tax revenue, making the town 
whole. You may ask, where does BMV get the funds to reimburse the towns? 
BMV collects an excise tax on trucks over 26,000 pounds registered in another state but traveling 
through Maine. That excise tax is deposited into the Excise Tax Reimbursement Fund and used to pay 
the towns for the lost revenue on the large trucks. At the end of each year, any remaining funds not 
paid out to municipalities, but that remain in this account, are transferred to the Highway Fund. 
If this bill passes, the Excise Tax Reimbursement program would no longer exist, and therefore, excise 
tax could not be collected on trucks owned by out-of-state registrants, traveling through Maine. Not 
1 29-A M.R.S. §533-A. 
29 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0029 
http://www.maine. gov/sos/bmv; tel. 207-624-9000
only will municipalities lose funds, but the Highway Fund will as well. On average, 6 million dollars 
is retained each year and transferred to the Highway Fund from the ETR program. 
It should also be noted that if this bill receives an ought to pass vote, we will need to amend the 
provisions governing excise tax on commercial vehicles operated by nonresident owners2 and also, the 
municipal tax reimbursement fund.3 
Finally, the BMV computer systems are outdated, and our priority is to modernize them. Any system 
changes will require a ﬁscal note and cause delays in this much needed modernization project. 
For these reasons, we oppose L.D. 1486. Thank you for your time. I’m happy to answer any questions. 
2 29—A M.R.S. §531(6). 
3 29-A M.R.S. §533~A. 
29 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0029 
http://www. maine. gov/sos/bmv; tel. 207-624-9000
