 
 
 
March 15th, 2023  
 
Senator Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
Representative Lori Gramlich , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in opposition to  L.D 865: An Act to Clarify the Roles and Responsibilities of the 
Board of Environmental Protection by Adjusting the Requirements for Certain Hearings and for Certain 
Agencies by Adjusting the Requirements for Cost -Benefi t Analysis  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submi tting testimony in opposition to L.D. 865. Unfortunately, due to a 
scheduling conflict and a previously scheduled work trip out of state, I am unable to deliver verbal testimony, 
but we felt it was important to submit written testimony and be on record reg arding L.D. 865.  
 
The business community welcomes a robust regulatory environment that provides  clear, predictable, consistent 
decisions from state agencies and the Chamber always advocates for that.  We already have a rigorous and 
thorough permitting process in Maine, and anything that adds more challenges for critical projects to come 
online is of concern to the business community.  Maine is urgently responding to the environmental and 
economic challen ges that climate change imposes on all of us, it is important that we have a streamlined process 
so various  projects can get permitted and come online as soon as possible. The Maine State Chamber supports 
the high -level goals of the state dealing with climate, we support the carbon reduction goals of 45% by 2030 
and 80% by 2050. We also support adding 30,000 new clean energy jobs. To reach these goals, we need a 
consistent regulatory process.  Additionall y, the proposed legislation would have far greater impacts than just  
renewable projects that need permits , it our opinion  it could have an impact  on all a pplicants within the 
Departmen t and that is incredibl y far reachin g and puts a lot of  pressure on the B oard of Environmental 
Protection. The Chamber has i ncredible confidence  and trust within the Department , and we believe these 
critical decisions  should remain in the control of the DE P.  
 
Some of our technical concerns are regarding section 3  and 4. The  proposed legis lation make s it so the Bo ard 
assumes  jurisdiction over projects of statewide significance, resulting in a significant burden on the Board’s 
limited resources . This also re sults in additional burdens and delays on the regulated community . Section 3 
 
 
 would amend th e current law and require the Board to assume jurisdiction over all applications – not only those 
applications referred to it by the DEP Commissioner pursuant to  § 344, subsection 2 ‑A – when it finds that at 
least 3 of the 4 criteria of statewide significance  have been met.  
Section 4 would  give the Board the flexibility to decide whether to vote to assume jurisdiction over an 
application if it finds that at least 3 of the 4 criteria of this subsection have been met.  These changes would strip 
from the Board its authority to control its own docket , resulting in a large influx of project applications that the 
Board must process  and decide .  This would not only tax an already overburdened Board but would 
significantly slow down the processing of applications.  A slow regulatory approval process is not business 
friendly.  
We also have serious c oncerns regarding section 5 of the proposed legislation . First, the requirement for the 
Board to hold a hearing on every appeal, even if there were no hearing on the initial permitting decision,  does 
not have merit and would be a significant burden on the regulated community .  The Department’s Chapter 2 
sec. 7 rules allow “any person” to request a hearing on any application.  And a hearing request must be made 
within 20 days after the application is accepted as complete for processing and  must include the reasons who a 
hearing is warranted .  If no hearing request is made while the application is being processed, it doesn’t make 
sense to require a hearing when an appea l is filed.  Holding a hearing is  an extensive process that could include 
multiple parties, each with multiple witnesses, and that could extend over multiple days.  The Board simply 
does not have the resources to hold a hearing on ever y appeal, and doing so would slow down all business 
before the Board.  In short , a hearing would cause substantial delay that no one wants.  All parties – appellants 
and licensees – want prompt resolution of appeals of permitting decisions .  
In closing, we feel L.D. 865 is bad for Maine businesses  and we would respectfully  encourage the committee  to 
vote, “ought not to pass ”. I am happy to pro vide any  additional information the committee may need before  the 
work session, and I will be sure t o be present at the  work session. T hank you.  
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
