 
Richard  A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State  House  Station   
Senator, District  18                                                                                                 Augusta, Main e 04333   
 
THE MAINE SENATE  
131st  Legislature  
Fax: (207) 287 -1527 *  TTY (207) 287 -1583  *  Message Service 1 -800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate  
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett  
LD 865, “An Act to Clarify the Roles and Responsibilities of the Board of Environmental 
Protection by Adjusting the Requirements for Certain Hearings and for Certain Agencies 
by Adjusting the Requirements for Cost -Benefit Analysis”  
15 March 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich , and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources.  I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I 
have the honor of servin g the people of 14 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate.  I 
am here to introduce LD 865, “An Act to Clarify the Roles and Responsibilities of the Board of 
Environmental Protection by Adjusting the Requirements for Certain Hearings and for Certa in 
Agencies by Adjusting the Requirements for Cost -Benefit Analysis.”  
 
The 125th Legislature passed LD 1 , “An Act to Ensure Regulatory Fairness and Reform ”. A 
special joint committee was then appointed to handle th e bill. Multiple public hearings were held  
throughout the state to gather public input on how to accomplish the bill’s intent.  
 
After those hearing s, a special subcommittee was appointed to look at the environmental 
concerns. Member of this committee included  Senators Saviello and Goodall and 
Representatives Deschene, Parker and Carey . This small group continued to gather information 
from the public. One thing that became very clear to this subcommittee was that the public and 
regulated community were very concerned that the Board of Environmental Protection (BEP) 
was overwhelmed with dealing with minor but time-consuming issues. Then Governor Le Page’s 
solution was to  establish a Court and abolish the BEP.  
 
After gathering information and listening to public concerns , the subcommittee  suggested  the 
following changes:  
 
• Reduce the  BEP in size from 10 to 7 members , and  
• Ensure in statu te that the BEP  only took up environmental issues of statewide concern . 
 
The le gislation ultimately passed in the House 147 -3 and in the Senate 34 -0. However,  one 
section was not properly changed.  
 
Interestingly , the first trial of this LD 1-created statu te did not come until a recent project  
familiar to us all, the New England Clean Energy Connect (“NECEC”) .  While this project 
revealed issues with this law that I believe need to be addressed, I want to be clear that this bill is 
not intende d to, nor will it , impact that project.  This bill aims to look forward, learning from this 
first major test of that LD 1 from the Legislature 12 years ago, and make certain corrections.  I 
believe this is important and timely:  there may soon be other projects  commanding the public’s 
attention , like mining, that will be of statewide significance requiring BEP jurisdiction.  
Common se nse and  overw helming public opinion  would  suggest that the NECEC  project  was n  
of statewide significance.  Yet, reading the law, the DEP Commissioner  at the t ime said:   “[T]he 
Board has discretion as to whether to assume jurisdiction, but is not required to do so. ” The 
Commissioner  was referring to 38 M.R.S. § 341 -D(2):  “The board may vote to assume jurisdiction 
of an application if it finds that at least 3 of the 4 criteria of this subsection are met. ”  
I point out that i n all other parts of the statu te the word “ shall” appears  rather than “may” .  Please 
note th e cognitive dissonance between  the first line of this parag raph 2 and the last : 
• “Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the board shall  decide each application 
for approval of permits and licenses that in its judgment represents a project of statewide 
significance. ” 
• “The board may vote to assume jurisdiction of an application if it finds that at least 3 of 
the 4 criteria of this subsection have been met. ” 
And what are these four criteria, o f which three are required to be met ?  For reference, the statute is 
below:   
 
Title 38: §341 -D. Board responsibilities and duties reads:  
2.  Permit and license applications.   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, 
the board shall  decide each application for approval of permits and licenses that in its 
judgment represents a project of statewide significance. A project of statewide 
significance is a project that meets at least 3 of the following 4 criteria:   
A. [PL 2011, c. 304, Pt . H, §6 (RP).]  
B. [PL 2011, c. 304, Pt. H, §6 (RP).]  
C. [PL 2011, c. 304, Pt. H, §6 (RP).]  
D. [PL 2011, c. 304, Pt. H, §6 (RP).]  
E. Will have an environmental or economic impact in more than one municipality, 
territory or county; [PL 2011, c. 304, Pt. H,  §6 (NEW).]  
F. Involves an activity not previously permitted or licensed in the State; [PL 2011, c. 304, 
Pt. H, §6 (NEW).]  
G. Is likely to come under significant public scrutiny; and [PL 2011, c. 304, Pt. H, §6 
(NEW).]  
H. Is located in more than one mu nicipality, territory or county. [PL 2011, c. 304, Pt. H, 
§6 (NEW).]  
The board shall  also decide each application for approval of permits and licenses that is 
referred to it jointly by the commissioner and the applicant.   
The board shall  assume jurisdic tion over applications referred to it under  section 344, 
subsection 2 -A when it finds that at least 3 of the 4 criteria of this subsection h ave been 
met.   
The board may  vote to assume jurisdiction of an application if it finds that at least 3 of 
the 4 criteria of this subsection have been met.  
 
Again , the last sentence  of this part of the statu te reads:  
 
“The board may vote to assume jurisdiction of an application if it finds that at least 3 of the 4 
criteria of this subsection have been met.”  I believe this was an oversight that needs  correcting.  
 
LD 865 also addresses other issues that became apparent during the permit issu ance that are, 
frankly , unacceptable. This legislation corrects those deficiencies:  
 
1. It took the BEP two and a half  years to hear a permit appea l. I realize the pandemic  
had an effect on the timeline , but two and a half  years?  This does not meet the 
statutory demand of “timely”1 consideration.  I hope the committee  would agree this 
is unacceptable. This legislation better defines the timeline for  such an appeal.  
 
2. During a recent appeal t he BEP ignored what was actually  going on in the field 
during that period of time. They hid behind the “record” being closed. They did not 
allow actual field conditions  to be considered.  I visited the project in the field and saw 
this destruction first hand  along with Senator Black, Representative Gramlich, and 
Representative Landry. Desp ite the long lapse in time and new information being 
available, t he BEP would not allow additional testimony when the final appeal was  
ultimately  heard. The BEP and its assigned Assistant Attorney General  (AAG) made 
it very clear that if appellants  continu ed to argue this point they  would be told to sit 
down. Yet , when the appeal was denied, the BEP directed the DEP to modify the 
permit  in question  to reflect what was actually happening in the field. In fact, one 
modification was worked out in 10 minutes during the hearing.  
 
My colleagues  and I wrote a letter to the BEP  providing evidence of the devastation 
taking pla ce.  We were admonished by the Executive Director for doing so. This 
proposed legislation addresses  this injustice by requiring real  time field conditions be 
considered as part of the record.   
 
3. What information gets to the Board is currently controlled by the BEP Chair and the 
Assistant Attorney General.  This legislation corrects this by ensuring the Board, not 
the Chair or the AAG, will make the decision on what the Board should see or not see 
on appeal.  
 
4. Some of t hose who testified  on LD  1 wanted to require a cost-benefit analysis be 
done for certain projects. However, financing this effort was not made clear. LD 865 
makes it clear if this analysis is done it will be by a third party being paid by the 
applicant. One amendment may be necessary t o ensure the benefactor  is the S tate of 
Maine. I do believe projects of statewide significance need this kind of analysis. To 
use the NECEC as an example: a lot of promises were made on how Maine would 
benefit. This kind of analysis would have provided accountability to the as sumed 
benefits and costs so that Maine people can assess whether those benefits would come 
to fruition.   
 
1 https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/38/title38sec341 -B.html .  “The purpose of the Board of Environmental 
Protection is to provide informed, independent and timely decisions on the interpretation, administration and 
enforcement of the laws relating to enviro nmental protection and to provide for credible, fair and responsible public 
participation in department decisions. ” 
 
Those in opposition to  this bill  might argue these changes will  “bog” down the Board and 
lengthen the permitting process. I disagree .  Indeed, I  believe it will encourage thoroughness and 
timeliness. Any project  with statewide significance would go to BEP and any appeal would go  to 
the Superior Court. Presently, if this LD 865 is not passed and the AAG hides behind the “may” 
a project like mining wou ld go to DEP, possibly being appealed to BEP and then to the courts. 
Lawyers get rich, permittee s are left in limbo , and the people of Maine lose.  
 
In closing l et me be clear  again that nothing you do today will affect the final disposition of t he 
NECEC  project. However, I fully expe ct there will be project s in the near future that will be of 
statewide significance  and caught up in this process . It is time to fix this statu te to what was 
originally intended.  Thank you.  
 
