 
 
 
 
Testimony  in Opposition to LD 1778 
An Act to Ensure a Sustainable Electric Grid   
Steven L. Weems, Board Member , Solar Energy Association of Maine  
President, Dirigo  Community Solar Group  
To the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
May 18, 2023  
 
 Senator Lawrence,  Representative Zeigler, and other distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology: 
my name is Steve Weems, Board Member of the Solar Energy Association of 
Maine  (SEAM) ; also founder and P resident of Dirigo Community Solar Group  
(Dirigo CSG) , a nonprofit associa tion of 14 small, member -owned  community solar 
farms.   SEAM and Dirigo CSG are opposed to all aspects of LD 1778, for similar 
reasons we testified in opposition to LD 442, LD 683, LD 1347, and LD 1531.  
Eliminating net energy billing and curtailing energy efficiency and beneficial 
electrification programs of the Efficiency Maine Trust (EMT) are not in the best 
interests of Maine people and businesses.  
 We are advocates of reforming the existing distributed generation (DG) 
program, which includes net energy billing (NEB), so it is beneficial to all Maine 
people and electricity ratepayers.  We are on record about this.  NEB is an 
essential component of Maine’s drive to decarbonize  its many uses of energy .  
Eliminating it would be disastrous in many ways .  Simi larly, it would be unwise in 
the extreme to further limit the energy efficiency activities of Efficient Maine 
Trust.  Reducing our use of energy wherever possible is the best approach to a 
sustainable future.  And the trust is eminently successful in its w ork. 
 
2 
  Our further comments are focused primarily on net energy billing: first a 
few overview observations, then more detailed explanatory information, some of 
which we have provided previously.  
 The criticism being voiced about NEB is a one -dimensional, exaggerated 
story rather than good .  As an antidote, we advocate , forward -looking solutions 
based on rigorous full economic analysis.   If there is a crisis, it is the inability of 
the grid to accommodate distributed energy resources and take advantage of 
two-way energy flow s.  To arrive at a good place, it is necessary to consider all the 
things that determine the health and well -being of “the public.”   In short:  
1. The problem of a rate shift is real but wildly exaggerated ( check the actual  rate 
filings of the utilities  – for example, see the CMP explanation at Appendix A ). 
2. A moratorium, ban, elimination, or retroactive adjustments of NEB would 
show bad faith , and hurt about 25,000 existing customers.  
3. The 130th Legislature established an ord erly process (including performance 
deadlines and a tariff reduction) to curtail and improve the distributed energy 
program (Including NEB) , with an timetable for analysis and restructuring.  
4. Great progress is being made in accordance with this process  – the                 
DG Stakeholder Group work produced a recommendation that would take 
over 90% of future distributed generation out of the NEB program and make it 
beneficial to all ratepayers  (see chart s at Appendix B  and Appendix C ). 
5. The key is evaluating all the benefits and costs of any energy program, large or 
small, including NEB, and structuring the  program so that it provide s net 
benefits to all Maine people , including electricity ratepayers.  
6. Regarding NEB  itself, since CMP and Versant are not in the energy production 
business and do not pay the generators for any of the NEB energy put on their 
grids, these generators should be viewed as another type of competitive 
energy supplier , selected by the customer.  This indicates a dual focus on (i ) all 
the cost-benefit factors , and (ii) a subset of th ese affecting the utilities and 
therefore ratepayers, in accordance with # 5 above, is necessary to reform the 
NEB program for the benefit of all.     
SEAM LD 1778 EUT Committee Testimony  5-18-23 
 
3 
 Appendix A  
 
Actual Numbers Instead of Scary Numbers                                                                 
April 18, 2023  
 
 The Office of the Public Advocate (OPA) keeps talking about an NEB 
ratepayer impact of $220 million per year. This is a fict ion.  It is a scary , 
hypothetical, worst -imaginable -case scenario.  For a more accurate context, 
consider the actual rate case filed by Central Maine Power (CMP) with the Public 
Utilities Commission (PUC).  Ironically this is the same rate case the OPA may  be 
able to negotiate down!  In this rate case, CMP is asking for about a $50 million 
increase spread over three year, purportedly for NEB costs.  This is significant, and 
is cause for distributed generation program reform, but it is not a crisis.  
Accordi ng to CMP, the company is seeking a total rate increase of                 
$ 94.9 million over 3 years, for both  (i) investment in a stronger, smarter, more 
resilient grid  (an ongoing CMP responsibility) , and (ii) to support Maine energy 
policy objectives (including NEB).  Allocating half of this amount to each purpose, 
this means $ 47.5 million for distributed generation and other clean energy 
incentives  (including NEB) .  The average CMP residential bill is $  153.84/month.  
Per CMP, this would result in an increase of $ 4.90 (only 3.2 % of the current total 
bill) over three years.  If the energy part of the bill decreases even one cent it 
would wipe out the impact of this clean energy cost.  
Math Proof  
Typical residential customer energy usage: 550 kWh/month                                                  
Standard Offer Energy Rate: $ 0.176310/kWh                                                                                       
Delivery Charge: $ 13.66 (fix ed for first 50 kWh) + $ 0.086420/kWh (variable 
charge for remaining kWh used)  
 
4 
 Current bill charge:  $ 13.66 + ($ 0.086420 x 500 kWh) + ($ 0.176310 x 550 kWh) = 
$ 153.84   
CMP Rate Filing Data (per CMP Customer Notification, March 2023) * 
Year         Revenu e Increase         CMP Estimate Ratepayer Impact     
2023          $ 43.5 million                         $ 4.65 per month                                            
2024          $ 27.7 million                         $ 2.78 per month                                          
2025          $23.7 million                          $ 2.37 per month  
* Note this is the total CMP request for both regular , routine on -going investment 
and clean energy purposes.   
Customer Bill Impact Related to NEB + Other State Clean Energy Policies * 
Year         Clean Energy Portion (1/2  of the above)        % of Baseline Total Bill     
2023                     $ 2.32 per month                                          1.51 %                                                 
2024                     $ 1.39 per month                                          0.90 %                                                 
2025                     $ 1.19 per month                                           0.77 %                                                  
Total                     $ 4.90 per month                                          3.18 %  
$ 4.90 per month (the cumulative total over three years is 0.9 cents/kWh  
* Note this is one -half the total rate increase for both regular, routine on -going 
investment and clean energy purposes.  
This is an incomplete story because it does not include additional p rojects that 
may come on line.  Nevertheless, it shows the limited impact of State energy 
policy initiatives in the current CMP rate filing.  The impact o f these policies on 
the typical residential customer is less than one cent per kWh.  A decrease  in the 
energy charge of one cent of more (considered probable), or any other charge 
category, would compensate for this negative impact in full.  A copy of the CMP 
customer notice on which the foregoing analysis is based is attached.   
 

 
5 
 Appendix B                                            
 
Accounting for the Benefits and Costs of Distributed Energy Resources (DER)    
April 14, 2023  
 
There are two basic, distinct types of economic analysis  typically 
une=dertaken .  Both are important to consider for a full and accurate 
understanding of the impact of distributed energy resources (DER), which is a 
category that includes but is not limited  to net energy billing (NEB).  
1. Benefit -Cost Analysis .  This is a comprehensive analysis that looks at all the 
benefits and costs of a distributed energy resource (DER), including utility 
system and societal (general population) benefits and costs .  The resu lts 
typically are expressed in a Benefit/Cost Ratio (BCR).  Benefits considered in 
the “Maine Test” by the economic consultants to the Governor’s Energy Office 
(GEO) for the DG Stakeholder Group work include: (1) avoided capacity costs;  
(2) avoided enviro nmental and RPS compliance costs; (3) avoided transmission 
costs, (4) avoided distribution costs; and (5) avoided greenhouse gas (GHG) 
and NOx emissions  (Source: Distributed Generation Successor Program in 
Maine , An Economic Assessment , January 5, 2023, pa ges 14 -19.)  
2. Rate Impact Analysis .  The rate, bill, and participation analyses encompass only 
the benefits and costs  of DER that affect the utility bills  of both participant and 
nonparticipant ratepayers.  This is a subset of the factors considered in an 
overall benefit -cost analysis, which exclude societal benefits, because these 
are not reflected in utility bills, even though they benefit participant and 
nonparticipant ratepayers equally. (Source: same as above, pages 22 -23.) 
The foregoing was taken from the work of the economic consultants Synapse 
Energy Economics (Synapse) and Sustainable Energy Advantage (SEA) included in 
the Final Report of the Distributed Generation Stakeholder Group, dated January 
6, 2023, as submitted to the EUT Committee. This is t he latest and most 
 
6 
 comprehensive analysis of the net benefits and costs, and ratepayer impact, of 
distributed energy resources.  A few important statements that can be made as a 
result are:  
 This work was oriented toward the charge of the GEO and the DG Sta keholder 
Group to come up with a successor DER program, so virtually all the analysis 
relates to future program options.  This corroborates the practicality and 
importance of such analysis.  
 The limited analysis included about the existing NEB program (curr ently the 
only active DG program) did not take into account the limitation on the C&I 
Tariff enacted last year.  
 Calculations about lost or foregone projected utility revenues are misleading, 
particularly if they are represented as negative ratepayer impac t, because 
typically they are based on what might happen (undoubtedly an 
overstatement to some degree, for multiple reasons), and do not take into 
account the benefits  of DER, including both avoided costs of the utilities 
(which reduce ratepayer impact) an d benefits to all Maine people, including all 
ratepayers, which are not reflected in utility bills.  
 It definitely is possible to quantify benefits, costs, and ratepayer impacts, 
despite the difficulty assigning a value to things like clean air and reduced 
climate change, especially when comparing the merits of future options.  
 It appears eminently possible to structure a successor program that benefits all 
Maine people, and which  reduces  the rates paid by all investor -owned utility 
ratepayers.  (See attached chart of the potential beneficial impact on 
ratepayers of the recommendation of the DG Stakeholder Group, as well as 
the net benefits available to all Maine people.)   A second chart (attached to 
Appendix C) shows the existing total pipeline, and that less than 10% of this 
volume would qualify for the NEB program.   
 
 
 

 
7 
 Appendix C  
 
Limited Total Capacity of Small Distributed Generation Projects ( 1 MW  max )   
April 13, 2023  
 
 Net energy billing (NEB) gives all Maine people the ability to take direc t 
action to help mitigate the worsening climate disaster.  Some form of NEB is 
essential to allow individuals, businesses, and other entities of conscience to 
install clean energy equipment, or participate in projects doing this for them, and 
be charged on  their utility bills only for any additional energy they need.  The 
smallest distributed generation (DG) projects, structured according to NEB 
principles, are the foundation on which the dynamic, two -way grid of the future 
will operate.  Good policy entail s analyzing the benefits and costs of these 
projects rigorously and implementing refinements that will increase benefits and 
reduce costs.   
 In any case, data from Central Maine Power (CMP) and Versant    
(November 2022) shows that whatever positive or negative impact the smallest  
DG projects  may have on nonparticipating ratepayers will be nominal, just 
because these projects account for such a small fraction of all DG projects.  For 
example, the data shows that a mere 7% of the total projects in the pip eline are   
1 MW in scale or less.  Please note the attached chart to see this graphically.    
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
8 
 Appendix D  
 
The Maine Distributed Generation Manifesto – Statement of Principles  
May 12, 2023  
 
1. Decarbonize Maine  life.   
 
2. Install distributed energy resources . 
 
3. Provide net benefits and reduce electricity rates . 
 
4. Empower people to take direct action to reduce climate disruption . 
 
5. Help lower income people participate . 
 
6. Analyze the economic impact of all factors , on everyone  
 
7. Maximize the economic values  of distributed energy resources . 
 
8. Simplify the net energy billing (NEB) program . 
 
9. Honor prior legislative , regulatory , and contractual commitments . 
 
10. Maximize energy reliability and grid resiliency .  
  
 
Brief explanations follow.  
 
1. Decarbonize Maine life as  required by Maine statute, or ahead of schedule, via 
conversion to electricity for all purposes requiring power, generated from 
renewable energy resources.  
 
2. Create a network of distributed energy resources (defined as renewable 
energy projects up to 5 MW in scale) as the backbone of local micro grids and 
 
9 
 an essential ingredient in the dynamic, two -way Maine grid system of the 
future.  
3. Support a tier of distributed energy resources (DER) programs that as group 
provide more benefits than costs to Maine people , and reduce electricity rates 
for all utility ratepayers.  
 
4. Empower individuals, businesses, schools, municipalities, and other 
institutions to take direct action to acquire their electricity from solar and 
other renewable distributed energy resources, up to a certain maximum 
project size (either 1 or 2 MW), through a successor net energy billing (NEB) 
program.  Larger DER projects (up to 5 MW) would not be in the NEB program.  
 
5. Look for ways to provide electricity produced from solar resources to people 
with low or moderate incomes, via maximization of the use of Federal funds 
or otherwise.  
 
6. Ensure that all actions are based on an evaluation of (i ) the full range of 
benefits (included avoided costs) and costs affecting Maine people, and (ii) the 
subset of these that affect electricity rates.  Make these analyses explicit.    
 
7. Maximum the value of distributed energy resources by incorporating 
techno logies with synergy (e.g., battery storage, grid improvements) while 
relying on proven technology and known, predictable project costs.  
 
8. Simplify the NEB program to create as much value as possible at the utility 
level and make it more understandable to ev eryone.  
 
9. Fulfill the obligations made to Maine electricity customers (residential, 
commercial, and institutional) in existing statutes, regulations and 
agreements, by making changes that apply in the future in an orderly fashion . 
 
10. Support efficient electrical system operation by utilizing an overall mix of 
electricity resources to provide system reliability in all seasons, under all 
weather conditions, at any time of day; and otherwise support the reliability 
and resiliency of the e lectrical system when stressed, for whatever reason.  
 
Steven Weems
Solar Energy Association of Maine & Dirigo Community Solar Group
LD 1778
The Solar Energy Association of Maine thought this public hearing had been shifted 
to a later date. Therefore we were not present to testify in person and are submitting 
written testimony after the fact. We apologize for any inconvenience this may cause, 
and appreciate Committee consideration of this submission. 
