Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, 
FAAP 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
Immediate Past President 
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, 
FAAP 
Board of Directors 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanieloy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP 
Valerie O'Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, 
NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
*Resident Board Reps 
**Medical Student 
Representatives 
Staff 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME 04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
www.rnaineaag.org Maine Chapter 
lN(l()RPORATED IN MAINE 
_, __\,.,... 
,i 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
lll:.Di(:\'l'llD Tl‘) Till: l|l:Al,Tll Oi‘ All (‘2lHl.DRl;N" l!I 
lﬂ'.\l"té3"l 
Testimony in support of LD 1577, ‘An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for 
Biomarker Testing’ 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Distinguished Members of the Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee, my name is Dr. Alton Kremer. I am a resident of Falmouth 
Maine and a board member for the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics 
(Maine AAP). 
I am a retired physician who spent most of his career developing new anti-cancer 
medications. In addition to the Maine AAP, I currently serve as a volunteer on the board of 
CancerCare, a charity supporting cancer patients and their families. I am testifying to 
support and urge passage of LD-1 577, An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for 
Biomarker Testing. This bill is critically important because it addresses the very core of our 
ability to properly diagnose and treat patients. It is about access to needed health care. 
Why is it so important? 
It has become clear over the past decade or so that cancer is not one disease, even when we 
consider cancers by their tissue of origin, the way We have traditionally talked about cancer. 
Cancers are now deﬁned by speciﬁc mutations, changes that occur in the genes of the 
cancer cell some of which drive them to become aggressive cancers. These mutations cause 
the production or over-production of speciﬁc proteins in these cells. These genes and/or the 
proteins they produce are the biomarkers. If we take the most common type of lung cancer 
(non-small cell lung cancer) as an example, in 2021 more than 70% of patients hada 
mutation driving the cancer.‘ This same subdivision of cancers by mutation occurs in 
breast cancer, melanoma, colorectal cancer and others. 
Treating patients based on the precise mutation, the biomarker, in their cancers is what We 
call precision medicine or personalized medicine. This allows physicians to give patients 
the drug that they, individually, need to treat the disease that they have. We have made 
great strides in our ability to do this. As an example, in 2021, for seven lung cancers 
deﬁned by speciﬁc mutations and biomarkers, over ﬁfteen drugs had been approved by 
FDA‘ and more are coming. 
Biomarker testing is necessary to use these new drugs. Over the past ﬁve years, 60% of the 
oncology drugs that have been launched need biomarker testing before they can be usedz. 
Many of these drugs treat cancers with one speciﬁc mutation in the cancer, be it lung 
cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer or others. Other drugs, called tumor-agnostic, can 
treat cancers from multiple different tissues that have the same mutation or biomarker. The 
use of the immunotherapeutic drugs that have proven effective across a number of cancers 
in some settings also require biomarker testing. The approval of these drugs by the FDA is 
often in combination with a “companion diagnostic ” , a speciﬁc test that determines if the 
patient has the biomarker that the drug targets.3 It is important to understand that if the 
safety and efficacy of a drug is shown only in people with a speciﬁc biomarker, then the 
FDA-approved label for the drug will restrict the indication to those people. This point 
derives from federal regulations and is clearly stated by FDA in their guidance3 . Therefore, 
the use of these precision medicine cancer drugs in accordance with both labeling and 
clinical practice depends on the biomarker testing. Consequently, it is clear that biomarker 
testing is important to patients, to all of us.I
Maine Chapter 
lN(.‘ORP()RAI'I;'D [N MAINL‘ 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
I)|l.l7l(P .'\TY.[) TU THY HY./\lTH (‘Y All (“.iHl.l7RI-.N ” I, 
lﬁhlﬁli‘ 
Unfortunately, today not all patients who could beneﬁt ﬁ'om these precision therapeutics 
actually receive them. One of the reasons for this is about the level of insurance coverage. 
Two—thirds of oncology health-care providers have reported insurance coverage as an issue 
in testing patients for biomarl<ers4 and this then becomes a barricade against giving patients 
the treatments they need. 
Precision medicine only works if we know the disease that the patient has. Biomarkers tell 
us the disease that the patient has and the drug the patient should receive. Biomarkers also 
tell us what drugs not to give. This is Why it is so important to have insurance coverage for 
biomarker testing. Without biomarkers, we cannot deploy the weapons we have developed 
against cancer, and we cannot properly treat patients. Insurance coverage for biomarker 
testing, which this bill will provide, is essential in having the best treatment for cancer. 
References: 
1. Chevallier, M., et al, World J Clin Oncol, 2021, 12: 217-237 
2. Global Oncology Trends, 2021, IQVIA Institute, June 2021 
3. Food and Drug Administration Guidances: In Vitro Companion Diagnostic Devices, 
2014, Principles for Codevelopment of an In Vitro Companion Diagnostic Device 
with a Therapeutic Product, 2016, and Developing and Labeling In Vitro Companion 
Diagnostic Devices for a Speciﬁc Group of Oncology Therapeutic Products 2020 
4. ACS CAN, Survey Findings Summary: Understanding Provider Utilization of 
Cancer Biomarker Testing Across Cancers, December 2021 
Submitted by: Alton B. Kremer MD, Ph.D
