Consumers for P-O “X2490 
1. Augusta, ME 04338 
rt ﬁZi‘i{ﬁ'2'§l§ 
consumerhealth@ma|necahc org 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable 
health care for all Mainers. 
Testimony In Support of: 
LD 1577, An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for Biomarker Testing 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee On Health 
Coverage, insurance, and Financial Services, thank you for the opportunity to submit these 
comments in support of LD 1577, An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for Biomarker 
Testing. 
My name is Ceilidh Shea, and I am the Policy Advocate at Consumers for Affordable Health 
Care, a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates the right to quality, affordable 
health care for every person in Maine. 
As designated by Maine's Attorney General, CAHC serves as Maine's Health insurance 
Consumer Assistance Program (CAP), which operates a toll-free HelpLine. Our Helptine fields 
approximately 6,000 calls and emails every year from people across Maine who need help 
obtaining, keeping, using, or fixing problems with private health insurance or with accessing or 
affording health care services. CAHC also serves as the Ombudsman program for Maine's 
Medicaid program, MaineCare, and helps people apply for and navigate the enrollment process 
for MaineCare. It is with that background that we provide these comments. 
Biomarker tests look for genes, proteins, or other substances that can provide information 
about cancer and the way it behaves. Each cancer patient has a unique pattern of biomarkers, 
some of which affect how certain treatments work. Some cancer treatments, including targeted 
therapies and immunotherapies, may only work for people whose cancers have certain 
biomarkers. ‘ Biomarker tests can help doctors make better informed decisions regarding what 
treatment is most appropriate or will be most effective for a specific patient. In a cancer 
diagnosis, there is no time to waste on ineffective treatments that can exacerbate the physical, 
emotional, and economic burdens of disease." Biomarker tests help avoid ineffective 
treatments and can lead to increased survivorship and better quality of life for patients. 
It's also important to note that although the applications of biomarker testing are currently in 
oncology and autoimmune disease, there is ongoing research to assess how biomarker tests 
can benefit patients with heart disease, neurological conditions, infectious disease, and 
respiratory conditions. “ 
Recent polling conducted in Maine, which we will be releasing soon, found that more than half 
of Mainers with commercial insurance faced difficulty paying for medical expenses not covered 
by insurance. More than half of Mainers also report being concerned that they won't be ableto
afford the costs of a diagnostic test they need. When biomarker testing is not covered by 
insurance, patients may be required to pay hundreds or even thousands of dollars in out-of- 
pocket costs. 
While most insurance plans offer coverage for some biomarker tests, one analysis found that 
83% of commercial plans in Maine provided coverage for biomarker tests that was more 
restrictive than National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines, despite the fact that 9 in 
10 providers rely on these guidelines to determine when to recommend a biomarker test.“ Lack 
of insurance coverage can further exacerbate health care disparities when only some people 
have access to the most effective treatments, as a result of biomarker testing. To ensure that all 
people have access to biomarker tests (and therefore better chances of survival) it is crucial 
that these tests be covered by all plans, including private health plans, as well as MaineCare. 
Cancer is the leading cause of death in l\/lainers. Biomarker testing is a proven solution to 
increasing survivorship and decreasing unnecessary, ineffective treatment. Most cancer 
patients do not have the luxury of time, or financial resources, to waste on exploring multiple 
ineffective treatments. All l\/lainers deserve access to high quality health care and to the most 
effective treatments available, which is why it is of the utmost importance that all health plans 
provide coverage for medically necessary biomarker testing, For this reason l urge you to 
support LD 1577. 
lhttps:[/www_cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatmentltypes/biomarker-testing~cancer- 
treatment#: “':text=Biomarker%2Otesting%2Ois%20a%2Oway,how%2Ocertain%20cancer%2Otreatments%20work 
"https:[/wwwfightcancer.org/sites/defauit/files/state documents/bmt costs and cost savings O.pdf 
ll‘https:1/wwwfightcancer.org/sites/default/files/state documents/me biomarker testing fact sheet 5.pdf 
"https://wwwfightcancer.org/sites/default/files/state documents/precision medicine and biomarker testing fa 
ct sheet clec 2022 O.pdf
