Corinne Pert
Blue Hill, ME 04614
May , 2023
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee:
I am testifying in support of LD 1577 - An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for Biomarker Testing.  Biomarker testing is the reason I am able to be here on earth to write this.
In January 2016 I was diagnosed with stage IV lung cancer.  Just months before I went on a multi-day backcountry backpacking trip from rim to river at Grand Canyon, carrying a 30 pound pack.  After years in administration, I was happily back in the classroom.  Then in fall 2015 I became ill.  After three months of illness, doctor appointments, and ER visits, a simple X-ray discovering a mass led (eventually) to my diagnosis. I was a lifelong nonsmoker and very healthy.  The cancer was in my left lung hilum and some nodes, and had spread to my liver.  When I arrived at Dana-Farber, they immediately began radiation, not as treatment but as palliative care to hopefully shrink the tumor so I could breathe while they were assessing my cancer.  I was dying.  
Also immediately Biomarker Testing was done.  My insurance company denied the testing.  What?!  I was literally dying. They said since I was in treatment it wasn’t needed.  I wasn’t in treatment, I was receiving palliative care.  The radiation was not considered as treatment by the experts treating me.  In fact, it did not shrink the tumor, but has left me with ﬁbrosis.   Dana-Farber pushed forward, tested, and found I have a gene fusion ROS1 (non hereditary) that is found in only 1% of lung cancer patients.  My insurance did eventually pay for the testing, thanks to the work of Dana-Farber advocating for me. In 2016 at Dana-Farber they knew to immediately do biomarker testing on a nonsmoking, healthy woman.  Now, Biomarker Testing should be routine and covered by insurance companies.  It saves lives.  I am proof.  I am in a FB group with ROS1 members who are proof.
The research ﬁeld that includes Biomarker Testing has identiﬁed many treatable cancers. For many like me it is the diﬀerence between going through weeks, months or years (if you survive) of harsh treatments such as radiation and chemotherapy that may be ineﬀective.  Biomarker Testing and the targeted therapy drugs have increased survival rates by great numbers.  I now know what my cancer is.  I began a targeted therapy drug when ROS1 was identiﬁed and within days my breathing was easier, the tumor was shrinking.  When the cancer progressed to my brain meninges 16 months later because the ﬁrst med didn’t protect the brain, the researchers had by then developed a drug that does.  I entered a clinical trial in July 2017 and I continue to be on this drug. My cancer is not gone, it is controlled. All thanks to Biomarker Testing.  Now I can ﬁnd joy in the everyday every day. 
My Biomarker Testing story is not unique. I have also lost many friends to lung cancer.   When you are critically ill or dying with a terminal illness is not the time to have to argue your case with insurance.  Biomarker Testing in 2023 should be a routine part of determining next steps for cancer patients.  It saves lives and leads to a higher quality of life for patients found to have speciﬁc, treatable gene mutations or fusions. For insurance companies to cover this life saving testing only makes sense for our citizens. Thank you for considering LD 1577.
Respectfully,
Corinne Cole Pert
Corinne Pert
Blue Hill
LD 1577
Corinne Pert
Blue Hill, ME 04614
May , 2023
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee:
I am testifying in support of LD 1577 - An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage
for Biomarker Testing.  Biomarker testing is the reason I am able to be here on earth 
to write this.
In January 2016 I was diagnosed with stage IV lung cancer.  Just months before I 
went on a multi-day backcountry backpacking trip from rim to river at Grand Canyon,
carrying a 30 pound pack.  After years in administration, I was happily back in the 
classroom.  Then in fall 2015 I became ill.  After three months of illness, doctor 
appointments, and ER visits, a simple X-ray discovering a mass led (eventually) to 
my diagnosis. I was a lifelong nonsmoker and very healthy.  The cancer was in my 
left lung hilum and some nodes, and had spread to my liver.  When I arrived at 
Dana-Farber, they immediately began radiation, not as treatment but as palliative care
to hopefully shrink the tumor so I could breathe while they were assessing my cancer.
I was dying.  
Also immediately Biomarker Testing was done.  My insurance company denied the 
testing.  What?!  I was literally dying. They said since I was in treatment it wasn’t 
needed.  I wasn’t in treatment, I was receiving palliative care.  The radiation was not 
considered as treatment by the experts treating me.  In fact, it did not shrink the 
tumor, but has left me with fibrosis.   Dana-Farber pushed forward, tested, and found I
have a gene fusion ROS1 (non hereditary) that is found in only 1% of lung cancer 
patients.  My insurance did eventually pay for the testing, thanks to the work of 
Dana-Farber advocating for me. In 2016 at Dana-Farber they knew to immediately do
biomarker testing on a nonsmoking, healthy woman.  Now, Biomarker Testing should
be routine and covered by insurance companies.  It saves lives.  I am proof.  I am in a 
FB group with ROS1 members who are proof.
The research field that includes Biomarker Testing has identified many treatable 
cancers. For many like me it is the difference between going through weeks, months 
or years (if you survive) of harsh treatments such as radiation and chemotherapy that 
may be ineffective.  Biomarker Testing and the targeted therapy drugs have increased 
survival rates by great numbers.  I now know what my cancer is.  I began a targeted 
therapy drug when ROS1 was identified and within days my breathing was easier, the 
tumor was shrinking.  When the cancer progressed to my brain meninges 16 months 
later because the first med didn’t protect the brain, the researchers had by then 
developed a drug that does.  I entered a clinical trial in July 2017 and I continue to be 
on this drug. My cancer is not gone, it is controlled. All thanks to Biomarker Testing. 
Now I can find joy in the everyday every day. 
My Biomarker Testing story is not unique. I have also lost many friends to lung 
cancer.   When you are critically ill or dying with a terminal illness is not the time to 
have to argue your case with insurance.  Biomarker Testing in 2023 should be a 
routine part of determining next steps for cancer patients.  It saves lives and leads to a 
higher quality of life for patients found to have specific, treatable gene mutations or 
fusions. For insurance companies to cover this life saving testing only makes sense 
for our citizens. Thank you for considering LD 1577.
Respectfully,
Corinne Cole Pert
