 
   
May  3, 2023  
 
The Honorable Senator Donna Bailey  
The Honorable Representative Anne Perry  
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
RE: Support for L.D.1577 An Act to Require Health  Insurance Coverage for Biomarker Testing  
 
Dear Chairs Bailey and Perry and Members of the Committee,  
 
My name is Danielle Adams and I am the Managing Director of Advocacy for the ALS 
Association  in New England. On behalf of the ALS Association and 66 patients we  currently  
serve in Maine , I would like to express our support  L.D.1577, An Act to Require Health  
Insurance Coverage for Biomarker Testing . This legislation  would increase access to biomarker 
testing for more Mainers  living with ALS and other diseases.  
Biomarker testing is an essential step to accessing precision medicine that can lead to improved 
survivorship  and better quality of life for patients.  A biomarker is a molecular signature, like a 
protein or gene, that can provide insights into medical conditions for diseases like ALS, cancer, 
arthritis, and more. The results of a biomarker test give providers kno wledge that can guide a 
patient's treatment plan, potentially providing access to targeted treatment that can improve 
disease outcomes, quality of life for patients, and reduce costs. In some cases, paying upfront 
for comprehensive testing can result in ov erall savings in treatment costs .  
However, insurance coverage is failing to keep pace with innovations and advancements in 
treatment for serious diseases and conditions. When biomarker testing is not covered by 
insurance, patients can be on the hook for h undreds or even thousands of dollars in out -of-
pocket costs. This bill would require state -regulated health insurance plans to cover 
comprehensive biomarker testing when supported by medical and scientific evidence.  
While biomarkers are primarily used in o ncology, more are being discovered every  day and are 
in the research pipeline. Just two weeks ago , the FDA granted accelerated approval for 
Tofersen, a gene -based therapy for people with SOD1 -ALS, a form of ALS found in about 20% of 
familial , or inherited cases. The accelerated approval pathway allow s the FDA to approve drugs 
quickly based on a surrogate endpoint -- in this case, the biomarker neurofilament light , or NfL. 

NfL levels in the blood and spinal fluid indicate damage that is happening to motor neurons. 
Tofersen was shown to reduce levels of NfL during the clinical trial.  The advisory committee 
found that the NfL levels indicate a change in the course of disease for people r eceiving the 
treatment , which translates into benefits such as longer life, increased muscle function and 
reduced disease progression. This is important to note because we see that research is on its 
way to discovering biomarkers that can lead to quicker diagnos is and  improved treatment 
pathways for patients living with ALS , a devastating and always -fatal disease . 
Unfortunate ly, not all communities in the  state are benefitting from the latest advancements in 
biomarker testing and precision medicine. Patients who are older, Black, uninsured or Medicaid -
insured, live in rural communities, and those who get their care in a  community setting versus 
academic medical centers, are less likely to be tested for certain guideline -indicated biomarkers. 
Without action, lack of access to biomarker testing could increase existing disparities in health 
outcomes by race, ethnicity, inco me, and geography.  
Currently it  takes 12 -14 months for someone to be diagnose d with ALS, a disease with an 
average prognosis of 2 -5 years , meaning they are further along in their journey before they  
begin receiving treatment . NfL  can be a diagnostic biomarker, meaning it will help patients to be 
diagnosed quicker. It can also be a prognostic biomarker, meaning it will help determine  if a 
patient will have a faster or slower disease progression,  or if a particular drug is working.  It is 
vital that biomarker testing is accessible to patients so they can receive a diagnosis earlie r and 
get treated quicker.  
When people living with ALS are already losing so much of their lives to this devastating disease, 
they should not have to worry about losing access to the extra time with their loved ones and 
the benefits  that t hese tests can provide.  
Thank you for your time and your consideration of this critical legislation. For all these reasons, 
I respectfully ask for your support on L.D.1577.  
Sincerely,  
Danielle Adams, MPH  
Managing Director, Advocacy (New England)  
ALS Association  
 
 
