Dear Senator Stewart, Representative Javner and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee, 
M y name is Diane Davis and I live in East Millinocket. I am writing in support of LD 1577. I am a two-
time cancer survivor. I was first diagnosed with uterine cancer at age 44, and treated with surgery. But 
years later, I was again in pain and knew something was not right. My health care providers 
investigated, and after numerous tests and eventual surgery, I was diagnosed with ovarian cancer. I 
began a treatment plan that many cancer patients may expect. My doctor surgically removed the tumor, 
and I began standard chemotherapy after the surgery. I did not expect that three months into 
chemotherapy, my cancer would be back and it had spread to my lymph nodes. The chemotherapy had 
had no effect at all. At that point, my prognosis was very poor, and I had few options. My doctor 
ordered biomarker testing, and the results we received opened-up treatment options I did not 
previously have. My genetic markers were positive for access to immunotherapy, and thankfully, I began 
to feel better within one treatment. I finished immunotherapy four years ago, and am currently stable 
and NED (no evidence of disease). Unfortunately, this positive treatment did not come without a cost. 
My Marketplace health insurance denied coverage of my biomarker testing, and I received a bill for 
more than $20,000. Luckily, I received assistance from the company that conducted my biomarker 
testing - the testing that ultimately saved my life. But not all cancer patients are so lucky. 
My biomarker testing also showed something else. It showed a gene mutation that could open different 
treatment options for me in the future. My doctor was extremely pleased with this saying that if my 
cancer returns and immunotherapy stops working, I would have other options. If we had not gotten the 
testing, we’d be unaware that those options existed for me.  
Stepping back in time, when I was initially diagnosed at age 44, the doctor never suggested biomarker 
testing. If I had had biomarker testing, they would have known I had Lynch Syndrome, and they wouldn't 
have left my ovaries. It would have prevented the cancer, the chemo, and everything that came with it. 
The initial cost of the testing, could have prevented the additional costs associated with my second 
cancer diagnosis and treatments.  
Thankfully, Caris Life Sciences company took care of my invoice for the testing. If they hadn’t, I would 
have had a huge debt, with reoccurring payments for many years to come. Not all patients have this 
opportunity. It makes dealing with a difficult diagnosis, even harder. If insurance companies were 
required to cover the testing, not only would they be helping their customers (patients), but they could 
save themselves the costs of covering unnecessary treatments and additional diagnosis. This coverage 
should be available to all patients, not just the lucky ones. 
Thank you for reading my testimony and I hope you will support the passage of LD 1577. 
Diane Davis 
 
