 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Sr. Clinical Director 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT 
LD 1577: An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for Biomarker Testing 
Presented to the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for Biomarker Testing. NAMI Maine represents the 1 in 4 
Mainers who struggle with mental health challenges each year. Mental Illness is a complex journey, with 
individuals waiting on average 10 years from the onset of symptoms till they seek treatment. Once an 
individual has stepped forward to seek treatment, biomarker testing can assist in stabilization and 
maintenance of their illness.  
According to the World Health Organization, suffering from a serious mental illness has been found to 
reduce life expectancy anywhere from 13-32 years depending on location and access to services. In most 
western counties, WHO states that mental illness is the leading cause of disability, as well as accounting 
for 30-40% of sick days. Currently, suicide is the second leading cause of death for 10–24-year-olds, with 
estimates of 130 suicide deaths occurring daily in the United States.  
Biomarker testing allows for an additional and critical tool for individuals struggling with their mental 
health, along with their providers. Unlike other illnesses, where scans and imaging can provide a concrete 
diagnosis and treatment regime, mental health conditions are more nuanced and at times can take 
multiple attempts to accurately diagnose and treat. During this time, many individuals can struggle to 
maintain employment, education, relationships, and at times their ability to live. Approximately 10 years 
ago, biomarker research was being completed within trial studies. An individual relayed their story of 
being in college during this time, struggling with severe depression, and overwhelming hopelessness due 
to struggles to treat and stabilize their symptoms. After trying 8 different medications and the individual 
attempting suicide, their doctor recommended them for a trial regarding biomarkers, which they now 
attribute to saving their life. The individual has since completed college, as well as their master’s program, 
and is living a fulfilling life.  
NAMI Maine urges you to consider the life changing and lifesaving work biomarker testing has been 
demonstrated to have. This committee can assist in saving lives and improving quality for so many. 
Because of this, NAMI Maine strongly urges the passage of LD 1577, An Act to Require Health Insurance 
Coverage for Biomarker Testing.  
 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) 
is the state’s largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental health system through 
collaboration and education. 
 
