Helen M. Roy 
helen.hnsn@gmail.com  
207-441-9487 
China, Maine 
 
May 8, 2023 
 
Testimony – LD 1577 An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for Biomarker Testing 
 
Greetings Senator Donna Bailey and Representative Anne Perry, and members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee. 
 
Please accept my testimony in favor of LD 1577, An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for 
Biomarker Testing. 
 
I have greatly benefited from biomarker testing. It saved me a lot of stress, time, and money for costly 
treatment. I did not deal with the horrible side effects of chemotherapy. It saved the insurance company 
a lot of money, paying for costly chemotherapy. Biomarker testing should be covered by health 
insurance for every patient who has a doctor prescribing it. 
 
In late 2013, after transferring to Husson University in Bangor to complete my degree, I was diagnosed 
with ER/PR positive, HER2 negative breast cancer. I was 48 years old. The journey started with a routine 
mammogram that found a small tumor in my right breast. In November, a biopsy was done with 
inconclusive results. In December, while on break, a lumpectomy was done. On December 26, 2013, I 
got the cancer diagnosis. Before the spring 2014 semester started, I had a sentinel node biopsy that, 
thankfully, showed the cancer had not moved into my lymph nodes. 
 
A genetic test was done in January. I learned that I have the BRCA 2 gene mutation. It made sense as my 
grandmother died young from cancer and my mother also died young from breast cancer. It’s in my 
family. 
 
I’ve lived with the threat of cancer my whole life. For me it wasn’t if I was going to get it but when. The 
when for me started in December 2013. 
 
Before transferring to Husson, I worked full-time as a CNA at a local rehabilitation facility. I had 
insurance through my job. I went back to school while a CNA in efforts to gain better employment with 
better income. The courses that fall semester at my new school were on the ground in a classroom. I 
was trying to figure out how I was going to keep working, to keep health insurance, commute back and 
forth to school, and participate in my classes. One of my co-workers was a full-time nursing student at 
the University of Maine Augusta. She told me to check with my school and see if they offered health 
coverage. Luckily, school did. Once I was enrolled in school’s coverage, I dropped my work hours down 
to per-diem, working the minimum to maintain my employment. It was during this first semester at 
Husson that cancer came knocking on my door. 
 
Thankfully, the insurance through school covered most of the surgeries, tests, and treatments. I was not 
denied any surgeries, tests, or treatments. The school plan had a deductible of $7,000. $7,000 for 2013 
and then again starting in 2014. I applied for financial assistance from both MaineGeneral and Northern 
Light Eastern Maine Medical Center as I stopped working and luckily, both hospitals helped me with the 
expenses that went towards the deductible and other out of pocket costs.  
 
It was in March 2014 that the OncoType DX test was done on cells from the .65 cm tumor. My oncologist 
recommended it, explaining the test would give her information to help her decide if I needed to do a 
course of chemotherapy. She also said that the lab doing the test would give me a call about the cost, 
insurance coverage, and possible financial assistance. 
 
Thankfully my insurance covered most of the $4380 bill for the OncoType DX test. The lab in California 
called me, screening me for financial eligibility. The rep asked if my income was under $60,000 and if I 
had any children in college. I told her my income was well below that as I was living off my student loans 
and that my daughter was also in school. The lab covered the $350 that was billed to me after the 
insurance paid its portion. 
 
The OncoType DX test is a genomic test that looks at the risk of the cancer’s recurrence. It gives you a 
recurrence score. The lower the number, the better the chances are the cancer is not coming back. It 
also provides guidance, based on clinical guidelines, on whether chemotherapy will be beneficial. 
 
I will never forget getting the call from my oncologist, once the OncoType DX results came back. She told 
me my score was on the low side in the mid-range. She said I would not need to do a course of 
chemotherapy. My relief at this news was incredulous. Along with my course load and commute, I was 
trying to figure out how I was to juggle chemotherapy and all its implications. Thankfully, I did not need 
to add this to the mix. 
 
My oncologist ordered a round of radiation treatments that ran from late March through mid-May, 5 
days a week, before or after class, in Augusta. Husson is in Bangor. My very long day was Wednesdays 
with the radiation treatment being at 7 in the morning and then heading to Bangor for a class at 9 a.m. I 
remember falling asleep by a window in the sunshine at the library at UMA, where my daughter was in 
school.  
 
A few days before Memorial Day in 2014, once the radiation treatments were done, I had an 
oophorectomy. This was to eliminate the risk of ovarian cancer. This cancer is harder to detect as 
symptoms do not rear their ugly head until it is hard to treat.  
 
I started a five-year course of tamoxifen in June 2014.  
 
Graduation, Summa Cum Laude, came in May of 2016 with employment at my current job in August 
2016.  
 
Currently, I am on a course of anastrozole. Along with this came very expensive zometa infusion 
treatments to replenish my bones with what the anastrozole robbed them of. The anastrozole is not 
expensive, thanks to insurance. The zometa infusions, on the other hand, ranged from $3,000 to $4,000. 
Thankfully a great benefit through work and my employer sponsored health coverage helped cover 
some of the costs of the infusions. 
 
As of April 2023, I have another year of anastrozole. In December, I am celebrating the 10th anniversary 
of the diagnosis. I say celebrating because I have been extremely lucky and truly blessed on this cancer 
journey.  
 
I had insurance through school, and then financial assistance through both medical centers that treated 
me. The tumor was found early, the cancer had not spread. I did not need to do chemotherapy, thanks 
to the OncoType DX test. I have an oncologist who fully explained treatments and why she was 
prescribing them, then followed up with answers to my questions, and was concerned about the 
stresses I dealt with, not only with the cancer, but with school. 
 
I am truly blessed. I know that not all cancer journeys turn out like mine. Not everyone diagnosed with 
cancer is as fortunate. I am alive. Annual mammograms and breast MRIs are monitoring anything new 
showing up. I have a wonderful job with health coverage and benefits that help me cover the expensive 
zometa infusions and the breast MRIs.  
 
I pray this committee votes “Ought to Pass” on LD 1577. Biomarker testing should be covered by 
insurance just like mammograms and colonoscopies are covered. Biomarker testing can provide 
information on a course of treatment. I my case, the biomarker test results helped me avoid 
chemotherapy, its debilitating side effects, its disruption of my education, and its financial hardship. It 
also helped the insurance company pay less for my cancer treatment. 
 
Thank you, 
Helen M. Roy 
China, Maine 
 
 
 
 
 
