 
  
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM IN SUPPORT 
 
LD 1577  
 
May 5, 2023  
 
On behalf of the Lupus and Allied Diseases Association  and the m illions of  Maine  residents  both 
directly and indirectly affected  by autoimmune conditions , cancer  and other diseases of unmet  
need , we passionately urge you to please support LD 1577  An act relating to insurance; requiring 
health plans to provide coverage for biomarker testing . 
 
As patient stakeholders who represent individuals dealing with serious medical conditions on a 
daily basis and their loved ones who strongly support establishing essential patient protections 
that improve access to vital therapies, we strongly urge your support and passage of LD 1577 to 
ensure that M aine residents  covered by state -regulated insurance plans , including MaineCare  
have coverage for biomarker testing when medically appropriate.  Access to appropriate 
medication can dramatically improve disease outcome and quality of life and effective treatment 
can reduce the severity and frequency of disease a ctivity and decelerate its progression, enabling 
individuals to remain productive.  
 
Due to the heterogeneity of autoimmune diseases like lupus, no two patients are alike and 
treatment is highly individualized. We  have been eagerly awaiting more efficacious  and safer 
groundbreaking  treatments that target the offending molecule or cell that disrupts our immune 
system and in a perfect world, people like us would take one pill a day for treatment  instead of 
forty -eight . We desperately need safer, more innovativ e treatments that address the pathogenes is 
of diseases, while impacting what matters most to patients —reducing symptoms and improving 
daily functioning and quality of life.  Biomarker testing will provide the path forward to targeted 
therapies and precision  medicine.  
 
Maine has a longstanding record of providing access to affordable healthcare as well as some of the 
strongest patient protections in the country. By improving coverage and access to biomarker testing 
across insurance types, LD 1577 has the potential to reduc e health disparities and inequities for 
communities of color, individuals with lower socioeconomic status, rural communities, disabled 
populations, and those receiving care in non -academic medical centers  who are all currently less 
likely to receive testing for biomarkers . 
 
The Lupus and Allied Diseases Association was founded in 1978 and is a national non- profit 
organization led by people with lupus and allied diseases and their loved ones who are dedicated to 
ensuring that the  patient perspective is included and recognized as an equal stakeholder in the 
healthcare, regulatory and public policy arenas and across the research continuum. It is our goal to 
improve access to care and quality of life by fostering collaboration among stakeholders and by 
wielding the patient voice as a catalyst to advance innovative advocacy, education, awareness and 
biomedical research initiatives that will identify causes, advance better diagnostics, and discover 
superior treatments, and cures.  
 
We urg e your  committee and the Maine  legislature  to support LD 1577 and stand with patients 
and their loved ones by helping to advance biomarker testing and ultimately, precision medicine.  
There are millions of people who could benefit from innovative dru gs now, and many more in the 
futur e who are yet to be diagnosed. Patients with rare and chronic diseases of unmet need with 
only limited or no therapies need access to an array of novel, promising treatments  and biomarker 
testing is the key to unlocking the right treatments for the right patients.  Public policy must keep 
pace with innovation.  
 
Please contact me at 315 -264-9101 or kathleen@ladainc.org  if you have any questions.  
 
We thank you for considering our unique patient viewpoint.  
 
Respectfully Submitted-  
 
 
 
Kathleen A. Arntsen  
President  & CEO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
· PO Box 1 70 · Verona, NY 13 478 · 315-829-4272  · www.LADAinc.org  · Info@ladainc.org  · 
 
