L HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04353-0002 
..=_,.~;;-\w,- (207) 287-1440 
€“ TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Kathy Irene J avner 
131 Pea Ridge Road 
Chester, ME 04457 
Residence: (207) 290-1321 
Kathy J avner@legislatm'e.maine. gov 
Testimony in Support 
of 
LD 1577An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for Biomarker Testing 
Good morning, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Affairs. 
I am Kathy Javner, I proudly represent District 29 located in the beautiful Katahdin 
Region. 
I am here today to present testimony in support of LD 1577 An Act to Require Health 
Insurance Coverage for Biomarker Testing. 
Two years ago I heard the words that left me completely overwhelmed. “You have 
cancer.” 
So many questions. So, so many emotions. 
The journey was long and arduous. 
One of the steps offered to me was testing for Biomarkers. I wasn’t quite sure if that was 
something that I really wanted to endure. However, the appointment was made. It was 
actually the one piece of my treatment that was able to be done by telehealth. 
That appointment was one of the most intriguing pieces of my journey. The specialist 
was extremely knowledgeable and clearly communicated to me the information needed 
so that I could make a very informed decision. I was so grateful to have the opportunity 
to gain a piece of vital health data. Information that would be extremely valuable to our 
daughter. 
They ordered the test and during my next blood draw, they drew an extra sample to be 
utilized for the Biomarker test. 
Then we waited. 
When the results were ready, I missed the call from the specialist. She left a voicemail. 
Which I still have saved on my phone. 
House District 29
She said, “I received the stat breast cancer panel back. It came back normal or negative. 
With no damages in those high risk cancer genes.” 
When I did call her back and we had our “follow up” , she said, “We have good news and 
some perhaps not so good news. You are not positive for the breast cancer genes, but then 
we also do not know why you have a cancer diagnosis. ” 
Even without an answer to the question of ,”Why?” , I was so relieved to have at least 
another “piece” of the puzzle in place; even if it wasn’t the last piece. 
While my Oncology team was discussing the option of Biomarker testing, the insurance 
question was the key to just how in depth the testing could be done. Once that was 
determined, they scheduled the full scope of the test. 
I urge you to pass LD 1577 so that our cancer warriors can have one less missing piece of 
the puzzle to their cancer story. 
Thank you. 
House District 29
