55 West Wacker Drive , Suite 1150   |  Chicago, IL 60601  |  1 -800-LUNGUSA  |  Lung.org  
  
  
 
 
 
T estimony of Lance Boucher  
 Assistant Vice President , State Public Poli cy  
American Lung Association  
In Support of LD 1 577 “An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for 
Biomarker T esting ” 
 
Good  morning Bail ey and Perry and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee  on  Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Service s. My 
name is Lance  Bouche r and I am the Assistant Vice President, State Public Policy for the 
American Lung Association working out of our Augus ta office.  
 
The American Lung Assoc iation appreciates the opportunity to offer comments to you  in 
support of LD 1577 “An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for Biomarker 
Testing .”  This legislation  will improve access to critical cancer care  for patients in Maine , 
including those with lung cancer.  
 
The American Lung Association is the oldest voluntary public health association in the 
United States, currently representing the more than 3 4 million Americans living with lung 
diseases, including more than  1,600  living with lung cancer  in Maine . The Lung Association 
is the leading organization working to save lives by improving lung health and preventing 
lung disease through research, education and advoca cy. 
Comprehensive biomarker testing allows do ctors to identify  abnormalities in a cell ’s DNA,  
which in turn helps healthcare providers determine the best course of treatment for 
cancer patients. This is particularly important when treating lung cancer,  as there are 
currently FDA -approved lung cancer treatments  for tumor abnormalities in seven  distinct 
genes .1 Studies show  that lung cancer p atients that have access to biomarker testing and 
are thus able to receive targeted therapy treatments have better  overall  chances of 
survival .2 Biomarker testing  is a crucial part of both  cancer care and  treatment of other 
chronic conditions  and  has been incorporated into many clinical guidelines  so that doctors 
may make the best decisions for their patients’ health.  
Despite the evidence for th e value of biomarker  testing, most  health  coverage plans  have 
been found to be more restrictive than the National Comprehensive Cancer Network ’s 
guidelines  for biomarker testing.3 Many patients who should receive biomarker testing 
 
 may be unable to do so because of  insurance coverage  restrictions and high out -of-pocket 
costs. Therefore,  it is important  that LD 1 577 increases coverage of biomarker testing  and 
removes some of these barriers to care . The Lung Association is especially pleased that 
this measure  would ensure cov erage of biomarker testing through MaineCare as well.  
Maine has an opportunity to increase equitable access to health care by passing LD 1577 . 
Current biomarker testing rates reflect significant racial disparities. For example, research 
shows that Black patients with non -small cell lung cancer are less likely to receive testing 
than white patients.4 The Lung Association supports this measure as a step towards 
closing these gaps.   
Increasing coverage of biomarker testing will improve health equity in Maine  and make 
cancer and ch ronic disease care more affordable and more accessible  for patients . The  
American  Lung Association urges you r unanimous vote of “Ought to Pass ” for LD 1 577. 
 
 
1 Lung Cancer Biomarker Testing | American Lung Association  
2 Value of Precision Medicine in Advanced Non -Small Cell Lung Cancer: Real -World Outcomes Associated 
with the Use of Companion Diagnostics - PubMed (nih.gov) ; The Effect of Advances in Lung -Cancer 
Treatment on Population Mortality - PubMed (nih.gov)   
3 Alignment of health plan coverage policies for somatic multigene panel testing with clinical guidelines 
in select solid tumors (futuremedicine.com)  
4 Presley CJ, PR, Chiang AC, Longtine JA, Adelson KB, Herbst RS, Nussb aum NC, Sorg R, 
Abernethy AP, Agarwala V, and Gross CP. Disparities in next generation sequencing in a 
population -based community cohort of patients with advanced non -small cell lung cancer. 
Journal of Clinical Oncology 2017 35:15_suppl, 6563 -6563.  
