  
Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Cross Building, Room 220  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
May 3 , 2023  
 
Chair  Bailey , Chair Perry , and Members of the Joint Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services , 
 
On behalf of the 395,000  Maine  residents with doctor -diagnosed arthritis, thank you for 
the opportunity to submit testimony in support of  LD 1577 , which would  allow more 
Maine  residents to benefit from the most effective treatments for arthritis and  other 
health conditions . This legislation  requir es insurance coverage for biomarker testing that 
is supported by medical and scientific evidence, including nationally recognized clinical 
practice guidelines, for the purposes of diagnosis, treatment, management,  or ongoing 
monitoring of  a disease.  
 
Given the complexity of arthritic diseases and demographic impact , 
understanding  arthritis is the first step in managing it.  Arthritis isn’t a single 
disease; the term refers to joint pain or joint disease, and there are more than 100 types 
of arthritis and related conditions. People of all ages, races and sexes live with arthritis, 
and it is the leading cause of disability in the United States.  
 
Autoimmune forms of arthritis like rheumatoid arthritis can be complex and with multiple 
classes of biologics to treat the disease, it can take multiple attempts on different  drugs 
to identify the one that will work best. A 2016 Arthritis Foundation (AF)  survey found it 
took an average of 2 -3 drugs before a patient became stable, and in the meantime,  
patients are faced with worsening of disease and the physical, financial, and emotional 
toll that comes with that. Early symptom management is key to preventin g more severe 
disease long -term and the resulting negative impacts.  
 
Biomarker testing could revolutionize the early part of a patient’s disease journey by 
getting them in the right class of medications earlier. Strengthening  the treatment of 
arthritis  through more targeted therapies can lead to improved health outcomes, better 
quality of life for patients , and lower health costs for the entire health system . 
 
Below are some current e xamples of biomarker testing for patients living with arthritis:  
 
  
• Polyglutamate testing , which  measures methotrexate’s effectiveness and can 
allow a doctor to adjust doses . 
• Vectra DA , which  is a blood test that measures 12 biomarkers of R heumatoid 
Arthritis (RA) . The test is not used to diagnose RA , but monitor s disease activity 
and can help predict joint damage.  
• Anti-CCP2 Test , which  selects the cyclic citrullinated peptide s (CCPs)  that best 
detect RA, making it more sensitive and specific. It can be used as another tool 
to help diagnose and manage care for patients livi ng with RA.  
• Anti-MCV , which  looks for antibodies common in early autoimmune arthritis. It 
helps to quickly identify RA patients who may present with other forms of arthritis.  
 
Unfortunately, not all communities are benefitting from the latest advancements in 
biomarker testing , like those listed above . Marginalized communities including 
communities of color, individuals  with lower socioeconomic status, rural communities, 
and those receiving care in nonacademic medical centers are less likely to receive 
biomarker testing. Improving  coverage for and access to biomarker testing across 
insurance types is key to reducing  these health disparities. Increasing access to 
biomarker tests to help get patients on the right treatment quickly is a vital compon ent in 
advancing care options for all patients.  
 
The Arthritis Foundation thanks the committee for their consideration of LD 1577  and 
urges all members to support this critical legislation to expand access to precision  
medicine for those living with arthritis and other chronic diseases  in Maine . 
 
Melissa Horn  
Director of State Legislative Affairs  
Arthritis Foundation  
1615 L St. NW Suite 320  
Washington, D.C. 20036  
240.468.7464 | mhorn@ar thritis.org   
 
 

