  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
May 8 , 202 3 
 
Senator Donna Bailey , Chair  
Representative Anne Perry , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1577 – An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for Biomarker Testing  
 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information on LD 1577, An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage 
for Biomarker Testing .  
 
This bill requires insurance coverage, including coverage in the MaineCare program,  for 
biomarker testing.  
 
MaineCare currently cover s some , but not all, biomarker testing. The number of available billing 
codes for biomarker testing is large and growing.  The fiscal impact of this bill is likely higher 
than anticipated.  
 
The private insurance provisions of the bill allow u tilization review to determine the 
appropriateness of biomarker testing for a particular patient/member; however, the MaineCare 
provisions do not speak to medical necessity for the test for a particular member, only to the 
scientific validity of the test. At present, MaineCare requires prior authorization for biomarker 
testing, and we would want to continue this practice to assure appropriateness and in view of the 
high cost of some biomarker testing. This may necessitate some changes in the language of the  
bill. 
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact us. 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  
 

