 
 
 
 advamed.org   ::      @AdvaMedUpdate   ::      AdvaMed  1 :: 
 
 
1301 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Suite 400  
Washington, D.C. 20004  
P :: 202.783.8700   
F :: 202.783.8750   
W:: AdvaMed.org  
 
 
May 8, 2023  
 
Senator Donna Bailey , Co-Chair  
Representative Anne Perry , Co-Chair  
Health  Coverage,  Insurance, and Fi nancial Services  Committee  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1577 -- An Act to Require Health Insurance Coverage for Biomarker Testing  
 
 
Dear Chair Bailey, Chair P erry, and Members of the Committee,  
  
On behalf of AdvaMed, I am writing in support of LD 1577 to increase access to biomarker testing 
by extending coverage to these innovative tests, ensuring patients receive an accurate diagnosis 
so they can receive the right treatment at the right time to maximize health outcomes.  
  
The Advanced Medical Technolo gy Association (AdvaMed) is the world’s largest medical 
technology association and represents over 400 member companies. AdvaMedDx, a division of 
AdvaMed, represents over 80 manufacturers of in vitro diagnostic (IVDs) tests and technologies. 
Our member com panies produce advanced IVD tests and technologies that allow early detection 
of disease, facilitate evidence -based medicine, improve patient and public health, and enable 
precision medicine. AdvaMedDx is the only advocacy organization exclusively addressi ng policy 
issues facing diagnostic manufacturers in the United States and abroad.    
  
Innovative diagnostic tests precisely measure biological signs called biomarkers. Biomarkers 
indicate if processes in the human body are functioning normally or if an abn ormal condition or 
disease exists, allowing doctors to better understand how this affects their patient. By combining 
  
 
 advamed.org   ::      @AdvaMedUpdate   ::      AdvaMed  2 :: 
 
 
the data from molecular and other diagnostic tests with an individual’s medical history and clinical 
symptoms, healthcare providers can de velop targeted management and/or prevention plans for 
that patient. When used in the treatment of cancer, precision medicine incorporates specific 
information about a person’s cancer to inform screening, diagnosis, prognosis, therapy selection, 
and to moni tor how well therapy is working.   
  
Advances in biomarker testing and cancer treatments now allow for targeted cancer therapies 
that can improve patient survival and quality of life. Biomarkers are also used to support clinical 
decision -making in numerous other disease areas, including cardiology, neurology, infectious 
diseases, and autoimmune disorders.   
  
Testing patients for specific biomarkers is integral to precision medicine in cancer care, but 
despite evidence pointing to the benefits, testing rates lag behind clinical guideline 
recommendations. Research shows that there are socioeconomic inequities in biomarker testing 
and targeted therapy utilization across cancer types.    
  
Health care coverage for biomarker testing is failing to keep pace with sci entific advancements. 
LD 1577  will require state -regulated plans to cover comprehensive biomarker testing when 
supported by medical and scientific evidence, including nationally recognized clinical practice 
guidelines. Timely access to appropriate biomarker testing will result in better health 
outcomes, advance health equity, and reduce costs . For these reasons, AdvaMed strongly 
supports LD 1577 .   
 
Sincerely,  
Roxy Kozyckyj  
Director, State Government and Regional Affairs  
Advanced Medical Technology  Association (AdvaMed)   
 
 

