 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
in support of  
LD 1273 , An Act to Exempt Some Businesses from Certain Laws Relating to Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances in Accordance with the Size of the Business  
LD 1537 , An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Prevention of Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
Pollution and to Provide Additional Funding 
 
April 2 6, 2023  
Amy Winston, S enior Director, State  Policy  
Amy.Winston@ceimaine.org  
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and Honorable Members of the Committee on Environment 
and Natural Resources :  
 
My name is Amy Winston and I live in Edgecomb. I a m testifying in support  of LDs 1273 and 1537  on 
behalf of Coastal Enterprises, Inc. (CEI). Founded in 1977 , CEI is a non-profit community development 
corporation (CDC) and community development financial institution (CDFI) that  works to build a just, 
vibrant, and climate resilient future for people in communi ties in Maine and other rural regions. We do 
this by integrating financing, business and industry expertise, and policy solutions. CEI envision s a 
world in which communities are economically and environmentally healthy, enabling all people, especially thos e with low incomes, to reach their full potential.  
 
Maine can continue to support systemic change by limiting the use of and trade in Maine of products with intentionally added PFAS. To address PFAS contamination, the legislature has already enacted a 
number of recent laws, including LD 1503, An Act To Stop  Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Pollution, 
in the 130
th Maine Legislature, enacted as 38 MRSA §1614. This statute, among other things, defines what 
qualifies as a product containing PFAs; establishes a notification process for manufacturers intentionally 
using PFAS; includes prohibitions on sales of certain products containing PFAS, effective January 1, 2023; 
and implements a PFAS source reduction program.  
 Both LD 1273 and LD 1537, if enacted, would amend 38 MRSA §1614 in important ways. LD  1273 would 
carve out an exemption for small businesses—those with fewer than 10 employees with less than $1 million in annual revenue —from the requirements of PFAS product testing outlined in the statute. As an 
organization that supports small business in  the state, CEI supports this amendment as it insulates small 
businesses from the liability and expense of a solution to a pernicious problem that they did little to 
create and perpetuate. By focusing PFAS testing and reporting on larger businesses who are  responsible 
for most of the PFAs contamination, this proposal captures the original intent of the law to focus these 
requirements on large manufacturers and retailers to leverage the most change in eradicating the use of 
PFAS.   
 
LD 1537 also makes severa l important changes to 38 MRSA §1614. The proposed bill would require the 
submission of additional information from businesses reporting PFAS in their products; extend the 
deadline for reporting PFAS in products until October 1, 2023; allow for the Departm ent of 
Environmental Protection (DEP) to add and exempt certain product categories from PFAS reporting requirements; appropriate $505,797 to the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP); and 
clarify packaging requirements. This bill also exempts smaller businesses – those with under $20 million 
in sales. CEI supports these important improvements and modifications to 38 MRSA §1614. The 
 
information gathering provisions that would be required by LD 1537, and allocation for remediation and 
waste manag ement will serve to better curb the spread of PFAS throughout the state. Extending the 
deadline also has the benefit of providing time for businesses and the state to adjust and respond to the 
changes made by 38 MRSA §1614.  
 
Perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroal kyl substances  (PFAS)  pollution is a serious health and environmental 
concern for Maine people, with significant economic consequences for farmers and food producers, 
fishermen and outfitters for whom the natural resource -based economy is as much a way of life as a 
livelihood. PFAS include  over 9,000 endocrine disrupting chemicals  that have been used by industry and 
government to improve functionality of consumer products from stain resistant furniture to Teflon pans, 
waterproof outdoor gear, and takeout containers. They are car cinogenic and linked to negative health 
effects from increased cholesterol to low birthweight, early puberty, liver and thyroid disorders, lower vaccine response and increased risk of birth defects. Their prevalence and persistent use undermine 
strategic w ork that fosters healthy  early childhood development. Known as “forever” and “everywhere” 
chemicals, because of their prevalence and the protracted time it takes for these molecules to breakdown, PFAs are widespread, with their effects manifest in  food and  soil, drinking water, and nonhuman animals 
in addition to human beings.  Chemicals are ingested when people or animals come in contact with 
products and packaging containing PFAS. Exposure begins before birth (in utero). Children and 
pregnant persons, and people with low incomes, are especially vulnerable.  
 Testing and mitigation are expensive. Current research by the NYU School of Medicine
1 estimates the 
national economic cost of health care and lost worker productivity that resulted from the top five medical conditions with the strongest association with PFAS exposure – low birth weight, childhood 
obesity, kidney and testicular cancer, thyroid disorder - at $5.25 billion. When the scope of study was 
expanded to include eight additional conditions linked to PFAS exposure, the annual disease burden and 
associated social costs of exposure to PFAS reached $62.6 billion – over the lifetime of the study 
population of 5,000.  
 
Regulatory action to limit ongoing PFAS use, eradicate contamination, and replace thes e chemicals with 
safer alternatives is justified given the economic and medical risks of allowing them to persist in the 
environment. Additionally, there are substantial economic and climate benefits to investing in clean 
consumer goods. While PFAS manufac turers value the benefit and use of these polymers in consumer 
goods and industrial processes at $2 billion a year
2 this estimate does not count long -term and 
widespread costs which are routinely externalized and disproportionately experienced by people o f color 
and people in low -income communities. There are costs associated with this short -term thinking, which 
prioritizes the benefits and conveniences of PFAS over the costs that communities and governments will 
bear because of the prolonged and widesprea d use of these compounds.  
 
 For these reasons we urge you to support both LD 1273 and LD 1537. Thank you for considering this 
testimony.  
 
 
1Obsekov, V. et.al. 2022. Leveraging Systematic Reviews to Explore Disease Burden and Costs of Per - and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substance Exposures in the United States | SpringerLink . Exposure and Health. Springer 26 July 2022.  
2 Cordner, Alissa, et al. 2021. “The True Cost of PFAS and the Benefits of Acting Now.” Environmental Science and Technology 
55(14): 9630- 33. 
