TESTIMONY OF DAVID LENNETT, SENIOR ADVISOR, NATURAL RESOURCES 
DEFENSE COUNCIL, IN SUPPORT OF LD 1537  
April 26, 2023  
 
Chairperson Brenner, Chairperson Gramlich, Members of the Committee – 
 
I had the privilege of serving as Director of DEP’s Bureau of Remediation and Waste 
Management from 1999 -2003, under Commissioner Martha Kirkpatrick in the second 
King Administration.  During that time, I was responsible for implementing Maine’s 
mercury pr oducts legislation, including the product reporting requirements.  It is based 
upon that experience that I speak in support of LD 1537, since the lessons learned from 
the mercury products experience apply to the PFAS reporting and elimination program 
as we ll. 
First, the national sales data on mercur y-added products  proved to be one of the most 
important data points we collected.  The data greatly improved our understanding of 
which product categories were the most important to address, and thus facilitated a 
prioritization process for phase outs.  It also created the most authoritative source of 
data on mercury use within product categories, promoted  benchmarking by companies 
of their progress in reducing or eliminating mercury use, and was relied upon by US  
EPA and many other stakeholders for almost two decades.  
DEP proposed requiring national sales data reporting in their first two concept drafts, 
but it omitted this requirement from the PFAS proposed rule now pending before the 
Board .  Without these data, DEP and this Committee will know the PFAS concentration 
in particular products, but not the relative importance of the products in an orderly phase 
out program.  Section 1 of LD 1537 would expressly require the reporting of national 
sales data.  
Which bring s me to my second point.  From now until 2030, when the broad statutory 
ban on PFAS in products takes effect, DEP should be prioritizing product categories for 
analysis and phase out regulations  to facilitate an orderly implementation of the law, 
and to achieve public health protections as quickly as possible.  DEP can take 
advantage of similar activities elsewhere, such as states with 2025 PFAS phase -outs in 
the clothing (and other textiles ) sector.  Waiting until 2030 for every product category is 
inconsistent with your direction in current law, and it invites chaos in seven years given 
the range of product categories.  Section 3 of LD 1537 operationalizes your intent in 
current law for a mo re systematic approach to PFAS elimination.  
Third, DEP will need the ability to assess the data obtained, undertake sector research 
on PFAS alternatives availability, and complete a series of rulemakings between now 
and 2030.  This will require staffing an d consulting resources, not a huge amount, but at 
a sufficient level and pay grade to make this work.  The delays in issuing the proposed 
reporting rule are a clear signal to you about what may lie ahead under the current 
circumstances.  
Finally, allow me t o tell you a brief anecdote which illustrates the importance of the 
Maine law and your leadership in this area.  I was recently in Pakistan for  a World Bank 
funded project to eliminate PFAS and other toxic chemicals in textile manufacturing  in 
four Asian c ountries .  The project team  and country representatives visited a large 
sports clothing there.  At the factory, a senior official of the company made a 
presentation highlighting the global pressures to eliminate PFAS use by his company , 
and specifically mentioned the Maine law as one of the  major catalyst s trigger ing 
demands from his customers  for expedited action.  Your law is making a difference.  
Please enact LD 1537 to make it even better.  
Thank you.  
