1 
 Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT  
LD 1537  
An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Prevention  
Of Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Pollution  
and to Provide Additional Funding  
Public Hearing  
April 26, 2023  
 
 
Honorable Senator Brenner, Chair; Honorable Representative Gramlich, Chair; and Honorable 
Committee Members:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony IN SUPPORT OF LD 1537. My name is 
Jacquelyn Elliott and I live in Waterboro. As a long -time environmental health and justice 
advocate, I have a keen interest in what is transpiring around the issue of PFAS pollution and 
regulation. Maine is on the forefront of facing the horrendous realities of PFAS contamination of 
our lands and waters; our wildlife and human bodies; while providing leadership in meeting the 
challenges posed to the public health of our citizens and the degradation of our environment. 
The cruel truth is PFAS are a class of toxic forever and ubiquitous chemicals that science is  finding 
threaten human and environmental health at ever -decreasing levels1 of exposure. PFAS have 
harmful impacts2 to every body system , and science is demonstrating those impacts are far -
reaching and suspected of damaging future generations3. It is becoming an inescapable 
 
1 https://www.epa.gov/pfas/key -epa-actions -address -pfas  
2 Emanuel, Gabrielle, February 16, 2023, Tracing the path of ‘toxic forever chemicals’ inside the 
body:   https://www.wbur.org/news/2023/02/16/pfas -biology -blood -new -hampshire     
3 Hileman, Bette, August 3, 2009, Environmental Healt h News, Are Contaminants Silencing Our 
Genes?:  
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/silencing -genes -chemical -contaminants -cancer -
diabetes/  
2 
 conclusion that to continue assaulting our health and environment with unnecessary contacts 
with PFAS chemicals is more than unwise. The only sane response is to turn off the toxic tap . 
LD 1537 outlines a reasonable framework to begin the process for abati ng the 
introduction of avoidable PFAS chemicals into an already overwhelmed environment. It would 
commence the assembling of a data base from which to develop  regulation and provide 
resources for that work. LD 1537 addresses technical issues with the PF AS products ban to include 
more  resources, direction, and funding to implement the law; identifies priorities for source 
reduction; provides for an orderly transition to phase out non -crucial PFAS uses; and exempts 
uses that currently have no reasonable al ternative prior to the 2032 phase -out deadline. LD 1537 
adjusts use -reporting provisions, extends the reporting deadline, and exempts small 
manufacturers until future phase -outs are instituted. Requirements for reporting are clarified to 
include informatio n obtained from suppliers as well as from product testing that establishes total 
organic fluorine content. These methods can be utilized in the absence of more precise  testing 
methods . LD 1537 addresses weaknesses in the proposed rule and requires that al l PFAS are 
subject to reporting regardless whether or not they are assigned a CAS Registry Number, and 
oblige s reporting national annual sales volume of products containing PFAS in order to establish 
priorities for source reduction documented by prevalent use.  
Thank you for considering my comments. I ask the COMMITTEE VOTE OUGHT TO PASS.  
 
Jacquelyn Elliott  
148 West Road  
Waterboro, ME 04087 -3210  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com  
