 
1620 L Street NW, Ste. 1200 | Washington, DC 20036 | (202) 331 -1770 | www.personalcarecouncil.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 2 8, 2023  
 
Committee Chair s Brenner & Gremmlech  
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: Support LD 1214 (Baldacci)  and OPPOSE LD 15 37 (Ingwersen)  
 
Chair  Brenner and Chair Gremmlech :  
 
On behalf of the members of the Personal Care Products Council  (PCPC)1, I am writing to express our support of LD 1214 , 
legislation that makes important improvements to the state ’s law on PFAS  in consumer products  while still leaving the 
substance of the law intact.  PCPC opposes LD 1537 , which would undo  some of the painstakingly negotiated language of 
the law.   
 
The Personal Care Products Council is the leading national trade association representing cosmetics and personal care 
products companies and serving as the voice on scientific, legal, regulatory, legislative and internati onal issues for the 
global cosmetics industry. The personal care products industry holds sacred the trust families put in the safety of their 
products. Our member companies invest substantial resources in scientific research and safety processes to ensure we 
are precisely following all laws and regulations and providing safe products to our consumers. PCPC and its member 
companies have a long history of going above and beyond what is required by law and a long history of working with 
various stakeholders at  all levels of government on public policy.   
 
PCPC’s member companies employ 11,400 Mainers  and contribute $580 million to Maine’s annual GDP.  PCPC values its 
partnership with Maine and asks the Maine legislature to pass LD 1214.  PCPC has supported legislation that prohibit s 
intentionally added PFAS in cosmetics.   LD 1214 seeks to amend  the PFAS law by clarifying its scope and adding much 
needed protection of confidential business information.  For this reason, we support LD 1214.  
 
Convers ely, LD 1537 would effectively dismantle important protections with in the law – provisions that had been 
carefully negotiated and agreed to by the legislature, NGOs, and business community  – and unnecessarily expands the 
obligations imposed on manufacturer s.  It also would ma ndate years of additional rulemakings by DEP, even before  the 
current rulemaking to implement the existing law has been completed.     
 
1 1 Founded in 1894, the Personal Care Products Council (PCPC)  is the voice  and advocate  for 600 member 
companies  representing  the $499.6 billion global cosmetics and personal care products industry. PCPC’s members 
represent  approximately  90% of the U.S. beauty industry and are some of the most beloved  and trusted  brands in beauty and 
personal care today.  As the manufacturers, distributers and suppliers of a diverse range of products millions of consumers rely on 
every day – from sunscreens, toothpaste and shampoo to moisturizer, makeup and fragrance – PCPC’s member  compan ies are 
global leaders committed to product safety, quality and innovation.     
 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
  
For these  reasons, PCPC  respectfully asks that you support LD 1214  and oppose LD 1537 . PCPC is  available to be a 
resource and would welcome  the opportunity to  have further dialogue on these important bills.  Thank you for your 
consideration and the opportunity to comment.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Kelsey Johnson  
Vice President, State Government Affairs  
 
 
Cc: Andy Hackman, Serlin & Haley Group  

