Testimony of Lani Graham, MD, MPH 
In Support of LD 1537 
An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Prevention of Perﬂuoroalkyl and 
Polyﬂuoroalkyl Substances Pollution and to Provide Additional Funding 
Sponsored by Senator Henry lngwersen 
And In Opposition to LD 1214 
An Act to Clarify the Laws to Combat Perﬂuoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances Contamination 
Sponsored by Senator Joseph Baldacci 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee, April 26, Z023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and Members of the 
Committee, my name is Lani Graham I am a former Chief Public health 
Officer for Maine. I serve on the Public Health Committee of the Maine 
Medical Association. l live in Freeport. I am here in Support of LD 
1537 and in Opposition to LD 1214. 
First, I am pleased to be before you so soon after earth day in support of 
LD 1537. Actions related to stopping the pollution of planet is just 
what was envisioned by Earth Day and exactly what this bill does. 
Tragically the very large chemical family known as PFAS, was carelessly 
allowed to contaminate Maine land, water, food, and people for decades. 
But thanks to hard work of many, including this body, Maine leads the 
nation in taking action. This bill is modest and generous, perhaps too 
generous, in allowing users of these chemicals lengthy periods to 
proceed with the essential phasing out process. We cannot hesitate now 
just as we are making real progress. While testing water, food, fish, and 
animals is a reasonable way to protect human health, that does not 
address the real problem, which is on-going contamination. Stopping 
the spread of contaminated waste on Maine land is a start, but if these‘ 
chemicals continue to enter our waste stream, the danger and pollution 
continues. We must stop the contamination at its source, which is 
what LD 1537 addresses, while at the same time recognizing that use
elimination will not be easy or immediate. In the interest of making 
things easier for small business this bill offers an exception on PFAS 
reporting requirements, keeping the focus where it needs to be on large 
manufacturers. 
Unfortunately, LD 1214 takes a much more relaxed approach to 
stopping PFAS contamination of Maine. All the changes in this bill lean 
in the direction of greater and longer contamination with this highly 
toxic family of chemicals. Should this law be endorsed, the new 
definition proposed for PFAS in this legislation would severely limit 
Maine's ability to track and reduce sources, as it leaves out thousands of 
family members included in the original definition. Possibly worst of all, 
manufacturers are given a free pass to continue using this family of 
chemicals even beyond 2030, regardless of whether the use of the 
contaminate is unavoidable. 
I hopeyou will unanimously support LD 1537 and unanimously reject 
LD 1214. 
Thank you for your attention. l would be pleased to answer any 
questions you might have.
