 
 
  97 Main Street, Belfast, ME  04915                    207.338.6575                     mainefarmlandtrust.org 
 
 
 
Testimony of Shelley Megquier, Policy & Research Director, Maine Farmland Trust, to the 
131st Legislature’s Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
May 3, 2023 
 
Good morning Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. My name is Shelley Megquier and I am the 
Policy & Research Director at Maine Farmland Trust (MFT).  I am providing testimony on behalf of 
MFT in support of LD 1537 – An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Prevention of Perfluoroalkyl 
and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Pollution and to Provide Additional Funding.   
 
MFT is a member-powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support farmers, 
and advance the future of farming. Since our founding in 1999, MFT has helped to permanently 
protect more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. Our Farm 
Network includes over 500 farms and, in 2022, 2,250+ individuals demonstrated their commitment 
to the future of Maine agriculture through an MFT membership. In 2022, MFT supported 48 farm 
businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and grants – delivering over 680 hours of technical 
assistance and $309,000 in business and seed grants to help businesses grow their profitability. Our 
main program areas are Farmland Protection, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm Business 
Planning, PFAS Support, Climate Resilience, and Policy and Research. 
 
For the past several years, MFT has been deeply engaged in the strong and collaborative response 
to the challenge of PFAS (per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances) contamination on Maine farms and 
farmland. The presence of PFAS in soil, water, crops and livestock is an emerging national issue, and 
PFAS contamination in Maine is alarming, especially for farmers whose livelihoods are connected to 
the land. The application of PFAS-contaminated sludge or residuals decades ago by farmers who 
were unaware of the presence and health risks of these chemicals can still impact PFAS levels in the 
soil and water today – with such high levels of contamination in some cases that agricultural 
production is simply no longer possible, at least in the near future until research is advanced on 
remediation methods. MFT staff have witnessed firsthand the significant impacts farm businesses 
and families have experienced from the contamination. These impacts include losing the financial 
value of products that can no longer be sold; making the investments to change farm management 
practices and adopt new infrastructure; and even having to purchase or lease additional land to use 
for their farming operations. These farmers have also had their wells contaminated, and live with 
ongoing concerns about the health effects of the PFAS contamination for themselves and their 
families. Finally, these farmers worry about the value of their land – their largest investment – and 
what their options might be if they are no longer able to farm there. 
 
We advocate in partnership with impacted farmers and other organizations for state and federal 
policies that stop the ongoing contamination of agricultural land, ensure that impacted farmers 
receive the support they need, and advance PFAS research, including on critical topics such as soil 
remediation. To comprehensively support Maine’s farmers and protect our agricultural land, we 
must slow the rate at which PFAS are entering the environment – eventually stopping it 
 2 altogether. We appreciated the PFAS source reduction measures and goals included under LD 1503 
in the 130th Legislature and also appreciate efforts this session to ensure that the Maine law is 
realistic, focused, and fair. Ultimately, while we work together to mitigate the existing problem of 
PFAS contamination, we need to identify and implement solutions to turn off the PFAS tap all the 
way upstream before the chemicals enter our state.  
 
MFT supports LD 1537 which modifies existing law to improve focus and ease of implementation.  
LD 1537 adds an important exemption to the reporting requirement for manufacturers who 
intentionally added PFAS to their products, whereby manufacturers with less than $20 million in 
national annual sales are not required to report. This exemption allows Maine law to target larger 
manufacturers, who are more likely to be able to identify product composition and the presence of 
added PFAS, and protects smaller manufacturers from undue burden. The bill also extends the 
reporting deadline from January 2023 to October 2023 to allow the Department of Environmental 
Protection time to complete the rulemaking that will describe reporting guidelines. MFT believes 
this extension is warranted to avoid confusion and anticipates that a date of October 1, 2023 should 
be manageable for large manufacturers, who, by that time, will have been aware of Maine’s new 
laws for over two years and who have the resources to respond in a timely manner once rulemaking 
is complete. MFT also supports the added language in page 1, lines 11-17 of LD 1537 that provide 
additional clarity for manufacturers on how to fulfil reporting requirements if the specific amount of 
each PFAS compound is not known to them, which may be the case for some products or 
manufacturers.  Last but not least, we support the allocations proposed in LD 1537 for two staff 
positions within the Department of Environmental Protection as well as the allocations for 
expenditures related to the implementation of PFAS source reduction measures. It’s important that 
implementing agencies have the resources they need to provide adequate oversight and support. 
 
In summary, we are testifying in support of LD 1537 due to the focus it adds to previously passed 
legislation, its inclusion of an added exemption for small businesses, and the inclusion of funding to 
support its implementation. To fully support Maine’s agricultural community and Maine farmers 
who have been impacted by PFAS contamination, we must significantly slow the flow of PFAS into 
our environment and LD 1537 makes practical changes to advance efforts to do so.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony and I’m happy to answer any questions you 
may have.  
 
 
