 1 
 
 
Senator Craig Hickman,  Senate Chair  
Representative Laura Supica, House Chair  
Committee on Veteran s and Legal Affairs  
Maine  State Legislature  
 
RE: LD 1610’s  provision  to ban corporate political spending by foreign  
government -influenced entities  
 
May 3 , 2023  
 
Dear Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee,  
 
I am the Counsel for Free Speech For People, a national non -partisan non -profit 
organization, that has played a critical role in helping draft, provide legal support, 
and advocate for the nation’s first laws that limit corporate political spending by 
partially -foreign -owned (foreign -influenced) corporations .1 I write today to 
provide  legal analysis  on LD 1610 , which would prohibit corporate political 
spending by foreign government -influenced entities . This bill  is grounded in 
constitutional principles  that generally restrict  foreign entities from spending 
money on U.S. elections and  is a productive starting point  towards  securing 
democratic elections from all means of foreign influenc e.2  
 
1 Legislation prohibiting corporate political spending by foreign -influenced corporations has 
been in effect in the city of Seattle since January 2020.  Last week, both chambers of the 
Minnesota Senate passed a landmark bill , which the Governor has pledged to sign into law,  
prohibiting such spending . Free Speech F or People, Minnesota becomes first state in the nation 
to pass legislation prohibiting foreign -influenced corporations from spending money in 
elections , https://bit.ly/44l1KcB . This year, similar bills passed one chamber each of the New 
York, Washington, and Hawaii legislatures, and are also pending in California and 
Massachusetts.  
2 While LD 1610 seeks to restrict corporate political spending by entities with some connection 
to forei gn governments , we recommend that the Committee revise the bill to trigger foreign -
influenced status based on any foreign investor outside the United States , not just governments . 
A foreign  investor  may exert influence  over corporate decision -making in a m anner inconsistent 
with democratic self -government even if the foreign investor is not a government . Furthermore, 
LD 1610 ’s foreign investment threshold (5%) should be lowered to either 1% for a single foreign 
investor  or 5% for aggregate foreign investment . These thresholds —used in the Seattle and 
Minnesota laws, and the bills in New York, Hawaii, Washington, California, and 
Massachusetts —reflect corporate governance experts’ analysis of investor influence.  
 2 I. General and legal background  
Under well -established federal law, recently upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court, it 
is illegal for a foreign government, business, or individual to spend any amount of 
money at all to influence federal, state, or local elections.3 This existing provision 
does not turn on whether the foreign national comes from a country that is friend or 
foe, nor the amount of m oney involved. Rather, as then -Judge (now Justice) Brett 
Kavanaugh wrote in the seminal decision upholding this law:  
 
It is fundamental to the definition of our national political community that 
foreign citizens do not have a constitutional right to partic ipate in, and thus 
may be excluded from, activities of democratic self -government. It follows, 
therefore, that the United States has a compelling interest for purposes of 
First Amendment analysis in limiting the participation of foreign citizens in 
activit ies of American democratic self -government, and in thereby 
preventing foreign influence over the U.S. political process.4 
 
Federal law, however, leaves a gap that has been opened even further since the 
U.S. Supreme Court’s 2010 Citizens United  decision invalidated laws that banned 
corporate political spending.5 While the existing federal statute prohibits a foreign -
registered  corporation from spending money on federal, state, or local elections, 
federal law does not address the issue of political spending by U.S. corporations 
that are partially owned by foreign investors. That is the topic here.  
 
The Citizens United  decision t hree times described the corporations to which its 
decision applied as “associations of citizens.”6 On the topic of corporations partly 
owned by foreign investors, the Supreme Court simply noted “[w]e need not reach 
the question” because the law before it  applied to all corporations.7 As a result, 
federal law currently does not prevent a corporation that is partly owned by foreign 
investors from making contributions to super PACs, independent expenditures, 
 
3 52 U.S.C. § 30121.  
4 Bluman v. Federa l Election Comm’n, 800 F. Supp. 2d 281, 288 (D.D.C. 2011), aff’d,  132 S. 
Ct. 1087 (2012); see also United States v. Singh, 979 F.3d 697, 710 -11 (9th Cir. 2020),  cert. 
denied sub nom.  Matsura v. United States, No. 20 -1167, 2021 WL 2044557 (May 24, 2021).  
5 Citizens United v. Federal Election Comm’n, 558 U.S. 310 (2010).  
6 Citizens United , 558 U.S. at 349, 354, 356. Many scholars have criticized the Court’s 
understanding of the corporate entity as an association. See, e.g., Jonathan Macey & Leo E. 
Strine, Jr ., Citizens United as Bad Corporate Law , 2019 Wis. L. Rev. 451 (2019). However 
misguided, this account reflects the reasoning that the Court has adopted in extending 
constitutional rights to corporations.  
7 Id. at 362.  
 3 expenditures on ballot measure campaigns, or even  (in states where it is otherwise 
legal) contributing directly to candidates.8 
  
Since 2010, neither Congress nor the beleaguered Federal Election Commission 
have done anything. However, as Professor Laurence Tribe of Harvard Law School 
and Federal Electi on Commissioner Ellen Weintraub have written, a state does not 
need to wait for federal action to protect its state and local elections from foreign 
influence. The goal of this bill is to plug the loophole allowing corporations partly 
or wholly owned by fo reign interests to influence elections.  
 
In the New York Times, Federal Election Commissioner Ellen Weintraub 
explained the problem, and pointed to a solution: “Throughout Citizens United, the 
court described corporations as ‘associations of citizens,” she  wrote. “States can 
require entities accepting political contributions from corporations in state and 
local races to make sure that those corporations are indeed associations of 
American citizens —and enforce the ban on foreign political spending against th ose 
that are not.”9  
 
As Weintraub noted, even partial foreign ownership of corporations calls into 
question whether Citizens United , which three times described corporations as 
“associations of citizens” and which expressly reserved questions related to foreign 
shareholders,10 would apply. Indeed, after deciding Citizens United , the Supreme 
Court in Bluman v. Federal Election Commission  specifically upheld the federal 
 
8 For example, Uber has shown an increasing appetite for political spending in a variety of 
contexts. In California, the company spent some $58 million on Proposition 22, which 
successfully overturned worker protections for Uber drivers. See Ryan Menezes et al., “Billions 
have been spent on California’s ballot measure battles. But this year is unlike any other,” L.A. 
Times, Nov. 13, 2020, https://lat.ms/3gRct8d . Uber is, as of this writi ng, 3.8% owned by the 
Public Investment Fund of Saudi Arabia —a foreign government entity, but at a level that would 
not trigger LD 1610. See CNBC, Uber Technologies Inc ., 
https://www.cnbc.com/quo tes/UBER?tab=ownership  (visited May 3, 2023). Similarly, in 
October 2016, Airbnb responded to the New York Legislature’s growing interest in regulating 
the homestay industry by arming a super PAC with $10 million to influ ence New York’s 
legislative races. Airbnb received crucial early funding from, and was at that time partly owned 
by, Moscow -based (and Kremlin -linked) DST Global. See Kenneth  Lovett, Airbnb to spend 
$10M on Super PAC to fund pre -Election day ads , N.Y. Daily News, Oct. 11, 2016, 
http://nydn.us/2EF5Lgi . 
9 Ellen Weintraub, Taking on Citizens United , N.Y. Times, Mar. 30, 2016, 
http://nyti.ms/1SwK4gK .  
10 Citizens United , 558 U.S. at 349, 354, 356, 362.  
 4 ban on foreign nationals spending their own money in U.S. elections.11 The 
Supreme Court went even further in Agency for International Development v. 
Alliance for Open Society Int’l, Inc . when Justice Kavanaugh (writing for the 
Court) held that foreign entities  located  abroad have no constitutional rights.12 
Furthermore, the Court explained that U.S. entities “ cannot export their own First 
Amendment rights” to the foreign entities with which they associate.13 
 
In light of the Court’s post -Citizens United  decision s in Bluman  and Agency for 
International Develop ment , a restriction on political spending by corporations with 
foreign ownership at levels potentially capable of influencing corporate 
governance can be upheld based on those cases  and as an exception to Citizens 
United .14 
II. Frequently asked questions  
Does the bill prevent corruption?  
The Supreme Court currently recognizes two distinct public interests in regulating 
the amounts and sources of money in politics: (1) preventing corruption or the 
appearance of corruption, and (2) protecting democ ratic self -government against 
foreign influence. This bill is defensible under both interests.  
 
As Judge Kavanaugh explained in Bluman , the public “has a compelling interest 
for purposes of First Amendment analysis in limiting the participation of foreign  
citizens in activities of American democratic self -government, and in thereby 
preventing foreign influence over the U.S. political process.”15 The U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit has confirmed that this interest applies to state 
elections as well.16 
 
Is the bill “narrowly tailored” to protecting democratic self -government?  
Yes. The public interest in protecting democratic self -government from foreign 
influence is particularly strong and supports a wide range of restrictions ranging 
 
11 Bluman v. Federal Election Comm’n, 800 F. Supp. 2d 281, 288 (D.D.C. 2011), aff’d,  132 S. 
Ct. 1087 (2012). In 2019, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit upheld federal statute’s 
foreign national political spending ban as applied to local electio ns. Singh , 924 F.3d at 1042.  
12 140 S. Ct. 2082, 208 6 (2020).  
13 Id. at 2088.  
14 A similar analysis would also apply to First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti , 435 U.S. 765 
(1978), which addressed limits on corporations spending in ballot question elections.  
15 Bluman v. Fed. Election Comm’n, 800 F. Supp. 2d 281, 288 (D.D.C. 2011), aff’d, 565 U.S. 
1104 (2012).  
16 United States v. Singh, 924 F.3d 1030, 1042 (9th Cir. 2019).  
 5 from investment in communications facilities to municipal public employment.17 
In the specific  context of political spending, the facts of the Bluman  decision are 
worth noting. The lead plaintiff wanted to contribute to three candidates (subject to 
dollar limits that in theory minimize the risk of corruption) and “to print flyers .  . . 
and to distr ibute them in Central Park.”18 All these were banned by the federal 
statute, and the court upheld the ban on all of them.  
 
In other words, in a context where the risk of corruption was essentially nil, the 
court found that the interest in protecting democ ratic self -government from foreign 
influence is so strong that a law that prohibits printing flyers and posting them in a 
park is narrowly tailored to that interest. Given that, a ban on corporate political 
spending —with the potential for far greater influ ence on elections than one 
individual printing flyers —by corporations with substantial foreign ownership, at 
levels known from corporate governance literature to bring the potential for 
investor influence, is also narrowly tailored to the same interest.   
 
Does this bill go further than the federal statute at issue in Bluman?  
Yes; that is the point . The federal statute prevents foreign entities from spending 
money directly in federal, state, or local elections.19 The proposed bill also applies 
to non -foreig n entities that may be in part based or incorporated within the U.S. but 
that are owned, controlled, or otherwise influenced by foreign interests —in this 
case, a foreign government —according to  the proposed definition .  
 
If you have any questions about leg al, policy, or technical aspects of the bill, I 
would be happy to discuss.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 Amira Mattar, Counsel  
 Free Speech For People  
   
 
17 See Bluman , 800 F. Supp. 2d at 287 (collecting Supreme Court cases upholding limits on 
noncitizen employment in a wide variety of local positions); 47 U.S.C. § 310(b) (banning 
issuance of broadcast or common carrier license to companies under minority foreign 
ownership).  
18 Id. at 285.  
19 52 U.S.C. § 30121, formerly codified as 2 U.S.C. § 44 1e. 
