 
 
 
May 3rd, 2023  
 
Hon. Senator  Craig Hickman, Senate Chair  
Hon. Representative  Laura Supica, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in Opposition to  L.D. 1610: An Act to Prohibit Campaign Spending by Foreign 
Governments and Promote an Anticorruption Amendment to the United States Constitution  
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the committee on Veterans and Legal Affai rs:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce . The Chamber is the 
voice of Maine business, speaking for approximately 5,000 Maine businesses of all sizes throughout the State. The  Maine 
State Chamber of  Commerce appreciates the opportunity to provide written testimony in opposition to L.D. 1610.  
 
For several years now, the Chamber has been in front of the Legislature  and this committee  expressing concerns about 
legislation  like the proposal being discussed here today. Most recently, there was previous legislation in the 130th 
Legislature, L.D. 194 - which is the original motivation behind what is before you today. The Chamber testified in 
opposition to that bill with concerns for  three basic reasons. Predominately, t hat bill present ed very substantial challenges 
to settled constitutional limits concerning the permissible governmental regulation of political speech. Second, ther e was 
no emergency . Third, enactment of  that proposed legislation would present serious operational difficulties for Maine 
businesses and impede their ability to protect and advocate for their legitimate interests. While we recognize  the proposal 
before you today is narrow er scope focusing on just companies t hat have the backing of foreign governments, some of our 
concerns still hold true.   
 
Additionally, we believe that this legislation is targeting a specific company , Hydro -Quebe over the New England Clean 
Energy Connect. This is not a reasonable way to make policy and  it sends a troubling signal to companies that may be 
looking to invest in Maine that they could be subject o f targeted to legislation like this.  
 
Our final point to make is that we recognize this issue will likely be decided at the ballot box in November, and we look 
forward to engaging in that ballot question. But we felt it was important to highlight a couple of the concerns that the 
Chamber has with this proposal. Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony.  
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
