 
  
Good afternoon, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and distinguished members 
of the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Betsy Williams and I am a 
resident of Brunswick. I am testifying today in support of LD 1610 on behalf of the 
Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network, which links Maine’s 26 UU 
congregations in working for legislation that centers on compassion, respect, and the 
democratic process that promotes equity and fairness in public affairs. 
 
Today we join many others advocating for legislation that will strengthen the 
democratic process by assuring that the voices that matter most—the voices that are 
heard and followed—are the voices of the people.  
 
LD 1610 is about a different voice in our democratic process—a voice that is neither 
compassionate toward nor respectful of the people of Maine. And that is the voice of 
money.  
 
Money is doing the talking when corporations, influenced by foreign governments, 
spend hundreds of thousands of dollars to influence our referendum campaigns. I 
confess to being “referendum weary” sometimes, but I also know that referendums are 
second only to voting itself as a way for individual Maine voices to be heard. Passage of 
LD 1610 would add Maine to a long list of other states protecting referendums from 
foreign money influence. 
 
And money is drowning out the voices of Maine people when more than $14 million 
dollars of outside money is spent on Maine’s statewide elections, as it was in 2022. And 
the problem in not limited to one party or the other—it’s across the board and getting 
worse every year. This legislation supports an anti-corruption amendment to the U.S. 
Constitution that would allow reasonable spending in our elections and require Maine’s 
congressional delegation to advance such an amendment on our behalf. 
 
Across our country we hear voters express cynicism about democracy these days—that 
money and the bottom line is driving public policy—not their needs or our common 
interests. It’s a nation-wide problem that we in Maine are not immune from. With this 
bill, you have a chance to say “We hear you. We care about you. We respect you.” 
Please use your voice to honor the overwhelming support from Maine citizens for this 
bill and vote Ought to Pass on LD 1610. 
 
Thank you for your patience, for your respect of the democratic process, and for your 
commitment to work for the betterment of the State of Maine.  
 
 
  
