Testimony of Connor Flotten 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans & Legal Affairs 
ti» 1 
at a%@;=f' #¢>..e>:;.»z»,M6 
LD 1610/IB 1, ?‘An Act to Prohibit Campaign Spending by Foreign Governments and Promote 
an Anticorruption Amendment to the United States Constitution ” 
Good afternoon, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. 
My name is Connor Flotten, l’n1 a resident of Brunswick. Thank you for the opportunity to 
testify in support of LD 1610/IB 1, “An Act to Prohibit Campaign Spending by Foreign 
Governrnents and Promote an Anticorruption Amendment to the United States Constitution. ” 
1 think everyone is pretty well aware at this point of just how crazy the problem of political 
spending has gotten. Last June, when I sat outside my old middle school collecting signatures for 
this measure, almost everyone I spoke to was on board as soon as I told them What the petition 
was for. People from across the political spectrum, some of whom I’d probably disagree with on 
almost everything else, were sick and tired of the millions of dollars in ads blanketing our state 
every year or two. Of the few people who didn’t want to sign the petition, most of them just 
did.n’t think it could be done. It’s not that they didn’t agree with the idea, they were just too 
exhausted from the endless stream of negative ads to think that the people of Maine and our 
Legislature could solve the problem. And now we can prove them wrong. 
Fin not alone in experiencing this. You’ve already heard from many of us who have seen the 
same thing, that the vast majority of Mainers support this measure. Polls indicate that 82% to 
89% of Mainers support LD 1610. What else can you ﬁnd that has 89% support these days? 
This isn’t a controversial issue, or at least it shouldn°t be. It’s not like. allowing foreign 
governments to spend money in our elections is some grand Maine tradition. It’s certainly not an 
American tradition. The founders were writing about the danger of foreign inﬂuence since before 
there was a Constitution that speciﬁcally bans foreign gifts to ofﬁceholders. This loophole was 
only opened up in late 2021, when the FEC ruled that because the Federal Election Campaign 
Act of 1971 doesn’t technically include referenda in its deﬁnition of “election, ” the Act doesn’t 
apply to it. There are already 8 states‘ whose laws speciﬁcally prohibit foreign government 
spending in their referendum campaigns. 
' 
lclaho, California, Colorado, Maryland, Nevada, North Dakota, South Dakota and Washington
l want to thank you all for the Work you do, and for the opportunity to speak here today in favor 
of LDl610/IB 1. In a time where it feels like the voices of ordinaify people are being drowned 
out by millions of dollars in campaign spending and dark money ads, it feels right to be able to 
stand in front of our representatives and make our voices heard. This is What deinocraey is 
supposed to be about, not whose friends have the biggest chee-l<bo0l<s. 
Over 80,000 Mainers gave their signatures in suppolt of LD1610/IB 1, from all across the state. 
Now you have the opportunity to enact the will of the people and pass this bill outright, se<.:urin.g 
our elections as soon as possible. Please, stand with us and vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 610/EB
L.
