Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs… 
 
I am James Swan, a resident of Waldoboro, Maine. I write you in support of LD 
1610, “An Act to Prohibit Campaign Spending by Foreign Governments and 
Promote an Anticorruption Amendment to the United States Constitution.” 
 
Foreign government interference in our elections is a threat to our democracy and 
national security. It is imperative that we take action to prevent foreign powers 
from spending money in Maine elections. Our election season now brings an 
onslaught of non-stop political ads, glossy flyers in the mail, and round-the-clock 
robocalls. The worst part is that the money isn’t even coming from Maine people. 
In the midterm election here in Maine, a record breaking $127 million was spent – 
mostly in the form of negative attack ads from dark money special interest groups.  
 
Out-of-state money is only part of the problem. In Maine, foreign governments are 
currently permitted to spend unlimited money to interfere with our referendums 
elections and disrupt our democracy.   
 
LD 1610 is common sense legislation that will stop this interference and protect 
the free speech, representation, and votes of all Mainers. 
 
Across the state, voters have signed in support, regardless of their political 
affiliation. Mainers are asking for you to lead in protecting our democracy.  
 
82% of Maine voters answered “yes” to the question “Do you want to prohibit 
foreign governments and foreign government-influenced entities from spending 
money to influence Maine elections?” This includes 91% of Republicans, 83% of 
Democrats, and 82% of Independents. Only 8% of Maine voters oppose this 
reform. 
 
65% of Maine voters support the proposed constitutional amendment that would 
allow Americans to limit campaign contributions and undisclosed political 
spending. This includes 65% of Republicans, 75% of Democrats and 68% of 
Independents. Only 10% of Mainers are opposed.  
 
86% of Maine voters agree with the statement, “The influence of money in politics 
is a threat to our democracy,” including 86% of Republicans, 90% of Democrats, 
and 87% of Independents. Only 5% of Maine voters disagree with the statement. 
 
LD 1610 addresses the issue of unlimited, unchecked spending in campaigns by 
corporations, special interest groups, and wealthy donors, which has drowned out 
the voices of the Maine people. By demanding passage of an anti-corruption 
amendment to the U.S. Constitution, the bill seeks to restore the power of the 
Maine people and legislature to regulate our campaign finance laws and ensure that 
our elections are not unduly influenced by moneyed interests. 
 
I respectfully ask that this committee stand with Maine voters in support of 
prohibiting foreign governments from spending money to influence Maine 
elections.  
 
Please vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1610/IB 1. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
James Swan 
Waldoboro, Maine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
