kathryn kellison
Windsor
LD 1610
Senator Hickman, Representative Supina and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, thank you for this opportunity to 
speak to you.
My name is Kathryn Kellison. I am a resident of Windsor.  I am here to testify in 
support of LD 1610 /lB1, An Act to Prohibit Campaign Spending by Foreign 
Governments and Promote an Anticorruption Amendment to the United States 
Constitution. 
I was born in Maine when Frederick Payne was governor and moved here 
permanently when Kenneth Curtis served in that position.  I care deeply about the 
State of Maine and how we are governed.
Last fall I traveled throughout Kennebec County collecting signatures to bring this 
bill forward because I think it is critically important to maintaining fair elections in 
our state.  
I believe in the ability of Maine voters to make decisions that are in our best interest 
when we have the opportunity to hear good information about the issues that concern 
us.  This opportunity is lost when corporations can use their financial resources to 
flood television and the internet with information that can be misleading or even false.
They are pursuing their interests, not necessarily those of Maine’s residents.  In last 
fall’s midterm election $127 million was spent, much of it on negative attack ads, 
often by groups which disguised their identity behind innocent sounding 
organizational names.  
It stands to reason that foreign corporations in particular have no business influencing 
decisions about our future, our environment, our way of life.  I want Mainers to make 
those choices after weighing impartial information.  
Thank you all for the many hours and hard work you do on behalf of Mainers.  I hope 
you will include in your work ending foreign contributions and money from vague 
sources influencing our votes.  I, and each person who signed our petition ask you to 
lead in protecting democracy in Maine.
I urge you to join me in supporting democracy.  Please vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 
1610/lB1.  Please reach out to me if you have any questions.
Thank you for your time.
Kathryn Kellison
kell6787@gmail.com
207 445-4415
P.O. Box 49 (80 Taylor Rd.)
Windsor, Me 04363

