LINDA HASKELL
GARLAND
LD 1610
LD 1610 - An Act to Prohibit Campaign Spending by Foreign Governments and 
Promote an Anticorruption Amendment to the United States Constitution
Madam Chairperson Supica and Committee. Testimony to support this Act LD1610. 
This Act spells it out! A."Contribution", B."Electioneering communication", 
C.Expenditure", D."Foreign government" includes any person or group of persons 
exercising sovereign de facto or de jure political jurisdiction over any country other 
than the United States or over any part of such country and includes any subdivision 
of any such group and any group or agency to which such sovereign de facto or de 
jure authority or functions are directly or indirectly delegated. "Foreign government" 
includes any faction or body of insurgents within a country assuming to exercise 
governmental authority, whether or not such faction or body of insurgents has been 
recognized by the United States.
E. "Foreign government-influenced entity" as listed in (1) and (2)(a)(b). F. "Foreign 
government-owned entity". G. "Independent expenditure". H. "Public 
communication". I. "Referendum" (1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).
2. Campaign spending by foreign governments prohibited. 
3. Solicitation or acceptance of contributions from foreign governments prohibited.
4.Substantial assistance prohibited. A. and B.       5.Structuring prohibited. 
6.Communications by foreign governments to influence policy; required disclosure.    
7.Due diligence required. 
8. Penalties. The commission may assess a penalty of not more than $5,000 or double 
the amount of the contribution, expenditure, independent expenditure, electioneering 
communication, donation or disbursement involved in the violation, whichever is 
greater, for a violation of this section. Further assessing violations as stated in this 
Act.
9. Violation. Knowingly violating commits a class C crime.
10. Rules. The commission shall adopt rules to administer the provisions of this 
section. Rules adopted under this subsection are routine technical rules as defined in 
Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
11.Applicability. Notwithstanding section 1051, this section applies to all persons, 
including candidates, their treasurers and authorized committees under section 
1013-A, subsection 1; party committees under section 1013-A, subsection 3; and 
committees under section 1052, subsection 2.
Sec. 2. Accountability of Maine's Congressional Delegation to the people of Maine 
with respect to federal anticorruption constitutional amendment.
This is as stated
 1. Definitions-A.B.C.
 2. Reaffirmation of the Maine Resolution reaffirmed and clarified by each member of
Maine's Congressional Delegation to support and promote an effective anticorruption 
amendment  to secure the principle and rights listed in A. and B.
3. Accountability. For 7 consecutive years beginning on July 31, 2023, the 
Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices shall issue a report, 
following public comment, identifying anticorruption amendment proposals 
introduced in Congress, and the members of Maine's Congressional Delegation 
sponsoring such proposals.SUMMARY as follows:
1. It prohibits a foreign government-influenced entity from making, directly or 
indirectly, a contribution, expenditure, independent expenditure, electioneering 
communication or any other donation or disbursement of funds to influence the 
nomination or election of a candidate or the initiation or approval of a referendum. It 
prohibits a person from knowingly or recklessly providing substantial assistance, with
or without compensation, in the making of an expenditure, independent expenditure, 
electioneering communication or disbursement in violation of this prohibition. It 
prohibits a person from knowingly soliciting, accepting or receiving a contribution or 
donation in violation of this prohibition and prohibits a person from knowingly or 
recklessly providing substantial assistance, with or without compensation, in the 
making, solicitation, acceptance or receipt of a contribution or donation in violation of
this prohibition.
2. It prohibits a person from structuring or attempting to structure a solicitation, 
contribution, expenditure, independent expenditure, electioneering communication, 
donation, disbursement or other transaction to evade the prohibitions and 
requirements in the initiated bill. 
3. It requires, whenever a foreign government-influenced entity disburses funds to 
finance a public communication to influence the public or government officials on 
issues of state or local policy or foreign relations, that the communication include a 
clear and conspicuous statement naming the foreign government-influenced entity as 
a sponsor of the communication. 
4.It directs each television or radio broadcasting station, provider of cable or satellite 
television, print news outlet and Internet platform to establish due diligence policies 
to prevent the distribution of communications for which foreign 
government-influenced entities have made prohibited expenditures, independent 
expenditures, electioneering communications or disbursements and further directs an 
Internet platform to, upon discovery, immediately remove any such communications 
from its platform. 
5. It provides that the Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices 
may assess a penalty of not more than $5,000 or double the amount of the 
contribution, expenditure, independent expenditure, electioneering communication, 
donation or disbursement involved in the violation, whichever is greater, for a 
violation of the initiated bill. 
6.The initiated bill also calls on each member of Maine's Congressional Delegation to 
actively support and promote an effective anticorruption amendment to the United 
States Constitution to reaffirm the power of citizens through their government to 
regulate the raising and spending of money in elections. 
7. For 7 consecutive years beginning July 31, 2023, the initiated bill requires the 
Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices to issue a report, 
following public comment, identifying anticorruption amendment proposals 
introduced in Congress and the members of Maine's Congressional Delegation 
sponsoring such proposals. 
I have entered this testimony as I have read this Act LD 1610. It speaks of Great 
Accomplishments for the Constitution of Maine and the USA. I SUPPORT LD1610.  
LINDA HASKELL, OUGHT TO PASS 
  
