Testimony in support of LD 1610/ IB 1 : ”An Act to Prohibit Campaign Spending 
by Foreign Governments and Promote an Anticorruption Amendment to the 
United States Constitution" 
May 3"‘ , 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, 
My name is Michael Rauth. I live and operate a small business in Scarborough. I 
am here to support the passage of LD 1610 ”An Act to Prohibit Campaign 
Spending by Foreign Governments and Promote an Anticorruption Amendment to 
the United States Constitution" 
I have lived in Maine for 37 years. We have all witnessed the dramatic 
acceleration in political spending during that time. The ability for special interest 
groups from outside of the state to try to influence issues important to Maine 
citizens is bad enough. But when foreign governments & corporations are allowed 
to spend millions of dollars, the voices of actual Mainers are drowned out in the 
process. It is common sense that foreign governments should not be allowed to 
manipulate Maine elections. But this is exactly what they can do without the 
limits on campaign spending that LD 1610 will put in place. 
l also wholeheartedly support section 2 of LD 1610 that calls on Maine's 
Congressional Delegation to actively support and promote an anticorruption 
amendment to the US Constitution. The corrosive effect of big money on political 
discourse in our country has been catastrophic. We need limits on campaign 
finance, transparency, and effective enforcement of these rules. 
Thank you for this opportunity to share my views with you today and for your 
work to improve the integrity of Maine's political processes. I respectfully ask 
that this committee stand with Maine voters in support of prohibiting foreign 
governments from spending money to influence Maine elections. Please pass this 
initiative outright & vote ”Ought to Pass" on LD 1610. 
Sincerely,A 
Michael Rauth 
miRetaw‘;.h.1@gm@.iL_¢Qm 
207~883-1531 ii 
ll 
ll 
ll 
17 
»; 
ll 
lil
l 
ll
if
