MEMO 
 
To: Senate Chair, Craig Hickman, House Chair, Laura Supica, and Members of the 
      Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
From: Orlando E. Delogu, Emeritus Professor of Law, U. of Maine School of Law 
Subject: Comments on LD 1610, An Act to Prohibit Campaign Spending by 
Foreign Governments 
Date: May 2, 2023 
 
Introductory Note:  It is my understanding that LD 1610 contains the precise 
language found in the Initiative that has been approved by the Secretary of State and 
that will be presented to the voters in November 2023.  It follows, that my comments 
with respect to LD 1610 apply with equal force to the proposed Initiative.  Further, 
these comments speak only to Sec. 1. §1064 within LD 1610.  Sec. 2 of LD 1610 is 
not addressed other than to note that nothing in the Maine Constitution outlining 
Legislative Powers (Article IV, Part third) authorizes the Legislature to direct or 
impose duties on Maine’s elected representatives to the Congress of the United 
States.   
 
     This Committee is no doubt aware that legislation similar to LD 1610 was passed 
by the preceding Legislature in June 2021.  That legislation (LD 194) was vetoed by 
the Governor.  The Governor’s veto message, and those opposed to LD 194, in 
testimony to this Committee, focused on the greater curtailment of free speech rights 
that Maine law would impose in contrast to then (and presently existing) federal 
constitutional (First Amendment) free speech rights and principles.   
 
     Federal legislation and case law, including Supreme Court case law, bars foreign 
governments (and their agents) from lobbying (for or against) political parties and/or 
those running for elected office. Foreign governments are not barred, however, from 
participating (for or against) in public policy advocacy, see Blumen v. FEC, 800 F. 
Supp.2d 281 (DCC 2011), and First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U.S. 765 
(1978).    
 
     There is little doubt that LD 194 (two years ago) and LD 1610 today are contrary 
to Congress’s and the Supreme Court’s interpretation of First Amendment free 
speech rights.i  The fact that there is no case law directly on point attests only to the 
fact that no state (prior to Maine in the last two years) has sought to narrow federal 
First Amendment rights as fully (and egregiously) as LD 194 and LD 1610 do.   
 
     LD 1610 begins by speaking of  “foreign government[s]” … “exercising 
sovereign…political jurisdiction over any country ….” But the Definitions sections 
make clear that the free speech limitations contemplated by LD 1610 extend much 
further than the national level of any/all foreign government[s].ii Many private 
businesses operating in Maine will meet the low threshold (5% of foreign ownership) 
thus barring them (and their employees) from  participating in public policy debates 
affecting their property rights, future employment levels, future capital investment, 
the continued viability of these private entities/corporations.   
 
     Summarizing this point—LD 1610’s sweeping curtailment of free speech rights 
based on nothing more than a presumption of mischievous and undue foreign 
influence, without any showing of actual “undue influence,” is unprecedented.iii  If 
adopted by the Legislature or passed by citizen initiative, this loss of free speech 
rights (and press rights) will certainly be challenged in court.  The case law noted 
above though predicated on federal constitutional principles suggests this challenge 
will succeed.      
 
     But federal First Amendment rights are not the only basis for rejecting LD 1610. 
The Maine Constitution (a document much closer to home) is facially at odds with 
LD 1610.   Article I, Declaration of Rights, Section 4 states: “Every citizen may freely 
speak, write and publish sentiments on any subject, being responsible for the abuse of 
this liberty; no laws shall be passed regulating or restraining the freedom of the press.”  
 
     Article X, Section 6 of the Maine Constitution states: “And the Constitution, with the 
amendments made thereto, in accordance with the provisions thereof, shall be the 
supreme law of the State.”  In short, Maine constitutional rights trump legislative 
enactments.  It follows that LD 1610 (if adopted) cannot contravene Article 1, Section 4.  
Further, the pending initiative, (if adopted) being nothing more than a legislative 
enactment is constitutionally barred from being characterized as an amendment of the 
constitution.iv       
     Collateral provisions of the Maine Constitution support the argument being made.  
For example Article X, Section 3 states: “All laws now in force in this State, and not 
repugnant to this Constitution, shall remain, and be in force ….”  This provision, though 
fashioned in the context of Maine’s separation from Massachusetts, makes the important 
point that laws (legislation) cannot be at odds with the constitution.  But that is precisely 
what LD 1610 is/does.  It narrows the free speech rights of countless Maine 
corporations/businesses; it impinges on (puts burdens on) the press, e.g., television, radio, 
print outlets, that they do not need or want.       
      In my view, these factors, the plain language of the Maine Constitution, suggests 
that this Committee should vote that LD 1610 “ought not to pass.” 
 
Respectfully Submitted: 
 
O. E. Delogu 
 
 
i See United States Constitution, First Amendment (adopted in 1791)— “Congress “shall make no law respecting 
an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the 
press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.” 
ii Definition D. includes all agencies and sub-agencies of a foreign government. Definition E. asserts that “Foreign 
government-influenced entity[ies],”—“A firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, or other entity…” 
have their free speech rights cut off, if as little as 5% of the equity in these private entities is held by a foreign 
government or government owned entity. Definition I. makes clear that referendum free speech debates at relatively 
low levels of county and municipal government are cut off. 
 
iii Also unprecedented is the total absence in LD 1610 of provisions defining how foreign “…governmental ownership 
of 5% or more…” will be determined; how and by whom will enforcement of sub-sections 2 through 7 prohibitions 
be effectuated. It begs credulity to believe that all of these responsibilities will fall to the Commission on Governmental 
Ethics and Election Practices, see 21-A MRSA §1001 and will be handled by agency rule-making as suggested in §1064, 
sub-section 10.        
iv Article IV, Part Third,  Section 18 of the Maine Constitution states:  “The electors may propose to the Legislature 
for its consideration any bill, resolve or resolution, including bills to amend or repeal emergency legislation but not 
an amendment of the State Constitution…” 
  
