Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony  in Opposition  to LD 1610  (IB 1) 
“An Act to Prohibit Campaign Spending by Foreign 
Governments and Promote an Anticorruption Amendment to 
the United States Constitution”  
 
May 3, 2023 
Patrick  Strauch,  Executive  Director  
Senator  Hickman,  Representative  Supica  and distinguished members  of the Veterans and  Legal  
Affairs  Committee , I am Patrick  Strauch, executive director  of the Maine Forest  Products  
Council. Since  1961, MFPC  has represented  the broad spectrum  of our state ’s diverse forest  
products  community,  including logging contractors, sawmills,  pulp and paper  mills,  biomass  
energy  facilities,  pellet  manufacturers,  furniture  manufacturers and  the owners  of more  than  
eight  million  acres  of commercial  forestland  in Maine.  I am submitting  testimony  today in 
opposition to LD 1610, “An Act to Prohibit  Campaign Spending by Foreign  Governments  and 
Promote  an Anticorruption Amendment  to the Unite d States Constitution .” 
The Council  opposes  LD 1610 because  a direct  line can be drawn  between  the spruce  budworm  
outbreak of 1970 -  ‘85 and efforts  to change  Maine’ s timber  harvesting laws  at the ballot  box. 
The scramble  to salvage wood  before  it was killed  or damaged  set off alarms with  
environmental  groups. The  Legislature  passed  the Forest  Practices  Act in 1989 to regulate  
harvesting, but  the limits  didn’t allay  all the concerns  and three  referendums  on clearcutting  
were  fiercely  debated  in 1996, 1997 and 2000. All  were  defeated,  thanks  to an industrywide  
effort  that included  companies headquartered  outside  the U.S., but  with  busines s operations  
here.   
Maine’ s forest  industry is  an amalgam  of companies  from  Maine  and elsewhere around the  
globe. The  definition  of a foreign- based  government  having 5% or more  of the total  equity  is a 
rule that would  be very  difficult to follow  for businesses  (including U.S. -based  businesses)  that 
are publicly traded  and may  have  foreign government  pension  funds  as investors  at any time . 
We support  and appreciate  business investments  that have  been  made and are  also actively  
marketing Maine  to innovative  companies  in other  parts  of the world  seeking new uses for 
wood. These  organizations  have  an important  responsibility  to protect  their  investments  from  
referendums  like those  in the past that threatened  wood  fiber  supply for  land  managers and 
wood manufacturers  alike.   
The Bill of Rights  protects  freedom  of speech  for all people  regardless  of status  or nationality. 
The Supreme  Court  also has ruled1 
that the government  cannot  prevent  corporations  and unions  
from  spending  money  to express their  views  in political  elections.   
Democracy  depends  on free speech  to allow  the open  exchange  of ideas by those  who are 
affected  by policy decisions.  Restricting  an open public  policy debate  could deprive  decisio n 
 
1 https://www.fec.gov/legal -resources/court -cases/citizens -united -v-fec/ 
2 
 makers  -- legislators  or referendum  voters  -- of  information  and perspectives that are relevant  to the decision. That is 
unfair  to those  excluded and  contrary to  constitutional  principles  of free speech  and democracy.  
Businesses with  assets  in Maine deserve  the right  to make  their  views  known about  issues and  decisions  that will affect  
them.  This referendum  also could be a deterrent  to businesses  that are considering  investing in  facilities  here.  For these 
reasons , the Maine  Forest  Products  Council  opposes  LD 1610.  
 
 
 
