 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                                  Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
In Presenting of LD 1610,  
“An Act to Prohibit Campaign Spending by Foreign Governments and Promote an 
Anticorruption Amendment to the United States Constitution” 
3 May 2023 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans & Legal Affairs: 
 
My name is Rick Bennett, I live in Oxford, and I have the honor of representing the people of the 
foothills and lakes region of western Maine in the State Senate. I am pleased to testify in support 
of LD 1610/IB 1, “An Act to Prohibit Campaign Spending by Foreign Governments and 
Promote an Anticorruption Amendment to the United States Constitution.” 
 
Similar legislation was first introduced during the 129th Legislature but, because of the 
pandemic, that bill never even had a vote in committee. Last year, during the 130th Legislature, I 
presented LD 194 – a similar bill that received bipartisan support from this committee. LD 194 
was enacted by the Legislature, only to be vetoed by the Governor.  
 
Then, the voters of Maine, unsure of what the 131st Legislature might bring, took matters into 
their own hands. Last year, over 400 volunteers helped to collect the signatures of over 80,000 
Mainers. The Secretary of State subsequently certified the petitions and now we, the Legislature, 
have the opportunity to pass the bill outright or send it to the November 2023 ballot.  
 
I have heard from voters across the state, and from the many Mainers involved in our Protect 
Maine Elections campaign, that they want the legislature to take action on this now. Given the 
widespread, bipartisan support of this effort, I ask you to vote “ought to pass,” on LD 1610, to 
allow this Legislature, this year,  the opportunity to pass this bill outright.  
 
A referendum election should be considered a backstop for when the legislature fails to act on an 
initiated bill. We should act now. This action would not be precedent setting; at least seven 
initiated bills have been enacted by the legislature, most recently in 2007 with “ An Act to Allow 
a Tax Credit for College Loan Repayments.”  
 
The premise of LD 1610 is simple. As foreign interests cannot contribute money to the elections 
of lawmakers, they ought not to be able to contribute money to the elections to make laws.  
 
The Federal Elections Commission recently ruled that it has no jurisdiction over state 
referendum campaigns, creating this dangerous loophole that allows foreign governments – and 
entities they control –  to spend in referendum campaigns unless explicitly prohibited by state 
law. This bill gives us the opportunity to make Maine one of a growing number of states and 
municipalities to ban foreign government spending in referendums – including Idaho, California, 
Colorado, Maryland, Nevada, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Washington.  
 
This initiative also protects the free speech, representation, and votes of all Mainers by affirming 
Maine’s support for an anti-corruption amendment to the U.S. Constitution and charging the 
Maine Ethics Commission to report on the progress made by Maine’s delegation in Congress to 
advance this amendment.  
 
It’s important to note that the Legislature has an obligation to defend the people’s right to 
petition their government. As the members of this committee know, the Legislature this week 
voted on an order requesting a solemn occasion ruling from the Court to clarify whether the 
initiated bills can be passed outright given that we are in a special session. Setting aside for a 
moment the circumstances that got us to this point, I strongly encourage this committee to hold a 
work session and vote on LD 1610 in a timely manner. While the Court works through its 
process, the Legislature has a responsibility to work through ours.  
 
Let’s face facts: the opponents of this initiative are few, foreign, and financially unfettered. They 
have already managed to sow confusion into the very process by which Maine voters can affect 
our laws, hence the need for a solemn occasion. We cannot let them succeed.  
 
Today you are faced with a fairly straightforward question: Will you stand with the Maine voters 
who are working to protect our elections, or will you stand with the foreign governments who 
seek to disrupt our democracy? 
 
I urge you to join me and stand with the voters of Maine by voting “ought to pass” on this 
critically important issue.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
