On Behalf of the Maine Real Estate Managers Association  In opposition to 1905 An Act to Create a Residential Rental Unit Registry  May 19, 2023  Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing Committee, I am writing you today as the co-chair of the Maine Real Estate Managers Association (MREMA) to oppose this legislation.  Our organization is a nonprofit which represents over 80 professional property management companies providing affordable and subsidized housing throughout the state.  It is within our mission to promote the availability of safe, decent affordable housing in Maine.  Our management members are both for-profit and nonprofit landlords that believe in this mission.  As affordable housing owners and managers, we strongly believe that all people should have access to housing. However, we do not believe that this bill solves the issues of the affordable housing crisis; instead it add barriers to landlords and will jeopardize the amount of affordable housing we desperately need in the state.  The stipulation around failure to register is problematic for our members because, for those that do not register, they cannot send a notice for non-payment of rent. In essence, we cannot evict any household that does not pay rent. For units that are registered a 120-day notice for non-payment would be required. Both stipulations conflict with the current law.  Requiring a landlord to allow 120 days for nonpayment of rent is asking them to forgo income for four months- jeopardizing their ability to pay their mortgage, pay for utilities and insurance and continue operating housing in this state.  There are many small independent and non-profit owners who manage 50 or more units and this will be particularly  burdensome to the them.  For housing authorities and/or those property owners that partner with housing authorities to provide housing choice vouchers to households, the required reporting could add a layer of administrative burden to an already highly regulated housing system. This could create another barrier for housing authorities to provide vouchers, and the private landlords that accept those vouchers.  The fees are not inconsequential.  In a time with raising inflation, utility increase spikes and staffing shortages already plaguing affordable housing 
Alpha Management Corp Auburn Housing Authority Avesta Housing Bangor Housing Authority Barkan Management Co. Bath Housing Brewer Housing Authority C & C Realty Management C. M. Cimino Realty Inc. C. S. Management, Inc C.B. Mattson, Inc. Caleb Foundation, The CMHI Property Management Inc Community Housing of Maine DBH Management DC Management Deanna Morse Property Management Inc Deering Pavilion Dover-Foxcroft Housing Dev Corp Downeast Community Partners Eagle Point Management, LLC Ellen M Leach Memorial Home Evernorth Federal Management Co., Inc Foothills Management Foreside Real Estate Mgt Gary Buck Property Management Guilford Development Corp Hallkeen Management, Inc Harbor Management Harborview Management LLC Hillside Apts Housing Authority City of Old Town Housing Foundation, The Kathryn Hughes Associates, Inc. L & L Management LaBrecque Property Management Laplante Apartments Lewiston Housing Authority Madison Avenue Associates Maine Development Mary Young Matthew Sherman Mem Apts 
MEMBERS 

operations, adding new fees, the inability or delay to evict for non-payment and added administrative burdens does not seem to align with our intent to increase the supply of affordable housing, and subsequently the managers of affordable housing. These additional fees to provide the housing needed in our state adds a very high barrier to landlords and building owners.   Overall, we believe that this bill does not address the root cause issue of the lack of affordable housing in Maine. The overall lack of affordable housing stock is what needs to be addressed. We believe that policies that make it harder for landlords to want to provide both market rate and affordable housing, and do not address the root issue, are not the solution. This could have the opposite impact, and cause landlords to not participate and decrease the amount of housing stock state-wide.   Thank you for your consideration, and please do not hesitate to contact me with any questions.  Alyssa Dean-Littlefield    Sherrin Vail  adeanlittlefield@wishcamper.com svail@evernorthus.org       
MEMBERS 
MCH Housing, Inc. Mexico Senior Housing Mike Eon Associates, Inc Monroe Group New Beginnings Inc New England Developers, Inc. Newell Investments Northland Management Corp Occupied Properties Penobscot Nation Housing Dept. Phoenix Management Pines, The Portland Housing Authority Preservation Management Inc Princeton Properties R & K Oxford Management R.L.W. Management, LLC Realty Resources Management Realty Services, LLC Ricker Plaza Saco Falls Management Scovil Apartments Shalom House SHP Management Corp South Portland Housing Authority Spear Management Co St. Amand, Roger & Eileen St. John Valley Realty Co, LLC Stanford Management Sterling Management, Inc. Stewart Property Management Targeted Management Co., Inc. Volunteers of America Northern New England Washburn Realty Company Washington Street Apartments Waterville Housing Authority Westbrook Housing Authority Yale Court, LP York County Shelter Program  
