, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES v _iv4.~ 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Amy Roeder TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
46 Blackstone Street 
Bangor, ME 04401 
Residence: 207-3 70-55 17 
Amy.Roeder@legislature.maine.gov 
May 19, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Amy Roeder Presenting 
LD 1905, An Act to Create a Residential Rental Unit Registry 
Before the Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Good morning, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and honorable members of the Joint sSelect 
Committee on Housing. My name is Amy Roeder, and I represent House District 23 which 
includes a portion of Bangor. Thank you for the opportunity to present LD 1905, An Act to 
Create a Residential Rental Unit Registry for your consideration. 
LD 1905 sets out to ﬁll a critical gap in the data we need to address our housing crisis. This bill 
would create a statewide database of all residential rentals. It would do so by compiling data 
from existing municipal registries, from state and local housing funders, and an online portal for 
landlords to register units that rent for more than 30 days, if they are not already included in 
those other databases. 
This data on our existing rental stock is critical for planning how and where to invest in 
residential housing. 
0 It will provide existing real estate investors, including landlords, with detailed 
infonnation on the local markets they operate within or are looking to expand into. 
O It will give local and state planners concrete information on how many units are 
occupied, vacant, or not ready for occupancy as they consider growth pressures, 
economic development needs, school district enrollment changes, and more. 
0 It will provide housing navigators with the contact information they desperately need for 
local landlords to help those struggling with housing instability and experiencing 
homelessness secure stable housing. 
I It will provide ﬁrst responders with contact information for dealing with routine 
complaints and emergencies.
0 It will allow local and state officials to track trends in the housing market, including 
occupancy, consolidation, the degree to which rents are leaving the state versus staying in 
their communities, and the extent of corporate control of housing in Maine. 
0 It will allow the state and localities to communicate with landlords. Right now there is 
not a means of alerting all landlords in the state about the creation of new state programs 
- from ﬁnancial assistance for tenants to energy efﬁciency upgrade grants or special 
ﬁnancing, incentives to accept vouchers, or opportunities for working with housing 
navigators. These programs will be more effective if we have a means of mailing or 
emailing information to every registered landlord in the state. 
0 If and when the housing market tums and tenants are not as easy to ﬁnd, landlords will be 
glad to be listed on a publicly accessible database so that they are easier to ﬁnd! 
Let me walk you through the bill. 
First, we have a sponsor amendment to present that will strike the ﬁrst four sections of the bill 
that relate to eviction, so consider those moot. 
Next, subsection 6030-H outlines the information that shall be collected and made public by the 
rental registry. 
0 First, we have the name and contact information for the owner or the residential rental 
unit. We have a number of iterations of contact information here to ensure that the people 
responsible in emergencies can be reached and it is also possible to track the extent of the 
residential rentals a company or a person owns in Maine. 
0 This is captured across A, B, C, D, E, andF 
O Subsection C is speciﬁcally to capture the relationships between corporations, as 
property owners often hold separate addresses under separate LLCs. 
0 G is to capture how many units are at the address, be it a single family home, a four-plex 
or a 150 unit property and how many of those units are occupied versus vacant. 
O There IS NOT any requirement to update this registry when that information 
changes. It is meant to capture a point in time and long-term trends, not the 
current status of all units 
0 H is to help assess how many units any town, region or the entire state has that could 
become available but are not currently habitable. 
0 I is the monthly rent for the units. (sidenote, this is expected to be challenged for privacy 
reasons and striking it may help landlords actually keep costs lower zf they don ’z‘ 
know 
others have significantly raised rents) 
0 Because the purpose of the rental registry is to have data on how many residential rentals 
we have in Maine and to be able to communicate with landlords, Landlords DO NOT 
need to register if they meet the following criteria: 
0 They are already registered with a local registry. 
O They are subsidized under 30-A, Chapter 201
Section 3 - Registration Fee 
The fee only applies to units owned by landlords with more than 50 units in Maine. That would 
include related companies. This is an extremely modest amount when considering that it is 
$4.16/month for each unit in the ﬁrst year, and $2.08 a month in subsequent years. We are only 
setting a fee in order to have the registry be self-sustaining, which follows the practice for 
municipal rental registries. 
Section 4 - Department Responsibilities 
This bill was drafted with input and feedback from staff in municipalities that already have 
residential registries - with staff in Portland, Orono, Bar Harbor, and Sanford about the process 
they used to establish their residential registry. The goal is to make the registration process and 
the management of the data as smooth and straightforward as possible. 
Subsections B and F shall be struck in the sponsor amendment, as they are no longer needed. 
The Department will need to create a basic database structure, an online portal for receiving 
registrations, an online portal that allows the public to search the database, a process for 
receiving information from municipal registries and housing authorities, and a process for 
sharing data with municipalities. This work shall be funded by the registration fees of larger 
landlords. 
Given the work the DECD is doing to set housing goals, to Work with municipalities to support 
the implementation of LD 2003, to plan regional economic development strategies, it fits well to 
task them with being responsible for the data on Maine’s residential rentals. 
Under this bill, municipalities with existing residential registries and housing authorities will be 
asked to share their data with the state in a manner to be determined by the department. 
Sponsor Amendment: 
I am striking the ﬁrst four sections of the bill, which were mistakenly left in the draft from an 
earlier draft of the bill. 
The amendment strikes the following from Page 2: 
- Line 13: I. The monthly rent collected for the residential rental unit. 
- Lines 16-19: if a residential rental unit is not determined to be aﬂordable under the fair 
market rent for the area as established by the United States Department of Housing and 
Urban Development pursuant to 24 Code of Federal Regulations, Section I9 888.115, 
- Lines 24-26: B. Provide a publicly accessible online calculator for an owner ofa 
residential rental unit to assess whether a residential rental unit's rent is a fair market 
rent under subsection 3 
- Lines 32-34: F.’ In any pamphlet, publication or publicly accessible website of the 
department listing or explaining tenants’ rights, provide an explanation of the rights ofa
tenant regarding the registry under section 600], subsection 2 and section 6002, 
subsection 5. 
Amend section 5 subsection 2.A to: 
The name and contact information of the owner of the residential rental unit, including the 
speciﬁc individual with a legal ownership stake. (Amy Smith will speak to this explicitb/, but this 
is language ﬁom the Lewiston registry.) 
Insert a new Section 7: Landlord Beneﬁt and Incentive Program Responsibilities 
Any state or local agencies that provide ﬁnancial beneﬁts to landlords shall share the rental 
registry with their participating landlords. Any new applicants for participation after the registry 
has been in operation for 12 months must be registered before they are eligible to receive 
incentives or beneﬁts. Registration veriﬁcation shall be in a form or manner as detennined by the 
department. 
This last section was added to create an incentive for landlords to register their units. There are 
numerous statewide and local programs with high value for landlords ranging from lead 
abatement to emergency rental assistance. This amendment ﬁrst asks those programs to share the 
rental registry link with their interested and participating landlords and then tasks the department 
with establishing a means of working with the programs on providing veriﬁcation units are 
registered with the state. 
A BDN article yesterday highlighted another problem that would be helped by having a registry- 
out of state owners, especially banks, of vacant properties: 
Large out-oﬁstate companies owning properties also makes it diﬁicult for the city 3' code 
enforcement officers to ﬁnd the right person to send violation notices to. 
While there may be local developers who are interested in buying and rehabilitating a vacant 
home, Kurtis Marsh, associate broker in Bangor with Realty of Maine, said those interested 
buyers are often unable to track down the owner or calls to the owner go unanswered. 
Before I close, I want to point out that numerous existing programs and bills before this 
committee and others would beneﬁt from the creation of a rental registry. 
LD 490 task DHHS with taking over a registry of lead-safe residential rentals. The lead 
abatement program overall would greatly beneﬁt from havin an invento of residential rentals 8 W and the contact information of the owners and property managers.
i 
Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
