REA MAINE ﬁE°rii§'i"6 ’R°§® 
Your Real Estate Experts 
19 Community Drive 0 Augusta, Maine 04330 0 (207) 622-7501 0 Fax: (207) 623-3590 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1905 (“An Act to Create a Residential Rental Unit Registry ”) 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS® 
May 19, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, 
my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations and we 
represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established 
in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build 
Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and 
commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as 
lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine 
Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade 
association in the country. 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® strongly opposes LD 1905. This bill would mandate 
annual registration of residential rental units except for units provided as subsidized housing or 
registered on a municipal registry. The Department of Economic and Community Development 
would maintain a publicly accessible registry with this information. The bill would also prohibit a 
property owner from serving a notice to terminate a tenancy for nonpayment of rent if the 
property owner's rental unit is not registered. 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® is committed to the protection and preservation of the 
constitutional right of every individual to acquire, occupy, use and dispose of real property. One 
of the fundamental tenets of private property rights is the freedom to contract. By mandating 
registration, the state is obstructing use of private property and reducing the freedom of parties 
to mutually benefit from that use. Rental housing needs are best met through private investment 
and incentives to accomplish the development of rental housing. Maine urgently needs housing 
supply of all types, and LD 1905 will prove to be a regulatory deterrent to the development and 
addition of units to the rental housing inventory. 
Furthermore, as written, the bill is vague because it does not define what constitutes a residential 
housing unit. In addition, how will this registry be funded? Will rental registration fees, or other 
taxes be implemented to pay for this? The bill fails to address any of these key components. 
Ultimately, every dollar spent on the development and maintenance of a statewide registry is 
another dollar not spent on increasing the supply of much-needed housing. 
For these reasons, we urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1905. Thank you for your time 
and consideration. 
|-TORQ - is a registered mnrk which identiﬁes a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS® 52'\L%:'° ‘Y':w$ 
141 1502 3.1
