ﬁt'Fal§'Méine, 
n.rW§\'ifii0er.‘ 
..A$I§i@Pi§ €i<?H . ~ J1‘ =" ' > _-‘ 
-a? _;;,§‘ 
1* =1 a. 
<- 
"’ H” 
‘:.:"1'§1¥_¢_:' _<'>”l' -‘.~’ 
'' 
%-ii 
-1;~ 
May 11, 2023 
To the Distinguished Members of the Housing Committee: 
Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD Opposition to LD 1905: An Act to Create a Residential Rental Unit Registry 
The Central Maine Apartment Owners Association (CMAOA) is a landlord membership organization of over 
650, as well as a cooperative team member of other landlord associations across the State of Maine including: 
Southern Maine, Lewiston Auburn, Greater Bangor Area, and Augusta Area. We provide educational events, 
sponsor community events, provide access to discounts on supplies and industry needs like fuels, flooring 
materials and paint. Our overall goal is to support Landlords in providing safe and affordable housing in 
collaboration with the valuable good renters in our area. CMAOA and the other organizations are neutral, 
nonpartisan, member led groups that have the common goal of keeping the rental housing industry safe, 
educated, and competitive. 
CIVIAOA has overwhelmingly heard from their members that the landlord/tenant relationship and its 
uniqueness should be preserved. By keeping rules, codes, zones, etc. managed by the people entering into 
the contract legally or when necessary, by the local municipality. A statewide rental registry is a bad idea 
because: 
0 Financial fees (including a no $ but administrative requirement) will punish tenants as their rent pays 
the costs of the business. 
0 It will create a municipal mandate that may not fit for that community or the tenants. 
0 This is the equivalent of licensing landlording. This has serious implications in the type of tax structure 
created. Should rentals be considered Active Income vs. its current Passive Income status. if the 
- 
legislature would like to treat private property rentals like hotels/commercial business that currently 
pays lodging tax etc. then the services such as 24-hour public service police removal of an unruly 
customer, changes to the emotional support animal laws, fees, etc. also come into the equation. 
0 lf a local municipality does not find this necc. Why are we going to create a new bureaucracy that costs 
money to implement and enforce?_ 
0 if the goal is to have a contact person for EVERY private property in the state for emergency services, 
isn't it best to consider a contact person clause under the local tax collector or fire departments? 
What will this achieve in helping with the current lack of housing? How will this encourage investment in new 
housing? 
We urge you to oppose LD 1905. 
Board of Directors of Central Maine Apartment Owners Association, Waterville, Maine 
Click Here for CMAOA Website and Contact information
