"Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and honorable members of the Joint Select Committee on 
Housing: 
My name is Chris McKinnon, l am a resident of Augusta, and l am here today to testify in favor of LD 
1905. 
Tenants, landlords, and municipalities need comprehensive data on housing to readily access 
information on programs that beneﬁt tenants and landlords. Having up-to-date address and contact 
information for residential rentals will improve outreach for programs ranging from energy efﬁciency 
upgrades to residential housing navigators. 
As a volunteer with the Maine People's Alliance Housing Strategy Task Force, l have been learning about 
the intolerable challenges facing homeless, unhoused, and low-income Mainers in their efforts to secure 
safe, stable, and affordable housing. 
i believe that housing should be a human right. That everyone should have a place to call home, a place 
where they are afforded the security and stability needed to anchor the other essential aspects of their 
lives: caring for families and children, preparing for work, attending to other responsibilities, and a place 
for rest and relaxation. Tragically, these basic human needs are too often out of reach when adequate 
housing cannot be secured. 
My wife, Maryanne, and I bought a home in Augusta in 2009. it was a good decision for many reasons. 
Not the least of which is, that had we stayed on as tenants in Portland, 75% of our monthly retirement 
income would have been consumed by the median Portland rent. 
We often wonder, "how do people do it?" 
it only makes sense that we can better address the complexities of this ongoing housing crisis if we all 
have access to accurate, up~to-date information. 
I believe this legislative proposal is needed to secure the data necessary to make possible the kind of 
information sharing that will allow effective communication on housing and program data between the 
State, municipalities, tenants, and landlords. Please support LD 1905. 
Thank you for your attention. 
Christopher NlcKinnon 
24 Gannett St. 
Augusta, ME 04330
