THE1 
LAW OFFIQE W DANIEL]. BERNIER 
May 16, 2023 
To The Distinguished Members of the Housing Committee 
From Daniel J. Bemier, representing the 
Central Maine Apartment Owners Association Working in conjunction with the Rental 
Housing Alliance of Southem Maine, the Greater Bangor Area Owners’ and Managers ’ 
Association, the Capital Area Housing Association, and Lewiston Auburn Landlord 
Association. 
Re: LD 1905 An Act to Create a Residential Rental Unit Registry 
I am writing in opposition to this legislation. 
The ﬁrst question I would ask is, what does this legislation achieve? Is this legislation 
really the ﬁrst step toward the state creating a system of micromanaging rental properties? 
That is how it is being perceived and that will have a chilling effect on investment. 
Why does this legislation impose a 120 moratoritun on evictions for nonpayment ‘? What 
does that do other than say Maine does not want investment in housing. We are-in the middle 
of a housing crises we need to stop attacking people who provide housing and start working 
with them. Why are we imposing additional fees on people who provide housing? 
As you look around at the municipal registration ordinances the ﬁrst question you have to 
look at is what do these really achieve. When the debate came up in Waterville, we kept asking 
what is this going to achieve? What is this going to achieve? Finally, all the proponents could 
come up with was the city needed emergency contact information and We were able to craft an 
emergency contact ordinance where apartments owners register with the Fire Department and 
the emergency contact information is available to the Fire Department, Police Department, and 
the Code Enforcement Ofﬁcer. There is no fee to register so the cost of doing business for 
landlords did not increase and it does not impact their ability to evict or anything such as that.I 
would note, that type of ordinance makes some sense on the municipal level. If there is a ﬁre or 
a police emergency at a unit, it is good for the municipal ofﬁcials who would be answering that 
call to have good access to an emergency phone number if they need to get a hold of the owner 
of the building. On a state level that makes much less sense. The odds are that it would be 
municipal ofﬁcials that would be responding to such an incident not state authorities. 
Page 1 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * dan@bemierlawof ﬁce.com
As you look at other ordinances many of these have become a way of taxing a select 
group of property owners rather than all property owners. When the discussion came up in 
Augusta, it basically came out that certain people in the city wanted to hire three (3) additional 
employees and rather than raise taxes on the community as a whole or ﬁt it in the city’s budget 
they were just going to impose a fee, really a tax, that would only apply to landlords as that was 
more politically easier than raising taxes on everyone. Going down the road of simply taxing 
select groups to fund programs is a very dangerous road to go down. Do we just tax parents of 
children to fund our schools‘? 
Then you get a third group of registration ordinances more like Lewiston, whichI 
question if they would survive a Court challenge as the Lewiston ordinance allows the city to 
search properties “without limitation ” . I call these warrantless search ordinances. They have 
not really enforced the Lewiston ordinance so I am not aware of a pending Cotut challenge, but 
I do think that their ordinance because the searching ability is “without limitation ” presents 
constitutional problems. 
This is a bill which would impose additional fees on landlords and create a new 
bureaucracy at a time when we need to be encouraging landlords to invest in properties. Putting 
more expenses and administrative burden on landlords will just increase rent. This is 
counterproductive. Also, once a bureaucracy like this is established, where does it end? Do we 
next shift to licensing landlords? What this legislation really achieves is saying Maine does 
not want investment in housing. This will just make the housing crises worse. The 
current crisis is a shortage of housing. It is not an eviction crisis. Evictions are down 
from a high of 6261 in 2014 to 4965 in 2022. We have still not returned to pre covid 
eviction numbers. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Ve ly yours, 
/’ ’ / 1. 
5://Daniel /ernier 
DJB/hb 
Page 2 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * dan@bemierlawof ﬁce.com
