fslwaedgg 
§*i1{f‘oi grmx 
HOUSING COMMITTEE 
I am opposed to LD 1905 for the following reasons. 
LD 1905 is repugnant to Article 1 of the Maine Constitution where it states; 
All people are born equally free and independent, and have certain natural, 
inherent and unalienable rights, among which are those of ........ .. possessing and 
protecting property. 
Black’s Law dictionary 7TH Edition, deﬁnes private property as: protected ﬁom 
public appropriation- over which the owner has EXCLUSIVE and ABSOL UTE 
RIGHTS. 
LD 1905 is repugnant to Article 2 Where it states: 
Power inherent in people. All power is inherent in the people; all free 
governments are founded in their authority and instituted for their beneﬁt! 
I assure you LD 1905 is not for the beneﬁt of the people but for the government 
and tenants. LD 1905 discriminates against Landlords speciﬁcally. 
LD 1905 is repugnant to Section 5 of the Maine Constitution Where it states: 
The people shall be secure in their persons, houses, papers and possessions ﬁom 
all unreasonable searches and seizures. 
LD 1905 requires information that is not privy to anyone except the person who 
owns that information. 
LD 1905 is common law extortion as deﬁned in Black’s Law dictionary: 
l. Extortion; The oﬂense committed by a public oﬁicial who illegally obtains 
property under the color of oﬂice esp., an oﬂicials collection of an unlawful fee.
2. The act or practice of obtaining something or compelling some action by illegal 
means, as by force or coercion. 
The tactics proposed in LD 1905 are the same tactics used by mobsters. Pay mea 
fee or I’ll take 3 months of your rent and you cannot evict a non-paying tenant. 
LD 1905 is repugnant to Section 11. Attainder, ex post facto and contract- 
impairment laws prohibited. The Legislature shall pass no bill of attainder, ex 
post facto law, nor law impairing the obligation of contracts... 
This bill is an impairment for the landlord to enforce a contract between the tenant 
and the landlord rendering LD 1905 Unconstitutional. 
Question 1: How familiar are you with the Maine Constitution? Have you read it? 
Question: 2: The title of LD 1905 is, 
An Act to Create a Residential Rental Unit Registry. 
Of the 5 Senators and Representatives who sponsored bill LD 1905, 
Please explain what creating a Residential unit registry has to do with tenants and 
evictions or robbing Landlords of their hard earned income? LD 1905 will force 
landlords to allow a non-paying tenant to remain in the unit for 3 months’ rent free, 
which could cost the landlord between $3,000 and $4,000. Then you want to ﬁne 
the landlord another 3 or $4,000 and when you’ve taken all the landlord ’s income, 
the landlord then has to hire an attorney to evict the tenant which could cost 2 or3 
more month’s rent as well as the 3- $4000 for an attorney. 
LD 1905 is repugnant to Section 9 of the Maine Constitution as it States: 
Sanguinary laws, excessive bail, cruel or unusual punishments prohibited. 
Sanguinary laws shall not be passed; all penalties and punishments shall be 
proportioned to the offense; excessive bail shall not be required nor excessive 
fines imposed, nor cruel nor unusual punishments inflicted.
LD1905 is repugnant to Article IX of the Maine Constitution as well as Maine 
Statutes requiring mandates be ﬁinded by State funding. 
Section 21. State mandates. For the purpose of more fairly apportioning the cost 
of government and providing local property tax relief, the State may not require a 
local unit of government to expand or modify that unit's activities so as to 
necessitate additional expenditures from local revenues unless the State provides 
annually 90% of the funding for these expenditures from State funds not 
previously appropriated to that local unit of government. Legislation 
implementing this section or requiring a speciﬁc expenditure as an exception to 
this requirement may be enacted upon the vote of 2/3 of all members elected to 
each House. This section must be liberally construed. 
LD 1905 will increase costs to tenants. Landlords have to pass the costs on to the 
tenants. 
l have spoken to landlords who are so fearful of renting an apartment because of 
the laws allowing tenants to freely lie to landlords and destroy their property 
without any recourse. This is part of the reason there is a housing shortage. 
There are laws that need to be enforced and laws that need to be changed to afford 
landlords equal justice. 
Laws are created for the good of all. . . .equal justice under the law. 
Where is the equal justice in LD 1905? 
The tenant is allowed to violate the signed agreement without penaltyi 
The landlord is stripped of his earned income and rights to his property 
The State extoits unearned and undeserved money by force.
