126 Sewall Street ' 
E.
, 
"asszssaa Mam ‘lu “Sm OCGI - 
wavﬁwtmejgiorg People licy olut n fmnk@meJp°rg 
Testimony of Frank D’Alessandro, Maine Equal Justice 
In support of LD 1905 “An Act to Createa 
Residential Rental Unit Registry ” 
March 19, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and distinguished members of the 
Special Committee on Housing. My name is Frank D’Alessandro, and I am the Legal 
Services Director of Maine Equal Justice. We are a civil legal services organization, and We 
work With and for people with low income seeking solutions to poverty through policy, 
education, and legal representation. Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in 
support of LD 1905. 
What This Bill Does 
This bill creates a residential rental unit registry administered by the Department of 
Economic and Community Development in which all residential property owners must 
register all residential rental units except for units provided as subsidized housing or 
registered on a municipal registry. 
\Vhy Maine Equal Justice Supports LD 1905 
In the l980’s the federal govermnent stopped building housing projects and instead begana 
tax credit program available to states to build their own affordable housing imits. Since this 
time Maine has experienced more instability with its housing market particularly as it 
pertains to maintaining stable housing for people With low incomes. 
The housing market is not as simple as the broad economic principle of supply and 
demand. Constructing housing can be costly, takes years to develop and build, and once 
built it will last for years to come. Whether there’s an excess in demand or a shortfall in 
demand, the housing market can overreact to these small tipping points Which is When We 
can see inﬂation and the drastic increases to housing costs that We are currently 
experiencing ‘. 
According to the Maine State Housing Authority, Maine has the eighth oldest housing 
‘ Greater Portland COU11Cil of Governments, Housing in the Turbulent 9O’s: Affordability Trends in Cumberland 
County, (Nov. 199 1), https://WWW.gpcog.org/DocumentCenter/View/l605/1991-Housing-in-the-Turbulent-90s-PDF
stock in the nation with roughly a quarter of homes built before 1939 and over 50% of 
Maine homes built before 1980.2 Homes built before 1978 are likely to have lead based 
paint which poses a signiﬁcant health risk to individuals and families with small children. 
Young children can test positive for lead poisoning, which can cost a landlord thousands.3 
By creating a rental registry database we will have a more accurate and comprehensive 
picture of the housing market within the state and each municipality. a rental registry can 
provide a host of beneﬁts such as: 
inform housing and cormnunity development policies 
help regulate a rental market 
identify households at risk of displacement (rent hikes or evictions) 
identify and address community health and safety concems 
help facilitate community outreach 
support social support services in and out of times of crisis 
be a critical organizing tool for tenants 
provide information on the rental ownership landscape 
help target community acquisition efforts 
mitigate growing speculative practices.4 
A rental registry will help state and municipal planners identify, address, and respond to 
needs more effectively and efficiently. By being able to recognize these pressures and 
changes in the market earlier we are able to respond sooner and with a comprehensive 
approach diminishing the impacts, and hopefully avoiding another crisis that we ﬁnd 
ourselves in today. With the information collected Maine communities will have better 
information to forecast future growth and housing needs which can help avoid a mismatch 
between the market and the population. 
Maine ’s rental housing market is experiencing signiﬁcant rental increases. As evidenced by 
what happened after the change in ownership of South Portland ’s Red Bank Village, new 
ownership can quickly make decisions that remove long-terrn affordable housing from the 
market. Increasing rent can often be the same as eviction for many tenants on a ﬁxed or 
low income. The rental registry will provide the state and municipalities useful data on 
vacancy patterns and trends in landlord and tenant behavior. 
With a rental registry we would also have data on Maine’s housing stock that is being used 
as rental units and could help mitigate potential exposure and risks to children living in 
older homes. Substandard conditions in the home are responsible for a wide array of 
signiﬁcant health problems, such as childhood lead poisoning; exacerbated asthma and 
respiratory conditions that result from exposure to mold, pests, and other household 
allergens; and increased rates of injury and mortality among the elderly. As rental housing 
is more likely to be substandard than owner-occupied housing, tenants are at 
2Maine State Housing Authority, Housing in Maine: An Overview, (Sept 2022), 
httpsI//legislature.maine.g0v/doc/ ’ 8866 
3 
Matthew Desmond et al., Evicting Children, 92 Socmr Foacas 303, 306 (2013). 
4 
https://WWW.policylink.org/resources-tools/tools/all-in-cities/housing-anti-displacement/rental-registries
higher-than-average risk.A rental registry that is coupled With a periodic inspection of 
housing units will help ensure that all rental units meet minimum safety and health 
requirements.5 
It also helps link landlords with the ﬁnancial resources available to support updates and 
rehabilitation to make Maine’s older homes safer and more energy efficient. 
Conclusion 
Maine Equal Justice hopes the Committee will vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 1905. 
We thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony and I am happy to answer any 
questions. 
5 See: A Guide to Proactive Rental Inspection Programs 
https1//WWW.changelabsolutions.org/sites/default/iiles/Proactive-Rental-Inspection-Programs_Guide_FINAL_2Ol40 
204.pdf
