Gina Morin
Auburn
LD 1905
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and honorable members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing: my name is Gina Morin, I am a resident of Auburn and I am 
here today to testify in favor of LD 1905, An Act to Create a Residential Rental Unit 
Registry.
This residential rental registry would:
Collect the data necessary to fully understand Maine’s rental housing market, 
including the location, number of units, and ownership
To maintain the contact information for all landlords in the state to better inform them
of the numerous programs available to support them and their tenants, including but 
not limited to rehabilitation and repair, energy efficiency upgrades, heat and energy 
assistance and more.
To support smaller towns that may not have the capacity to capture and maintain such
data on their own, be it for communication or code enforcement
To establish a database of information that can be used to cross reference with other 
program data, communicate with tenants regarding their rights and responsibilities, 
track housing vacancy patterns, trends in tenant and landlord behavior, and more.
To make clear that residential rentals are providing an important service and as such, 
need to be understood. 
Landlords would report basic information on their units to the registry, to be updated 
annually: 
Address of the property, owner contact information, and emergency contact 
information 
Name and contact information for the management company, if applicable
# of units and the monthly rent charged
The status of the units at the time of registration or renewal: Vacant or Occupied or 
Not Yet Ready for occupancy 
The name and contact information of any corporations with a parent or subsidiary 
relationship to the owner of the unit.
For landlords who own more than 50 units, a small fee of no more than $50 per unit 
for the initial registration, $25 per unit for renewal.
I want this committee to understand what a minute fee this really is. If a landlord 
owns 50 units, a fee of $50 per unit for the first year actually equals $4 a month per 
unit. Each subsequent year the fee would be $2 a month per unit.
If this data would have existed when I was homeless, a housing social worker or 
housing navigator would have had access to important landlord information that could
aid in obtaining information on apartments for rent. I believe this would have made a 
big difference in the time it took for me to secure stable housing.
National corporate landlords are buying up huge swaths of the residential real estate 
market. It is critical for the State and local governments to know to what extent large 
corporations control their housing market. It’ll also aid in understanding how national 
corporate landlords are skyrocketing our rental prices here in Maine
A residential rental unit registry would be the most effective way to ensure landlords 
and tenants are taking advantage of all the programs Maine has to offer. I ask this 
committee to please vote ought to pass on LD 1905.
Thank You.

