James Lysen
Maine People's Alliance
LD 1905
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and honorable members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing.  My name is Jim Lysen, I am a resident of Lewiston, and I 
am here today to testify in favor of LD 1905.
 
When I was a City Councilor in Lewiston I was named to a Committee to create a 
Rental Registry in Lewiston. We knew the information to be collected was vital to 
both landlords and tenants, as well as to the municipality. Unfortunately, the 
Committee, led by landlords, weakened the initiative by not including fees to fund the
Registry. 
Now we have the ability to create and self fund a statewise Rental Registry that will 
benefit all of Maine. The information collected will give a clearer picture of housing 
rental trends and for Maine to fully understand the housing market. As a former 
Professional Planner, I know this information will help planners, local officials, state 
officials, first responders, and landlords plan for the future and respond to urgent 
needs. Why this data is not being collected is what confuses me.
Having this information will make it easier to inform landlords of the many programs 
designed to support them and their tenants. Once the database is established, it can be 
used to track housing trends, understand patterns in rental ownership, clarify the 
extent of corporate control (which is a major concern of mine) and the extent of which
our housing is  currently vacant. This is vital information, and why the Registry is 
critical for Maine as it attempts to solve longtime housing shortage problems.
I know there are never easy solutions to such major problems. But this step is critical 
to Maine as we begin to make sure all forms of safe, decent and affordable housing 
are available to Mainers, and how to keep the channels of communication open so we 
can solve our own problems ourselves. That is what Mainers do!
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today, and I encourage the Committee to 
support LD 1905. 
Jim Lysen
26 Taylor Hill Road
Lewiston, ME 04240
