5/14/2023  
 
RE: LD 1905  
Committee on Housing , 
To be clear, I’m opposed to this law. At a time of higher interest rates, which will already lead to 
lower investment, does Maine  want  to be known as a bad place to  invest ? Some cities in Maine 
have attempted  similar laws. They are all failures. Due to this bill and similar anti -rental housing 
laws being proposed, many quality housing providers have been calling me to ask the question 
is it time to sell? When these providers sell it is usually to out of state rs with deep pockets 
without  ties to our community. I don’t see that as a win for the State.  
Even some  advocates of low-income  tenants were not in favor of similar laws in Waterville . For 
example, a representative from a  local  homeless shelter at  one community meeting asked for a 
similar law not to pass as studies have shown that rental registries and similar regulations 
decrease the number of units available to the poor . The data is clear, if you vote for this bill, 
you are forcing more people in our community out onto the street . 
This law is bound to fail. Check out the Maine Housing study1 on similar rental laws. They do 
not work. I have not seen any long -term  data to indicate th at rental registries  improve housing 
outcomes  and I ’ve looked hard for it. Why are you wasting resources on something that has not 
worked in countless Maine communities ? 
I have grave concerns about the information you are tr ying to collect and make public 
information . Most of our tenants have been wonderful. We enjoy providing them great places 
to live and watch our residents  flourish, however, there are moments, when I ponder if I should 
own a bullet proof vest. I’d hate for  this new law to put myself and my family in danger. If you 
look nationwide, landlords have been shot and killed just this year. Police officers have been 
shot and killed by  tenants while serving evictions. When housing goes bad for tenants it is a hot 
bed of emotions. I don’t think rental housing providers  should have to risk their lives  further by 
divulging information that does not need to be in the public record.  
Specific ally, i n Section 5, 6030H - 2C, I question the legality  of having to disclose ownership 
structure  of LLC’s. The who le point of an LLC is liability pro tection and anonymity . This provision 
seems like it ’s trying to pierce  the corporate  veil. People  will reduc e investing in housing if we 
lose the protection of the LLC -that is too much financial  risk, and it would be  much  safer to put 
money into a 401k.  
In Section 5, 6030H - 2I, why does the state need pricing data for rentals ? If the state is not 
paying the rent that is a private matter.  
 
1 https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/7909  
When we went through this process with a similar law in Waterville, we found all the town 
really needed was an emergency contact that police, fire , and code could call. Housing 
providers  want to know if our buildings are burning down  so we ’ll provide the phone number . 
Every town in Maine could ask for this information and the ren tal community by large would be 
happy to provide this. Fairfield  does not have a ny ordinance , but it collect s phone numbers in 
its tax d atabase requir ing no new bureaucracy  in place to maintain that information . There is no 
need for a statewide registry asking so many questions along with a new fee structure to fund 
this government bureaucracy.  Let cities and towns make rules best for their community.  
It's outrageou s to charge a $25 dollar fee each year to our tenants  to register our units.  Every 
year, we will present them with  an annual charge of $25 dollars  titled  LD 1905 . On this bill I will 
include everyone’s names and contact information from this committee who voted for this bill 
if they have any questions or complaints about the junk fee  being charged by the state and not 
our comp any. Although this may seem like hyperbole, the fact is every dollar you charge 
housing providers gets charged to our tenants be it directly or indirectly. Our tenants do not 
need  additional  costs.  
Regarding  the fee  per units, w hat if the majority owner only owns a few buildings, but a 
minority own owns over 50 buildings? Do they have to pay the annual registration fee? It’s 
unclear.   
There are many other technical issues  with the language  in th is bill. In section 7, it outlines 
those units that are not require d to register (subsidized  units or registered with a municipality).  
Based on the language  it is unclear if  exempted units are still not allowe d to issue notice s to 
quit unless th ey “voluntarily”  register their units with the state.  
I have issues with section  5 asking for the Municipality’s  database. When we worked with the 
City of Waterville on their rental registry , we specifically put it under the umbrella of the fire 
department to prevent sens itive  information from becoming  public  so only police, fire and code 
could access the eme rgency contact information that we provided. We don’t need sensitive  
information  available  as public information. Why does the state even need this information ? 
The state is not involved in the la ndlord -tenant relationship besides law making  around that 
relationship .  
Furthermore , this bill has a hidden state -wide 120-day eviction moratorium.  We had enough  
eviction moratoriums during the pandemic,  and it caused nu merous issues with problem  
tenants. There is no good reason to have to wait 120 -days after registering to be able to ser ve 
notice s to quit. Even landlords who register as  soon as the portal system is active will be  stuck 
with this 120-day eviction moratorium.  120 days  of no t getting rent is a substantial  loss that 
many small housing  providers cannot absorb . Furthermore,  there will be situations  when there 
is an abusive tenant who is ruining the lives of their neighb ors. Do you want someone to 
intimidate  the single mom and her kids next door for 120 days  while everyone waits out this 
eviction morat orium ? Also consider what this eviction moratorium will do to back up the courts  
once the ban is lifted .   
This program will require  a huge government bureaucracy  to implement  and maintain, yet  
there is  no fiscal note. Where is the data ? San Francisco  implemented  a registry  a few years 
ago with a cost estimate up to 3. 6 million dollars  per year . The ir po pulation is only 815,000, 
which is much less than the state of Maine  so I can only imagine our costs could exceed that 
amount. Why does the State want to spend over 3 million dollars on a regist ry that does not 
work ? I question , how is this registry  going to help me provide better housing to our re sidents?  
Spend that 3. 6 million dol lars to h elp u s build  housing.  
This is just another anti -housing law that does nothing but create more red tape  and costs . I 
maintain housing providers are part of the solution to our housing crisis. We are not just a 
minority  group that people should be able to constantly  attack  and marginalize  and blame all 
the housing problems  on. Buying a house is also expensive . Everything is  expensive . For 
example, i n 201 9 the cost to clean a fu rnace was $185, now we are paying $279. Drywall since 
2019 is up 30%.  It’s not just rentals  that are expensive . 
Come up with alternative proposals that will increase the unit count in Maine. Please also 
consider proposals that will work with small devel opers. For example, in  Central Maine it cost s 
50% to 100% more to build new units than it is to acquire  existing and performing h ousing 
stock, even with the huge cost increas e in acquiring  existing rental units  since the pandemic.  
This is why we have such a unit shortfall . Even now it costs too mu ch to build without help. 
Most of the government funds only help  with large projects. I know some Maine H ousing 
funding wants 50+ units. Most local  companies cannot come up with that capital stack,  but we 
could put up some  2–4-unit build ings. Increa sing the number  of units  and making it more 
affordable to do so  is the only true long -term  solution  to a housing crisis .  
 
Regards,  
Justin Giroux  
Manager, Habitat For ME LLC  
Fairfield, ME  
 
