Katerine Collins
Lewiston
LD 1905
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and honorable members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing.  My name is Katie Collins, I am a resident of Lewiston and I 
am writing this testimony in favor of LD 1905.
After being a renter in Maine for the past 15 years, I purchased a two-family home in 
Lewiston. Newly in a position of being a landlord, I felt a special interest in learning 
about the rental registry. 
After researching the issue, I feel that the information gathered and available would 
be important to both landlords and tenants in forming trusting and safe relationships. 
The ability to know the name and contact information of my landlords throughout my 
rental history was an important factor in feeling confident and safe in my home. It 
allowed me to share concerns about the building and communicate relevant 
information from neighbors when needed. Knowing who my landlords were and how 
to reach them also allowed me to connect other renters to safe and reliable housing 
and landlords to responsible tenants. 
As a landlord, it is important to me to be available to the individuals renting my 
apartment. It fosters open communication and ensures that I know about safety 
concerns early and easily. It also provides peace of mind for my tenants who know 
they will be able to reach me if an emergency arises.
It also adds a layer of accountability, and as a landlord, there is a great responsibility 
to provide safe housing to other community members. Without a rental registry, it is 
far too easy for buildings to be neglected and for tenants to be stuck in unsafe housing
with no ability to advocate for themselves both directly to their landlord or to local 
oversight offices.
I would be happy to register my building, reporting basic information, because I 
believe tenants deserve to have information vital to their own well being. Please help 
move this on by supporting it in your Committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to comment on LD 1905.
Katherine Collins
72 Nichols Street
Lewiston, ME 04240
