 
 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org 
Date May 18th, 2023 
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee on Housing in support of LD 1905 – An Act 
to Create a Residential Unit Registry 
To Chairperson Pierce, Chairperson Gere, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing: 
My name is Rebekah Lane and I am the Community Organizer for Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine. I am 
here today to express our support, and ask for your support, of LD 1905 – An Act to Create a Residential Unit 
Registry 
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access to nutritious 
food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the public in the fight to end 
hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 600 organizations to help distribute food 
to community members in need. Our network of partner agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior 
centers, school programs, and healthcare facilities. In our work centering equity, we are increasingly working 
with communities of color to address food security in a culturally responsive way.  
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in Maine. Working in partnership with the state 
legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make Maine a stronger, better 
place to work and live.  
During a recent advocacy meeting for the food bank we discussed some of the many barriers that many of 
those with lived and living experiences of hunger face when it comes to housing.  Having a registry that 
provides up-to-date contact information for landlords, physical addresses for rental properties, emergency 
contact information, and the current rent being charged for the units provides potential tenants with a great 
resource during a stressful time.  
Ensuring that only rental units on the registry can be terminated for non-payment, without facing hefty fines, 
is a great step towards protection for both landlords and tenants. And participation in the registry also 
provides reassurance about how a management company and/or landlord is invested in having a fair and 
honest relationship with tenants. 
We ask that you vote in support of LD 1905.  
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony. 
Sincerely, 
Rebekah Lane 
Community Organizer 
rlane@gsfb.org 
