 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.org 
Hello Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Special Committee on 
Housing, 
My name is Taylor Cray, and I am the Outreach Team Leader for Preble Street’s Advocacy 
Team. I am here today to ask that you please testify in support of LD 1905: An Act to 
Create a Residential Rental Unit Registry. 
The work that Preble Street does is centered around the ability to meet the needs of 
individuals living throughout Maine, including the ability to help individuals and families 
find safe and stable housing. Through programs like the Rapid Re-Housing program, which 
has housed over 100 individuals since it’s inception in 2020, Preble Street works to 
collaborate with landlords and communities to ensure that individuals and families are 
safely housed. A large aspect of this work is done by creating relationships with landlords 
who are willing to collaborate with case workers to ensure that clients are successful in 
their housing arrangements. A rental housing registry would help to facilitate the creation 
of such relationships, and to create a more transparent rental market. 
As we all know, corporate ownership of rental units has created an environment where 
renters are at the mercy of market changes and the whims of corporate landlords. In our 
current housing market, being priced out of your apartment can mean being priced out of 
your neighborhood, community, and sometimes even the entirety of the city or town that 
you live in. While the current rental and housing market has created an environment that 
frequently causes fear and desperation, we have the ability to create policy change that 
will protect tenants, assist landlords, and ensure that our policymaking on this issue is 
fully-informed. A recent article in the Bangor Daily News discussed the number of vacant 
properties in the greater Bangor area, and the difficulties that realtors and the City have 
had in contacting the owners of these properties to communicate about sales. These 
conversations would be much easier to facilitate if the City, Realtors, and others had 
access to all of the updated information about the ownership and contact information for 
the property. 
Across the State of Maine, both urban and rural areas are struggling to house their 
residents. This bill proposes a helpful way to collect information about available rentals. 
This would benefit both individuals and municipalities alike, and would go a long way in 
ensuring that our state had the knowledge it need to address our current housing crisis. I 
urge you to please vote in favor of LD 1905. 
Thank you for your time this morning. 
Sincerely, 
Taylor Cray
Advocacy Outreach Team Leader
Preble Street 
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to 
homelessness and hunger

 
  
