 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE IMMIGRANTS’ RIGHTS COALITION  (MIRC)  
Regarding  L.D.  1905 : An Act to Create a Residential Rental Unit Registry  
Sponsor:  Representative Amy Roeder  
Public Hearing: Friday, May 19,  2023  
 
 
Dear Members of the  Committee on  Housing : 
 
My name is Tobin Williamson  and I am the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ 
Rights Coalition (MIRC), a statewide network of almost 100 member organizations working to 
enhance the lives of Maine’s immigrant communities. MIRC works to advance systemic changes 
in Maine through  collaborative advocacy to ensure that voices of the state’s large, diverse, and 
growing immigrant communities are heard.  
One of the biggest challenges we have seen in the past couple of years i s the disjointed  and 
disconnected e ffort of trying to work with  various municipalities , housing authorities,  and 
landlords  in trying to fin d hous ing for the large number of new arrivals into our state.  This is not 
just a Portland  / South Portland  issue ; it also imp acts Brunswick, Freeport, Old Orchard Beach, 
Saco, Lewiston, Auburn, W estbrook, Scarbo rough, and, mo st recently and notably, Sanford.  
While we still continue to advocate for a state -led office of asylum seeker resettlement  and 
coordination , there is no doubt a statewide database of residential units would be a step in the 
right direction.  
This bill would help with figuring out local markets and development opportunities. It would 
assist with e conomic development  and urban planning. Perhaps most importantly, it might make 
it easier to fi nd shelter for people who  otherwise  have n owhere to go.  The overall lack of housing  
units  and coordination is a tremendous strain on organizations like MIRC that wo rk to make s ure 
people  have a place to call home . 
Moreove r, the creation and upkeep of a  statewide residential unit registry would be a tremendous 
asset to our state.  We are proud to join Maine Equa l Justice and the Maine People ’s Alliance in 
support of L.D. 1905, and hop e that you will, too. Thank you very much for your consideration 
of this important issue.  
 
### 
