 
In Support of LD 1072  
An Act Regarding the Bureau of Motor Vehicles  
Joint Committee on Transportation  
April 27 , 2023  
Good Afternoon, Senator Chipman , Representative Williams , and distinguished members of 
the Joint  Committee on Transportation ,  
My name is April Gleason  and I am the  Chief Loan Officer for University Credit Union  (UCU) . 
UCU serves the members and families of the University of Maine System as well as several 
other organizations. We represent more than 28,000 members and $459 million in assets. I 
am submitting testimony today in favor of LD 1072 . 
University Credit Union frequently makes auto loans to members of our community. Not only 
is this a core part of our business, it helps us provide lower interest rates and monthly 
payments to our members when we can assist with refinancing.  
Since the state has not yet fully implemented electronic titling, for most refinances, UCU must 
wait to receive the title from the previous financial institution before sending it to the 
Secretary of State’ s office for title updates. These documents do not come immediately after 
the loan is finalized; we typically receive  the titles from the prior financial institution very close 
to the 30 day deadline  for title changes .  
Once we do receive the title, we mus t mail the title application with the title 4 -5 days before 
the 30 day deadline to factor in the time it will take to get to the proper destination in the 
mail. While t his should be plenty of time to get to the Secretary of State’s office, o n at least 5 
or more occasions we have received the late fee amount of $50 for factors that are 
completely out of our control.  
We do due diligence to attempt to get these documents to the Secretary of State (SoS) in a 
timely fashion, but we are still being penalized for  factors outside of our control. The statute 
says applications must be received  by the SoS within 30 days, giving them no flexibility in 
waiving fees if the application was postmarked within 30 days.  
We appreciate the Bureau adding the ability to waive these fees in legitimate circumstances 
like these and would urge the committee to support LD 1072.  
Thank you for hearing our testimony.  
