131315 Legislature Senator Benjamin M. Clzipman 
3 State House Statzon 
S€l’l£lt€ Of MGiﬂ€ Augusta,ME 04333-0003 
. . Oﬂice: (207) 287 I515 
Senate District 28 Benjamin. Chiprnan@legislaf21re.maine gov 
T ransporrafion Committee, Chan 
T axafion Comminfee, Member 
Testimony of Senator Ben Chipman to introduce LD 1072, f‘An Act Regarding the Bureau 
of Motor Vehicles ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
April 27, 2023 
Representative Williams, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Transportation, my name is Senator Ben Chipman and I represent Senate District 28. I am here to 
speak in support of LD 1072, “An Act Regarding the Bureau of Motor Vehicles. ” 
I want to thank the Secretary of State and Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV) for allowing me to 
sponsor their department bill. 
The Secretary of State will speak in more detail about the technical and practical implications of 
this bill, but I would like the committee to know this bill only seeks to enhance the BMV’s 
mission of providing accessible, timely, and secure motor vehicle services to people in Maine. 
The BMV is one of very few state agencies that get to interact with practically every single 
person in our state, beginning in their adolescence all the way to adulthood. Therefore, our 
responsibility as members of this committee is to ensure weare supporting the BMV in their 
mission to deliver customer-centered services and to enhance the quality of life and opportunity 
for people in Maine. 
Earlier this year, our committee had the opportunity to tour the BMV to see the work that is 
being done there and review the BMV’s strategic plan. It was great to see that they’re seeking 
not only to modernize technology but also update the way they provide services to the people of 
Maine. This bill is intended to clean up areas of statute to align aspects of the motor vehicle laws 
with modernized services. 
I am happy to answer any questi_ons_or get additional information to the Committee ahead of the 
work session. Thank you for your time. _ 
- 
Fax: (207)287-1585 * TTY 71] * [Message Service 1 ~8()()-423-690() * legis/clture.mainagov ﬁsenate
