Moine Credit Union Leogue
A 2 Ledgeview Drive - 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Mailing Address: P.O. Box 1236 - 
Portland, ME 04104 
207-773-5671 - 
1-800-442-6715 
www.mainecul.org 
in Support of LD 1072 
An Act Regarding the Bureau of Motor Vehicles 
Joint Committee on Transportation 
April 27, 2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distinguished members of 
the Joint Committee on Transportation, 
My name is Cate Pineau and lam here to submit testimony on behalf ofthe Maine Credit 
Union League. The Maine Credit Union League is the trade association for Maine's 50 credit 
unions and over 725,000 members statewide. We respectfully submit the following testimony 
in favor of LD 1072. 
Credit unions are frequently involved in auto lending and reﬁnancing. As financial 
cooperatives, credit unions are often able to offer their members good rates and are 
frequently able to help Mainers looking to purchase a new vehicle or to refinance one ata 
better rate. This bill would allow for the Bureau to have more flexibility in when they apply 
late fee fines. 
At the beginning ofthe pandemic, the Bureau was extremely far behind in processing titles 
and at times this meant that the financial institution that was providing the financing for a car 
purchase was unable to get the title application mailed in within the statutorily required 30 
days causing a mandatory fee to be imposed on the credit union. Through the leadership of 
Secretary of State Bellows and Deputy Secretary Curtis, the backlog of titles is significantly 
lower, taking only a few days to process titles rather than the months that it has been in 
recent memory. However, the industry still faces challenges: large financial institutions are 
often slow to release the title for a refinancing, and delays in the postal service have resulted 
in credit unions being assessed the fine despite having done eveiything right. 
Section 3 of LD 1072 allows the Bureau to be flexible and to use their discretion in imposing a 
fine given the circumstances. Credit unions have spent thousands of dollars on these fines 
because of external forces and the flexibility would bring the knowledge ofthe Bureau into 
these decisions and would save businesses and consumers money and headaches. 
The League would like to thank the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, Secretary Bellows, and Senator 
Chipman for including this provision in the bill. We appreciate the opportunity to offer 
testimony on this important topic. If the League can be of any assistance during the 
deliberations of this bill or others similar, please do not hesitate to contact us.
