 
In Support of LD 1072  
An Act Regarding the Bureau of Motor Vehicles  
Joint Committee on Transportation  
April 27 , 2023  
Good Afternoon, Senator Chipman , Representative Williams , and distinguished members of 
the Joint  Committee on Transportation ,  
My name is Joann Bisson and I am the President and CEO of Oxford Federal Credit Union. 
Oxford Federal Credit Union serves anyone who lives, works, worships, or goes to school in 
Androscoggin, Cumberland, Franklin, Kennebec, Knox, Lincoln, Oxford, Sagadahoc,  
Somerset, or York counties. We have over 18,000 members and hold nearly $ 308 million in 
assets. I am submitting testimony today in favor of LD 1072 .  
Like many credit unions, we do a significant number of auto loans, both for new purchases 
and for refinan ces. It’s part of our people helping people mission to provide affordable rates 
and make sure people have access to safe and reliable transportation. When we are 
refinancing loans, we must wait for the previous financial institution to receive our payoff a nd 
release the title before we can submit the title application to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles.  
If the title application is received more than 30 days late, the Bureau will assess a $50 late fee. 
We do not pass these fees on to our members and a lready th is year , we have paid more than 
$2,650 in late title fees to the Bureau, through no fault of our own . There have also been 
instances , like during the pandemic  where the application may have been received by the 
Bureau within 30 days , but not processed until significantly later.  
We appreciate that this legislation allows the Bureau to waive fees in situations like these 
where we are not at fault. We make every e ffort to submit title applications as quickly as 
possible, however mail delays and delays in processing from large financial institutions mean 
that the 30 day timeline is often unmet. We look forward to the Bureau continuing to work on 
this issue and any s olutions in the future that might extend the timeline while electronic titling 
is still being researched and implemented .  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 1072.  
