; Department of the Secretary of State -‘~' .,. 
\‘¢::~’>\ V’ 
In 4.! 
Q; ‘ 
gig‘ Bureau of Motor Vehicles 
ig I 
Shanna Bcuows Catherine Curtis 
Secretary of Slate 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
April 27, 2023 
Testifying In Support Of 
L.D. 1072, “An Act Regarding the Bureau of Motor Vehicles ” 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Transportation, my name is Shenna Bellows, and I am the Secretary of State and chief motor vehicle 
officer. I am speaking today in support of L.D. 1072. 
To begin, I would like to thank Senator Chipman for sponsoring this bill on behalf of the Bureau of 
Motor Vehicles. This bill accomplishes several things - it makes technical changes, brings Maine in 
line with international law, and enhances services for customers. 
Section one and two of the bill make technical adjustments to allow for enactment of section three, 
which gives the Secretary of State, or their designee, the ability to waiver a penalty or fee. There have 
been numerous situations where people are saddled with unjust fees due to clerical mistakes and/or 
human error. For example, Senator Timberlake had a constituent who had their registration suspended 
due to the town clerk forgetting to collect a fee. The constituent was unknowingly driving around with 
a suspended registration and ultimately faced a snowball effect of legal and ﬁnancial consequences due 
to this one mistake. Section three would give the Secretary, or their designee, discretion to waive a fee 
in a situation like the one just described. 
Section four of the bill would restrict the carrying of weapons in any Bureau of Motor (BMV) office, 
including any of our branches, to on-duty or off-duty law enforcement ofﬁcers. Last year, the BMV 
was the target of two threat incidents. One occurred at one of our branches, with a customer who 
brandished a weapon, and the other was received at our main office. In both instances, staff and 
customers were left shaken and afraid. Several states — including New Jersey, Iowa, Comiecticut, Ohio, 
and West Virginia — have similar provisions of law that prohibit weapons from being brought onto 
their property. 
Section ﬁve of the bill strengthens privacy protections of our data by inserting a cross reference to the 
federal law, the Driver Privacy Protection Act (DPPA). 
29 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0029 
http://www.maine.g0v/sos/bmv; tel. 207~624-9000 " Deputy Secretary of S late
Section six and section eight are related. Together, they reallocate the provisions of law governing the 
issuance of temporary license plates from the laws governing motor vehicle registration to the laws 
governing motor vehicle dealers, who issue the plates. It also changes cross-references as needed and 
makes a change for consistency with current law. 
Section seven repeals the honorary consul license plate as the federal government has advised states 
not to issue them. 
Section nine speciﬁes that the issuance of a temporary registration permit for the transportation ofa 
tiny home is for occasional transportation only. In our experience, we have seen tiny homeowners 
relocate their homes more than once resulting in the BMV receiving multiple requests for permits so 
this change would create efﬁciencies in that program. 
Section 10 and 11 came from a constituent inquiry Senator Hickman received. These two sections 
codify a practice we already undertake — issuing special veteran registration plates and designated 
motorcycle plates to any person who has served a minimum of 20 years in the National Guard and has 
been honorably discharged if they can provide appropriate documentation. I will note that L.D. 128, 
“An Act to Increase the Limit on Sets of Special Veterans Registration Plates from 3 Sets to 4 Sets,” 
was unanimously voted ought to pass as amended by this committee in March. As a result of this vote, 
we would need to make an additional change to section ll to bring this section in line with L.D. 128. 
Section 12 requires a lienholder who participates in the electronic lien titling program to register with 
the Secretary of State. This change would aid the progress we are making to move towards electronic 
liens. 
Section 13 and 14 of the bill make technical adjustments to allow for enactment of section 15, which 
allows for a foreign national with a valid driver’s license issued by a foreign jurisdiction to obtaina 
Maine driver’s license that is valid for up to one year after becoming a resident of this state. This 
provision is also the result of a constituent situation that was raised by Senator Grohoski, who hada 
Ukrainian family in her district who possessed Ukrainian licenses but questioned whether they had to 
get a Maine license. This provision would recognize valid licenses from foreign countries that are 
recognized under the 1949 Geneva Convention on Road Traffic, an international agreement which 
holds, among other things, that any member should honor the foreign license of “any driver admitted to 
its territory ” for at least a year. This provision codities our responsibilities under the 1949 convention 
in state statute, and create an explicit exemption for new residents with foreign licenses who have been 
here for less than a year. 
Section 16 requires the Secretary of State to permanently revoke, without preliminary hearing, the 
commercial driver's license of a person who has been convicted of a felony involving an act or practice 
of severe forms of human trafficking in which a commercial motor vehicle was used. This requirement 
is mandated by federal law. 
Section 17 allows the Secretary of State to provide social security numbers within the Department of 
the Secretary of State to implement the federal National Voter Registration Act (NVRA) of 1993, the 
federal Help America Vote Act (HAVA) of 2002 or other federal election law Within the central voter 
registration system. Maine is unique in that the Bureau of Motor Vehicles and Bureau of Corporations, 
Elections, and Commissions are both under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of State. The 
communication between systems will ensure our voter lists are kept up to date and accurate. 
29 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333~0029 
http://www.maI' ne. gov/sos/bmv; tel. 207-624-9000
Section 18 and 19 of the bill make technical adjustments to allow for enactment of section 20, which 
allows the Secretary of State to accept an application for a driver's license for a minor if the application 
is accompanied by evidence that the minor is an unaccompanied noncitizen minor under federal 
immigration law and otherwise meets the legal status criteria under state and federal law. Current law 
requires a minor’s application to be signed by a legal guardian, but, by deﬁnition, a noncitizen minor 
who is unaccompanied under the law does not have a legal guardian who can sign the application. 
Section 21 provides clarity by changing the categories of instructor licensure for driver education 
schools from Class A and Class B — which is always confusing because we also have Class A, B, and 
C driver licenses - to Class 1, Class 2 and Class 3 and speciﬁes that a Class 3 instructor license 
authorizes the holder to teach only the classroom phase of driver education as an employee or affiliate 
of a licensed driver education school. This is a recommendation supported by driver education schools. 
Section 22 extends the ﬁngerprinting requirement for driver education instructors from every 5 years to 
every 6 years, to coincide with their instructor license renewals, which are every 2 years. 
Section 23 allows the issuance of a temporary nondriver identiﬁcation card to an applicant that is valid 
for up to 90 days. This provision would apply in situations Where the individual can meet the legal 
presence standard but who does not have their documents or does not already have a license and needs 
a state ID quickly. For example, we have seen situations where an individual comes from another state 
and could waive in and get a temporary license, or whose personal situation does not allow for them to 
take the time needed to do the written exam and road test. 
Section 24 provides that when a person has operated a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause the 
death of a person and has been convicted of criminal homicide or attempted criminal homicide, the 
Secretary of State will revoke that person's driver's license for at least 5 years without further hearing 
upon receipt of an attested copy of the court records as long as the attested copy is received within one 
year of the date of conviction. We had an unfortunate situation last year where a constituent had been 
convicted of a crime and served their sentence, but at that time, the BMV had not received the 
appropriate court records that would trigger a revocation. It was not until last summer — years later, 
when they had rehabilitated themselves and returned to a productive life — that the BMV received the 
court documents forcing us to revoke their license. The change to this section of law would ensure 
appropriate timing of the revocation process. 
Section 25 amends the provision of law that requires the Secretary of State to suspend without 
preliminary hearing for a period of at least one year a person's driver's license if the Secretary of State 
ﬁnds that person to have negligently operated a motor vehicle in a manner so as to cause the death of 
another person by clarifying that the Secretary of State is required to notify only the immediate family 
of the victim prior to the suspension and is required to consider written or oral statements received 
from the immediate family in response to the notice. 
This concludes my testimony. Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions the committee 
may have. 
29 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0029 
hltp://www.maine. gov/sos/bmv; tel. 207-624-9000
