David Butler
Windham
LD 1926
Dear Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich and Distinguished 
Members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee,
I am writing to ask that the Environment and Natural Resources Committee vote that 
LD 1926, An Act to Impose a Moratorium on New Point Source Waste Discharge 
Licenses on the Lower Presumpscot River, ought to pass:
As a canoeist, and a frequent paddler on the lower Presumpscot, I have seen first hand
that the Water quality in the lower Presumpscot River has improved dramatically in 
recent decades. These gains in water quality are restoring the river’s environmental 
health and the area’s economic value. New sources of pollution would threaten these 
gains. 
To continue efforts to reduce and minimize industrial discharge into the Prsumpscot 
River, this four-year moratorium on new industrial discharges will preserve the river’s
significant advances in water quality while a long term solution is identified. These 
advances in water quality have restored habitat for fish, birds, and other wildlife, 
including shad, alewives, and blue back herring; commercially important species. 
This section of river has become a recreational destination for thousands of residence 
with easy access to hiking trails, swimming holes, fishing, canoeing and kayaking, 
and simply enjoying a connection with the river, The lower Presumpscot River flows 
through Maine’s most densely populated and ever-growing region, from revitalized 
downtown Westbrook, along the Portland-Falmouth border, to head of tide. 
This temporary moratorium allows for continued operation of existing discharges and 
will not thwart urban growth. The existing discharges are the Portland Water District, 
Westbrook Wastewater Treatment Facility, and the Sappi Mill. This moratorium will 
not affect their discharge capacity to treat current and future wastewater loads, and to 
continue commercial operations. 
The four years allotted in this moratorium will allow sufficient time to finish studies 
of the lower Presumpscot River and determine appropriate means of protecting water 
quality.
Sincerely,
David Butler
Master Maine Recreational Guide
 
