Testimony in support of LD  1926  by Matt Streeter , Sebago Chapter of Trout Unlimited  
 
May 17, 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee,   
 
My name is Matt Streeter . I am a board member and a member of the Conservation Committee 
of the Sebago Chapter of Trout Unlimited,  and I live at 66 Quebec Street in Portland . 
 
I am testifying in support of  LD 1926 :  An Act to Impose a Moratorium on New Point Source Waste 
Discharge Licenses on the Lowe r Presumpscot River  
 
The Sebago Chapter of Trout Unlimited is the southern Maine chapter of a national 
conservation organization focused on restoring and protecting cold water fish  habitat , including 
salmon and trout habitat. Our chapter  represent s over 700 TU members from Freeport south 
and west to the New Hampshire border.  
 
The Presumpscot River is a remarkable story of a severely degraded river that has been brought 
back to life with great effort over many decades. From at one time being a virtual sewer, it is 
now a beautiful place to spend time and fish  along its entire length, from Sebago Lake to Casco 
Bay. I have heard of people catching brown trout in the size range above 5 pounds, and alewife 
runs in the tens of thousands have been restored to Mill Brook, Highland Lake, and in the main 
stem river up to Mallison Falls .  
 
We have testified to the Maine Department of Environmental Protection in favor of revising the 
Water Quality designation for the lower Presumpscot River from Class C to Class B, in light of 
the great strides made i n water and habitat quality . In the latest round of reclassifications, 
MDEP did not  upgrade the river segment, despite sufficient dissolved  oxygen data, for lack of 
specific data on macroinvertebrate populations. It seems that reclassification is likely to succeed 
in the next round  three ye ars from now.  It would be a shame if in the meantime, after all the 
progress that has been made, new discharge licenses were issued and the gains in water and 
habitat quality were put at risk. Note that existing license s will be unaffected.  
 
For these reasons, I urge you to pass LD 1926 to impose a Mor atorium on New Point Source 
Waste Discharge Licenses on the Lower Presumpscot River . 
