Paul Lattanzi
Yarmouth
LD 1926
Dear Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich and Distinguished 
Members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee,
I am writing to ask that the Environment and Natural Resources Committee vote that 
LD 1926, An Act to Impose a Moratorium on New Point Source Waste Discharge 
Licenses on the Lower Presumpscot River, ought to pass because:
Water quality in the lower Presumpscot River has improved dramatically in recent 
decades. These gains in water quality are restoring the river’s environmental health 
and the area’s economic value. New sources of pollution would threaten these gains. 
The Presumpscot River drains two thirds of the Casco Bay watershed. The river has a 
significant influence on the health of the Casco Bay estuary and its many species that 
depend on both freshwater and saltwater habitat. 20% of Maine’s population lives in 
the Casco Bay watershed, an area that represents only 3% of land in Maine. 
This four-year moratorium on new industrial discharges will preserve the river’s 
significant advances in water quality while a long term solution is identified. These 
advances in water quality have restored habitat for fish, birds, and other wildlife, 
including commercially important species. This section of river is now popular for 
recreation, hosting public trails and preserves where countless people walk, swim, 
fish, paddle, and more. The lower Presumpscot River flows through Maine’s most 
densely populated and ever-growing region, from revitalized downtown Westbrook, 
along the Portland-Falmouth border, to head of tide. 
This temporary moratorium allows for continued operation of existing discharges and 
will not thwart urban growth. The existing discharges are the Portland Water District, 
Westbrook Wastewater Treatment Facility, and the Sappi Mill. This moratorium will 
not affect their discharge capacity to treat current and future wastewater loads, and to 
continue commercial operations. 
The four years allotted in this moratorium will allow sufficient time to finish studies 
of the lower Presumpscot River and determine appropriate means of protecting water 
quality.
Sincerely,
Paul Lattanzi, CDR, USCG (ret) 
Yarmouth

