225 Douglass  Street     P.O. Box 3553     Portland,  Maine  04104 -3553  
Phone:  207.774 -5961     Fax:  207.761 -8329    Web:  www.pwd.org  
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY  OF THE  PORTL AND  WATER  DISTRICT  NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  
LD 1926  - AN ACT  TO IMPOSE A MORATORIUM ON NEW POINT SOURCE WASTE 
DISCHARGE LICENSES ON THE LOWER PRESUMPSCOT RIVER  
 
Senator  Brenner,  Representative  Gramlich , and Distinguished  Members  of the Environment  and 
Natural  Resources  Committee , my name is Scott  Firmin , and I am the Director  of Wastewater  
Services  for the Portland  Water  District.  I provide  this testimony  neither for nor against LD 1926.  
Portland Water District was created by the State Legislature in 1908 to provide drinking water and 
public fire protection services to people in greater Portland. Today, PWD provides drinking water 
and public fire protection to over 200,000 people in 11 com munities, and wastewater treatment 
services to six of those communities. The affairs of PWD are managed by a Board of Trustees 
composed of 11 members, all popularly elected by a plurality of the voters from the communities 
they represent.  
PWD’s Westbrook Regional Wastewater Treatment Facility serves the communities  of Gorham , 
Windham , and Westbrook . The discharge from the treatment facility is permitted and regulated by 
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). T he communities rely on this facility to 
protect public health and the environment , and to enable  economic growth  and development .  
Our understanding of LD 1926  is that it is not intended to  impact current or future discharge capacity 
of the Westbrook Regional Wastewater Treatment Fac ility. This legislation appears to be intended  to 
limit new large point source discharges.  It is unclear if o ther types of discharges, like industrial 
stormwater permits or stormwater outfalls which also require permits  are affected . The prohibition s 
in the bill  should be clarified to expressly identify the intended discharges to be prohibited.  
The licensing of discharges is already heavily regulated  and managed by the Maine DEP . Strict r ules 
and regulations guide the discharge licensing process.  The longstanding  process relies on a careful 
assessment that includes water quality designation , scientific analysis,  and public not ice with the 
opportunity for extensive public comments and input.  With this established  process and such a clear 
set of requirements already in place for decades, the need for legislative intervention should be 
carefully considered.  
LD 1926 should be thoroughly  reviewed  to ensure that the intended discharge types are identified 
under this requirement  and that unintended consequence are not created . Further, the well vetted  
regulatory process should be considered in determining if legislative intervention i s truly needed.  
Thank  you for your consideration.  
 
Scott  Firmin,  P.E. 
Director  of Wastewater  Services  
May 16, 2023  
 

