STATE OF MAINE 
, _ . DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL sv . 
_' 
3 AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 
OFFICE or PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL 
REG ULATION ' 
35 STATE HOUSE STATION Ame L Head 
.liiﬂ€E T. MIIIS Comnlissiog ﬁrv DPFR 
@<»v<=m<>r 04333-003 5 Director, oi>oR 
TESTIMONY OF ANNE L. HEAD 
COMMISSIONER, DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL AND FINANCIAL 
REGULATION 
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1929 
“AN ACT T O PROTECT CONSUMERS B Y LICENSING HOME BUILDING 
CONTRACTORS ” 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT AND BUSINESS 
SPONSORED BY REPRESENTATIVE TIFFANY ROBERTS 
PUBLIC HEARING: MAY 23, 2023, 3:00 PM 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and Members of the Committee. My name is Anne Head. 
I am Commissioner of the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation. I appear today 
on behalf of the Administration to speak in opposition to LD 1929 on both substantive and 
technical grounds. We appreciate the concerns raised by proponents, but we disagree that licensure 
is the means to address those concerns or achieve the goals of public protection. 
It is unclear which problems this bill seeks to solve. If the goal is to address the fact that 
unqualiﬁed persons are doing substandard work on Maine homes, this bill does very little to ensure 
that those potential licensees are any more qualiﬁed with a license than without one. If the goal is 
to address potential ﬁnancial harm from fraud or criminal behavior, this bill does very little to 
expand the enforcement mechanisms that already exist within the Attorney General’s office ora 
private right of action. Perhaps the focus should be on expanding resources within the AGs ofﬁce. 
If the goal is to establish construction standards, that is also not achieved by this bill. 
Generally, licensure ensures that someone has obtained certain minimum qualiﬁcations and has at 
least a base level of competency in a profession or occupation. A person who meets those 
standards is awarded a license which is a state-granted right to practice a profession or perform a 
trade. A licensee has a vested property right in that license, meaning that boards cannot take any 
action against a licensee without affording the individual adequate due process. 
OFFICES: GARDINER ANNEX. 76 NORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE 
PHowF.: (207)624-8500 (VOECE) T1=vuS¢r5; Carly,/1agn¢R@1av7tl FAX: (2O'2')624 8690 
WWW.MAINE.G()V/PPR/PROFESSI()NALLlCENSlNG/
Adequate due process means that discipline may only be imposed if an individual agrees to the 
discipline (a consent agreement) or after an adjudicatory hearing. A board cannot revoke a license 
without a full adjudicatory hearing except in extremely narrow circumstances, i.e., “immediate ” 
jeopardy ” of harm, and even then, the revocation is of limited duration (30 days). Licensing boards 
have no authority to issue cease and desist orders to respond to a claim of unlicensed practice. For 
OPOR and DPFR afﬁliated boards, all unlicensed practice matters are required to be referred to 
the Ofﬁce of the Attorney General.1 
With respect to consumer complaints, boards cannot award damages or restitution; all ﬁnes 
imposed by a board are transferred to the General Fund. Further, boards can only take action on 
complaints that allege a violation of board law or rule. They are not staffed to investigate all 
complaints but rather, they rely on written submissions of the complainant and the licensee to make 
a preliminary determination whether there has been a violation of law or rule. 
With that background, this bill does not require individuals offering construction services to meet 
minimal competency in building construction or workmanship nor does it require contractors to 
have knowledge of and build to certain building standards. Without a clear picture or description 
of the permissible scope of activity of a “contractor, ” there are no standards for a board to 
determine a violation of law or rule. Simply stated, this bill cannot be implemented because it 
does not include the basic components of an actual licensing program. 
If the committee is interested in creating a licensing program, it would need to identify its 
objectives and clearly set forth the standards. The Sunrise Review is usually the process by which 
the committee evaluates those objectives. The Committee has indicated a preference for 
undertaking its own Sumise Review by sending out a questionnaire to the Interested Parties list. 
There is motivation bias inherent in any voluntary solicitation of feedback. No happy customers 
respond to questionnaires. The type of information the Committee seeks can only be developed 
through a comprehensive study. l recommend that you take the time to review the Maine studies 
from past legislatures available at these links: 
Sunrise Review of LD 1551. An Act to License Home Building and Home Contractors - 
2004. 
Study of Residential Contractor Licensing pursuant to Resolve 2007. c. 219 as amended 
bv Public Law 2009. c. 261 ~ 2.010 
If the committee chooses to move forward with this bill there are also a number of technical issues 
including, but not limited to:. 
0 A licensing statute, not a rule, should state clearly who is required to obtain a license. 
LD 1929 deﬁnes “residential construction ” as building, demolition or alteration ofa 
residential dwelling unit or building or premises with 4 or fewer residential dwelling units, 
and includes any activity affecting the residential portion of a building or premises that 
have both residential and commercial components if the building or premises include 4 or 
fewer residential dwelling units. The term includes interior and exterior construction, 
renovation and repair, paving, rooﬁng, weatherization, installation or repair of heating, 
1 
Title l0 MRS 8003-C
2
plumbing, solar, electrical, water or wastewater systems, and other activities to be speciﬁed 
by the board in rule. 
“Contractor ” is not deﬁned nor is the contractor ’s scope of practice. 
What is the purpose of this board and why is it so large? 
o Title 5 §l2015, sets a limit of 9 members for any new licensing board established 
after 2000 and must include 2 public membersz . 
o The bill does not appear to set any standards for minimal competency in building 
construction or workmanship and yet the board consists of thirteen members, many 
of whom represent areas of speciﬁc expertise such as the State Fire Marshal, the 
Director of the Efficiency Maine Trust, municipal code enforcement ofﬁcers, an 
attorney with construction litigation experience. What is this board expected to do? 
0 Is this board really a workgroup to ﬁgure out Whether and how to license 
contractors? 
The bill requires only six hours of unspeciﬁed education. This requirement is 
signiﬁcantly less than the number of hours that any other trade licensee needs aside from 
apprentices and helpers. What type of education and what subjects should be covered? 
The bill requires an exam but doesn’t include a description of the standards the 
contractor must satisfy. What type of exam and what subjects should the exam cover? 
The only standard governing the conduct of the contractor is whether there is a contract 
and whether the contractor complied with the terms of the contract. 
The bill sets forth that a violation of the chapter constitutes an unfair trade practice 
prohibited under Title 5, section 207. Violations of unfair trade practices are not enforced 
by licensing programs. They are enforced through a private right of action or through the 
Ofﬁce of the Attorney General — which is already available to individuals who believe that 
they have been defrauded, cheated or scammed. 
It is unlikely that a board could deny a license for performing in an unprofessional and 
incompetent manner or bad faith. Those allegations are highly subjective and very difficult 
to prove. Furthermore, any claims of fraud would need to be referred to the Attorney 
General’s Ofﬁce. 
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to answer any questions now or at the work session. 
2 
See, 5 MRS §l2Ol5(l).
3
