Committee Members, others testifying, and those in attendance, 
I rise today to voice my support for LD 1929. 
My wife and I don’t make a lot of money, she is a CNA and I am a pastor. 
But we had enough saved to be able to build what would, We hoped, be our forever 
home. I did everything I was taught to do, both by friends, intemet, you name it, on 
selecting a contractor. I found one contractor who came out, Walked the property, 
and We negotiated a price. I called his references and everything sounded good. He 
promised the shell would be built and I would be Working on it before Christmas. 
That was in July of 2022. As of today, I am still Waiting for the foundation to be 
poured. I Was promised in September, then October, then November. He arrived at 
my door in December saying the concrete was scheduled for the next week and he 
needed payment. I, stupidly, gave him the money. He now refuses to do any Work, 
and blames me for his inability to work. I have sunk so much money in with this 
contractor, that my Wife and I do not have enough money to start over. We could 
pay a second time for the foundation, but by the time the shell would be near 
completion, we would be out of money, and I would have to be shorting a 
contractor I hired. Essentially, in order to get my house, I would have to do 
something similar to what my current contractor did to me. My Wife and I reﬁlse to 
do that. Both the Piscataquis County Sheriff ’s Office and the District Attomey 
refuse to hear our statement. Essentially making us feel like this contractor has 
gotten away with theft in the amount of $5 5,000. We have been living in our 
seasonal camp- we insulated our outhouse and used it all Winter. But What is most 
concerning, more than the money, more than the house, is that my Wife will give 
birth to our ﬁrst child in October, andl don’t have a place to raise it. Anything the 
Legislature can do to make sure this does not happen to another person, I fully 
support. Thank you for your time today, and may God bless you. 
4%”-/we/L» iée 
;t§,,.,,,l @miiw~ 
arr’ 01.1 4%»,M 
/V] cewwl, /75 
OVHKB
