Heather Savoy
Augusta 
LD 1929
As a homeowner I have experienced three "contractors" that left me hanging after 
beginning a job. The first one was to do my driveway. I had asked him to widen it. I 
paid for the supplies and he completed the driveway. I was not home to see the work 
being completed but came home to a driveway that iverall looked nice. We had 
crushed stone put in. It was nice until it rained. My driveway became a lake and the 
cars were not accessible. I had told him to fix it and he ended up ghosting me. I ended
up having someone e else come do it. It did not end up perfect but I basically paid him
so that it would not flood which he did.
The second contractor was to replace my shower. He talked me I to doing tile instead 
of just replacing the shower. He was confident it would be amazing. Him and his wife
were doing it. Again paid for the supplies and gave them money down to start the job.
What I saw at the end looked like a kindergarten pice of art. Uneven tiles, cracked 
tiles and an extremely poor job. I ended up having to have a friend come and take a 
look. We had to demo the entire thing. Upon demolishing g we found they used 
regular sheetrock that was not rated for water. He cut my water pipes and used 
electrical tape to patch the pipes resulting in water going down to my dining room 
downstairs.  My friend who is not a contractor did the job as expected.  The third was 
a contractor who was to redo my flooring. He didn't prep my house just started 
sanding the floors, he wasn't able to sand the floors to get all the varnish off. He 
talked me I to using paint since the wood was old and the varnish was hard to get off. 
As someone who doesn't know anything about floorwork I followed his lead. He used
my personal fans, he showed me the finished job but the paint was still wet. We were 
not able to get a close look. It looked good from where we could see. After the floors 
dried we did a closer I section to find that the sander completely ruined all of our trim 
boards, the floor was tacky because he never vacuumed the floors after sanding he 
only swept. I asked him to come back and fix everything but he quoted another full 
job worth to fix his errors. I had to take matters into my own hands and do the floors 
myself which came out perfect. I sanded them myself and they look great. I still need 
to fix everything else he left me with. I support this bill while I think it falls a little 
short. I believe the $7500 threshold is a good start but it doesn't help the people that 
need it mist with the 1-5k jobs that most of the fake contractors do. This law needs to 
pass as a step forward
