Good afternoon Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and honored members of the Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business Committee. My name is Les Fossel, I served 
in the 123rd and 124th Legislatures. I am speaking in neither for nor against LD 1929. 
I have been a building contractor since 1975. Currently we have 15 employees and a 14 month 
contracted backlog. My employees have a combined 160 years of experience. We guarantee our 
work permanently against defects of workmanship or material. We use the AG's model contract. 
This bill as written won't work. As some carpenters think they can solve any problem witha 
hammer, there are some legislators who think they can solve any problem with a law. This is 
simply not true in the real world. Some points: 
* There about the same percentage of dishonest customers and contractors. Customers 
have cheated me out of hundreds of thousands of dollars . If you require contractors to disclose 
any relevant legal proceedings against them, then the same standard should be required for the 
homeowners [Page 3 lines 19-24). There must be a time limit on the age of proceeding that 
should be listed. 
* I strongly support requiring worker's comp. This is easy for me since we have one of the 
lowest worker comp rates for carpenters in Maine at about $8 per $100 of payroll. I compete 
against so called "independent contractors" who have neither worker's comp or unemployment 
comp. as new risks, they will pay 3 times my rate, or about $24 per hundred. If you don't figure 
out a work around, then you will increase residental building costs by something like 20%. 
* Your bill must grandfather current contractors. I have done this work for something like 
100,000 hours. I have taught real estate agents, assessors, appraisers, and inspectors. I have 
been on the faculty ofboth USM and KVCC. For over 30 years I've taught a field course for 
homeowners thru Maine Adult Ed. I shouldn't waste 6 hours in a course to qualify as contractor 
from someone who doesn't begin to know as much as I do. This is insane. (page 3, lines 33-37). 
* There are many very competent contractors who have not been successful in school. It is 
wrong to not have a provision to prove competence on the basis of real world experience. [page 
3, lines 33-37). 
* There is no reason to have an annual license renewal. [page 4, lines 7-10) 
* If we pass a law, then it needs to reward both the honest homeowner and the honest 
contractor. This proposed law places yet another burden on the honest contractors. 
* The current Maine Attorney General's model contract must be revised to eliminate the 
sections that do nothing more that insult the honesty of contractors. and the language must be 
simplified it can be easily understood 
* I see no reason to increase the threshold for a contract from $3,600 to $7,500. 
* Fees contemplated under this legislation should be turned over to the towns to cover their 
additional administrative burden. 
* Before you pass any legislation, I suggest you ask what was once known as the ”Fossel" 
question from my legislative days: "Has anyone else passed such a law? If so, has it solved the 
problem? If not, expect multiple unforeseen problems. 
I would be happy to answer any questions and attend the work session for this bill. Thank you.
Les Fossel 
Business Owner 
Restoration Resources, Maine's premier historic house restoration company, founded in 1975 with 16 
employees (188 years of combined experience) and $1.7 million annual sales. (www.oldhouserestorationcom). 
His work has been featured in DownEast Magazine, Money Magazine and many other publications. 
Awards 
2017 Maine Preservation ”Honor Award for Elijah Kellogg Church" 
2010 Burnt island Lighthouse, Southport 
2008 “Long term commitment to providing broad ranging preservation education ” 
2007 Maine Preservation for "Outstanding contribution as Vice President ” 
2001 “Excellence in restoration carpentry and the building preservation trades” 
Education 
Beginning at the University of Southern Maine, he's taught over 2,000 Realtors. He regularly lectures to local, 
state and national groups. Les was in the Rho class of Leadership Maine. Currently Les is teaching a 
Preservation Carpentry course at Kennebec Valley Community College. He created Maine Preservation's 
summer internship program for master's degree students. He has taught field courses for over 1,000 owners of 
old houses and barns since 1990. 
Current community service 
DaPonte String Quartet: Board & past Chair (DownEast Magazine: Maine's best music group) www.daponte.orv 
Lincolnllealth: Board, Performance Improvement, Governance Comms. (Consumer's Report: America'ssafest hospital) 
Wiscczsset & Quebec Railroad: Treasurer (a founder). 2' Narrow Gauge Railroad wwfryorg 
Maine Allllare: Executive Committee. Promotes universal affordable health care www.maineailcare,org 
Lincoln County Dental: Board. Serves low income dental patients www.lcdental.org 
Saint Andrews Village: Treasurer. Boothbay Harbor Retirement Community wwvustandrewsvillag e.com 
Eltlercare Network ofbincol/2 County: Chairman. Serves low income elderly wwweldercarenetworkorg 
Maine Preservation: Advisory Board (past vice-chair) wwwmainepreservationorg 
Maine Legislative Candidate: Wiscasset, Whitefield, Jefferson House District 
Legislative service 
Moderate Caucus Chair Became the largest caucus in the 115*“ Maine Legislature 
judiciary Compromise legislation on takings ofland by government 
Government Oversight Reformed of the Maine Turnpike Authority 
insurance & Financial Services Created the Ioint Select Committee on Healthcare Reform 
Health & Human Services Authored the Electronic Health Records law 
Congressional Reapportionment Authored the law 
Les graduated from Lake Forest College with a degree in Sociology/Anthropology. Les and his wife 
Merry (they met in high school) live in an 1815 Alna Cape with 3 barns (with 90‘ ofsolar panels and 
heat pumpsl), a greenhouse, and 39 acres with a very large garden, orchard, pasture, and a hayfield. 
Together they have 4 children and 5 grandchildren.
