Nancy Nicholson
Bangor
LD 1929
My name is Nancy Nicholson and I am 1 67 year old resident of Bangor. I am writing 
to express my support for bill LD 1929. 
Almost every single homeowner I know, including some very prominent people, have
been ripped of by contractors.  
We bought a house in Bangor 10 years ago and we were subsequently ripped off by a 
pair of sleazy real estate agents, the home inspector recommended by our agent (this 
inspector was recently finally accused in a lawsuit where his clients were injured 
because of his negligence) and a contractor.  I know that bill LD 1929 only applies to 
the contractor, but I'm giving you the background of our total experience. 
The contractor who ripped us off has been in the Bangor neighborhood for years.  He 
actually does not do bad work, but after he walked off my job without finishing it 
AFTER I paid him for the entire project, we took him to small claims court and won.  
We got NOTHING.  It was a complete waste of time, and law enforcement kept 
sending me bills for their services in tracking him down.  In the course of this 
debacle, I paid $35 myself for a background check on him and found out that he had a
20 page rap sheet and was in and out of jail for many years and the charges against 
him included ASSAULT and THEFT.  This is really not the kind of person you want 
in your house. 
 Another point is that many of these guys won't take a credit card, they demand a 
check, which they immediately take to your bank and cash and don't pay any TAXES 
on their income.  
I have brought my complaints to the attention of several public officials over the years
and have basically gotten nowhere.  The Maine Real Estate Commission is there to 
protect Realtors, not consumers.  I sadly learned that the culture of Maine preaches 
that if you trust the wrong person it's your own fault and hopefully you'll learn a 
lesson.  (Yes, I'm from away - but I do own a house and a cemetery plot here!)
I am hoping, with this bill, that this ideology may be changing.  
Thank you for accepting my testimony.  I will be watching the results with great 
interest.
Nancy Nicholson
Bangor, ME
