To: Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business Committee 
 
Date: May 23, 2023 
 
RE: LD 1929, An Act to Protect Consumers by Licensing Home Building Contractors 
 
My name is Rebecca Weinstein. I am a resident of Portland. I would like to lend my support to 
the passage of LD 1929, An Act to Protect Consumers by Licensing Home Building Contractors. 
 
I have been in the process of home renovation for nearly 2 ½ years. I have been stood up by 
numerous contractors, mislead, outright lied to, and ripped off.  
 
After three different contractors agreed to perform work and never showed, I finally signed an 
agreement and paid a deposit of $12,000 with a contractor whose reviews now appear to have 
been fraudulent. The work did not start until nearly six months after the agreed upon date. The 
project took three times longer than promised, as multiple new jobs began so that initial 
payments could be collected. The contractor never pulled permits as he claimed he would and the 
job was utter chaos. The workers required to be licensed (electricians and plumbers), were not – 
though I was told they would be. Each week there were fights when the crew didn’t get paid and 
at least one person quit or got fired. By the end I had banned one of owners from my premises 
and the other owner, who had virtually no experience, proceeded to do every aspect of the job 
with no regard to code. I now have to get the work redone at my expense. Of course, I can sue 
them, but that is a major undertaking. This company, I have found out, has committed fraud with 
regard to hiring practices and has been reported to the State. In all, I paid them nearly $40,000 in 
labor costs, plus materials.  
 
I have since interviewed several new contractors to fix the job and each tells me different 
information regarding what needs to be done and how.  
 
It is shocking that companies in a line of business for which such large sums of money change 
hands, have no licensing requirements.  
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Rebecca Weinstein, Portland 
 
 
 
