Stacy Mahonen
Poland
LD 1929
I started my remodel in March 2022 and was told by the contractor it would be 
completed early June. He told me no permits were necessary even though I 
continually asked and did not know the first thing about permits. Time went on, I paid
money per each invoice, but for items as they popped up, not for our original agreed 
items. August rolls around and we are about $70k in when code enforcement stops by.
Nothing is up to code and permits are required. No material I paid for showed up. 
Labor I paid for wasn’t completed. I now have to start at the beginning. I had to pay 
double for permits. I hired another contractor. I made sure to sign an agreement 
before work started. Two weeks went by, $13k later, not a single item passed code 
and I had to have police escort them from my property as they refused to leave and 
would not refrain from yelling and threatening me. October arrived and I hired 
another contractor, who said they were licensed. We signed an agreement for all 9 
items to be completed within one month. One item was finished within the timeframe,
but they said they could not continue without more money. I was extremely desperate 
at this point as I was staying with a friend and needed to get moved into my house. 
$17k and another month later, they stopped showing up and threatened a lien on my 
home for the remaining money. All items they started, did not finish, is very poor 
craftsmanship. It was done very poorly and still has to be redone. None of my interior 
doors close correctly. They broke three of them which I had to return for new ones, or
buy new ones as they wouldn’t let me return them. They told me the size doors to 
purchase only to find out they never measured and gave me a generic size. They 
argued with me nearly the entire time. They built the interior stairs the way they 
wanted, not how I paid for them to be built. I hired multiple other contractors after to 
finish the job. They either couldn’t perform adequately, didn’t show up, completed an
item and didn’t return, or found other items to add on to the bill. I have my house 
completed just enough now to move in, but there are items that still haven’t passed 
code and I’m still waiting for my current contractor to show up as he told me “he’s 
waiting for a rainy day”, even though he has been completely paid for the job. These 
so called contractors should have to prove they’re worthy and capable to do the job. 
They should have something to lose if they don’t do the job up to code or who simply 
take off with the money. A license would hold them more accountable. Us consumers 
are not able to pick the bad from the good when they all show up with a great first 
impression. We should have a way to be able to decipher between them, and a license 
will help a great deal. 
