Nicole Grohoski {zé ifir P.O. Box 1732 
Senator, District 7 Ellsworth, ME 04605 
TI-IE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Nicole Grohoski 
In Support of LD 1897, “An Act to Improve Public Roadways on Unbridged Islands 
Not Served by the Maine State Ferry Service” 
Before the Committee on Transportation 
16 May 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and honorable members of the Transportation 
Committee, I am Senator Nicole Grohoski and I represent the 22 towns of Senate District 7, 
which is most of Hancock County, including a number of unbridged islands. Thank you for 
providing me the opportunity to present LD l897, “An Act to Improve Public Roadways on 
Unbridged Islands Not Served by the Maine State Ferry Service.” 
Maine has 15 unbridged, year-round islands. They are located from Peaks Island in Casco Bay 
all the way up to the Cranberry Isles off of Northeast Harbor. Six of these islands are sewed by 
Maine State Ferry Services (MSFS): Matinicus, Vinalhaven, North Haven, Islesboro, 
Frenchboro, and Swan’s Island. These state ferries provide invaluable connections between the 
islands and the mainland. 
The other islands are served by for-proﬁt boat operators, nonproﬁt boat operators, anda 
for-proﬁt airline, which provide passenger, EMS, and freight service. One of the boat operators 
(Casco Bay Lines, authorized by Private and Special Law‘) receives a small subsidy from the 
state,2 and at least one boat operator receives a modest subsidy from the island they serve. 
However, none of the islands without state ferries receive a signiﬁcant ﬁnancial contribution 
from Maine DOT for transportation infrastructure. 
As Senator to ﬁve unbridged, year-round islands, Ihave learned a lot about these communities 
that I hadn’t considered before. In many ways, these communities are among the most resilient in 
Maine, given their ability to thrive in the midst of so many limitations. The people who serve as 
leaders on these islands often wear many hats — sometimes one person is the town clerk, the 
teacher, the librarian, and runs the island’s recycling program. Maine’s unbridged islands 
experience the challenges other rural communities in Maine face, but on a magniﬁed scale, given 
' 
https://www.cascobaylines.com/uploads/enabling-legislation.pdf 
2 https://Wwwcascobaylines.com/uploads/FY2023-Budget-For-Websitepdf 
3 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
State House (207) Z87-1515 * Fax (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free l-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Nicole.Grohosl<i@legislature.rnaine.gov * legislature.maine.gov/senate1
i
t 
:9 
it
t 
i. 
ll 
pl 
ll 
it 
»i
s
l
their physical disconnection from the mainland. It’s not easy living on these islands, and the 
folks who call them home are inspiring. They are also humble and hard-working, and don’t tend 
to ask for much. T hat’s why when a constituent came to me about the roads on her island, I took 
note. I learned that most islands do not get DOT funding support for their roads, because there 
are no state roads on the island. 
Island Institute recently partnered with Maine DOT to conduct a study of Maine State Ferry 
Service} executed by KPFF, a nationally recognized consultancy specializing in marine 
transportation. In the report from that study, I learned about the diversity of ferry service each 
island gets. I appreciate the work that was done to complete this study, so we can all havea 
better understanding of how the state supports our remote, island communities. I believe this was 
the ﬁrst in-depth, comprehensive look at ferry operations, and I look forward to seeing the many 
positive outcomes that will materialize from the report’s ﬁndings. 
It is clear that the state’s contribution to MSFS is incredibly important to the communities they 
serve. Unfortunately, not all of our island communities receive this level of support from the 
state. I ask that this committee consider investing in the islands not served by MSF S, so they can 
receive similar support from the state as their sister islands. 
Thank you for your attention and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
3 
https://Wwvv.islandinstitute.org/2023/04/28/maine-state-ferry-service-reports-released/
2
