My name is Peggy R. Stevens. I am a year round resident of Isle au Haut for 40+ years and am currently the First Selectperson of IAH for the past 8 years. Isle au Haut is an unbridged island without Maine State Ferry Service. We have a very limited tax base as half of our island is Acadia National Park. We get a payment in Lieu of Taxes from the Park close to $8,000. a year.  There are no hotels or restaurants to beneﬁt from income from park tourists or other visitors. The mainland gets these beneﬁts. We subsidize through taxation the Isle au Haut Boat Services which is a private not for proﬁt company. Our island pays a lot of taxes with few services from the State or Federal Government. Maintaining our paved and gravel roads are extremely important to us for transportation of residents, tourists, recreation, health and safety and for possible ﬁre ﬁghting needs. The key point of asking for this bill to be presented was the exorbitant cost of transportation to the island for paving product to do small sections of road. We have to gear up to get the Triaxle trucks, equipment, barging, road closure just to do small sections of road (200 feet). The product comes from Ellsworth or Bucksport but a distant from Isle au Haut. We need a staging area which ties up the parking lot and the town for a large period of time and cost a fortune for the small amount we can accomplish. We run out of money after doing just small sections. We can only do it about every 10 years as money allows.  We cannot possible collect enough taxes to pave a large section of the worse damaged crumbling roads. The road commissioner does patching but getting the asphalt heating unit from the state is equally a hardship. They only want to part with it for a week at the most. It cannot always be returned in just a week. It comes on a barge and barging has to be scheduled. We have to barge when we have other needs such as gravel or propane. Tides are a LARGE consideration. It is not economically feasible to barge on all tides. You have to be able to load and unload large truck with gravel. So, in short not everyday is a possibility. We are limited by weather, and tide and can only do paving at certain times of the year and dates of the months.We would like to have enough money from the State to allow us to do a large section of the paved road all at once. It would streamline all the work that goes into planning, getting the barge scheduled and devoted to road paving for the time needed for such a project and hire the paving company to get the job done. Getting gravel out here for the gravel sections is also a costly process. We have no good road gravel out on IAH to be mined. We have to truck our road gravel. Trucking gravel requires a little less planning than the paved product but weather and tide enter into the efﬁciency and cost. 
It would be energy efﬁcient to pave a large section of the road all in one period. The cost of transportation (a large part of our cost on an island) would be cheaper as would the paving itself. The paving company would put more into the project and it would be less expensive in the long run.Thank you for hearing me. I can be reached anytime for more information on Isle au Haut. Selectboard1@isleauhautmaine.usPeggy Stevens
