Town of Isle Au Haut Testimony for LD 1897William Stevens, citizen and past Road Comm. I’m William Stevens, year round resident, Town of Isle Au Haut, past elected Road Commissioner for 35 years, and presently serving as deputy. I write in support of LD 1897, an Act to improve public roadways on unabridged islands not served by the Maine State Ferry Service. All of the fourteen unbridged island communities have unique challenges for transportation on their respective islands, with land based roadways, local and mainland access points for small private passenger/ mail boat service, larger Maine State vehicle and passenger ferries, and in one case, an airstrip for small plane access. In principal, all public island and mainland roads beneﬁt equally from DOT Local Road Assistance funding based on lane miles within each Town. However, in reality there is huge discrepancy in DOT ﬁnancial support among the island towns and especially so for the communities not served by the Maine State Ferry Service or no longer having designated State Aid Roads, which are maintained on a greater level by DOT. The Maine State Ferry Service and State Aid Roads are a huge subsidy to those islands that beneﬁt from their existence! While I’m pleased that other islands enjoy these subsidized beneﬁts, Isle Au Haut and a few other islands get paltry little in DOT $’s  — in Isle Au Haut's case, $20,000 per annum. The existence of the ferry services also provide ALL Tide Level Landing Access on both the islands served and the mainland. This makes it possible for the privately operated, Island Transporter Barge to dock readily at these facilities so long as not to interrupt the Ferry schedule. Isle Au Haut has only one access point on Deer Isle at Stonington, and that is a  privately owned, very rough and narrow slip, accessible but 4-1/2 to 5 hours of a working day, and then only on a few days per month when tides are high at midday, noon! Sounds complicated to Coordinate — IT IS Indeed! A typical full working day of the Island Transporter Barge delivering, at most, nine tri-axle loads of gravel, equal to,162 cubic yards costs $12,000 or approximately $74 per cubic yard- Three times the Mainland price and not all costs are then covered, since the gravel needs reloading and spreading. My Point - material costs for road maintenance on Isle Au Haut are at minimum, (Three) times more expensive than the Mainland and more than (Double) those of island’s with all tide ferry terminals.Paving local island roads is even more expensive and complicated. Hot top mixing plants are many mainland miles from the Access Ramp at Stonington, mobilizing paving equipment to the island is expensive, and tide access and weather issue make for greater logistical problems. A recent quote of $200,000 per mile for paving on Isle Au Haut is reasonable - Swans Island with the beneﬁt of Ferry Service and better Access only two miles from dock to dock, is paving at approximately $179,000 per mile this summer. Isle Au Haut has 5 miles of asphalt roads, 4-1/2 miles have not had any resurfacing of any type in 24 years. We are currently patching, previously patched, potholes!
Local revenues appropriations from property taxes supporting all transportation related items was $144,000, this amount provided for Town roads, Town Landing, Mailboat Passenger Service Subsidy, and freight access ramp maintenance at Stonington. This represented 22% of the Annual Budget of $662,000. Gravel Road maintenance $40,000 per year, DOT revenue is banked to accumulate to a level that supports a reasonable effort of paving, or other capital improvements, like culvert replacement. Isle Au Haut’s tax base is very small, less than 4000 acres of 8000 of the twenty ﬁve islands that make up the Town. Acadia National Park, Federal Wildlife Service and Maine Coast Heritage Trust own the other 4000 acres with 24 miles of waterfront, and pay “in lieu of taxes”, $10,000 per year. In comparison, as an example, I pay over $8,000 local property tax on 10 acres with 650’ of waterfront, and a 120 year old house with outbuildings. Isle Au Haut’s undeniably beautiful landscape, beneﬁts the general public at large, but the Town enjoys only minor economic beneﬁt from the National Park and conservation lands . Businesses on the Mainland derive the beneﬁts from tourism that heads our way, and to the State, all the  sales taxes and income taxes that derive through those businesses. Likewise the large lobstering grounds surrounding Isle Au Haut disproportionately beneﬁt the Mainland based ﬁshing ﬂeet at Stonington, very little of the exceptional resource value derives to the island Town and it’s businesses. In short, Town Isle Au Haut speciﬁcally, is unfairly revenue subsidized for road maintenance based on it’s inherently difﬁcult access conditions, and tax revenue and economic disparities.The Town also pays disproportionately higher assessments to County Government and State School Subsidy as our Town is considered property value rich —- Truly, Not the Case—these unbridged Islands Public Roads need greater ﬁnancial support!Thank you,William Stevens 
