Consumers for t P-0 B°X249° 
4.. ~41; Q Augusta, ME 04338 
ta ﬁiirtﬂéﬁlz consumerhealth@mainecahc org 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable 
health care for all Mainers. 
Testimony In Support of: 
LD 1708, An Act to Address Anti-Competitive Terms in Health 
Insurance Carrier and Health Care Provider Contracts 
May 11, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee On Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services, thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments in 
support of LD 1708, An Act to Address Anti-Competitive Terms in Health Insurance Carrier and Health 
Care Provider Contracts. 
My name is Kate Ende and I am the Policy Director at Consumers for Affordable Health Care,a 
nonpartisan, nonproﬁt organization that advocates the right to quality, affordable health care for every 
person in Maine. As designated by Maine’s Attorney General, CAHC serves as Maine’s Health Insurance 
Consumer Assistance Program (CAP), which operates a toll-free HelpLine. Our HelpLine, fields 
approximately 6,000 calls and emails every year from people across Maine who need help obtaining, 
keeping, using, or ﬁxing problems with private health insurance or with accessing or affording health care 
services. CAHC also serves as the Ombudsman program for Maine’s Medicaid program, MaineCare, and 
helps people apply for and navigate the enrollment process for MaineCare. It is with that background that 
we provide these cormnents. 
LD 1709 addresses anticompetitive health insurance contract terms that have been used by some health 
systems to impede competition and increase prices. Speciﬁcally, this bill prohibits the use of anti-steering, 
anti-tiering clauses, and all-or-nothing clauses in contracts between health insurers and health care 
providers. ‘ Nationally, some dominant health systems have used anticompetitive contract provisions to 
keep high-cost, low-value providers in preferred plan networks and to raise hospital prices? Prohibiting 
anticompetitive contract terms can help level the playing ﬁeld for negotiations between insurers and large 
health systems, allowing insurers to negotiate lower in-network prices and design networks with the 
highest-quality, lowest-cost providers. 
Some insurers often offer incentives, such as lower copays or deductibles, to patients who choose higher- 
quality, lower-cost providers, in other words steering them to these more efficient providers. They might 
also place more efficient providers in a preferred tier, encouraging providers to compete to offer better 
care at lower prices, in order to be included in the preferred tier. However, some health systems 
contractually require carriers include all providers and facilities within their system in the carrier’s 
preferred network tier, regardless of each individual facility ’s performance or prices, or prohibits a carrier 
from steering consumers to other providers outside of the health system.3 These practices are referred to 
as anti-tiering or anti-steering clauses. Some contracts also include all-or-nothing clauses, in whicha 
health system refuses to contract with a carrier for a speciﬁc provider or facility in their system, unless 
1 https:1/nashp.org/nashp-model-prohibiting-anticompetitive-contract —terms—agplication-to-employer 
plans/it: “':text=NASHP's%20m0de|%20legislation%2Oprohibiting%2Oanticompetitive%2Ocontract%2Oterms%2Opre 
vents%2Ohea|th%20care-,contract%20that%2Ocontains%2Oanticompetitive%20terms. 
2 Ibid. 
3 https1//ctmirror.org/2022/03/16/lawmakers-weigh-anti-comoetitive-practices-in-health-care[
carrier agrees to contract with all the system’s affiliated providers and facilities, across all markets. ‘ Since 
carriers are required to maintain adequate provider networks, there are some providers or facilities, 
particularly in rural areas, that they likely have to contract with in order to meet network adequacy 
requirements. If these facilities are part of a larger health care system, anti-steering, anti-tiering, and all or 
nothing clauses can take away a carrier’s leverage when negotiating rates and contract terms for other 
facilities or hospitals within the health system, which often leads to higher prices. 
Higher prices not only contribute to higher premium costs, but also to higher out-of-pocket costs , that 
consumers have to pay, when services are subject to a deductible or coinsurance. Results from a recent 
survey of Maine voters, which we released earlier today, found that two out of three Mainers believe a 
major medical event would be a ﬁnancial disaster for them. More than four out of ten Mainers reported 
experiencing discomfort or pain for longer than they needed to, due to high healthcare costs and more 
than one third of Mainers reported that they delayed or skipped going to the doctor when they were sick 
due to high healthcare costs. Additionally, when Mainers do access care, they often struggle to pay for 
their medical bills, and often go into debt. One in three Mainers reported they struggled to pay for basic 
necessities, such as food, heat, or housing, within the past two years as a result of a medical bill. Among 
those who struggled to pay for basic necessities, nearly three quarters reported they experienced this as 
the result of a hospital bill. Nearly one in three Mainers reported they had been contacted by a collection 
agency about a medical bill within the past two years, of which more than 80% said the medical bill that 
was sent to collections was from a hospital. It is clear that Mainers are struggling to afford the health care 
services they need, including hospital services. Excluding anti-steering, anti-teering, and all-or-nothing 
clauses in these contracts will allow insurers to negotiate lower prices, which should lead to lower costs 
for consumers. 
Massachusetts, California and Nevada currently have laws that restrict these types of clauses. Maine 
would beneﬁt from following their lead, especially given the highly consolidated nature of our market. 
For this reason, I urge you to support LD 1709. Thank you for your time and I’d be happy to answer any 
questions. 
4 httpszl/ctmirronorg/2022/O3/16/lawmakers-weigh —anti-cornpetitive-practices-in~health~care[
