Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield  
2 Gannett Drive  
South Portland, Maine 04106  
 Denise F. McDonough  
President  
 
 
        May 24, 2023  
 
The Honorable Donna Bailey, Senate Chair  
The Honorable Anne Perry, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0100  
 
Re:   L.D. 1399, “An Act to Improve State Oversight of Proposed Health Care Entity 
Transactions”  and L.D. 1708 “ An Act to Address Anticompetitive Terms in Health 
Insurance Carrier and Health Care Provider Contracts ” 
 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative  Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing  Committee  on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:  
 
My name is Denise McDonough, and I am the President of Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
in South Portland, Maine .  I regret that I could not attend the pub lic hearing on these bills , but I 
wanted to share with you why I feel these bills are so important  and express my strong  support 
for L.D. 1399, “An Act to Improve State Oversight of Proposed Health Care Entity 
Transactions” and L.D. 1708, “An Act to Address Anticompetitive Terms in Health Insurance 
Carrier and Health Care Provider Contracts”.  
 
The health care landscape in Maine is extre mely concentrated and dominated by two large 
hospital systems.  There are thirty -six hospitals in Maine  and 19, or just over half , of those 
hospitals in Maine are owned by just two hospital systems : MaineHealth owns nine hospitals in 
Maine (and one in New Hampshire) while  Northern Light owns ten hospitals .  Although these 
two systems own approximately 53% of the hospitals in Maine, they also represent  68% of our 
spending on hospital services.  Furthermore, t hese two systems also own a number of physician 
practices .  This means they are in a position of extreme strength  and hold significant leverage 
when negotiating contracts with health insurers , particularly when combined with network 
adequacy requirements .   
 
As this Committee knows, h ealth insurers such as Anthem must mee t network adequacy 
requirements .  Pro viders kno w this  too, and use it as leverage  in their negotiations with carriers  
in the following ways:  
• Demanding  exorbitant rate increases ;  
• Requiring  favorable positions in a carrier’s network, such as placement in a higher tier  to 
the exclusion of competitors,  regardless of cost or quality ;  
• Insisting on  the same preferential treatment for all owned hospitals ; and  
• Threatening to terminate all providers in the system when a contract for only one hosp ital 
is the subject of negotiati ons. 
 

Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial  Services Committee  
May 24, 202 3 
Page 2 of 2 
 
These are not just hypothetical example s—we have seen this play out several times over the past 
few years.    
 
Last year, however,  we saw the introduction of a new tactic —attempting to use our members , 
and their patients,  as pawns .  Last year, while the parties were engaged in a mutually agreed 
upon mediation , MaineHealth publicly announce d its intention to terminate Maine Medical 
Center ’s participation in the Anthem network .  This announcement, complete with a press 
conference , occurred nearly nine months before the termination would  take effect  and more than 
two years before the expiration of the contract  in place at the time . As noted in my testimony 
before this Committee on April 28, 2022, MaineHealth sought to make the threat of terminat ing 
Maine Medical Center public for one reason —to create chaos and confusion in the marketplace , 
and to attempt to scare Anthem members in an effort  to gai n more leverage in the negotiations.  
 
It is important to remember that health insurers are regulated by the Bureau of Insurance.  Our 
rates and business practices are regulated and subject to review by the Bureau of Insurance.  We 
are subject to market con duct examinations to ensure that we are compliant with the 
requirements of Maine law and rules adopted by the Bureau of Insurance.   
 
Providers are not subject to that same level of oversight —there is no regulatory body with 
overs ight of the business practices of a provider, what providers  charge , or to ensur e that patients 
are not overcharged.  There is no process comparable  to a market conduct examination  for 
providers . 
 
Mainers are experiencing an increase in health care cost trends that is not sustainable. Our 
customers and members depend on us to help them access the services they need while 
maintaining affordability.  
 
We believe these bills  will protect  health ca re consumers in two important ways —by providing 
the Attorney General’s office with additional oversight authority with respect to mergers and 
acquisitions , should it wish or need to exercise that authority  (L.D. 1399)  and by ensuring that 
provider c ontracts do not inc lude provisions that are detrimental to the interests of members and 
employers  (L.D. 1708) . 
 
Thank you for your consideration and I ask you to support L.D. 1399 and L.D. 1708 . 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Denise McDonough , President 
Anthem Health Plans of Maine, Inc.  
 

