 
 
     May11nd, 2023  
 
The Honorable Donna Bailey  
The Honorable Anne Perry  
Members, Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Cross Building, Room 220 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1708 , An Act to Address Anticompetitive Terms in Health Insurance 
Carrier and Health Care Provider Contracts ; Support  
 
Chair Baile y, Chair Perry , Members of the Committee,  
My name is Sam Hallemeier , Director of  State Affairs , and I am writing on behalf of the 
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association (PCMA)  to support  LD 1708. PCMA is the 
national association representing America’s pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs). PBMs administer prescription drug plans and operate mail -order and specialty pharmacies for more  
than 275  million Americans  with health coverage through large employers, health insurers, labor 
unions, and federal and state -sponsored health programs.  
 LD 1708 would prohibit carriers from entering into anti -steering  clauses in contracts with their 
PBMs . This would increase the ability of a carrier to develop plan designs that lower costs for 
their members  and allow a PBM to communicate with members , informing them about access to 
lower -cost medicines. PBMs lower costs and encourage quality care by developing a network of 
retail pharmacies willing to accept discounted pricing in exchange for access to a plan’s members.  Retail pharmacies must compete to be part of the retail phar macy network for a 
particular PBM or risk losing access to the consumer. Store -based retail pharmacies contract  
with a PBM to participate in the PBM’s retail network and provide prescriptions to a plan’s beneficiaries.  
 
PBMs offer their clients a choice of  more selective networks as a way to reduce costs further.  A 
more selective network provides the plan sponsor with the greatest degree of economic control 
over prescription fulfillment. A pharmacy will offer bigger discounts or a lower dispensing fee to 
be in a more exclusive network because each pharmacy in the network will fill a larger 
percentage of prescriptions for the plan.  Plan sponsors must balance the access and availability 
of pharmacies against a higher level of discounts achieved by a smaller ne twork. The network 
must be sufficient to maintain access but selective enough to garner the necessary discounts.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In the interest of  Maine patients and payers , we support  LD 1708 . According to the Federal 
Trade Commission (FTC), cost savings generated by networks and selective contracting are 
passed on to consumers in the form of lower premiums, lower out -of-pocket costs, and better 
services.  
 
 
Sam Hallemeier  
 
Director, State Affairs  
shallemeier@pcmanet.org 
(202) 579- 7647  

