Qt\ 
Yaw‘ 
/.-' ._:i"'- 
_ .4
i 
.4 
Eric Brakey 131s‘MA1NE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator Eric Brakey 
L.D. 563, "An Act to Assert State Sovereignty over Ocean Waters 
up to 12 Nautical Miles off the State's Coast" 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources 
Thursday, April 6, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Committee on Marine 
Resources, thank you for your time and attention. I am Senator Eric Brakey of 
Androscoggin County, representing the people of Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland, and 
Durham. Today, I am here to present L.D. 563, "An Act to Assert State Sovereignty over 
Ocean Waters up to 12 Nautical Miles off the State's Coast." 
For the last half decade, unelected Washington agencies — based hundreds of miles 
away from our southern border -—- have bullied the Iobstermen of Maine. Without a 
single documented case of right whale entanglement in Maine lobster lines, bureaucrats 
have used the right whales as their excuse and justification for tightening the noose 
around the necks of our lobster industry. In response, protests have been had; letters 
have been sent; and accommodations have been made (when accommodation was still 
reasonable). 
Maine people have been pioneering sustainable fishing practices since generations 
before Washington D.C. was transformed from a swamp into a city. Those sustainable 
practices are today among the most respected in the world. It is not credible to believe 
these federal bureaucrats care more about sustainable fishing practices than the people 
who have been fishing these waters for generations, and seek to hand those traditions 
down for generations more. 
I will always remember going out on the boat with my friend and lobsterman, Billy Bob 
Faulkingham. That was the summer of 2018. I was just leaving the Maine Senate after 
two terms, and he was just running for the Maine House for the first time. Today, in our 
respective third terms representing the people of our respective communities, we are 
together sponsoring this legislation to defend Maine’s lobster industry. 
Rep. Faulkingham showed me the lengths to which our Iobstermen go to maintain 
sustainable practices, throwing back lobsters that are too big or too small, in order to 
ensure lobster populations continue at sustainable levels. Even then, however, the 
specter of federal regulation was on the horizon.


