 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 563 (Opposed in Part)  
 
TO:   Senator Cameron Reny 
 Representative Allison He pler 
          Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 563, An Act to Assert State Sovereignty over Ocean Waters up to 12 Nautical Miles off 
the State ’s Coast  
 
DA: April 6 , 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission respectfully submit s the following  testimony 
regarding LD 563 .   
 
 Persons and shipping in the waters beyond three nautical miles are subject to a complex mix 
of state and federal regula tory and crimina l jurisdiction.   CLAC obj ects to LD 563 to the extent that 
it goes beyond fisheries regulation and extends  the State ’s general criminal jurisdiction  to 12 
nautical miles .  CLAC is concerned that this legislation  extends the reach of Maine ’s criminal 
statutes without addressing questions of whether there is a need or resources available to do so.   
 
 CLAC members do not have experti se in the areas of fisheries regulation and defer to 
agencies and persons with experience in those areas to address potential conflicts between  this 
proposal and existing federal laws  governing fisher ies management , regulation of vessels, and 
natural resources beyond the three -mile limit .   
 
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Cou nsel, and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
