My name is Michael Maharrey and I’m the national communications director for the Tenth 
Amendment Center. I live in Tarpon Springs, Florida. 
 
LD563 merely codifies state authority that is inherent under the Constitution.  
 
In effect, the Constitution, as originally understood, grants the federal government authority to 
own land for purposes enumerated in the document, but requires the government to dispose 
of the remainder. 
 
During the ratification of the Constitution, there were frequent assurances that the states 
would control the territory within their own borders.  
 
Under international agreements, territorial waters extend out 12 miles.  
 
In my view, federal regulation of Maine fisheries is constitutional overreach and you have a 
right and even and obligation to assert your authority.  
 
Here’s the reality – if you don’t stand up and draw a line in the sand, the feds are going to keep 
bullying you. As Mercy Otis Warren put it, “Resist the first approaches of tyranny.” 
 
A PRACTICAL STEP 
 
From a practical standpoint, as long as you don’t actively interfere with federal activities, Maine 
is under no obligation to enforce any federal regulation. Without your cooperation, the feds are 
going to have a hard time enforcing their will. As you’ve already heard, Maine agencies are 
doing to enforcement. The feds don’t have any way to do it! 
 
During the ratification debates, there was a lot of worry that the federal government would 
overstep it bounds. In Federalist #46, James Madison gave a blueprint to deal with what he 
called “unwarrantable acts.” Or even warrantable acts that are unpopular. Among the things he 
recommended was “a refusal to cooperate with officers of the union.” 
 
Should an unwarrantable measure of the federal government be unpopular in particular States, 
which would seldom fail to be the case, or even a warrantable measure be so, which may 
sometimes be the case, the means of opposition to it are powerful and at hand. The disquietude 
of the people; their repugnance and, perhaps refusal to cooperate with officers of the Union, 
the frowns of the executive magistracy of the State; the i, which would often be added on such 
occasions, would oppose, in any State, very serious impediments; and were the sentiments of 
several adjoining States happen to be in Union, would present obstructions which the federal 
government would hardly be willing to encounter. - James Madison, Federalist 46 [Emphasis 
added] 
 
And here’s the dirty little secret. You don’t have to cooperate and even the federal government 
agrees. 
 
This is well-established under the anti-commandeering doctrine. This longstanding legal 
principle based on five major Supreme Court cases hold that the federal government cannot 
require states use their personnel or recourses to enforce federal laws or implement federal 
programs. An overview of those cases is below. 
 
No determination of constitutionality is necessary to invoke the anti-commandeering doctrine. 
State and local governments can refuse to enforce federal laws or implement federal programs 
whether they are constitutional or not and for any reason at all. 
 
With this in mind, I urge you to pass LD563 and end all state and local enforcement of federal 
regulations.  
 
In fact, you could amend the bill to include provisions specifically banning state and local 
enforcement of federal regulations. (Model language below) 
 
 
 
ANTI-COMMANDEERING CASES 
 
The following are the five landmark cases where the Court has 
upheld this doctrine. 
 
In Prigg v. Pennsylvania (1842), Justice Joseph Story held that 
the federal government could not force states to implement or 
carry out the Fugitive Slave Act of 1793. He said that it was  
a federal law, and the federal government ultimately had to 
enforce it: 
 
The fundamental principle applicable to all cases of this sort, 
would seem to be, that where the end is required, the means are 
given; and where the duty is enjoined, the ability to perform it 
is contemplated to exist on the part of the functionaries to 
whom it is entrusted. The clause is found in the national 
Constitution, and not in that of any state. It does not point 
out any state functionaries, or any state action to carry its 
provisions into effect. The states cannot, therefore, be 
compelled to enforce them; and it might well be deemed an 
unconstitutional exercise of the power of interpretation, to 
insist that the states are bound to provide means to carry into 
effect the duties of the national government, nowhere delegated 
or instrusted to them by the Constitution. 
 
In New York v. United States (1992) the Court held that the 
regulations in the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendment 
Act of 1985 were coercive and violated the sovereignty of New 
York, holding that “because the Act’s take title provision 
offers the States a ‘choice’ between the two unconstitutionally 
coercive alternatives–either accepting ownership of waste or 
regulating according to Congress’ instructions–the provision 
lies outside Congress’ enumerated powers and is inconsistent 
with the Tenth Amendment.” 
Sandra Day O’Connor wrote for the majority in the 6-3 decision: 
 
As an initial matter, Congress may not simply “commandee[r] the 
legislative processes of the States by directly compelling them 
to enact and enforce a federal regulatory program.” 
 
 She later expounded on this point. 
 
While Congress has substantial powers to govern the Nation 
directly, including in areas of intimate concern to the States, 
the Constitution has never been understood to confer upon 
Congress the ability to require the States to govern according 
to Congress’ instructions. 
 
Printz v. United States (1997) is generally cited as the 
lynchpin for the anti-commandeering doctrine. At issue was a 
provision in the Brady Gun Bill that required county law 
enforcement officers to administer part of the background check 
program. Sheriffs Jay Printz and Richard Mack sued, arguing 
these provisions unconstitutionally forced them to administer a 
federal program. Justice Antonin Scalia agreed, writing in the 
majority opinion “it is apparent that the Brady Act purports to 
direct state law enforcement officers to participate, albeit 
only temporarily, in the administration of a federally enacted 
regulatory scheme.” 
Citing the New York case, the court majority declared this 
provision of the Brady Gun Bill unconstitutional, expanding the 
reach of the anti-commandeering doctrine. 
 
We held in New York that Congress cannot compel the States to 
enact or enforce a federal regulatory program. 
 
Today we hold that Congress cannot circumvent that prohibition 
by conscripting the States’ officers directly. The Federal 
Government may neither issue directives requiring the States to 
address particular problems, nor command the States’ officers, 
or those of their political subdivisions, to administer or 
enforce a federal regulatory program. It matters not whether 
policymaking is involved, and no case-by-case weighing of the 
burdens or benefits is necessary; such commands are 
fundamentally incompatible with our constitutional system of 
dual sovereignty. 
 
In Independent Business v. Sebelius (2012), the Court held that 
the federal government cannot compel states to expand Medicaid 
by threatening to withhold funding for Medicaid programs already 
in place. Justice Robert Kennedy argued that allowing Congress 
to essentially punish states that refused to go along violates 
constitutional separation of powers. 
 
The legitimacy of Congress’s exercise of the spending power 
“thus rests on whether the State voluntarily and knowingly 
accepts the terms of the ‘contract.’ ” Pennhurst, supra, at 17. 
Respecting this limitation is critical to ensuring that Spending 
Clause legislation does not undermine the status of the States 
as independent sovereigns in our federal system. That system 
“rests on what might at first seem a counterintuitive insight, 
that ‘freedom is enhanced by the creation of two governments, 
not one.’ ” Bond, 564 U. S., at     (slip op., at 8) (quoting 
Alden v. Maine, 527 U. S. 706, 758 (1999) ). For this reason, 
“the Constitution has never been understood to confer upon 
Congress the ability to require the States to govern according 
to Congress’ instructions.” New York, supra, at 162. Otherwise 
the two-government system established by the Framers would give 
way to a system that vests power in one central government, and 
individual liberty would suffer. 
 
In Murphy v. NCAA (2018), the Court held that Congress can’t 
take any action that “dictates what a state legislature may and 
may not do” even when the state action conflicts with federal 
law. Samuel Alito wrote, “a more direct affront to state 
sovereignty is not easy to imagine.” He continued: 
 
The anticommandeering doctrine may sound arcane, but it is 
simply the expression of a fundamental structural decision 
incorporated into the Constitution, i.e., the decision to 
withhold from Congress the power to issue orders directly to the 
States … Conspicuously absent from the list of powers given to 
Congress is the power to issue direct orders to the governments 
of the States. The anticommandeering doctrine simply represents 
the recognition of this limit on congressional authority. 
 
Taken together, these five cases firmly establish a legal 
doctrine holding that the federal government has no authority to 
force states to participate in implementing or enforcing its 
acts. 
 
Madison’s advice in Federalist #46, supported by the anti-
commandeering doctrine, provides a powerful tool that states can 
use against federal acts and regulatory programs. 
 
MODEL ANTICOMMANDEERING LANGUAGE 
 
A department, agency or political subdivision of the State may not assist, participate with or 
provide material support or resources to enable or facilitate a federal agency in the 
enforcement of any [whatever regulations you don’t want to enforce] that aren’t codified in 
state law.  
