 
 
Maine Lobstermen’s Association  
 
Against  
 
LD 563 An Act to Assert State Sovereignty  
over Ocean Waters up to 12 Nautical Miles off the State’s Coast  
 
April 6 , 2023 
 
Senator Reny , Representative Hepler , and members of the Marine Resources Committee, my 
name is Patrice McCarron . I am the policy director for  the Maine Lobstermen’s Association  (MLA). 
The MLA opposes LD 563 to extend Maine’s sover eignty out to 12 miles from shore .  
 The MLA strongly supports the spirit of this  bill which is intended  to protect the Maine lobster 
fishery from onerous federal regulations . Unfortunately, the MLA  does not believe this proposed 
legislation w ill achieve the desired outcome.  
 Extending Maine’s sovereignty be yond 3 nautical miles does not exempt the Maine lobster fishery 
from the provisions of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) or the Marine Mammal Protection Act 
(MMPA). The ESA impacts fishing activity in state waters  if an Incidental Take Permit (ITP) is 
requi red. The MMPA applies to commercial fisheries in both state and federal waters if National 
Marine Fisheries Service has determined a fishery may  cause serious injury or mortality to a 
marine mammal. Extending the state’s sovereignty further from shore would not change this.  
 The MLA understands that this approach has been pursued in the past. This included a case before 
the Supreme Court in 1975 which held that the federal government has sovereign rights over 
waters beyond 3 miles from shore. The MLA also recalls that this strategy was again investigated  in 
the late 1990’s when Robin Alden was Commissioner of the Department of Marine Resources, and 
it was determined that it is not legally possible . 
 
The MLA also worries that there w ould be unintended consequences if this bill is passed.  Assert ing 
state sovereignty over waters up to 12 na utical miles from shore  would expand the fishing area for 
all state commercial fishermen. This would increase the risk the Maine lobster fishery  poses to 
right whales, which would trigger even more stringent federal rules  in the future . This would have 
devasting impacts on the lobster fishery.   
 
The MLA  supports the intent of this bill but do es not believe it would achieve the desired 
outcome. The MLA urges you to vote ought not to pass.  
 
Thank you.  

