TESTIMONY OF 
Patrick Keliher 
Department of Marine Resources 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying 
ln Opposition to 
LD 563 An Act to Assert State Sovereignty over Ocean Waters 
up to 12 Nautical Miles off the State's Coast 
Before the Committee on Marine Resources 
Sponsored by Senator Brakey 
Date of Hearing: April 6, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Marine Resources, my name is Patrick Keliher, Commissioner for the 
Department of Marine Resources, and I am testifying on behalf of the Department in opposition 
to LD 563.' 
LD 563 creates a new subsection of law regarding Maine's territorial waters. Under the 
existing definition of territorial waters in Title 12, this term means all waters of the State within 
the rise and fall of the tide seaward to the 3 nautical mile line. This bill amends Title 1 to claim 
Maine's jurisdiction over and control of all waters, and all submerged lands lying under those 
waters, within the rise and fall of the ride seaward for 12 nautical miles. 
Whether or not the State of Maine could unilaterally assert its sovereignty orjurisdiction 
beyond the 3-mile limit under the current constitutional and statutory framework was explored 
in a legal and policy analysis prepared for DMR by the Marine Law Institute of the University of 
Maine in 1997. Their determination was that such a claim would not be legitimate. The 
seaward boundary of the states is defined by the Submerged Lands Act (SLA). The SLA is a U.S. 
federal law that recognized the title of the states to submerged navigable lands within their 
boundaries at the time they entered the Union. They include navigable waterways, such as 
rivers, as well asimarine waters within the state's boundaries, generally three geographical 
miles from the coastline. Because the Submerged Lands Act is federal law, any inconsistent 
state law would be preempted under the Supremacy Clause. 
Some states have pursued an argument in court that for historical reasons, they are entitled to 
a boundary of three marine leagues instead of three nautical miles (one marine league equals 
three nautical miles). Another approach to modifying the State's boundary would be to seek 
an amendment to the federal Submerged Lands Act extending state’sjurisdiction. These are 
among the potentially available avenues to achieving a legally valid change in the State's 
seaward boundary. 
Setting aside the issues of legality, it is also worth discussing what such a change could actually 
accomplish. In a press conference earlier this year, it was noted that this bill was a response to 
the overregulation of Maine's lobster industry by the federal government. However, it is 
important to understand that application of the Endangered Species Act or the Marine
Mammal Protection Act is not limited to federal waters, so such a change of state waters 
jurisdiction would have no effect on the applicability of the federal whale regulations. 
ln fact, expanding state waters out to 12 miles would increase the amount of risk associated 
with the Maine lobster fishery, by allowing more of the fishing effort (and associated vertical 
lines) to move offshore. Currently license holders that do not have a federal permit are 
limited to ﬁshing within 3 miles of the coast. lfthose same license holders could fish as far 
offshore as 12 miles it will result in a higher rate of co-occurrence with right whales, creating 
more risk, that will then need to be further mitigated. y 
Finally, successfully obtaining jurisdiction over the waters out to 12 miles would come with 
many other obligations for DM R, which would require additional resources for the Department 
to meet. Some examples of this include: 
0 Marine Patrol enforcement of Title 12 marine resource laws and regulations may incur 
an added boat fuel and operating cost expense due to fishing activity in State waters 
being more spread out because fishermen without federal licenses would be able to fish 
out to 12 miles, rather than being limited to within 3 miles. It may take a patrol boat 
more time and resources to board and inspect 10 lobster boats spread out in a 10x12 
nautical mile area rather than a 10x3 nm area. This logic would also apply to locating, 
hauling, and inspecting fixed gear. 
0 The current MOU with the USCG for Recreational Boating Safety specifies that MMP will 
investigate and complete reports on all recreational boating accidents occurring upon 
waters of concurrent jurisdiction (currently coastal waters out to 3nm). A change toa 
12nm State jurisdiction would potentially result in an increase in time and expense to 
investigate and report on additional boating casualties. This increase would not be 4x 
the current effort due to the fact the majority of the recreational boating activity occurs 
near shore, however there would undoubtedly be an unquantified increase in effort and 
expense. _ 
0 MMP officers may currently enforce Title 17A criminal law within the State's 3nm 
jurisdiction. Increasing the State jurisdiction to 12nm would again, similar to the 
recreational boating accident investigation effort, increase BM P's potential workload 
investigating and taking enforcement action for incidents involving Title 17A violations. 
The State's exercise of criminal jurisdiction beyond the federally recognized 3-mile limit 
could conflict with and be preempted by federal laws establishing criminal jurisdiction 
_ beyond 3 miles with the US Coast Guard and the FBI. 
While the Department shares the frustration caused by the expectation of additional federal 
regulations on Maine's lobster industry, LD 563 cannot achieve the jurisdictional change that it 
seeks, it would not provide the relief from federal regulations sought, it would increase the 
amount of risk the ﬁshery presents, and it would create new and unwanted responsibilities for 
DMR. For these reasons, we ask the committee to vote Ought Not to Pass. Thank you for your 
consideration, and l would be happy to answer any questions you might have.
