Amishia Caron
Augusta
LD 1120
Good afternoon Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the 
committee.
I am writing because one of the best people I have ever known took her life on 
November 15, 2021.  As did at least 12 others since the bridge was built to replace the
Waldo-Hancock bridge which was the sight of so many suicides itself that the Maine 
DOT officials considered adding a fence or a separated pedestrian walkway to the 
new span but in the end decided against it.  Research shows that if someone is 
considering suicide and are deterred from their plan in the moment of extreme turmoil
and do not go on to commit suicide.
This is not the first time an emergency bill placing suicide barriers on the PNB has 
been discussed, every other time they have been shot down because it would destroy 
the aesthetics of the bridge, it was to costly and the best reason I found was that 
“Brook’s emergency bill ultimately failed in committee after lawmakers said they 
didn’t have enough time to review the proposal thoroughly.” Not enough time? Not 
enough time to try and help prevent families from having to suffer the tragedies of 
their loved ones jumping to their deaths in their times of extreme despair? Lives 
matter all lives.  Roads are built with guard rails on areas that are considered 
dangerous, why are fences not put on bridges?  A 2007 report by researcher Andrew 
Pelletier that showed safety fences work. Pelletier looked at suicides on Memorial 
Bridge in Augusta during a 22-year period before and after installation of an 
11-foot-high safety fence in June 1983, and concluded the barrier was effective in 
preventing people from jumping.  As for those who believe desperate people will 
simply choose another means, Pelletier’s report also found there was no evidence 
showing suicidal individuals sought alternative sites for jumping. In fact, mental 
health professionals say that individuals contemplating suicide have a specific method
in mind and, when thwarted, tend to abandon their plans.  
Thank you for your time, Amishia Caron

