Good afternoon Representative Curry and members of the board. My name is Devon McElroy from 
Litchfield, Maine. I’m here to speak in favor of proposed bill LD1120 SP454- the suicide fence for the 
Penobscot Narrows Bridge. I could throw statistics at you all day; for example, the suicide rate nationally 
has increased 20% since 2020- however numbers really pale in comparison when quantifying a human 
life, not to mention the gaping hole that the tragic loss of suicide leaves on a family, or a community. On 
November 15, 2021 my best friend and partner in life, Siri Norman, left this world by jumping from the 
Narrows bridge. I KNOW that she’d still be here today if there had been a barrier preventing her from 
taking that leap. I truly believe that Traci Merriam, Brandon Cassette, Jeffery Landwehr, Harrison 
Damon, Mark Michael Thomas, Robert Cadson, William Burton, Chase Dmuchowsky, and the few who’s 
names weren’t mentioned would have taken that one final pause to reevaluate their choice and therein 
be given a chance to get the help they needed to find peace in their souls. 
 On the day Siri left us 3 out of the 4 crisis phones weren’t working, but when it really comes down to it, 
a phone can’t stop a body from falling. Until we can reform our healthcare system and get the mental 
health aid and support that our communities need, we owe it to our children, friends, family, and 
communities to do everything in our power to prevent such tragedy from happening. 
 I took a walk along the bridge Sunday to reflect on the importance of why I’m here today. On my walk 
back to my car a kind couple stopped traffic to make sure I was ok. I explained to them why I was there 
and assured them that I was, in fact, ok. This experience showed me just how much the community is 
aware of the dangers this bridge poses to anyone suffering the despair and aguish of depleted mental 
health, and that they care enough to take the time to make a difference. Not a lot of people would stop 
traffic to check on a stranger, so I am confident this bill, if passed, will make a difference for the 
communities around it, and offer even a slight modicum of peace to families grieving over the needless 
loss of a loved one.  
As a parting thought to chew on: The Penobscot Narrows Bridge is 135 feet high, was built in 2004 and 
has a total of 12 known suicide successes, and one known attempt that was unsuccessful. In 1983 
Augusta finally installed a suicide fence on the 100-foot Memorial bridge after 14 known deaths in 
approximately 20 years, and there hasn’t been a single death since. Research shows that most jumps are 
impulsive and had there been a barrier people would have been thwarted and likely not tried another 
attempt. I think that speaks volumes to the efficacy of prevention at any cost. I appreciate the 
opportunity to speak on behalf of those who aren’t able, and I thank you for hearing me today. I hope 
with the fourth attempt of this bill we can make the right decision here, thank you.  
Devon McElroy
Litchfield
LD 1120
Good afternoon Representative Curry and members of the board. My name is Devon 
McElroy from Litchfield, Maine. I’m here to speak in favor of proposed bill LD1120 
SP454- the suicide fence for the Penobscot Narrows Bridge. I could throw statistics at
you all day; for example, the suicide rate nationally has increased 20% since 2020- 
however numbers really pale in comparison when quantifying a human life, not to 
mention the gaping hole that the tragic loss of suicide leaves on a family, or a 
community. On November 15, 2021 my best friend and partner in life, Siri Norman, 
left this world by jumping from the Narrows bridge. I KNOW that she’d still be here 
today if there had been a barrier preventing her from taking that leap. I truly believe 
that Traci Merriam, Brandon Cassette, Jeffery Landwehr, Harrison Damon, Mark 
Michael Thomas, Robert Cadson, William Burton, Chase Dmuchowsky, and the few 
who’s names weren’t mentioned would have taken that one final pause to reevaluate 
their choice and therein be given a chance to get the help they needed to find peace in 
their souls.
 On the day Siri left us 3 out of the 4 crisis phones weren’t working, but when it really
comes down to it, a phone can’t stop a body from falling. Until we can reform our 
healthcare system and get the mental health aid and support that our communities 
need, we owe it to our children, friends, family, and communities to do everything in 
our power to prevent such tragedy from happening.
 I took a walk along the bridge Sunday to reflect on the importance of why I’m here 
today. On my walk back to my car a kind couple stopped traffic to make sure I was 
ok. I explained to them why I was there and assured them that I was, in fact, ok. This 
experience showed me just how much the community is aware of the dangers this 
bridge poses to anyone suffering the despair and aguish of depleted mental health, and
that they care enough to take the time to make a difference. Not a lot of people would 
stop traffic to check on a stranger, so I am confident this bill, if passed, will make a 
difference for the communities around it, and offer even a slight modicum of peace to 
families grieving over the needless loss of a loved one. 
As a parting thought to chew on: The Penobscot Narrows Bridge is 135 feet high, was
built in 2004 and has a total of 12 known suicide successes, and one known attempt 
that was unsuccessful. In 1983 Augusta finally installed a suicide fence on the 
100-foot Memorial bridge after 14 known deaths in approximately 20 years, and there
hasn’t been a single death since. Research shows that most jumps are impulsive and 
had there been a barrier people would have been thwarted and likely not tried another 
attempt. I think that speaks volumes to the efficacy of prevention at any cost. I 
appreciate the opportunity to speak on behalf of those who aren’t able, and I thank 
you for hearing me today. I hope with the fourth attempt of this bill we can make the 
right decision here, thank you. 

