 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community 
Programs 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT 
LD 1120: Resolve, to Install a Suicide Barrier on the Penobscot Narrows Bridge 
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
May 4th, 2023 
 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports 
the passage of LD 1120 Resolve, to Install a Suicide Barrier on the Penobscot Narrows Bridge. 
NAMI Maine works closely with the Maine CDC, Maine Suicide Prevention Program (MSSP), and 
many state partners to support suicide prevention. We also provide resources, guidance, and 
support after a suicide loss across the state of Maine. For many years we have provided 
consultation and support for the Maine Department of Transportation (DOT) related to suicide 
prevention efforts on DOT bridge infrastructure. NAMI Maine also supports efforts in working 
with the media on safe messaging practices including when reporting on losses off bridges that 
are considered possible suicides.   
Maine has the highest rate of suicide in the Northeastern US. We lose a Maine citizen to suicide 
every 36 hours, and suicide deaths occur at more than 12 times the rate of homicide deaths in 
Maine.  Suicide deaths attributed to a leap or fall off a height, including cliffs, buildings, or 
bridges, represent less than 2% of our suicide deaths each year. But because they are a very 
public form of death, they are often covered prominently in the media.   
It has long been recognized that certain locations develop into suicide hotspots, defined as a 
specific location or a region that has become widely recognized as a site where people go to 
end their life. No place begins as a suicide hotspot, but it develops that identity over time.  
Commonly recognized hotspots include tall buildings, cliffs, or bridges. In Maine, the Memorial 
Bridge in Augusta, with lethal height, pedestrian access, and a location close to a significant 
population of people, became a hotspot for suicide in the late 1970s and early 1980s.  A total of 
14 suicides occurred off the bridge before a barrier fence was erected in 1983. No additional 
suicide deaths were reported after barriers were in place and there was no sign of an increase 
in deaths in other locations in the Augusta area. The effectiveness of barriers to prevent suicide 
has been established at many locations worldwide. The Penobscot Narrows Bridge has been the 
site of at least 12 suicide deaths since it opened in December 2006.  The bridge combines a 
prominently visible stature, a highly lethal deck height, and relative ease of access by car or 
even by foot.  In addition, both the Memorial and the Penobscot Narrows Bridges have received 
prominent media attention following suicide deaths. These elements combine to underscore 
their stature, past and present, as suicide hotspots in Maine. 
 
 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community 
Programs 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
In 2007, the Maine DOT worked with NAMI Maine and the MSSP to establish crisis phones and 
signage urging people to reach out for help on the Penobscot Narrows Bridge to support 
prevention. There is little evidence to support that the phones have been used to any 
significant degree. NAMI Maine also increased efforts to prepare and support media outlets  to 
report on suicides appropriately and to underscore the connection to mental health crisis 
support for someone struggling. With suicide losses continuing off the bridge, it is time that 
fencing to deter suicide is established on the bridge. NAMI Maine urges passage of LD 1120 to 
prevent further suicide losses from this established suicide hotspot. 
 
Greg Marley, LCSW 
Senior Clinical Director of Suicide Prevention 
NAMI Maine 
 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) 
is the state’s largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental health system through 
collaboration and education. 
 
