Testimony of Linda Norman 
in favor of passing LD 1120_ 
Resolve, to Install a Suicide Barrier on the Penobscot Narrows Bridge 
Good afternoon Senator Chipman, Representative Williarns, and distinguished members of the 
Transportation Committee. __ 
My name is Linda Norman and I am here today becausemy daughter Siri committed suicide from the 
Penobscot Narrows Bridge on November 15*“ , 2021. She was not the first to do so, nor the last. I want 
there to be no more. _'
~ 
As we emerge from the isolation of Covid, we as a society are becoming more and more aware of the 
frequency of mental health issues, as well as the shortage of mental health providers. Our feelings of 
powerlessness and isolation have increased anxiety, depression, and anger throughout Maine. 
Siri was a very intelligent and capable person who graduated with honors from UMA and was working 
as an accountant. She was also struggling with depression and anxiety, but was working with her PCP 
on medication adjustments and was trying to connect with a therapist.- 
Siri had plans for her life and she was looking forward to Thanksgiving in a few days and preparing to 
cook at her dad’s house. I may never know exactly what triggered the crisis that drove her to suicide 
that Monday. When someone is that deep in crisis, they don’t see any way out and are not likely to 
reach out for help via solar telephone on the b1idge—.especially when, as the Bangor Daily News 
reported, three of the four telephones were not working the day that Siri died. Crises are very intense 
periods of despair, but they are temporary. While in crisis it seems there is no way out; but as it passes 
and people are able to think more clearly, solutions can be found. A barrier buys a person the time they 
need to be interrupted or deterred long enough to see a way out of crisis-—or to be seen by someone 
who can help. Siri was seen by adriver on the opposite side of the bridge, who was unable to turn 
around in time to help; The woman who witnessed Siri’s death has been deeply impacted. 
While there are many ways to attempt suicide, few have as little chance for medical intervention after 
the fact. 
A single suicide affects family members, friends, colleagues, witnesses, first responders, and medical 
and mental health providers, to name a few.A 
I understand similar bills have been rejected in -the past, in part, for aesthetic reasons But there is no 
place uglier to me than a place where several people have committed suicide. Wikipedia devotes an 
entire section on the Penobscot Narrows Bridge entry to the significant number of suicides there. 
Hardly the best image for a tourist attraction. Around the country and the world, barriers on bridges 
like the one in Augusta, have been shown to reduce suicide attempts . I ask you to please support this 
bill; it won’t bring my daughter back, but it will prevent other deaths.- 
Thank you._ 
Linda Norman 
Auburn, ME 04210
