PUBLIC HEARING ABOUT THE INSTALLING A BARRIER ON THE PENOBSCOT NARROWS 
BRIDGE 
I have come here to testify in support of the proposed suicide barrier on the Penobscot 
Narrows Bridge. I am a Licensed Clinical Social Worker who have worked with clients who have 
lost loved ones to suicide. As a mental health professional, I have witnessed the devastationI 
that the survivors of a loved one's suicide experienced. This is a different kind of grief. The grief 
is compounded by guilt that why didn't they see the warning signs so that they could have 
helped. Studies have shown that delaying suicide attempts can prevent the suicides. The 
impulsive urge to end the pain and hopelessness often changes when they reach out for help. 
Every time I drive across that bridge, I am haunted by the image of someone walking, running 
or driving(stopping), to the center of the bridge, climbing over the short railing and falling to 
their deaths as traffic drives by. I can only imagine what it feels like to be a witness or be the 
first responders. The trauma is experienced by all. 
The bridge barrier would prevent impulsive suicides. In a prominent suicideologist ’s 
book entitled The Suicidal Mind, Edwin S. Shneidman stated ”I believe that people who are 
actually committing suicide are ambivalent about life and death at the very moment they are 
committing it. They wish to die and they simultaneously wish to be rescued" . The barrier would 
be a deterrent allowing possibilities of rescue and healing. 
Shneidman also posits that suicide can be prevented by changing our perception. I have 
read testimony from previous hearings that have focused on the inevitability of suicide, cost, 
and aesthetics. My understanding is that there is no evidence to support that people will simply 
find another way to commit suicide. Falling 134 feet is far more lethal than most other methods 
and prevents the possibility of getting help. Using a cost benefit analysis for the barrier, the cost 
of the barrier is estimated to be 2 million dollars. This seems to be a good investment when you 
consider the cost associated with the known 12 people that have committed suicide since the 
bridge was built. Consider the costs to the towns needing an infrastructure to respond toa 
suicide and supporting the mental health of first responders. And the cost to the state for 
investigation and autopsies. Regarding aesthetics, I am confident that we have the creative 
capacity to design a barrier that will look good. 
Suicide is preventable. The barrier is one of theways.
