 
 
 
April 4, 2023,  
Dear Transportation Committee Members:  
MaineDOT does not have an official position on LD 1120, Resolve, to Install a Suicide Barrier on the 
Penobscot Narrows Bridge,  but rather, would like to provide you with some additional information for 
you to consider as you deliberate on this topic .  
 
MaineDOT is first and foremost an engineering organization. Accordingly, we prefer to gather 
information and thoroughly analyze it before making decisions w ith potential statewide and long -term 
implications. At this time, we are well equipped to provide a cost estimate and any engineering concerns 
that may arise from the installation of a pedestrian safety fence on the Penobscot Narrows Bridge. A 
preliminary estimate based loosely on the pedestrian fence located on the Memorial Bridge in Augusta, 
adjusted for i nflation and length, indicates that a similar fence on the Penobscot Narrows Bridge could 
cost $1 million  or more . Additionally, in order to successfully inspect the bridge,  the fence would either 
need to be removed for the inspection and reinstalled after or MaineDOT would need to purchase a new 
Under Bridge Inspection Truck (UBIT) that can accommodate reaching over the erected  barrier.   The 
estimated cost of a new truck is $1 million.    
 
MaineDOT understands the importance of this topic and is committed to doing its part in the work of 
suicide awareness and prevention.  Over the past several legislative sessions there have been similar 
proposals brought forward . After legislation was submitted during the 126th Legislature , MaineDOT 
began working with the  Maine  National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) . Through this partnership, 
MaineDOT and NAMI Maine collectively identi fied several things that could assist in the prevention of 
bridge -related suicides. These included the installation of telephones at both the Prospect and Verona 
Island ends of the bridge, signage alerting individuals to these phones as well as the crisis hot line, and a 
media tool/education kit to educate the media on how best to report on suicides.  
MaineDOT has continued working  with NAMI, most recently collaborating on a report to this committee  
on the research  conducted on  bridge safety standard s.  We expect this report to be completed shortly and 
will provide copies to the committee for your review . 
We hope this information is helpf ul as you continue deliberating on this legislation.   
 
Thank you , 
Nina Fisher  
Deputy Commissioner, MaineDOT  
 
