_ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
V 
g Q07) _2s7-1400g 
--
- 
. ~ 
TTY. Maine Relay 711 
Poppy Arford 
8 Quarry Road 
Brunswick, ME 04011 ' 
(207) 522-1997» 
poppy.arford@legislatureinaine.gov" 
_. 
_, _ _ April 4, 2023 
I ' 
' 
Testimony of Rep. Poppy Arford in support oft 
LD 1120 Resolve, to Install a Suicide Barrier on the Penobscot 
Narrows Bridge 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, I am Representative Poppy Arford. I proudly serve House District 
101 in Brunswick. Thank you for the opportunity to come before you today to share my strong 
support for LD 1120, Resolve, to Install a Suicide Barrier on the Penobscot Narrows Bridge. 
On Nov. 15, 2021, at approximately 9 a.m., Siri Nonnan parked hercar on the Verona side 
of the Penobscot Narrows Bridge, walked out onto the bridge, climbed over the rail and 
jumped off. Her mother, Linda Nonnan, will be testifying today and has given me 
permission to use their names. Linda is a dear friend of a friendof mine.-Our mutual friend 
contacted me in January of 2022 to ask if there was anything I could do as a legislator to 
stop people from jumping off the Penobscot Narrows Bridge. She shared how Linda had 
lost her daughter. My friend was quite upset and wanted to do whatever she could to help 
Linda, who was understandably having a very hard time coping with her daughter's death- 
by suicide. 
Although this happened over a year ago, I remember it just as if it had happened this 
morning. Although I did not know Siri, I grieved her death and, as a mother myself, 
imagined Linda’s pain. I detennined that passing a bill to build a suicide barrier fence was 
the right legislative action. The need for this has only increased as, since Siri’s suicide, two 
more people have jumped off the Penobscot Narrows Bridge. William Burton of Stockton 
Springs is believed to have died when he jumped last July, and this past November, 
college student Chase Dmuchowsky jumped to his death. 
I want to share my heartfelt gratitude to Sen. Chip Curry for sponsoring this bill and inviting me 
A 
to be a co-sponsor. The solution LD 1120 presents requires that the Department of 
District 101: Brunswick (part)
Transportation con
l struct and maintain a pedestrian barrier fence on the Penobscot Narrows 
Bridge for the purpose of suicide prevention. If such a barrier had been in place when Siri, 
William and Chaselwere standing on the bridge intending to die by suicide, their decision would 
have been challenged by the presence of a fence, and they might still be with us today.
\ 
I will leave you with a quote from The Republican Journal Editorial: Suicide by bridge. 
“T here ’s a sigd irony in Penobscot Narrows bridge history: Because the predecessor- 
Waldo-Hanciock Bridge had been the scene of so many suicides, Maine DOT initially 
considered ridding a fence — but in the end decided against it. It ’s well past time to 
rectijy that drror. We engineer our roads with guardrails and medians for safety; why 
would we similarly build protective fencing into our bridges? The need fora 
deterrent on ‘the deadly Penobscot Narrows Bridge couldn ’t be clearer. As the 131st 
Legislature opens its session this weelg we urge lawmakers to adopt emergency . 
legislation :0" 
) that end. Stop this suicide by bridge.” 
Please, I urge you to: vote LD 1120 a unanimous Ought To Pass. Thank you. 
SOURCES I 
o LD 1120, Resolve, to Install a Suicide Barrier on the Penobscot Narrows Bridge: 
www.mainele gislature.org/1egis/bills/ getPDF.asp ‘?paper=SPO454&item= 1 &snum=1 31 
0 The Republidan Journal: Journal Editorial: Suicide by bridge, December 8, 2022. 
Updated March 13, 2023.u 
District I01 : Brunswick (part)
