Steve Norman 
8 Alto St.-~
. 
Belfast, ME 04915_ 
207-ass-1966 I 
April 4, 2023I 
. \' 
I don’t_really want to be here today; In fact, I would give anything to not be here 
.today. I 
V .~ 
_*
. 
My daughter Siri jumped from the Penobscot Narrows Bridge on November 15,, 
2021. Until thatday, I never imagined that I would be in a position where‘I would feel compelled to testify about installing a suicide barrier on a bridge.'
I 
Her action came as a bolt out of the blue for me. Hersuicide is with me, and with the others who loved her, every day. I hope that my speaking today can help to 
prevent even just one more person from jumping from that bridge and spare any. _- 
other family from the pain experienced by loved ones who are left behind. _ 
Since Siri’s suicide, I have learned" that suicide is often short-lived, a moment of crisis that passes. If the crisis is overcome, people who were suicidal at that point 
usually go on to lead normal productive lives. _A suicide barrier would allow 
people that second chance.‘'
‘ 
.' 
VA
I 
I have also seen reports that restricting access to a suicidei 
hotspot (which is what the Penobscot Narrows Bridge hasbecome) does not shiﬂ; the problem to another . 
location. VI
' 
- '0 
I'
I
- 
A study done of the Memorial ‘Bridge over the Kennebec River right here in 
Augusta from the years ’ I960 to 20.05 reported 14 suicides from the bridge—all_ 
before the‘ 
barrier safety fence was installed there in 1983, none in the 23 years 
after the barrier was installed. The safety fence was effective in preventing 
suicides from the bridge, and there was no evidence that suicidal individuals 
sought alternative sites for jumping. V j; I I
I
- 
I urge you to approve then fund a suicide prevention barrier for the Penobscoti 
Narrows Bridge. You may save the life of a loved one, or certainly the life of' 
someone’s loved one.I
» 
.“ I' 
Thank you very muchi fto Senator Curry and the other sponsors of this legislation. I-I 
appreciate very much your work on this issue.I
Vt
