Testimony in Support of LD 882 
An Act to Allow Nonmunicipal Emergency Medical Services providers to be 
Considered State Employees for Purposes of Certain Benefits 
 
Good morning, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Committee on 
Labor and Housing. My name is Rick Petrie, and I am a Paramedic who has worked in the 
Maine EMS system for 42 years. I am now the Chief Operations Officer for North East Mobile 
Health, a for-profit Ambulance Service based in Scarborough Maine and the Program Director 
for the Jackman Paramedic project.  
 
I was also fortunate to serve as a member of the EMS Blue Ribbon Committee whose work laid 
the foundation for this, and other, legislation supporting Emergency Medical Services in Maine.   
 
As the Blue-Ribbon Committee heard very clearly, EMS is in trouble. We are inadequately 
funded, tightly regulated, and under resourced. We have a significant staffing shortage because 
of poor wages and benefits, long hours and incredibly difficult working conditions. Yet, every 
day, EMS providers have found a way to respond, sacrificing time with their families, 
appropriate rest, and their own mental health. 
 
One of the areas with which we struggle is pay and benefits because we are so poorly 
reimbursed. Nationally, the average median wage for EMT’s is $17.05 per hour, and the Bureau 
of Labor Statistics lists EMS as one of the lowest-paying jobs in health care. The same wage 
and benefit issues are rampant throughout the Public Safety profession. We are all having 
difficulty recruiting and retaining new members into our respective fields, creating a crisis in the 
professions that Maine Citizens rely on when they are sick, injured, or in danger. We are 
attempting to rectify the pay issue through other legislative bills. However, retirement for non-
municipal, non-profit, community-based EMS agencies remains an issue. 
 
Many EMS providers in Maine work as firefighter/EMT’s for Fire departments, but many want to 
work solely as EMS providers and not firefighters. As a result, they don’t have access to an 
effective retirement program, with a resulting negative impact on their decision to enter the field. 
In our current challenging workforce environment, we need to consider the incentives to recruit 
and retain providers.       
 
I realize that there may be some question about the ability of the state to allow access to the 
state retirement and benefit programs. I would ask that we definitively answer the question 
before dismissing the idea, and consider how we can set up a system to help the people who 
provide critical services to the people of Maine.  
 
Thank you for your consideration, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
 
Rick Petrie, EMT-P 
rpetrie@nemhs. com 
207-754-9109 
