4*» 
, - HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
E (207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 Suzanne Salisbury 
134 Park Road 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Residence: (207) 899-6863 
Suzanne.SaIisbury@|egislature.mainq.:;ov 
March 28, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Suzanne Salisbury presenting 
LD 882, An Act to Allow Nonmunicipal Emergency Medical Services Providers to Be Considered 
State Employees for Purposes of Certain Beneﬁts 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Sue Salisbury, and I represent House District 128, which 
includes part of Westbrook. I am here today to present LD 882, An Act to Allow Nonmunicipal 
Emergency Medical Services Providers to Be Considered State Employees for Purposes of Certain 
Benefits 
After the passage of LD 1988 last session, a Blue-Ribbon Commission on Emergency Medical Services 
(EMS) in Maine was formed. Over the course of the summer and fall, the commission, of which I was 
honored to be a part of, met to review Maine’s EMS system and recommend improvements to address 
issues, including funding, stafﬁng, training, governance and more. The Commission was tasked with 
submitting a report of its ﬁndings to the legislature. 
We reported out several speciﬁc ﬁndings, but in general, we found that the system was in trouble and it 
was imperative that we come up with solutions that not only address immediate issues like certain 
services being completely unable to respond to calls, but also long-term workforce challenges. 
Recruitment and retention will always be a challenge when dealing with a ﬁeld of work that offers low 
pay, long hours and the constant threat of exposure to disease and trauma. Often, EMS providers are only 
able to piece together a living by working at multiple services to make ends meet. We urgently need to 
attract more workers to this ﬁeld. Adequately compensating and protecting the ones who so thanklessly 
devote their lives to this work is an important part of solving the larger puzzle that is Maine’s EMS 
workforce shortage. 
Our businesses, schools and hospitals could not operate without the good work of our EMS. Moving to 
designate EMS providers as state employees, as LD 882 proposes to do, both honors the role that they 
play across the state and also provides an important beneﬁt that would entice more individuals to this 
ﬁeld. 
However, I have been made aware that this option may not be viable and will look to the guidance of 
Maine PERS on how we should proceed. 
Thank you for your time and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
District I28: Part of Westbrook
