Alexander Mayer, MD 
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery 
Maine General Health 
Alexander.Mayer@MaineGeneral.org  
(207) 621-4620 
 
Testimony for LD 1254 – An act to provide coverage and prior authorization of medications 
and services during a MaineCare provider’s enrollment period. 
As delivered via Zoom to Health and Human Services Committee on 5/3/23 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and respected members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee. My name is Alexander Mayer and I appreciate the 
opportunity to testify today in favor of LD 1254, An Act to Provide Coverage and Prior 
Authorization of Medications and Services During a MaineCare Provider's Enrollment Period. 
I’m a reconstructive surgeon at Maine General.  I am a native New Englander and did my 
undergrad at Colby College.  I subsequently went away to do my medical training and 
fellowship and now I’ve returned to Maine to practice. I also happen to be the only 
reconstructive surgeon in our health system. 
When I started at Maine General last August, I was told to anticipate a waiting period of 
5 to 9 months for my enrollment into Maine care.  During that time, it proved very difficult to 
see and treat patients with Maine care at all. This unfortunately represents a huge portion of 
our patient population.   
Many of the medically necessary procedures that these patients were seeking needed 
prior authorization. However, during the provider enrollment period there was no way to verify 
if these patients met the criteria for prior authorization.  We were placed into the position of 
either deferring care for these patients until the enrollment was complete or providing care to 
these patients with the hope that they would ultimately meet the criteria for surgery and the 
hospital would get reimbursed retroactively.  Unfortunately, this did lead to situations where 
they did not meet the prior authorization criteria and the hospital was denied appropriate 
reimbursement for their procedures. 
Beyond procedures, prescription medications and testing posed similar 
issues.  Prescriptions requiring prior authorization would be kicked back from the pharmacy, 
but I had no recourse to submit the prior authorization since my enrollment was still pending.  
All of this is to say, that patients were kept from getting procedures in a timely manner, 
kept from getting medications for their ongoing treatment and recovery, and experienced 
significant limitations in their access to care. This was due to the prolonged enrollment period 
and inability to verify prior authorization criteria during that time. 
Ultimately, it took nearly 5 months for my enrollment to be complete and during that 
time I had the opportunity to discuss with other members of our hospital, including hospital 
administration, primary care physicians, and other surgeons, whether they had experienced 
similar issues in the past.  I was shocked to discover universal widespread frustration with these 
issues at all levels of our institution. It was at this point that I reached out to Rep. Arford to see 
how we might improve access to care for these patients. In a state with a clear provider 
shortage, I’m here today simply hoping that there is an opportunity to improve access to care 
and get Maine Care patients the medications, tests, and procedures they require in a more 
appropriate timeframe.  
 
 
 
