L.D. 1254  
An Act to Provide Coverage and Prior Authorization of Medications and Services 
During a MaineCare Provider's Enrollment Period 
This bill allows a provider with a pending enrollment application to apply for a prior authorization of medications 
and services and requires the Department of Health and Human Services to make available prior authorization 
criteria to providers with a pending enrollment application. It also requires the Department of Health and Human 
Services to cover medications and services delivered by a provider during the time the provider's application is 
pending based on the determination of the prior authorization request.” 
 
Testimony prepared by Laura Tracy, Director of Primary Care, MaineGeneral Medical Center 
Public Hearing Date: May 3, 2023 
Dear members of the Health and Human Services Committee, 
My name is Laura Tracy, and I am currently serving as the Director of Primary Care at MaineGeneral 
Medical Center in Augusta, Maine. I have worked with our Medical Practices for the past 23 years.  
Our primary care practices serve approximately 70,000 patients in the greater central Maine service 
area. In primary care alone, we employ 100+ medical staff. In total for our organization, our medical 
staff comprise over 250+ members. With these numbers of employed medical staff, we are constantly in 
a state of recruiting and hiring new providers. Once a new medical staff member is hired and begins to 
see patients, we are typically waiting anywhere from 5 to 9 months or more before MaineCare 
enrollment is complete. We understand that this is partially due to an administrative backlog of 
processing enrollment applications, but it is delaying patient care and this is not acceptable.  
Here is the challenge: Our health system has a much higher demand for physician services than we have 
supply. Patients are waiting over a year in some of our departments to see a primary care physician, if 
they do not have one. So when a new physician is hired and starts working in our clinics, we need to 
have them see patients as soon as possible. If they begin seeing MaineCare patients while in the 
enrollment waiting period, and those patients need medications or procedures, or any service that 
requires a prior authorization by MaineCare, we currently have no way to obtain the necessary prior 
authorization, and therefore we are not able to provide adequate medical care for these patients.   This 
sets us up for failure in many ways: 
1. Seeing a patient but not being able to prescribe medications or perform procedures is harmful 
and counterproductive 
2. Patients are unhappy, and still need to seek care elsewhere (though they may not find access to 
care in a timely or safe manner) 
3. Health systems like ours bear the cost of hiring and paying medical staff who cannot see the 
patients they were hired to see and care for 
4. Medical staff are unhappy, and may be incentivized to move to other locations where they are 
able to see patients 
Over time, the MaineCare enrollment period has grown to a month’s long process. As a result, we have 
had to build several workarounds to manage operations in our medical practices. Some examples are as 
follows: 
  
1. Preventing new medical staff from seeing MaineCare patients at all, which delays care, and 
further backlogs our access problem. This also puts patients health and safety at risk, as often 
times delaying care can result in more serious illness, or even death 
2. Relying on other medical staff in the same clinic to see more patients and/or carry more of the 
workload, adding to the ongoing burnout problem of our existing medical staff 
3. Seeing patients and providing limited care, but withholding necessary medications or 
procedures until MaineCare enrollment is complete. This is not only risky, but beneath an 
acceptable standard of care.  
4. Seeing patients and providing necessary care and treatment, but forgoing payment for services.  
 
All of this is not only a hardship to the clinic and medical staff, but more importantly, to patients. 
Every workaround creates a potential for missed, delayed or fragmented care, which our healthcare 
system and our patients cannot afford.  
 
We have learned that MaineCare has not allowed ANY workarounds to the prior authorization 
process for procedures and medications, which is absolutely unacceptable. Delaying and denying 
patient care for administrative backlogs is not safe and should not be allowed. The citizens of Maine 
and specifically, MaineCare patients, deserve better access to care.  
 
This bill will remove an administrative barrier, while still allowing for a system that can safely and 
effectively control and approve services according to current prior authorization standards and 
processes. I strongly encourage you to support the passage of this bill in an effort to improve access 
to quality patient care.  
 
 
 
 
