northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1254 An Act to Provide Coverage and Prior Authorization of Medications and 
Services During a MaineCare Provider's Enrollment Period 
 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against 
May 3, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer  and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am providing comment 
on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member organizations neither for nor 
against bill.  Northern Light Health member organizations include 10 hospitals located in 
southern, central, eastern and northern Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground 
ambulance, behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty 
care practices and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  Ninety three percent 
of Maine’s population lives in the Northern Light Health service area.  Northern Light 
Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s largest employers with more than 10,000 
employees statewide. 
 
In speaking with the bill sponsor, Representative Arford, the primary challenge for 
providers enrolling with the MaineCare program is the time from application to status as 
an enrolled MaineCare provider.  This is the same issue we addressed regarding health 
insurance carriers in 2021 – LD 1196 “An Act Regarding Reporting on Spending for 
Behavioral Health Care Services and To Clarify Requirements for Credentialing by Health 
Insurance Carriers”.  This bill was signed into law and establishes a timeline for 
commercial carriers to approve credentialling applications for new providers within a 
60-day period.   
 
We recommend that the Health and Human Services Committee consider applying the 
same standard to MaineCare enrollment.   
 
Title 24-A: MAINE INSURANCE CODE 
Chapter 56-A: HEALTH PLAN IMPROVEMENT ACT 
Subchapter 1: HEALTH PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
 
D. A carrier shall make credentialing decisions, including those granting or denying 
credentials, within 60 days of receipt of a completed credentialing application from a 
provider. For the purposes of this paragraph, an application is completed if the 
application includes all of the information required by the uniform credentialing 
application used by carriers and providers in this State, such attachments to that 
application as required by the carrier at the time of application and all corrections 
required by the carrier. Within 30 days of initial receipt of a credentialing application, a 
carrier shall review the entire application and, if it is incomplete, shall return it to the 
provider for corrections with a comprehensive list of all corrections needed at the time 
the application is first returned to the provider. A carrier may not require that a provider 
have a home address within the State before accepting an application. A carrier that is 
unable to make a credentialing decision on a completed credentialing application within 
 the 60-day period as required in this paragraph shall notify the bureau in writing prior to 
the expiration of the 60-day period on that application and request authorization for an 
extension on that application. A carrier that requests an extension shall also submit to 
the bureau an explanation of the reasons why the credentialing decision on an 
application is taking longer than is permitted or, if the problem is not specific to a 
particular application, a written remediation plan to bring the carrier’s credentialing 
practices in line with the 60-day limit in this paragraph.   [PL 2021, c. 603, Pt. B, §1 
(AMD).] 
 
For MaineCare enrollment reporting purposes the committee would want to consider a 
different reporting entity from the Bureau of Insurance.  The committee could consider 
an annual report to the Health and Human Services committee as an option. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment on this bill.   
 
 
 
