Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
May 3, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Members, Joint Standi ng Committee on Health an d Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100 
Re:  LD 1254 – An Act to Provide Coverage and Prior Authorization of Medications and Services During a 
MaineCare Provider's Enrollment Period 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Huma n Services: 
This letter  is submitted  in opposition  to LD 1254,  An Act to Provide  Coverage  and Prior  Authorization  of 
Medications and Services During a MaineCare Provider's Enrollment Period . This bill allows a provider with 
a pending enrollment application  to apply for a prior authorization of medications and services and requires 
the Department  to make  available  prior  authorization  criteria  to providers  with  a pending  enrollment 
application. It also requires the Department to cover medications and services  delivered by a provider during 
the time the provider's application is pending based on the determination of the prior authorization request. 
The MaineCare  billing  system  (MIHMS)  will not recognize  pending  providers  because there  is no National 
Provider Id entifier (NPI) in the system since the provider’s enrollment is not complete. Changing the system 
to accommodate  this change  would  be complicated,  long,  and expensive.  There  are also  Health  Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) concerns associated with this bill. Since the provider would not 
be fully enrolled, MaineCare would be prohibited from communicating health information about the member 
without written authorization. While such authorization could be acquired, doing so would result in a separate 
prior authorization process that would complicate the process and lead to provider confusion. 
In addition, there already exists a simple workaround for this type of situation.  A provider can submit a request 
for prior authorization under the NPI of another, already enrolled rendering clinician and receive a response 
from the Department. Then, after the enrollment process is completed for the rendering clinician, the provider 
can simply  request  that the Department  update  that prior  authorization  with  the NPI  of the  newly  enrolled 
clinician.     
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If you have any 
further questions, please feel free to contact me. 
Sincerely, 
Mich elle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

