 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
in support  
LD 1274, An Act to Increase Land Access for Historically Disadvantaged Populations  
 
Amy Winston  - Senior Director, State P olicy  
4/4/23  
Sear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker , and Members of the Committee:  
My name is Amy Winston and I live in E dgecomb. I am submittin g this testimony in support  of LD 1274, 
An Act to Increase Land Access for Historically Disadvantaged Populations , on behalf of CEI  - a mission -
driven community d evelopment financial institution (CDFI) based in Brunswick . CEI works to build a just, 
vibrant,  and climate -resilient future for people and communities in Maine and rural regions. We do this 
by integrat ing financ e, business expertise, and policy solutions to  make the economy more equitable.   
The Black Farmer Restoration Program Act will make the economy more equitable b y encouraging the 
growth of Black farmers in the field of agriculture . Its reparative  Black Farmer Restoration Fund land 
grants and F armer Conservation Corps  apprenticeship s support existing socially disadvantaged farmers 
and small organic farms, to redress /reduce  longstanding disparities in access to land  and technical 
training  and promote agricultural entrepreneurship . In addition to its economic benefits and impact, the 
program will support community development  efforts among farmers of color and create an 
infrastructure for more equitable access to ag related resources .  
While CEI was not  involved in develop ing this bill,  CEI represents CDFIs on the Permanent Commission 
on the Status of Racial, Indigenous and Maine Tribal Populations and supp orted LD 870, Resolve, 
Directing the Permanent Commission on the Status of Racial, Indigenous and Maine Tribal Populations 
To Study the Impact of Policies Regarding Agriculture, Access to Land, Access to Grants and Access to 
Financing on African American and Indigenous Farmers in the State , which passed in the 130th 
legislature.  In its report back to this Committee, “Land Access for Indigenous & African American 
Farmers in Maine”, the Permanent Commission study team  demonstrated clear  impacts of land 
dispossession, displacement, and enslavement on  these communities ’ economic and food security, 
health and abilit y to access and cultivate land .  
“To transform systems,” t he report calls for “ policies and practices that fundamentally counter the racial 
ineq uities imposed on ... communities of color throughout US history and seek to redress historic 
wrongs across sectors” (p.3). The report compares low farm ownership and high food security rates 
among Black/African Americans in Maine in particular, and the ne ed for forward looking programs that 
are reparative , to increase land access and provide “equal footing” to farm -specific technical training, 
grants, and financing  for Black/African American and farmers from other socially disadvantaged groups  
to foster these communities’  ability to grow  and market  their own food . This program will grow a whole 
generation of Black/African American farmers and provide the means to access the land needed to grow 
and market their own food. Maine’s economic strategy is  to grow and foster innovation in this sector. 
What could be more innovative than encouraging the growth of diverse business ownership in Maine’s 
food sector.  
