Helen Poertner
Bar Harbor, ME
LD 1274
Helen Poertner
Bar Harbor, Maine
Chair Ingwersen and Chair Pluecker and the distinguished members of the Committee
On Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry
My name is Helen Poertner, I live in Bar Harbor, Maine and I am a farmer. I’m here 
today with Maine Youth Power, youth-led, youth movement, throughout rural and 
suburban Maine fighting to win human dignity, equity and a livable future for all. I 
am here today to ask that you support Senator Hickman’s Bill LD 1274 An Act to 
Increase Land Access for Historically Disadvantaged Populations. 
I came to Maine four years ago and fell in love with farming here. I think that this bill
is an opportunity for the State of Maine to start doing justice to the communities that 
have experienced decades of racism, in all aspects of life and especially in policies by 
the US Department of Agriculture. 
As a young farmer without a farming background in my family, I know how hard it is 
to start my own farm, as well as access resources to learn the many skills of farming. 
Farmland access is the key issue in prohibiting people from starting their own 
small-scale farms, which are the future of our global food system, as well as our food 
system in Maine. This is hard for everyone but especially challenging for historically 
disadvantaged populations whose access to farmland has been destroyed by racist 
USDA policies, as well as the legacy of slavery that makes it a lot less likely for 
Black Mainers to have access to intergenerational wealth to buy or lease land. 
Further, a community’s ability to grow and eat culturally appropriate food is 
important for its members to thrive. It gives people agency over their own lives and 
the empowerment to tell their own stories and build their communities the way they 
want to. In a state that has such a large majority of white people, access to these 
opportunities is especially important. Again, access to land to grow culturally 
appropriate food is at the center of this effort. 
I’ve loved learning to farm in Maine, and I have deeply appreciated the support 
networks that exist. However, I barely share conference and training spaces with 
Black people. This is not because Black people don’t want to farm but because there 
are stark racist barriers in the way of their success that white farmers don’t face. 
Small-scale farms, like we have so many in Maine, are the future of our food system 
and our only sustainable option in the face of the climate crisis. Maine has a 
responsibility to grant Black farmers access to land to include everyone in the future 
of getting food on our tables. 
Members of the Committee On Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, I urge you to
support LD 1274, An Act to Increase Land Access for Historically Disadvantaged 
Populations. 
Thank you for listening. 

