April 3,  2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
 
RE: LD 1274 – An Act to Increase Land Access for Historically Disadvantaged 
Populations  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I 
am the Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I 
appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 1274, An Act to Increase Land 
Access for Historically Disadvantaged Populations.  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.  The Nature 
Conservancy has  been working  in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 12th largest 
landowner in  the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We also work 
across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the Gulf of Maine 
to rebuild groundfi sh populations, and develop innovative solutions to address our 
changing climate.  
 
Our organization has come to understand that centering equity in our work is critical to 
achieving TNC’s vision of a world where “the diversity of life thrives”. Conservation 
does not happen in a vacuum. The work of conserving natural places inevitably 
intersects with and affects human communities in ways that create both benefits and 
burdens. As conservationists and as people, it is our responsibility to understand the 
full range of these impacts —especially the burdens they impose on communities that 
have historically experienced oppression and marginalization, and still do today.  By 
cultivating our understanding of racial equity, including how a white -dominant mindset 
has shaped TNC and traditional conservation priorities and decisions, we will deepen 
our engagement with all communities  and generate better conservation outcomes for 
people and nature.  
 
TNC has committed to continually identifying and seizing opportunities to understand, 
check, surrender, share, and use our power to increase equity. One of ou r strategies for 
connecting people with nature includes, “Working with communities to promote 
lasting economic prosperity through natural solutions and community driven 
sustainability.” LD 1274 aims to support a community driven solution for economic 
prosp erity through access to farming – both through land access and skill building 
resources.  
 
We urge the committee to support LD12 74 and thank Senator Hickman for his 
leadership in sponsoring and bringing this bill before you. Thank you for the 
opportunity to comment.  
