 
 
 
Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
By Robin Kerber, American Farmland Trust, New England Policy Associate  
April 3, 2023  
Re: An Act to Increase Land Access for Historically Disadvantaged Populations.  
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry:  
I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of  LD 127 4 - An Act to Increase Land 
Access for Historically Disadvantaged Populations.  
My name is Robin Kerber, and I am American Farmland Trust's New England Policy 
Associate. American Farmland Trust (AFT) is the only national conservation organization dedicated 
to protecting farmland, promo ting sound farming practices, and keeping farmers on the land. As an 
organization, we understand that achieving a resilient agricultural system depends on equity and 
inclusion for all groups who have been, and still are, marginalized. We know  that social and racial 
injustices are entrenched in our nation's history and agricultural system. We cannot fully appreciate 
either without acknowledging genocide, land theft, enslavement, and other injustices perpetrated 
against Black, Indigenous, and ot her marginalized peoples. To learn more about our organizations 
approach to addressing systemic inequities in agriculture, we  encourage you to read  American 
Farmland Trust's full equity statement here. We support policies that we know  will start to rectify 
the harm that systemic racism inflicted on Black, Indigenous, and Other Farmers of Color  (BIPOC)  
across Maine.  
According to the 2017 National Agricultural Statistic Service (NASS) Census of Agriculture, 
there are 143 Black farmers w ho farm a total of 1,309 acres in the state of Maine. This is in 
comparison to the 7,600 who identify as White farmers  and farm a total of 1,307,613 acres. In 
addition, the average size of a farm operated by Black farmers is just 9 acres  while the average size 
of a farm  operated by White farmers  is 175 acres1. AFT recognize s that the 2017 NASS Census data 
may be limited in capturing data that accurately depicts the number of BIPOC farmers in the state 
due to many reasons, including the history of discrimination and distrust of USDA and NASS by 
many BIPOC producers. However, t his stark disparity reflects centuries of land and agricultural 
policies, planning practices, and other forms of systemic racism that have prioritized White  
producers.  
 
1 U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), “2017 Census of Agriculture,” last updated April 2019, accessed August 
2022, https://www.nass.usda.gov/ Publications/Highlights/2019/2017Census_Farm_Producers.pdf  
 

The creation of a Black Farmer Restoration Program and the Farm Conservation Corps 
within the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  (DACF)  is a strong step  the state 
can take in building better relationships with historically marginalized producers and communities. 
According to a National Young Famers Coalition report released in 2022, access to land is the single 
largest  barrier to new and beginner farmers , many of whom identify as BIPOC2. Financial, 
linguistic, and cultural barriers and biases exacerbate typical c hallenges facing new and beginning 
farmers.  Furthermore , both housing and farmland prices increased  during the pandemic  in Maine. 
Main e’s housing prices  increased by an average of  30% and the average value  of farmland  per acre 
increased by 10 % from  2019  to 20223. This is because there was a  significant increase in  
development and real estate pressure from out -of-staters looking for more space during a time of 
restrictions and lockdowns4. Compounding this inflated real estate market with over a century of 
Black land loss, the number of Black farmers in Maine repres ents less than 2% of the total farmers 
using barely 0.1% of agricultural land in production.  
The 1910 US census recorded over 219,000 land -owning Black farmers  in the entire country . 
The Land Loss and Reparations Project , a report involving a multi -univer sity research team as well 
as several inves tigative reporters, looked at census data between 1920 and 1997, and conservatively 
estimated that during that timeframe, the amount of Black -owned farmland that was lost can be 
valued at $326 billion5. This estimate does not include many of the benefits that cannot be 
calculated from receiving generational wealth. There is an immeasurable magnitude of what has 
been lost, and $326 billion is considered a very conservative number. The 2017 Census showed th at 
only 11% of the Black farmers in Maine that participated owned the land they stewarded, compared 
to 95% of White  farmers. Land ownership has historically been a means to income and growth 
opportunities, sales and market expansion, and generational wealt h for the landowners. Yet the 
opportunity to own the land that farmers steward has and continues to be taken away from 
marginalized communities. Agriculture  is not a privilege afforded to only those with significant 
financial means but a vital step to brin g equitable access and opportunity to Maine's historically 
marginalized people.  
LD 1274 also creates the Farm Conservation Corps that support s the education and training 
of young farmers in Maine's historically marginalized communities. These communities have long 
faced challenges such as loan discrimination, barriers to accessing state and federal programs, 
unequal recipients  of federal funding, and unstable land tenure. The result of this u njust system 
means that 95% of the country's farmers are White , despite a very diverse population .  Creating an 
apprenticeship and agricultural land grant program within the Department of Agriculture, 
 
2 Ackof, S., Flom, E., Polanco, V. G., Howard, D., Manly, J., Mueller, C., Rippon -Butler, H., & Wyatt, L. (2022). Building a Future with Farmers . National 
Young Farmers Coalition.  
 
3 U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), “2017 Census of Agriculture,” last updated April 2019, accessed August 
2022, https://www.nass.usda.gov/ Publications/Highlights/2019/2017Census_Farm_Producers.pdf  
4 Landry, T. (2023, March 6). Maine's out -of-state homebuyers came from these  states last year. MaineBiz . 
 
5 Mitchell, T. W., Francis, D. V., Hamilton, D., Rosenberg, N. A., & Stucki, B. W. (2022, May 1). Black Land Loss: 1920 –1997. AEA Papers and 
Proceedings , 112(38–42). 
Conservation and Forestry that specifically serves thes e marginalized Maine farms is crucial to 
equitable distribution of services and resources.   
According to  AFT's Farms Under Threat  report non -White  farming population are increasing  
throughout the region . New England ’s Black farming population has more than tripled since 2007 
and has grown five times since 2002. Supporting access to land and resources for successful farming 
is key to ensuring farm viability  for these producers and will sustain this growth. While only 30% of 
new and beginning farmers (defined as those who have farmed for 10 years or less)  identify as 
White , 79% of Black farmers in New England have been farming for ten years or less6. In June 
2021, Maine passed LD 870 to study the  impact of p olicies on BIPOC farmers in the state. The 
report, “Land Access for Indigenous and African American Farmers in Maine”, included 
recommendations  for the state to consider  making  sure that those interested in farming ha ve the 
resources , support, and means to reach their goals . This growing group of farmers represents an 
opportunity to slowly repair injustices in our nation's past and is why Maine must look at passing 
forward think ing legislation like LD 1274 that will establish programs like the Black Farmer 
Restoration Program  and Farm Conservation Corps  as part of Maine's robust efforts to build a 
resilient and equitable food system for all.  
To conclude, this legislation is critical to examine how the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry can increase the number of Black producers who apply for opportunities 
through the agency and configure new ways to promote equity in the state's agricultural sector. AFT 
recognizes that similar legi slation was introduced in Illinois, North Carolina, South Carolina and 
Georgia, as such, we are confident that the legislature will work with stakeholders to make the 
proposed programs work for Maine's historically marginalized  population. On behalf of Ame rican 
Farmland Trust, I strongly urge you to p ass LD 1274 because  this legislation will enable DACF to 
build better relationships with Black farmers, Indigenous farmers, and Other Farmers of Colo r in 
Maine .   
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on this vital legislation. Please feel free to 
contact me at rkerber@farmland.org  or my colleagues at American Farmland Trust if you have any 
questions about this testimony on LD 1274.   
 
Sincerely,  
Robin Kerber  
New England Policy Associate  
American Farmland Trust  
 
6 U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultur al Statistics Service (NASS), “2017 Census of Agriculture,” last updated April 2019, accessed August 
2022, https://www.nass.usda.gov/ Publications/Highlights/2019/2017Census_Farm_Producers.pdf  
