MAI NE FARM LAND T RU ST 
Testimony of Shelley Megquier, Policy & Research Director, Maine Farmland Trust, to the 
131“ Legislature's Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
April 3, 2023 
Good morning Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. My name is Shelley Megquier and l am 
testifying today on behalf of Maine Farmland Trust (MFT) in support of the Amendment to LD 
1274 —An Act to increase Land Access for Historically Disadvantaged Populations. 
MFT is a member-powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support 
farmers, and advance the future of farming. Since our founding in 1999, MFT has helped to 
permanently protect more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. 
In 2022 alone, MFT supported 48 farm businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and 
grants — delivering over 680 hours of technical assistance and $309,000 in business and seed 
grants to help businesses grow their profitability. Our main program areas are Farmland 
Protection, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm Business Planning, PFAS Support, Climate 
Resilience, and Policy and Research. 
Land access is one of the most critical components of agricultural production. A farmer's » 
success is often dependent upon their ability to find available land that is affordable and 
appropriate for farming. Centuries of structural and institutional racism have blocked Black 
farmers from equal access to land in a myriad of ways. It is important to recognize that land 
ownership in America, including in Maine, is inherently connected to a history of genocide and 
dispossession of Native peoples and forced labor from Black, indigenous, and other people of 
color. Some of the dynamics of structural and institutional racism that contribute to unequal 
land access for people of color such as discriminatory policies, unequal access to capital, and 
exclusion from information and services continue on to this day. While some components of 
structural racism, such as enslavement and widespread violence against Black people that 
drove them off their land, are largely things of the past, the painful legacy of past violence and 
denials continue to shape present-day experiences and opportunities for Black people across 
the country, including Maine's Black farmers. 
A survey conducted by the National Young Farmers Coalition found that, among 4,344 young 
farmers surveyed in 2022, finding affordable land to buy is the top challenge for young farmers. 
Purchasing land is even more challenging for Black young farmers, with 66% of Black 
respondents ranking finding affordable land as "very or extremely cha|lenging" and 75% of 
Black farmers surveyed sharing that they currently need more access to land, whether to buy or 
lease.1 Black farmers also disproportionately face obstacles in accessing credit. 59% of Black 
respondents to the National Young Farmer Survey said that finding access to capital was "very 
1 
National Young Farmels Coalition (2022), National Young Fanner Survey. Accessed 3/25/23 at lltjiis;/Ly ﬂygptizgg ﬁtrngggggggiggsygyggi 
97 Main Street, Belfast, ME 04915 ' 207.338.6575 0 mainefarmlandtrust.org
or extremely challenging" , as compared to 37% of White respondents. Student loan debt 
exacerbates this challenge with young Black farmers being nearly twice as likely than their 
White counterparts to be burdened by student loan debt? These survey results clearly point to 
the need for targeted policy solutions that improve access to land for Black farmers, which is 
what LD 1274 seeks to do. 
Maine—specific survey data also demonstrates a strong need for policy solutions such as LD 
1274. According to the Permanent Commission on Racial, indigenous, & Tribal Populations ’ 
February 2022 report to this committee, Maine is plagued by racial disparity in economic 
security with over 53% of Black children in Maine living in poverty. Black Mainers are more 
likely to be food insecure and less likely to own their homes? The 2017 Census of Agriculture 
revealed that only 11% of Black farmers in Maine own the land that they cultivate. ‘ Lease 
agreements are often less reliable for farmers and can limit the long-term investments that 
farmers are able to make. In Maine, Black or African American farmers operate on leased land 
at much higher rates than other farmers. According to the 2017 Census of Agriculture, about 
6% of all Maine producers farm only on leased land, while 85% of the 146 Black or African 
American farmers in Maine operate only on leased land.5 
MFT supports LD 1274 which proposes two distinct but mutually reinforcing approaches to 
encourage the growth of Black farmers in the field of agriculture: a land grants program and an 
apprenticeship program. LD 1274 establishes the Black Farmer Restoration Program within the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to support Black farmers accessing land 
and having increased opportunity to contribute to our food system. The Department would 
purchase agricultural land from willing sellers, protect the land through an agricultural 
easement, and then grant the land to an eligible farmer. Notably, the creation of Black or 
African American- and Wabanaki-specific grants and funding opportunities to aid in the 
purchasing of land was one of the recommendations of the February 2022 report, Land Access 
for Indigenous & African American Farmers in Maine. LD 1274 also establishes the Farm 
Conservation Corps to provide young people from socially disadvantaged groups with an entry 
into farming and agriculture through an apprenticeship program. The Farm Conservation Corps 
allows young people of color to gain practice experience and knowledge that will support them 
to pursue productive careers in agriculture. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today to support LD 1274. I'm happy to answer any 
questions you have. 
2 
National Young Farmers Coalition, Building a Future with Farmers 2022: Results and Recommendations from the 
National Young Farmers Survey, (2022), available at: wwwvoungfarmersorg/22surve\¢ 
3 
Permanent Commission on Racial, Indigenous, & Tribal Populations (2022), Land Accessforlndigenous & African 
American Farmers in Maine: Report to the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, 
available at: htips://www.pcritpme/resources. 
4 United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), Census of 
Agriculture for 2017, Maine, "Selected Farm Characteristics by Race of Principal Producers: 2017." 
https://www.nass.usda.g0v/Pubilcatiorls/Agtensus,1 ’2O17fFuii Reportfvolume 1, Chapter 1 State Levei/Maine,- ’ 
5 
USDA, NASS, Census 0fAgriculture for 2017, Maine, "Summary by Tenure of Farm Operation, 2017."
2
