UV» ZY$?’;§;§2;‘¥;; 
The Maine Caaiition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Dnmestic; Vieiemze 2o7_43O_8334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
In SUPPORT of LD 580: “An Act to Improve Family Court Procedure ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Wednesday, March 15, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, l am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)‘ in support of LD 580, “An Act to improve Family Court Procedure. ” 
What should families do when they have concerns that the other parent poses 
imminent safety risks to their child? The protection from abuse statute narrows eligibility to 
those cases where abuse or other specified conduct has already occurred; Maine’s law 
enforcement agencies are similarly limited in their ability to respond to risk as opposed to 
conduct already committed; and the Office of Child and Family Services prioritizes those 
cases where there isn't a parent able to protect the child. These should not be the only 
options available to respond to families in crisis. A functional, timely family court response is 
essential. However, Maine’s family courts are currently not able to provide a timely response 
to many families in crisis. We urge you, as policymakers and appropriators, to deeply 
consider how that impacts vulnerable families and child wellbeing across Maine every day, 
to move forward with reasonable process modifications that have been embraced by many 
other states, and to provide any funding necessary for effective implementation. 
Maine’s Commission on Domestic and Sexual Abuse reported to the Maine 
Legislature back in 2010 that consideration should be given to creating an ex parte 
petitioning process in Maine’s family courts. The Abuse Commission has come back to you 
again with data to demonstrate the continued need for a different approach to responding 
to families in crisis. The Abuse Commission provided a lengthy report outlining its recent 
study and findings. Hundreds of professionals and parents with experience of the family 
court system were surveyed. Only 20% of respondents indicated any level of agreement 
(somewhat agree, agree, or strongly agree) with the assertion that Maine’s family courts are 
able to provide a sufficiently timely response to parents who have concerns about the 
imminent safety risks to their children. Those expressing some level of disagreement 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year, including court advocacy services in the civil and criminal courts. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mceclv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of3 
included more than half of the members of the Maine bar who responded as well as more 
than half of the responding judicial officers. MCEDV would like to additionally underscore 
two narrative comments noted in the report from child welfare case workers. One 
caseworker noted: ”l tell [parents] that they can be found to be in contempt ofcourt for 
violatingtheir [family] court order but that it is also their duty to keep their child safe (and this 
feeis so unhelpful!)/ ’ Another caseworker reflected: “The non-offending parent is asked to 
agree to and follow a safety plan when they have no authority to enforce it.” 
Though this issue is certainly not limited to those parents who have experienced or 
are experiencing domestic violence, domestic violence resource centers work with survivors 
across the state every day who are caught in this incredibly hard to navigate place. They 
believe the other parent poses an imminent risk to the safety of their child and don’t know 
what to do next. The current system and structure sets them up to fail. Without the 
availability ofa timely family court response, parents with concerns the other parents is an 
imminent safety risk alternatively: 
0 Fail to meet the statutory or evidentiary standards to have a protection from 
abuse order issue (again, a PFA is the only ex parte order currently available to 
unrepresented litigants); 
0 Fail to follow the family court's prior order or withhold their child from the other 
parent without court authority, which risks being penalized for it later in a family 
court proceeding; and/or 
o Fail to follow the child welfare system's expectation that they adequately protect 
their children from known or foreseeable harm, which risks state intervention 
through that process. 
More than 30 other states and the District of Columbia have a process in place for 
families to seek an ex parte emergency parental rights order from the family court. What is 
before you for consideration is not a radical proposal. lt is, in fact, a process that 13 states 
have determined is inherently within the purview of their judiciary to construct even absent 
explicit statutory authority. We understand Maine's judiciary sees the need for statutory 
authority for such a process. We urge you to give them that authority, together with 
sufficient fiscal resources to implement it. 
The Abuse Commission ’s report further recommends continued multi-disciplinary 
review and feedback regarding whether implementation of any new process is meeting the 
articulated need and accomplishing the intended goals. Creating explicit opportunities and 
expectations for policymakers to review implementation of new policies and processes 
fosters transparency and leads to more productive public policy development. We hope you 
will also support the continued review and report back that is proposed in Sections 2 and3 
of the amendment to LD 580. 
As always, thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective. MCEDV and our 
member programs look forward to continuing to engage with legislators, representatives 
from the judiciary and other interested parties on these important issues.
