DISABILITY ‘ 
RIGHTS 
MAINE D1 Mai“ 
March 29, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
Cross Ofﬁce Building, Room 209 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Re: L.D. 435, Resolve, to Ensure the Provision of Medically Necessary Behavioral 
Health Care Services for Children in Their Homes and 
Communities 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services: 
My name is Atlee Reilly and I serve as the Legal Director of Disability Rights Maine, 
Maine’s Protection and Advocacy agency for people with disabilities. Thank you for the 
opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 435. We are joined by the following 
organizations: American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, GLBTQ Legal Advocates & 
Defenders, and the Center for Public Representation. 
Children with behavioral health needs are entitled to receive medically necessary 
behavioral health services. ‘ And to prevent unnecessary institutionalization, these 
1 
As a State participating in the Medicaid program, Maine must comply with the EPSDT 
provisions of the Medicaid Act for all Medicaid-eligible children and youth under the age of 21. 
The Medicaid Act requires the State to arrange or provide periodic screening to Medicaid- 
eligible children and youth, in order to identify any behavioral health or other condition early and 
before those conditions become serious or debilitating. Whenever a screening identiﬁesa 
healthcare need, it must be followed by a comprehensive assessment or needed diagnostic 
service, to determine whether and what treatment services are medically necessary. Finally,
Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 29, 2023 
Page2 
services must be offered in their homes and communities? But the State of Maine has, for 
years, failed to arrange for or provide these services. 
As a result, many of these children ’s symptoms have escalated, leading to hospital 
emergency room visits, institutional care, and juvenile justice involvement, which, in 
turn, has resulted in serious, often lifelong consequences. Many of the people Maine has 
failed are no longer children. And the children this Committee may hear about today, 
and those the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee has been hearing about this 
session, have likely been denied access to medically necessary and legally required 
community based behavioral health services for much, if not all, of their lives. 
To provide some context, We offer the following timeline: 
December 15, 2018 - It has been over four years since the release of the Children ’s 
Behavioral Health Services Assessment, which documented signiﬁcant and longstanding 
deﬁciencies within the behavioral health system for children in Maine, and concluded: 
“Children ’s behavioral health services are not available immediately (or at all).”3 
Maine must timely arrange or provide for the treatment and other services necessary to “correct 
or ameliorate defects and physical and mental illnesses and conditions discovered by the 
screening services. ” 42 U.S.C. § l396d(r)(5). The scope of the EPSDT obligation is extremely 
broad, with the State required to provide all Medicaid reimbursable diagnostic and treatment 
services to eligible children when those services are medically necessary —an obligation not 
limited to those services that are offered in the State Plan. Crucially, the Medicaid Act and its 
implementing regulations require that each service covered by Medicaid must be provided 
reasonably promptly, and “must be sufﬁcient in amount, duration and scope to reasonably 
achieve its purpose. ” 42 C.F.R. § 440.230(b). (emphasis added). 
2 
The United States Supreme Court has held that Title II of the ADA prohibits the unjustified 
segregation of people with disabilities. The Court explained: “First, institutional placement of 
persons who can handle and benefit from community settings perpetuates unwarranted 
assumptions that persons so isolated are incapable or unworthy of participating in community 
life. . .Second, conﬁnement in an institution severely diminishes the everyday life activities of 
individuals, including family relations, social contacts, work options, economic independence, 
educational advancement, and cultural enrichment. ” Olmstead v. L. C., 527 U.S. 581 (1999). 
3 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Child and Family Services, 
“Children ’s Behavioral Health Services Assessment Final Report” , Public Consulting Group, 
(December l5, 2018). Available at." 
littps://www.maine.govidhhsisites/maine.gov.dlilisfiiles/doeumentsfocfsiclvhs/documeiitszivlli- 
OCFS-CBl~lS —Assessment-F inal-Reported?
Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 29, 2023 
Page3 
March 29, 2019 - Exactly four years ago, this Committee held a public hearing on LD 
984 - Resolve, To Develop Plans to Return to the State Children Housed in 
Residential Treatment Systems outside of the State, which required DPH{S to “coordinate 
with families of children who are receiving residential treatment services for behavioral 
health issues out of state to develop plans to bring the children back to the State.” This 
Committee heard testimony from parents, providers, advocates, and others about the 
impacts of the failure to provide access to behavioral health services, resulting in the 
institutionalization of Maine children in facilities hundreds or even thousands of miles 
from their families and communities. 4 LD 984 was passed and enacted.5 
February 25, 2020 — More than three years ago, the Maine Juvenile Justice System 
Assessment found that many “youth are in detention due to a lack of community-based 
alternatives [and] wait lists for existing programs, ” and that in the majority of cases “the 
reason for detention was to ‘provide care’ for youth.” The System Assessment found that 
“years of under-investment in behavioral health and other services has left the state 
without adequate programs and services to meet the needs of young people. The system 
still doesn’t work well for many youth and their families, particularly youth with serious 
behavioral health problems, immigrant youth, African American youth, LGBTQ+ youth, 
tribal youth, and youth with disabilities. ”6 
4 Testimony from the public hearing on LD 984 during the 129th Legislature is available here: 
http1/iwww.mainelegislaturc.org/legis/bills/disp_lay»ps.asp ‘?ld=984&PlD:1456&snum=l29&sec 
fl. The ACLU of Maine stated: “Maine’s children deserve to live at home and receive services in 
their communities, and we urge this committee to ensure that they can.” DRM’s testimony 
included the following: “The cycle is clear and devastating. Currently, when a young person with 
mental health issues and/or developmental disabilities qualities for home and community-based 
treatment, they spend months, even years, on a waiting list in order to receive the necessary 
services - or only receive a partial amount of the hours needed. Without appropriate treatment, 
their behaviors escalate and they are pushed into an unnecessarily high level of care (residential, 
hospital, emergency room, crisis unit, incarceration). ” And the Maine Association of Criminal 
Defense Lawyers wrote: “A continuum of care and community-based services is what our 
children need, not more institutions or prisons. Let’s fund the programming that helps, not 
harms, our children. Time is of the essence. Our children are depending on us to do better by 
them.” 
5 
129th Legislature, Resolve 219, Chapter 54 (June 6, 2019), available at: 
https:f!legislatui'e.1naine.gov/legis/bills/getPDF.asp ‘?paper=l-lP0739&item=3&snum=l29 
6 Center for Children ’s Law and Policy (“CCLP”), Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment 
Final Report (Feb. 25, 2020), available at
Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 29, 2023 
Page4 
April 7, 2021 — Approximately two years ago, this Committee heard testimony on L.D. 
l 173 - Resolve, T 0 Develop a Plan to Treat in Maine Those Children with Behavioral 
Health Needs Currently Treated Outside the State. LD 1173 simply would have required 
DHHS to complete the task it was presented with in 2019: to develop plans to bring 
children who are receiving residential services outside of the state back home to Maine to 
receive appropriate services and supports. Again, parents, advocates and providers alike 
raised the alarm about the failures in the behavioral health system for children and called 
for action.7 DHHS testified in opposition to the bill, writing: “Our opposition to this bill 
is quite simple. (CBHS) division is already hard at work implementing a comprehensive 
plan to improve behavioral and mental health services available to all Maine children... 
The development and writing of the plan envisioned by LD 1173 would take time away 
from the system improvement efforts already underway. ”8 As a result, LD 1173 did not 
pass,9 even though the number of youth in out of state residential settings had increased 
since LD 984 was enacted. ” 
l1_t_tps:f/ irpcdnmulti screensite.con1fde726780f tilesfuploadedt ‘l\/laine%20.luvenile%2{).lustice%2,0S 
ystcm%2()Assessment%2OFINA L%2ORE?.PORT%202.~25~20.pdi ‘ 
7 Testimony from the public hearing on LD 1173 during the 130*‘ Legislature is available here: 
http://wwwmainelegislatureorgf legisf bills£‘display_ps.asp?Pl D: l 456&snum=l 30&pape1*==:&pap 
erld=l&ld=l l73?§ Testimony from Kerri Bickford on behalf of Pathways concluded: 
“We must act immediately in the interests of the children and families of Maine. They are 
counting on you. The ﬁnancial costs of delaying are already piling up. The human costs will 
be even higher.” DRM’s testimony concluded: “So, yes, Maine should bring its children home. 
But in planning to do so, Maine should focus on developing and resourcing appropriate 
community based and non-institutional services and supports. ” 
8 
Testimony of Todd A. Landry, Ed.D., Director, Office of Child and Family Services, available 
at: http://’www.mainelegislature.orgflegis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp ‘?id=1 50526 
9 Ought Not to Pass Pursuant To Joint Rule 310, May l9, 2021 
iittp:/!www.zm1inelegislatureorgflegis/billsfdispla}/_ps.asp ‘?PlD=l456&snum=l30&paper=&pa;g 
et“ld.==i&ld=l l73# 
1° In March 2019, when this Committee held a hearing on LD 984, there were 73 youth in out of 
state residential settings. In June 2019, when LD 984 was enacted, there were 75 children in out 
of state residential settings. And by April 2021, when this Committee held a hearing on LD 
1 173, that number had increased to 80, (although this was a signiﬁcant jump from the 68 youth 
in out of state residential settings in March 2021). Data available at: 
littpsz./fwww.maine.govfdhhsfocfs/data~reports-initiativesfehildtens-l"»ehzwiorai-health
Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 29, 2023 
Page5_ 
June 22, 2022 — Last summer, the United States Department of Justice (DOJ) issueda 
letter of ﬁndings outlining its determination that Maine unnecessarily segregates children 
with mental health and/or developmental disabilities in psychiatric hospitals, residential 
treatment facilities, and at Long Creek Youth Development Center, in violation of the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).“ The DOJ found that Maine children are 
subjected to unnecessary institutionalization when they are “unable to access behavioral 
health services in their homes and communities —services that are part of an existing 
array of programs that the State advertises to families through its Medicaid program 
(MaineCare), but does not make available in a meaningful or timely manner.” And the 
DOJ found that “Children who are already separated from their families in hospitals and 
residential treatment facilities struggle to transition back to the community because of the 
State’s waitlists for community-based services. ” 
Given this timeline. it is shocking that LD 435 is necessary. 
LD 435 would require DHHS to “develop a plan to ensure that medically necessary home 
based and community-based behavioral health care services for children are available in 
the scope, intensity and duration necessary to meet the needs of children and their 
families in each county and region in the State.” This simply requires DHHS to do what 
the law requires, what various experts have been calling for as outlined above; and what 
it told this Committee it was already doing almost two years ago. 
The plan required by LD 435 “must include an assessment of and plan for the needs of 
children currently in institutional settings within the State and outside the State.” One 
would assume that DHHS has already done this, because how can Maine develop a plan 
to deliver legally required services and avoid unnecessary institutionalization to meet 
needs that it has yet to identify? But that appears to be what Maine is trying to do. 
And the plan required by LD 435 “must identify clear steps and timelines for 
implementation and it must identify any additional resources needed to implement the 
plan.” Again, given that DHHS represented to this Committee almost two years ago that 
it was already “hard at work implementing ” such a plan, one would think the detailed 
plan could simply be presented today. We don’t anticipate that will happen.” 
U The July 2022 Letter of Findings is available here: https1.//www.justicegov/opa/pr[iustice- 
department- ﬁnds-maine-violation~ada-over-institutionalization —children-disabilities 
12 
We understand that DHHS will submit testimony in opposition to this bill today because, in its 
view, “this work is already happening ” . And We understand that DHHS will encourage this 
Committee to focus on implementation. We agree that the successful implementation of a plan
Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 29, 2023 
Page6 
We are hopeful that Maine and the DO] will work quickly toward a resolution that will 
ﬁnally put Maine on the path to meeting the needs of youth with behavioral health needs 
in their homes and communities. And we are hopeful that this Committee will do 
whatever is necessary to encourage DHHS to do just that, while standing ready to provide 
the resources necessary for the effective implementation of any agreement. If that 
happens, LD 435 will be, as it should be, unnecessary. 
But until that happens, LD 435 remains necessary. “ We support LD 435. 
to ensure, as LD 435 requires, that “medically necessary home based and community-based 
behavioral health care services for children are available in the scope, intensity and duration 
necessary to meet the needs of children and their families in each county and region in the State”, 
must be the goal. But we disagree that such a plan exists. If it did, DHHS would be able to 
answer foundational questions such as the following: 
1) Approximately how many children need [insert service here, i. e. Hi-Fidelity 
Wraparound/Intensive Care Coordination, Home and Community Based Treatment, 
Rehabilitative and Community Support Services/In Home Behavior Therapy, etc.] in 
[insert DHHS service region or county here]? 
2) What is the current capacity for providing [insert service here] in [insert region or 
county here], accounting for the anticipated intensity and duration of the service 
needed? 
3) What is the plan to close the gap between [answer to question 1] and [answer to 
question 2] and what resources are needed to do so? 
13 
Waitlists are an imperfect measure of need for various reasons, including the fact that many 
families are waiting for case management and may have a hard time getting on the waitlist, and 
other families may be inappropriately removed from Waitlists. And waitlist numbers do not 
account for the many youth who may be receiving some service (such as “clinician only” HCT) 
but are not receiving services in the intensity that they need. But imperfect as it is, the most 
recent publicly available waitlist data illustrates the signiﬁcant problems with timely access to all 
of the services for which publicly available data is available. For example, as of December 
2022, there were 679 youth waiting for Section 65 HCT services. In Aroostook County, 40 
youth were waiting an average of 169 days. In Franklin County, 16 youth were waiting an 
average of 388 days. In Washington County, ll youth were waiting an average of 435 days. 
And there were 300 children waiting for specialized Section 28 services across the state, with 98 
youth waiting an average of 330 days in Cumberland County, 29 youth waiting an average of 
296 days in Penobscot County, 1 I youth waiting an average of 618 days in Hancock County, and 
8 youth waiting an average of 362 days in Franklin County. For access to the data, see: 
https://www.maine.gov/dhhsiocfs/data-reports-initiatives/childrenwbehavioral-heaith
Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 29, 2023 
Page7 
Sincerely, 
Atlee Reilly Carol Garvan 
Legal Director Legal Director 
Disability Rights Maine American Civil Liberties Union of Maine 
Mary Bonauto Kathryn Rucker 
Civil Rights Project Director Senior Attorney 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders Center for Public Representation 
C: Victoria Thomas, Esq., United States Department of Justice
