 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community 
Programs 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT  
LD 435 , Resolve, to Ensure the Provision of Medically Necessary Behavioral Health Care Services for 
Children in Their Homes and Communities 
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of Resolve, to Ensure the Provisions of Medically Necessary Behavioral Health Care Services for Children 
in their Homes and Communities. Over the last two weeks, NAMI Maine and other mental health 
advocates have attended hearings and work sessions before this committees esteemed colleagues 
sitting on the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee regarding very similar issues and concerns. 
We strongly support this resolve, as it shifts the ownership and support for the young people of our 
state back in the correct system.  
Research indicates that as many as 70% of justice involved youth have a diagnosable mental health 
condition. Limited access to evidence-based treatments often results in many of these young people 
receiving minimal, if any treatment, until they interface with the criminal justice system. As this 
committee examines the importance of this bill in ensuring that the children of our state receive mental 
health services in their homes and communities, please keep in mind that when evidence-based 
treatments are not delivered in timely and appropriate settings, many of these youth will find 
themselves receiving services in far more costly or restrictive settings. In the worst of scenarios, suicide 
has become the second leading cause of death for 10-24 year olds.  
According the CDC, only 20% of children who require behavioral health care services receive them in 
their home and community, with children in rural communities having lower rates. Prior to the 
pandemic, Maine has the highest rate of children diagnosed with anxiety and third highest rate of 
children diagnosed with depression, along with being identified with a critical shortage of providers. As 
the pandemic continued, the mental health system continued to experience a depletion of services, 
providers, and treatment options for children. In the spring on 2022, the State of Maine was cited by the 
Department of Justice due to the lack of available community resources and services for the young 
people of the state.  
NAMI Maine supports the work and initiatives of this committee in ensuring that the future of our state 
are receiving the care and treatment that we would ensure for any other illness that they may have. The 
investments of this committee will provide critical resources and allow for the best possible outcomes 
for our children. Although it may be an additional cost for the state initially, this would save the state 
future spending in higher and more expensive care in the future.  
 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) is the state’s largest grassroots 
mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone 
impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental 
health system through collaboration and education.   
