Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
y Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 435 - 
" 
Resolve, to Ensure the Provision of Medically Necessary ’ 
Behavioral Health Care Services for Children in Their Homes and "' 
Oﬁicers ~"' i
_ 
Dave McCIuskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1“ Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"“ Vice- 
President 
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Aroostook Mental Health Center 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"' 
Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, lnc. 
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Sewing Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health ‘& Counseling 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
TriCounty Mental Health Sen/ices 
4 Wellspring, inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Sen/ices -' 
- ~ 
Communities" 
Sponsored by Representative Lori Gramlich ‘ C 
March 29, 2023 . 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the 
Health and Human Services Committees. My name is Malory Shaughnessy and i am the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance 
is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine's community based 
mentai health and substance use treatment providers, providing services to over 80,000 
Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of 
sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.‘ 
On behalf of the Alliance, l am here today to speak in support of LD 435, Resolve, to 
Ensure the Provision of Medically Necessary Behavioral Health Care Services for Children 
in Their Homes and Communities. ” This resolve directs the Department of Health and 
Human Services to develop a plan to ensure that medically necessary home-based and 
community-based behavioral health care sen/ices are available in the scope, intensity and 
duration necessary to meet the needs of children and their families in the State. it 
directs the department to submit the plan to the loint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services no later than October 1, 2023. 
A year ago, l stood before this committee and reminded you that in the 129th legislature, 
LD 984 was brought forward by Representative Gramlich and was voted out of this 
committee with a unanimous ”0ught to Pass as Amended." The amendment was very 
simple: 
"Resolved: That the Department of Health and Human Services through 
its case managers shall coordinate with families of children who are 
receiving residential treatment services for behavioral health issues out 
of state to develop plans to bring the children back to the State to receive 
the required services."V 
The House and Senate read and approved the bill on May 29th, and the Governor signed 
it on June 6th of 2019. That was 1,391 days ago. Maine chiidren in need, and their 
families, are still waiting. That is why Representative Gramlich has come forward again 
with the proposal in front of you today. 
Every day that a child does not get the support and the senrices they need makes their 
long-term prognosis worse. Every day that a child cannot see their parents or connect 
with their family makes that child a little bit more detached. 
It has been almost 1400 days since you passed a resolution that instructed the 
department to ”negotiate reimbursement rates as necessary to find providers" to return 
children to the State and their families." 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.521.8118 " Fax 207.621.8362 '" 
theAllianceMaine.org
Please tell the department that within 30 days after this legislation takes effect, you want to see a plan for implementing the Resolve signed by the Governor. The Department needs to clearly lay out what it would take to expand home and community treatment to end the waitlists, what it would take to provide funding to providers and their staff to be able to open up some of the closed beds, what it would take to retrofit a few residential homes to the more secure environment that some of these youth need to be safe from harming themselves or others. You would only be asking for a plan to do this work. 1 
l urge committee members to vote ought to pass on this proposal. I would be happy to answer any questions you have for me and to bring any other information you need for the work session on this bill. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 “' 
Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theA||ianceMaine.org
