526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207 -480-1478      833-713-2618     www.maineddc.org  
 
 
  
 
March 29, 2023  
 
Testimony Neither For Nor Agai nst of LD 435, Resolve, to Ensure the Provision of Medically 
Necessary Behavioral Health Care Services for Children in Their Homes and Communities  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Se rvices:  
 
My name is Nancy Cronin , and I am the Executive Director  of the Maine Developmental 
Disabilities (DD) Council.1  Medicaid requires  all eligible children receive “Early and Periodi c 
Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment,” or EPSDT as it became known.  These requirements, put 
in law in 1967, expand ed Medicaid’s role beyond treatment of illness to include promoting 
childhood growth and development.  Screening and diagnosis services are i ntended to identify 
physical and mental conditions, and treatment services are to be provided to “correct or 
ameliorate defects and chronic conditions.”2   
 
This bill appears to create a resolve to require medically necessary behavioral health services in 
Maine .  That requirement already exists  through the EPSDT law.   Now, I am not saying at all 
that Maine is in compliance  of that law  as I am not sure that  we are.  EPSDT  is not widely known 
and for those who do know about it, it remains extremely unclear HOW to access treatment  
services  under optional EPSDT .  Further, I don ’t believe that having children waiting for services 
or unable to access the neces sary services complies with  EPSDT.   Give n the light shed on our 
 
1 Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill 
of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970.  Maine’s DD Council has been advocating with and for individuals with 
developmental disabilities for over 50 year s.  The DD Council is a federally funded, independent organization with 
members from across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and representatives of public 
and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for service s for individuals with developmental 
disabilities.  As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, capacity building and systemic change 
activities, with the goal that individuals with developmental and other disabilities of all ages are fully in cluded, 
integrated, and involved in their communities and the decisions impacting their lives.   
2 https://mchb.hrsa.gov/programs -impact/early -periodic -screening -diagnosis -
treatment#:~:text=Mental%20Health%20and%20EPSDT&text=EPSDT%20also%20finances%20diagnostic%20and
,are%20covered%20for%20adult%20services.  
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council  
526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207 -480-1478      833-713-2618     www.maineddc.org  
 
 
 States waitlists by the DOJ report  and how that connects to O lmstead3, it would be un surprising 
to me if the State  was also sued and challenged that we are not in compliance  with  Medicaid ’s 
EPSDT requirement .   
 
Over the past two decades there hav e been numerous lawsuits and court decisions reaffirming 
states’ responsibilities to provide the full range of screening, diagnostic and treatment services 
and assure access to care at a level that meets each child’s needs.  For example , a lawsuit  in 
Maine resulted in a settlement agreement in October, 2008, addressing timely delivery of early 
intervention services to children ages 0 -5 and setting out a series of required actions to be 
undertaken by DHHS to assure that children and their families know about their rights and have 
access to needed services.   That settlement named KS vs Harv ey is still legally binding  although I 
am unsure if the settlement is remember ed or being fulfilled .  (I have a copy of this settlement 
and would be more than happy to email it to an yone who might find it helpful. ) 
 
We recommen d amending this bills langua ge to direct  the Department of Health & Human  
Services to form a work group to evaluate the current system of providing early periodic 
screening, diagnosis and treatment services , with especi al cons ideration to the T, treatment, 
portion of EPSDT  in the State and to report to the work group’s findings by January 15, 20 24, to 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Hum an Services.  Further include within the resolve 
that the Joint Standing Committee would be authorized to submit legislation to the Second 
Regular Session of the 131rst Legislature related to the report in order to facilitate the 
implementation of the workg roup's recommendations.  
 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide input  and I am available fo r any questions.
 
 
 
3 https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice -department -finds -maine -violation -ada-over-institutionalization -children -
disabilities  

