 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office 
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333- 0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 29, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333-0100  
 
Re:  LD 435  – Resolve, to Ensure the Provision of Medically Necessary Behavioral Health Care 
Services for Children in Their Homes and Communities  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary:  
 This letter is to provide information regarding LD 435 , Resolve, to Ensure the Provision of Medically 
Necessary Behavioral Health Care Services for Children in Their Homes and Communities . This 
resolve directs the Department to develop a plan to ensure community -based behavioral health 
services are available to meet the needs of children and families.   The Department firmly believes this work is already happening, and therefore opposes this proposal . 
The Department has also developed a set of strategic priorities to guide the work of the Department on children’s behavioral health services through 2026. I’ve attached a copy of this document to this 
letter for reference.  
 
The Department, in its Children ’s Behavioral Health Services Annual Report, published January 11, 
2023, has outlined several  initiatives in the Governor’s proposed budget that are designed to continue 
the Department’s efforts to rebuild the children’s behavioral health system and addres s concerns and 
recommendations raised by stakeholders, including providers, advocates, the Department of Justice, families, and youth with lived experience. These initiatives build upon rate increases implemented 
through MaineCare’s rate reform efforts .  
 
Additionally, the Department recently published the  Comprehensive Behavioral Health Plan for 
Maine (PDF)  pursuant to Rslv 21, Ch. 80, which includes further planning for children’s behavioral 
health services. Planning has been robust, and we appreciate the Committee’s commitment to focusing on implementation.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consid er this bill going forward. If you 
have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
       
      Dr. Todd A. Landry, Director  
      Office of Child and Family Servic es
 

 
Maine's Children's Behavioral Health Services 
Strategic Priorities 2023 -2026
Improve the Accessibility for 
Children's Behavioral Health 
Services
•Implement evidence -based screening 
tools and person-centered planning
•Implement improvements in the 
Behavioral Health Home and Targeted 
Case Management services to provide 
wrap around services and continuity 
of care
•Develop and implement a statewide, 
publicly available, behavioral health service locator tool
•Design and implement mobile crisis 
services
•Establish a statewide public education 
campaign regarding mental health and available care and resources
Improve Availability of Children's 
Behavioral Health Services
•Develop and deploy recruitment 
campaigns for behavioral health 
professionals and reduce barriers to 
training
•Update the system for Therapeutic Foster 
Care, including the service model and 
funding
•Review and revise reimbursement 
methodology for children's behavioral 
health services
•Expand the variety of services available to ensure the appropriate services are 
available to meet the needs of children and families
•Implement High Fidelity Wrap Around Services (HFW) to address the needs of 
children involved in multiple systems
•Continue to pursue establishment of a Psychiatric Residential Treatment Facility 
(PRTF)as part of a full continuum of care
Improve the Quality and 
Consistency of Children's 
Behavioral Health Services
•Establish a permanent system to 
provide oversight and quality assurance feedback to providers
•Implement and enforce licensing 
requirements for all providers  
•Continue to furnish provider trainings 
in evidence -based treatment modalities
•Implement provider accountability measures to ensure consistent and safe 
treatment
•Ensure a comprehensive community -
based approach for children with 
intellectual disability or autism 
spectrum disorder
