LD 1135 
An Act to Safeguard Gender-af ﬁrming Health Care 
Presented by Representative Osher 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Abigail Beal of Cherryﬁeld, Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. 
I stand before you today in firm opposition to LD 1735. 
The truth is that this bill is not about health care, child safety, or caring solutions to gender 
dysphoria. Rather, this bill is entirely about the mutilating, kidnapping, and destroying of 
children, both Maine citizens and those who are brought here to receive such treatment. 
This bill seeks to completely violate and remove the rights of parents to protect, care for, give guidance 
to, or even maintain custody of their child While another adult takes and aids the child in the 
facilitating and receiving of permanent, life-altering surgeries and treatments. And not only 
would parents in the home state of a child lose jurisdiction, neither police in Maine nor police 
in the originating state of the child and family would have any process to get that child back. 
This is kidnapping, and it is insanity. 
Children aren't allowed to be given aspirin in school without permission, go to a tanning 
salon, or buy cough syrup over the counter as a minor. So What are We thinking?! How can we 
permit them to make their own decisions regarding irreversible, life-altering hormones and 
surgeries? 
The American College of Pediatricians published a paper on their website in 2018 that states 
the following: “Neuroscience clearly documents that the adolescent brain IS cognitively 
immature and lacks the adult capacity needed for risk assessment prior to the early to mid- 
twenties There is a serious ethical problem with allowing irreversible, life-changing 
procedures to be performed on minors who are too young to give valid consent themselves 
This ethical requirement of informed consent lS fundamental to the practice of medicine, as 
emphasized by the U S. Department of Health & Human Services website ‘The voluntary 
consent of the human subject is absolutely essential ’ 
Moreover, when an individual IS 
sterilized, even as a secondaiy outcome of therapy, lacking full, free, and informed consent, it 
is a violation of international law” 
They go on to say that, “A review of the current , literature suggests that this protocol [of 
pubertal suppression of minors] is founded upon an unscientific gender ideology, lacks an 
evidence base, and violates the long-standing ethical principle of ‘First do no harm‘" 
According to the College, “ There is not a single large, randomized, controlled study that 
documents the alleged benefits and potential harms to gender-dysphoric children from 
pubertal suppression and decades of cross-sex hormone use Nor is there a single long-term, 
large, randomized, controlled study that compares the outcomes of various psychotherapeutic 
inten/entions for childhood GD with those of pubertal suppression followed by decades of 
toxic synthetic steroids ln today’s age of “evidence-based medicine, ” this should give 
everyone pause”
The undeniable truth is that there are two sexes - male and female. That's it. Even the shape of the 
pelvis is different between a girl and a boy Sex is undemable and unalterable, God created it that Way. 
and We can't change it. 
This is a great and evil experiment. I will call it What it is. This is not "gender-affirming health 
care." This is child mutilation, double mastectomies, and castration. 
This is about making Maine a “sanctuary state” for children seeking gender transition services 
Without parental permission This is a Satanic attempt to destroy the future and families of our state and 
our country, and we must not stand for it. I repeat — we must not stand for it’ 
For if We do, our children will be delivered agamst our will to be used, abused, mutilated, destroyed, 
and discarded. And our fathers and mothers will be left helpless to become as 'Rachel weeping for her 
children and could not be comforted for, because they are not' 
Will you allow yourselves to thus become as Pharaohs and as Herods unto us, taking our children and 
delivering them up unto the destruction of their lives and their souls?‘ God, have mercy! 
For it is in the name of Jesus Christ, the Supreme Author of Order and the Creator of Life, that I urge 
you to vote “Ought not to pass” on LD 1735. Thank you for your time 
For full article and documentation, please visit https //acpeds Ol'l;_T[p0SIHO[1-SlI&I8[t ‘1El1llS/g €l1d€1'-(l§§ph01'la-111-Children 
“Currently there is a vigorous, albeit suppressed, debate among physicians, therapists, and academics 
regarding what is fast becoming the new treatment standard for GD in children This new paradigm IS rooted in 
the assumption that GD lS innate, and involves pubertal suppression with gonadotropin releasing hormone 
(GnRH) agonists followed by the use of cross-sex hormones —a combination that results in the sterility of 
minors A review of the current literature suggests that this protocol is founded upon an unscientific gender 
ideology, lacks an evidence base, and violates the long-standing ethical pnnciple of ‘First do no harm’" 
“There is not a single large, randomized, controlled study that documents the alleged benefits and potential 
harms to gender-dysphoric children from pubertal suppression and decades of cross-sex hormone use Nor is 
there a single long-term, large, randomized, controlled study that compares the outcomes of various 
psychotherapeutic interventions for childhood GD with those of pubertal suppression followed by decades of 
toxic synthetic steroids In today’s age of “evidence-based medicine, ” this should give everyone pause Of 
greater concern is that pubertal suppression at Tanner Stage 2 (usually 11 years of age) followed by the use of 
cross-sex hormones will leave these children sterile and without gonadal tissue or gametes available for cryo- 
preservation” 
“G10 clinicians, who saw clients between ages 3 and 18, had a much more cautious stance on social 
transitioning for their younger clients — they believed that in many cases, it was preferable to ﬁrst “help 
children feel comfortatie in their own bodies," as they often put it, since in the GlC’s view gender is quite 
malleable at a young age and gender dysphoria will likely resolve itself with time” 
https /lvvww thecut com/2016/02/fight-over-trans-kids-got-a-researcher-fired html 
From the The American College of Pediatricians 
“Dr Kenneth Zucker, long acknowledged as a foremost authority on gender identity issues in children, has also 
been a lifelong advocate for gay and transgender rights However, much to the consternation of aduit 
transgender activists, Zucker believes that gender-dysphoric pre-pubertal children are best served by helping 
them align their gender identity with their anatomic sex"
