Alvin Lui
Noblesville
LD 1735
When my daughter was 4 she thought she was a pirate, so we had her healthy left eye 
removed and right leg amputated…at the knee. The school counselor told us we had 
to “believe our child when her tells us who she is” and if we didn’t affirm her identity 
as a pirate and remove her eye and amputate her leg, then she would kill herself. What
were we supposed to do?
Under LD 1735, "but not limited to.." shows up 4 times when it comes to Transgender
procedures.  In the scenario above, if my daughter were to cross over to Maine, you 
would keep her from us because we would be deemed "unsafe and abusive" for 
refusing to give her "lifesaving healthcare".
The entire Transgender Cult is a destructive social contagion, equally as ridiculous as 
my agreeing to remove my daughter's eye and leg because she tells me she is a pirate. 
Now you have proposed a bill that is state sanctioned trafficking.  This is quite 
literally a Transgender Trafficking bill.  It is utter insane.
Every supporter of LD 1735 will tell you just two things: (1) Parents are unsafe and 
abusive. (2) Kids will kill themselves. That’s it. That’s all you’re going to hear. Their 
entire disgusting Transgender agenda is built on emotional blackmail of parents.  
So let me present some actual facts:
The treatment protocol of puberty blockers followed by cross-sex hormones among 
adolescents, what is known today as the “affirmation model”, did not exist in the 
United States prior to 2007. No treatments, no wall-to-wall celebration like we see in 
schools today. So where were the massive amounts of suicides among minors? Why 
wasn’t anyone screaming from the roof tops that kids were killing themselves because
no one believed they were the opposite sex? 
Before this social contagion started around 2016, just 0.003 percentage of girls had 
true gender dysphoria. Zero Zero Point Three. That’s 1 in 30,000. And even then, the 
majority of that tiny percentage desisted once they hit puberty.
 
By 2022, 1 in 167 girls identified as Transgender. 
Transgender drugs can cause a 6x increase in the most serious types of heart attacks, a
7x increase in stroke, and a 5x increase in artery blockage of the lungs. If a child is 
put on puberty blockers before they hit Tanner Stage 2 puberty, they will be not able 
to achieve orgasm for the remainder of their lives. There is nothing "safe and loving" 
about any Transgender treatments. 
The great majority of parents love their children. They sacrifice for their children. 
They loving give their children their name. Then these insufferable, arrogant, 
self-important school counselors and social workers come along and tells 
impressionable children it’s ok to change their names, that their parents are abusive, 
and they know better than the parents who gave them life. This is one of the most vile 
and disgusting things we have ever seen. They are not the “safe” ones. They’re Child 
Mutilation Advocates. Now you want to further that lie by turning Maine into state 
that supports Transgender Trafficking.
Reject LD 1375. Reject this Transgender Trafficking bill

