 
 
May 1 , 2023  
 
Testimony re: LD 1735 : “An Act to Safeguard Gender -affirming Health Care ” – OUGHT TO PASS   
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide  these comment s in strong support of  LD 1735 . My name is Chris McLaughlin, 
and I am a licensed clinical social worker with over 2 2 years of experience providing behavioral health services to children 
and families across a variety of treatment settings  here in Maine . For all of those years, I have worked directly in some 
capacity with transgender and gender diverse youth and their par ents and families. For 2 decades, I have provided training 
to schools, community organizations, and healthcare facilities around the unique needs of trans - and gender diverse clients.  
I am also humbed to be  the Executive Director of the Maine Chapter of th e National Association of Social Workers 
(NASW -ME). A large part of my job at NASW -ME is to represent the interests of Maine’s social workers as they endeavor 
to meet the behavioral health needs of Maine people across all settings and ages from Fort Kent t o York and all places in 
between . On behalf of our over 1000 members here in Maine, I’m honored to share thoughts on this important proposed 
legislation.   
 
We are firmly in support of LD 1735  and would like to offer our sincere gratitude to Representative Osher for her tireless 
work on this important issue . As you might know, g ender affirming care encompasses a range of medical treatments and 
procedures that enable individuals to align their physical appearance with their gender identity. Thi s can include hormone 
therapy, gender confirmation surgeries, and other forms of medical and psychological care. For many transgender 
individuals, gender affirming care is essential to their mental and physical well-being  and denying them access to these 
treatments can have devastating consequences. Early intervention is crucial for mental and physical well -being, helping to 
reduce mental health disparities and improve overall quality of life. Limi ting access to gender -affirming care is dangerous. 
Research h as consistently shown that gender -affirming care significantly reduces rates of depression, anxiety, and suicidal 
ideation among transgender youth. Leading medical organizations, such as the American Medical Association , American 
Psychological Association,  the National Association of Social Workers,  and the World Professional Association for 
Transgender Health, endorse gender -affirming care as appropriate and necessary treatment for these young individuals.  
 
Unfortunately, there are still many barriers to accessing gender affirming care, including discrimination from healthcare 
providers, limited insurance coverage, and legislative efforts to restrict access to these treatments. We have seen these 
legislative restrictions emerge across  the country. In fact, at the time I am writing this testimony today, the  ACLU has 
identified 469 anti -LGBTQ+ bills that have been introduced across the country. Many of these bills are efforts to restrict 
gender -affirming care to  some of the most vulnerable individuals in our country today: transgender youth. At the time of 
this writing, 12 states have enacted laws restricting or banning access to gender -affirming care for minors. Simply put, 
Maine is better than this. Representat ive Osher’s bill before you today ensures that the  entire  country also knows that 
Maine IS better than this.   
 
To ensure equal access to treatment for all transgender youth, we must eliminate  those  barriers to gender -affirming care, 
such as financial burde ns, insurance coverage, and geographical limitations. These barriers not only harm individuals 
seeking care, but also perpetuate harmful stereotypes and discrimination against the transgender community as a whole. 
Gender -affirming care is not a one -size-fits-all approach; it is  implemented through  a tailored treatment plan crafted 
between healthcare experts and their patients and guardians that takes into account each individual's unique needs, goals, 
and circumstances. NASW ME believes that i t is essential  whenever possible  to involve parents and guardians in the 
decision -making process, ensuring they are educated and informed about their child's gender -affirming care. When 
clinically appropriate, i mplementing an informed consent model allows for a thorough  understanding of the potential 
benefits, risks, and alternatives associated with gender -affirming treatments  and strengthens th e emotional support system 
that many transgender youth need to live their best lives possible . Furthermore , increased education and training for 
healthcare providers, educators, and legislators are necessary to better understand and support  the unique needs of 
transgender and gender -nonconforming youth. Addressing the harmful impact of discrimination and stigma on transgender 
youth is vital, and gender -affirming care plays a critical role in mitigating these effects.  It is imperative that we  work to 
remove these barriers and ensure that all individuals have access to the gender affirming care they need. This includes 
passing legislation that protects transgender individuals , especially youth,  from discrimination in healthcare settings and 
ensuring that insurance coverage for gender affirming care is comprehensive and affordable.  
 
Protecting gender affirming care is not only a matter of individual health and well -being, but also a matter of human rights 
and equality.  It’s also a matter of digni ty, respect, and safety.  New data from The Trevor Project (2023) from a study of 
more than 28,000 LGBTQ young people (aged 13 -24) across the United States  found that nearly 2 in 3 LGBTQ young 
people said that hearing about potential state or local laws banning people from discussing LGBTQ people at school made 
their mental health a lot worse.  By supporting gender -affirming care for youth, we are not only promoting their mental and 
physical well -being, but also fostering a more inclusive and compassionate  society for all  who live, work, and play in our 
great State . By passing LD 1735, we are sending a very strong message to our state’s transgender and gender -diverse youth 
that they DO belong here in Maine.  I urge this committee to take action to protect th e rights of transgender youth  and 
ensure that they have access to the care they need to live full and healthy lives. I want to  thank you all for your work on 
this issue . Please do not hesitate to reach out to NASW ME for any support we can offer , including  any social work  
representation and participation in any future work sessions for LD 1735 . 
 
Thank you again,  
 
 
Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW  
Executive Director  
Maine Chapter – NASW  

