LD 1735 "An Act to Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care" 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Committee of 
Judiciary. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony in OPPOSITION 
of LD 1735 “An Act to Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care.” 
As a father, husband, proud American, and a Veteran with over two decades of service, I am 
horrified and disgusted to see a bill that would turn Maine into a sanctuary state for human traffickers, 
child traffickers and sex traffickers be brought forward, let alone considered. 
When have we as a country decided it’s okay to manipulate, exploit, mutilate, and sterilize children?  
When have we as a country decided parents or guardians no longer have any say or right to their 
children’s upbringing, education, and general welfare? 
When have we as a country decided it’s okay to take a child who still believes in Santa Claus, Easter 
Bunny, Tooth fairy, and other childhood imaginations, and corrupt them into thinking they are the 
wrong sex or body? 
When have we as a country decided to tell kids puberty is horrifying and you need to take blockers 
to prevent it? Puberty is a natural “transition” into adulthood that shouldn’t be shamed or vilified. You 
cannot reverse time and start over. These blockers have lasting harmful effects. 
Furthermore, this is not an attack or bashing of the Gay community because they are the first ones 
to get manipulated, exploited, and mutilated by those supporting this bill. 
Furthermore, there is no such thing as “gender affirming care.” It is gender mutilation that has 
irreversible physical, mental, and spiritual harm to a child. The fact is, kids who receive these barbaric 
surgeries are nothing more than “cash cows” of one million to 1.3 million profits to big pharma, the 
mutilation clinics, and social workers.  
Furthermore, this bill violates the following statutes, but no limited to: 
Maine Title 5: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND SERVICES, Part 12: HUMAN RIGHTS, Chapter 337-
C: CIVIL REMEDIES FOR HUMAN TRAFFICKING 
https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/5/title5sec4701.html  
Maine Title 17-A: MAINE CRIMINAL CODE, Part 2: SUBSTANTIVE OFFENSES, Chapter 35: SEX 
TRAFFICKING, PROSTITUTION AND PUBLIC INDECENCY https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/17-
A/title17-Asec852.html  
Federal Law 22 USC § 7102; 8 CFR § 214.11(a): Sex trafficking is the recruitment, harboring, 
transportation, provision, or obtaining of a person for the purposes of a commercial sex act, in which the 
commercial sex act is induced by force, fraud, or coercion, or in which the person induced to perform 
such an act has not attained 18 years of age. 
Furthermore, the sponsor, co-sponsors and supporters of this bill should be charged for conspiracy 
to commit human, child and sex trafficking, conspiracy to commit child mutilation, conspiracy to commit 
child abuse in accordance with the mentioned statutes, but not limited too said statutes.  
I urge this committee to vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD 1735 “An Act to Safeguard Gender-
affirming Health Care.” 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.)  
 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 1735
LD 1735 "An Act to Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care"
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the 
Committee of Judiciary. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am 
submitting my testimony in OPPOSITION of LD 1735 “An Act to Safeguard 
Gender-affirming Health Care.”
As a father, husband, proud American, and a Veteran with over two decades of 
service, I am horrified and disgusted to see a bill that would turn Maine into a 
sanctuary state for human traffickers, child traffickers and sex traffickers be brought 
forward, let alone considered.
When have we as a country decided it’s okay to manipulate, exploit, mutilate, and 
sterilize children? 
When have we as a country decided parents or guardians no longer have any say or 
right to their children’s upbringing, education, and general welfare?
When have we as a country decided it’s okay to take a child who still believes in 
Santa Claus, Easter Bunny, Tooth fairy, and other childhood imaginations, and 
corrupt them into thinking they are the wrong sex or body?
When have we as a country decided to tell kids puberty is horrifying and you need to 
take blockers to prevent it? Puberty is a natural “transition” into adulthood that 
shouldn’t be shamed or vilified. You cannot reverse time and start over. These 
blockers have lasting harmful effects.
Furthermore, this is not an attack or bashing of the Gay community because they are 
the first ones to get manipulated, exploited, and mutilated by those supporting this 
bill.
Furthermore, there is no such thing as “gender affirming care.” It is gender mutilation 
that has irreversible physical, mental, and spiritual harm to a child. The fact is, kids 
who receive these barbaric surgeries are nothing more than “cash cows” of one 
million to 1.3 million profits to big pharma, the mutilation clinics, and social workers.
Furthermore, this bill violates the following statutes, but no limited to:
Maine Title 5: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND SERVICES, Part 12: 
HUMAN RIGHTS, Chapter 337-C: CIVIL REMEDIES FOR HUMAN 
TRAFFICKING https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/5/title5sec4701.html
Maine Title 17-A: MAINE CRIMINAL CODE, Part 2: SUBSTANTIVE OFFENSES,
Chapter 35: SEX TRAFFICKING, PROSTITUTION AND PUBLIC INDECENCY 
https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/17-A/title17-Asec852.html
Federal Law 22 USC § 7102; 8 CFR § 214.11(a): Sex trafficking is the recruitment, 
harboring, transportation, provision, or obtaining of a person for the purposes of a 
commercial sex act, in which the commercial sex act is induced by force, fraud, or 
coercion, or in which the person induced to perform such an act has not attained 18 
years of age.
Furthermore, the sponsor, co-sponsors and supporters of this bill should be charged 
for conspiracy to commit human, child and sex trafficking, conspiracy to commit 
child mutilation, conspiracy to commit child abuse in accordance with the mentioned 
statutes, but not limited too said statutes. 
I urge this committee to vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD 1735 “An Act to 
Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care.”
Thank you for your time,
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.) 
