David Arthur Kendall: Founder of IBA M1n1str1es & Dir of Advocacy for PRM 
WWw.ibelongArnen.com Www.ParentsRightsMaine.org 
MAINE LD1735 Committee: Iudiciary 
I Q a gay man. I ﬂag a transgender woman for over 30 years, until my 
mental disorder was healed. I am a detransitioner. I @ a member of the 
lgbTQia TransQueer Gender Rainbow Cult for over 30 years. I can call it 
a cult, as I am a victim of it, and its agenda to target, manipulate, groom 
and victimize anyone in its path, especially youth! 
I am also a registered sex-offender. I was sex-trafficked & conditioned to 
become an agent of my handlers. I have seen personally how this cult has 
desensitized, conditioned, sexualized & criminalized youth. 
Children are in danger! Children are being targeted! They are being 
preyed on and devoured! DO YOU CARE?!!?!?! ANY OF YOU!!?!? 
Not only would LD1735 open Maine up to child sex-trafficking, this bill 
allows children who have mental illness to be mutilated, sterilized & 
butchered. There are laws against exploiting the mentally disabled. 
DYSphoria, means: DYS — an abnormal condition, phoria — mental 
confusion. I suffered from an abnormal condition of mental confusion, as 
does every single one of these trans-identi ﬁed children that are receiving 
medical affirmation for mental illness. The body isn't the issue, the mind 
IS. 
TransQueer Gender Ideology is a hoax! It is a scam! Big-Pharma funds 
all of their advocacy programs & gender clinics while pedophiles & 
pederast organizations help them create research & statistical data to 
help separate children from their parents & families. 
€1Ti§e§f€’téi3iéx. €1ii!3ieéééliziihs:.héi1¥i§i cf[iiéiéiiétéiiiiiéiié ﬁsﬁééiéaliksiiiéfsiiiiei 
éiﬁré §3fP§§:.Qi1!§'1_3:§.$. e§é§§§rI=!§15§3£§:*§1§§ vi@§é§£iéé,§ €1u¥ili%é 
ii{€ii7ii1f5ii11é%?*i3fi6ft “1Y</éiii$1155/ ‘3?§>¥"i< ‘3£sééhiiiiiéii.§ €<i§iEi§ﬁib%é$é5ii5 €§§
PLEASE Hear Me; 10 years ago I said this cult was going to subject 
children to explicit obscene pornographic materials to desensitize them 
a1 before sexu ' 
izing them while also making the children see their own 
parents as the enemy to further its wicked agenda to push trans-af ﬁrming 
destruction! They've done that. 
I warned th i 
educators & social workers were being groomed into the 
emotionally umprisoning them with depression, confusion etc. Well, 
they've done that too! IF LD1735 PASSES, MAINE WILL BECOME ONE at 
system to take control of these children through mind games and 
OF THE TOP STATES FOR CHILD SEX-TRAFFICKING!
i I am not say ng it MAY happen or that it COULD happen, I am telling 
you, regardless of your thoughts, feelings, beliefs, or politics, if this bill 
passes Maine WILL be ﬂooded with child sex-trafficking, pedophilia and 
the most detestable, criminal, barbaric tax-payer funded scientiﬁc& 
surgical experimentations like we have never seen before! 
ANYONE that remains silent or takes part in passing LD1735 is, without 
a shadow of any doubt, a pedophile or a pedo-apologist! Plain and 
simple, there is no middle ground here! Do NOT Be A Pedophile ora 
Pedo-Apologist for the lgbTQia TransQueer Gender Cu1t’s agenda! 
111 Are there a y questions?
