State of Maine 
Join Committee on the Judiciary 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1735 
Law Professor David S. Cohen 
 
May 12, 2023 
 
Good morning distinguished members of the Committee on the Judiciary. 
 
My name is David S. Cohen, professor of law at Drexel University’s Thomas R. Kline School of 
Law in Philadelphia. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today in support of LD 
1735, An Act to Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care or what one may call the Maine Shield 
Bill.  
 
Along with two other law professors, Rachel Rebouche, the dean at Temple Law, and Greer 
Donley at Pitt Law, I have spent the last year and a half studying the legal issues arising out of 
the Dobbs case, stripping away a long-standing constitutional right to bodily autonomy and 
decision making and suggesting the Court was aiming at others, including the right to marry, the 
right to intimacy, and the right to contraception. Given the long-standing connection between 
reproductive rights and LGBTQ rights in American law, the Dobbs decision in many ways has 
unleashed a rapid wave of bans in states on reproductive health care and transgender health care.  
 
This bill helps Maine in this new reality. Maine cannot change the unfortunate and cruel fact that 
many states have banned transgender heath care that is within the medical community’s standard 
of care. But, what you can do with this bill is protect Maine healthcare providers, people within 
your state who receive care, and those who travel to your state to obtain health care from the 
very real threat that other states pose. 
 
What I am referring to is the threat that government officials and private individuals in other 
states will try to investigate, sue, or prosecute people for providing lawful transgender healthcare 
in Maine to people who may have connections to ban states. 
 
Based on my expertise and my coauthors’, we strongly believe that this risk will intensify in the 
coming years, as states seek to ban standard of care health care not only in their borders but also 
when their residents seek care in other places or travel between states as snowbirds, vacationers, 
or college students. 
 
So far, nine states have enacted laws like the one you are considering today to protect access to 
transgender health care -- Connecticut was the first last May. Just this week Vermont’s governor 
signed that state’s comprehensive shield bill. 
 
The exact provisions in each state’s laws vary, but they all have the same broad goals that your 
bill does or will with amendments -- protecting providers from out of state subpoenas and 
summons, protecting health care information, preventing extradition when it is not required by 
the Constitution, allowing providers to countersue if someone enforces an out of state judgment 
around lawful care in Maine, protecting providers’ home addresses, and protecting providers 
from threats and violence. 
 
Rest assured, these laws pose no constitutional problems. It is completely constitutional for 
Maine to control its own courts and law enforcement departments. The Full Faith and Credit 
Clause of the Constitution requires Maine recognize out of state final judgments, but it does not 
require Maine to cooperate with out of state investigations or ongoing lawsuits. Also, the 
Extradition Clause of the federal Constitution requires Maine to extradite people who are in 
Maine who have physically fled from another state where they are accused of committing a 
crime. There is no obligation for Maine to extradite someone who is accused of committing a 
crime without physically being in the other state. LD 1735 is not at all constitutionally 
problematic. 
 
It is, though, incredibly important. These provisions will help ensure two things: first, they will 
serve a prophylactic purpose of preventing out of state actions against Mainers and second, if 
they do occur, they will help Mainers mitigate their effects. In our current legal environment, this 
bill is essential to prevent other states from interfering with the safe and legal care that Maine 
provides.  
 
Therefore, I urge you to pass this bill and I look forward to assisting the sponsors, stakeholders, 
and this Committee on amendments to ensure it is as comprehensive as possible. Thank you. 
