Deborah Milite
Freeport
LD 1735
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on 
the Judiciary:
I am Deborah Milite of Freeport, Maine, and I strongly oppose LD 1735, An Act to 
Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care.  There are so many reasons why this bill 
should not pass, and in the interests of time I will focus on (1) the child’s particular 
part in this and (2) the parents’ particular rights in this as in the best interest in and 
love for their child.
At age 71 and having been a child, I can attest that children can be gullible, especially
wanting to please those they admire, and inexperienced, prone to follow the latest 
trends among their peers, or in these perilous times, TikTok influencers with their 
CCP backers. They follow the crowd, especially in adolescence and particularly if 
they have anxiety or lack self-assurance.  For many decisions, children just do not 
have the experience and knowledge, AND FOREKNOWLEDGE OF OUTCOME to 
make a decision, particularly one about changing their sex (if that is even possible 
without a brain or chromosomal change) that entails irreparable consequences. If the 
matter were a change in hair color or bedroom decor, such a choice can be changed 
again or restored if found unpleasing or tiresome. One’s original male or female 
sexuality can never be restored to what it was pre chemical or surgical alteration.  
There are many people who have transitioned as children who regret having done so 
and want to but cannot fully detransition.
I ask if you have listened to any of these regretful detransitioners. The proverbial egg 
cannot be unscrambled.  Furthermore, how can anyone, teacher, social worker, doctor,
TikTok Chinese owner Byte Dance, or any other person or organization or business or
industry with a TRANSITORY interest in a child, DARE to take the responsibility 
and bear the consequences of encouraging or acquiescing to that child to make such a 
radical, irreversible change to themselves?  AND, that is where parents come in, who 
know and love their children, and want the best for them, even to withholding from 
their child something the child insists they want that the parent knows is not good or 
appropriate for their child at that time or perhaps at no time.  Why would anyone 
allow the most consequential and irreversible decision a child can make, to its 
sexuality, to be their own inexperienced, uninformed, decision?  Children simply do 
not have the capacity to make such decision before they reach adulthood.  And any 
transitory professional who assists a child or adolescent to make such a radical 
decision is simply negligent at best and criminally liable at worst.  Not to mention, a 
transitioning person becomes dependent on, in effect slave to, medicines or hormones 
or surgery, for the rest of their lives.
Finally, from time immemorial societies have acknowledged and granted parents the 
right and responsibility of making important decisions before the age of majority, just 
as parents are responsible for the financial costs of raising of their children.  This 
must remain the standard because neither the State nor some teacher nor doctor has 
the overall permanent charge and love of the child.  There is a nefarious intent afoot 
in denying parents the authority over the child they love.
Therefore, because of the irreversibility, the permanence of the chemical, hormonal 
and surgical changes made to a child’s body, the child must not be the one making 
such a decision before the age of majority.   It is for these child and parent-related 
reasons, and for so many more reasons, that I urge that this bill LD 1735 OUGHT 
NOT TO PASS.
Thank you.
Deborah Milite
Freeport

