G. Frank & Susan Strickland
Brunswick
LD 1735
Judiciary Committee,
For over two years during the pandemic, we keep hearing the mantra, “Trust the 
science, trust the science”. Now we are expected to believe from “the science” that 
females can become males and males can become females?
This is ludicrous. Anyone who learned basic biology and/or anatomy and physiology 
knows that one’s sex is determined at the time of fertilization. A fertilized egg is 
produced ONLY from female and male gamete cells (ovum and sperm respectively); 
this produces either a male or female at the molecular level. 
An inclination toward transgenderism is not biologically normal; it is completely 
contradictory of “the science", common sense — or even evolution. I, for one, believe
it is an affront to God who made humans in His image, male and female (Gen. 1:27). 
No amount of “gender reassignment surgery” — genital mutilation — will change 
who a person is. In addition, this will result in the 100% sterilization of anyone who 
undergoes these procedures. This is reminiscent of Nazi Germany because this 
information is purposely withheld so that youth are unaware of this permanent 
consequence.
Our governor and the legislature want to function not only as participants in this evil 
practice but facilitators in the destruction of individuals and families by attempting to 
make Maine a “sanctuary state” for anything to do with transgenderism. The child 
abusers - those who mutilate children and/or facilitate such practices - are seeking to 
assign the child abuse label to parents who refuse to allow their children to follow 
though with permanent physical and mental disfigurement via hormones therapy and 
surgery. 
Transgender ideology has grown exponentially, particularly among adolescents. This 
is not an issue of biology but an issue of social contagion ferried mostly via social 
media. At a time when they are going through the angst that comes with puberty and 
adolescence, our youth have fallen prey to ideologues who are attempting to destroy a
generation by psychologically raping them of their very ontology. Adults need to be 
adults and protect these vulnerable youths - even from themselves.
We plead with you to put a halt to any legislation that promotes or pays for this 
destructive ideology. Please stand up for what you know is right and honorable; 
refuse to be party to what is evil.
Romans 13:4 says, "For the one in authority is God’s servant for your good.” Act like 
the servants of God that you are (whether you believe in Him or not) and protect our 
citizens.
Sincerely,
 G. Frank & Susan Strickland
Brunswick, Maine

