Gina LeDuc-Kuntz
Freeport
LD 1735
May 12, 2023
Dear members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is Gina LeDuc-Kuntz and I am a
Freeport resident. I am writing to urge this committee to vote  “ought to not pass” on 
“LD1735, An Act to Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care.”
First off, and I just want to get this out of the way, this judiciary committee has 
become a kangaroo court. It is clear, the democrats on this committee are running 
their own personal radical agendas through this committee DESPITE Maine 
residents’ objections. You, regardless of your own political affiliation, are bound to 
represent the State of Maine, not your own political ideologies.
That being said, LD1735 is disgusting radical child exploitation.
 
This bill cannot pass and if any piece of this bill passes, it can only do so if no part of 
this bill violates the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction & Enforcement Act, the 
Uniform Criminal Extradition Act, the United States Constitution under the 
Extradition Clause of the U.S. Constitution (Article IV Section 2) requiring:
A person charged in any State with Treason, Felony, or other Crime, who shall flee 
from Justice, and be found in another State, shall on Demand of the executive 
Authority of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed to the State 
having Jurisdiction of the Crime
Additionally, this bill cannot violate the US Supreme Court’s decision in Puerto Rico 
v. Branstad, 483 U.S. 219 (1987), where the Court established the power of federal 
courts to enforce both the Extradition Clause and the Extradition Act by writs of 
mandamus.
Furthermore, this bill cannot violate the Maine Constitution or a parent's 
constitutional rights declared in Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702 (1997), that 
the Constitution, and specifically the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment, protects the fundamental right of parents to direct the care, upbringing, 
and education of their children.
On a final note, children who have not reached the age of majority do not hold the 
capacity to consent to the treatments proposed in this bill, therefore, LD1735 needs to 
be amended to provide the means to any child subject to gender affirming treatments 
to seek damages against any and all who participated in subjecting the child to gender 
affirming treatments up until that child has reached the age of majority and the statute 
of limitations has tolled.
Thank You,
Gina LeDuc-Kuntz

