Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary:
I am Hadassah Beal of Cherryfield, Maine, and I am here in strong opposition of LD 1735, An act to 
Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care. 
It is incredibly sad and a disgrace to our State that we are even considering such a abhorrent 
bill. This bill removes the God-given authority of parents over their children and legalizes so many 
evils. God gave children to parents, not to the state, a school teacher, a social worker, or anyone else. A 
minor is not allowed to get a tattoo, go to a tanning salon, or purchase medications, but we are seeking 
to allow these same minors to make a life-changing decision that will affect them forever, and that can 
rarely be reversed, without the permission of their parents? A child is not ready to make such a decision
on their own without parental advice, and no other adult has the right to take this into their hands.
Another huge problem with this bill is the allowance for children to be removed from their 
parent's custody, and making it so Maine courts cannot do anything about it. Again, I repeat, children 
belong to their parents, and the state has no right to meddle in the affairs of parents who are protecting 
their children from a terrible, life-altering surgery. 
Maine does not need to become a “sanctuary state” for those who are seeking these gender-
manipulating services.
God created each one of us to be either male or female, for a specific purpose. To try to change 
one’s gender by using medications and surgeries is immoral, and it is severely misusing the gift of 
medicine and medical knowledge.
I love my country and my state, but I am saddened and greatly disappointed by the path we are 
taking in Maine. We are turning our state into a place that I cannot be proud of. Please, do not continue 
to vote for bills that harm our citizens, disgrace us in the eyes of other states, and most of all, grieve the
Lord. We cannot expect for our state to be blessed  by God if we insist on allowing and doing these 
things that are an abomination to Him. Maine will be judged for our grievous sins.
I urge you to please vote “Ought Not to Pass” on LD 1735. Thank you for your time.
