Isabelle Schmidt
Bowdoin
LD 1735
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary:
My name is Isabelle Schmidt from Bowdoin.  I would like to address LD 1735.
Of utmost concern, this bill’s provisions would deny our nation’s citizens the freedom
of speech and religion enshrined in the 1st Amendment of America’s Constitution. 
The infringement of this country’s parents’ rights in the exercise of freedom of 
religion and speech before their own children couldn’t be more is evident than in LD 
1735. This in itself should stop the bill in its tracks.  
For many reasons, most parents would not agree to raising gender-dysphoric children 
by implementation of the binding of still developing sex-related body parts, the 
ingestion of dangerous and irreversible drugs, breast and genital removal surgery and 
psychological manipulation with indoctrinating ideology. Parental protection of their 
children from such extreme measures does not constitute abuse and would not begin 
to justify our state taking custody of a child in place of a parent. On the contrary, it is 
the supposed protection of the children in ways suggested by this bill which indicates 
abuse, so what parent wouldn’t seek to protect their child from such a state, should 
LD 1735 become law? If passed, this bill would also set a precedent for the 
government to take children away from parents for any reason next deemed suitable 
and convenient in the future. Such a law would not only prove destructive to children 
and families, but to humanity itself. While purporting to protect them, taking 
advantage of people of all ages and roles in their weakest time of life seems to be a 
specialty of this administration.
And yet, this bill also champions criminals. Allowing Maine to become a sanctuary 
state for those who knowingly break the law in their own state, through kidnapping 
and performing gender-transitioning treatments upon children there, clearly annuls 
another state’s right to exercise legal authority over its own residents. This eradicates 
the concept of law and order itself in our country. How does Maine or any state have 
legal jurisdiction over the rest of the Union? Whether Maine would be the first state 
or the fiftieth to implement such a thing, it should be illegal, especially where the true 
safety and well-being of children are concerned. In addition, it is dangerous as a 
precedent when such power may subsequently be used against Maine for any reason 
another state sees fit. As more states of different political leanings adopt this 
sanctuary state tactic in defense of ideology, we can see what national contention it 
would lead to. What about the effect of that consequence upon young people? Think 
long-term. Such harm outweighs the harm of far more reasonable and preferable 
measures taken in response to gender-dysphoric children. Instead, we ought to simply 
convince them with care and love to wait until they are of legal age before 
participating in life-changing alterations to mind and body. This they already have to 
do to legally drink alcohol, get a tattoo, drive, vote, or defend our country, among 
other things.
Speaking of children, within this bill, a child is not even defined by age. Nothing is 
stipulated here in LD 1735 that would bar a 2 year-old from being taken in as a ward 
of the state for the purposes of “gender affirming care.” After all, there are some 
people who think it true that children of such a tender age know themselves to be of a 
different gender than originally defined. To those among us who are so hell-bent on 
ruining the psyches of our young with these indoctrinating, often permanent acts, stop
co-opting words like “care” and “health” into contexts that are actually opposite to 
their intended meaning. The only ones who are fooled are these children this bill 
pretends to serve but actually harms.
The overreach of this bill is absolutely appalling in all its aspects. Such immense 
powers, once established, would then be instrumental in implementing any 
ideological agenda. Maine residents should petition those who could affect an 
investigation into the dealings behind this relentless push to ruin children and families
in particular. This is unspeakable dystopian overreach, and we won’t stand for it! For 
these reasons and others, vote “ought not to pass” LD 1735.
Thank you.
