Jennifer  Dellasega
Seattle, WA
LD 1735
To the Judiciary Committee,
I was introduced to the world of “gender identity” when I found out my daughter was 
being socially transitioned by her elementary school teacher and therapist when she 
was in 5th grade at 10/11 years old. The therapist and teacher were using male 
pronouns and a new made up name. This was something my child was trying on like a
teen would have tried a style like punk or goth in years past. The problem is that it’s 
hard to get out of once they go down this road, for many reasons, not the least of 
which are the adults who are encouraging them.
My daughter’s therapist told me my daughter wanted to be in the boys’ cabin for 5th 
grade overnight camp. It was presented to me as if my daughter requested this but 
later, after she desisted, I asked my daughter where she got the idea from and she said,
“It wasn’t my idea, my teacher asked me if I wanted to be in the boys’ cabin. I wanted
to be with my friends, the girls.” She ended up not going on the overnight trip at all 
because she asked us if she could stay home, but her teacher hadn’t asked her what 
she wanted; he was saying “Isn’t this what you want?” and she felt like she had to 
answer yes. He was leading her. I believe this is happening on many levels throughout
public and private schools and mental and medical health institutions. I think her 
teacher thought he was being helpful, but he was actually causing harm to my child 
and to our family by attempting to do something behind her parents’ backs.
It is exceedingly difficult for a child to reverse course once they have been socially 
transitioned. Social transition is a powerful psychotherapeutic treatment and it 
concretizes an identity for a child even though it may not be a permanent identity if 
the child were left to their own natural exploration. Many of them go on to have 
medical procedures and take drugs to help them appear like a facsimile of the 
opposite sex.
These are all children with some form of vulnerability such as issues due to autism, 
trauma or difficulty being accepted as a gender stereotype non-conforming child. This
ideology is packaged in a way that is enticing to children and presented as an answer 
to all of their problems. It’s a false solution and they feel they have to level up and do 
the next, more extreme step with the promise of a “feeling of euphoria” that is short 
lived or not present at all. Now they have to deal with more medical and mental health
issues created by medical transition on top of their original mental health issues. It’s 
like they are chasing a rainbow for a pot of gold they will never reach.
We removed our daughter’s access to the internet and took her out of public school 
and she is now comfortable knowing she is a girl. If we had not removed our daughter
from all of the influences that were affirming her as a boy at age 10 or 11, she could 
likely have gone down the path of medicalization. I believe school and medical and 
mental health professionals would have encouraged it. I have learned that I cannot 
trust these blindly-affirming professionals with my daughter’s medical and mental 
well-being. 
Children need to be left alone and allowed to experiment with different styles and 
interests without these harmful, irreversible, medical procedures being offered, 
encouraged and advertised to them. I believe we have only just begun to see the tidal 
wave of young detransitioners who were irreversibly harmed. I count our daughter as 
one of the lucky ones, in that we were able to put up guardrails to keep her safe from 
that particular harm even though the professionals were working against us. We must 
put a stop to these harmful procedures for children and you
If this bill had been passed before my daughter desisted she may have been 
encouraged to leave us in order to get to your state and get procedures that are 
harmful and irreversible. We may have never seen her again. She wouldn’t have had 
the benefit of the knowledge of her parents to protect her. Instead she is living happily
as a girl with her loving family. This bill will be very dangerous for children if it is 
passed. Please vote no on LD 1735
Thank you for considering my testimony.
