Jennifer Gingrich
Portland
LD 1735
I know that objecting to this bill is futile: Maine will unfortunately pass it, because 
Democratic legislators foolishly think that this is just an extension of gay rights and 
the progressive thing to do.
For the record, I'm a lifelong Democrat. I know I'm screaming into the void here, but 
this bill is so utterly wrongheaded and dangerous that I have to voice my opinion 
anyway.
Across the United States, the rate of children -especially adolescent girls - who 
identify as transgender has skyrocketed by over 5000%  in a mere decade.
For many years, the medical community has acknowledged the role that social 
contagion plays in dysphoric conditions affecting adolescent girls. It has long been 
accepted that girls who have a peer with an eating disorder are at exponentially 
greater risk of developing an eating disorder themselves. And yet we are not allowed 
to even discuss the possibility that this sudden, massive rise in teen girls thinking 
they're boys could have anything to do with social contagion, because that's 
'transphobic'. No, we must believe that tens of thousands of American girls discovered
overnight that they're really boys and social contagion has nothing to do with it.
Nor can we discuss the fact that medical professionals at gender clinics say up to 40%
of the children who identify as transgender are autistic, although only 2% of children 
have autism. No, we're supposed to believe that's just a big coincidence, too, and has 
nothing to do with autistic children being monotropic and prone to focusing 
obsessively on a single solution to their problems.
Worst of all, we mustn't mention the fact that studies have shown that 80% to 90% of 
children who identify as transgender will desist and re-identify with their birth sex if 
they are not put on puberty blockers and hormones.
We are inundated with false information about children committing suicide if they 
aren't given puberty blockers or surgery, although in fact there has never been a single
documented case of any trans-identifying minor killing themselves because they 
couldn't access such medical procedures. In fact, numerous studies have shown that 
being put on blockers and hormones does NOT improve the mental health of 
trans-identifying children at all, and in many cases, makes it worse.
Do the legislators voting for this even know that puberty blockers are followed by 
hormone replacement therapy (HRT) in 98% of the cases where blockers are 
prescribed, and that the combination of the two means permanent infertility? I 
wouldn't blame them for not knowing it, although it's a medical fact stated by the very
doctors who prescribe them, because the media somehow keeps forgetting to report 
that very important fact when they call puberty blockers 'reversible'. Could  YOU 
have decided at the age of ten  or eleven - when puberty blockers are begun - that you 
would never want children of your own? That's what these kids you are so gallantly 
giving "gender affirming care" must do.
(Oh, the combination also usually leaves the user anorgasmic - permanently unable to 
achieve orgasm. That's another thing these 10 year olds, who have never had an 
orgasm, have to agree they'll be okay with never experiencing. Really. Look it up).
Sweden, Finland and Norway all have socialized medicine. Their doctors and 
pharmaceutical companies don't stand to get extremely wealthy off of putting children
on puberty blockers followed by lifelong hormones and likely extensive surgeries.
It's no coincidence that all three countries have stopped treating children with puberty 
blockers after their scientists and doctors did studies and found there was NO GOOD 
EVIDENCE BASE suggesting that they improve mental health outcomes for children,
and in fact, in many cases make them worse. They also found that puberty blockers, 
which are still listed as 'experimental' in the US, are NOT fully reversible and have 
serious and permanent side effects including early onset osteoporosis, brain swelling, 
lowered IQ and more.
I don't suppose that Maine legislators will listen to the detransitioners, either. These 
are girls like Chloe Cole, Prisha Mosley, and Layla Jane who had their healthy breasts
amputated when they were young teens, only to realize by the time they were 18 that 
they were never trans at all and desperately regret it. Says Jane, who is now suing the 
California surgeons who performed her double mastectomy when she was thirteen: 'I 
don't think I should have been allowed to change my sex before I could legally 
consent to have sex."
Oh, you were told that never happens? A decade ago, there was ONE pediatric gender
clinic in the United States. Today, there are over 300, all eager for the massive money
to be made off of medically transitioning children. Long gone are the days of long 
months or years of therapy; now kids say they are prescribed puberty blockers on 
their first doctors' visits.
Not long ago, pretty much everyone accepted as common sense that toddlers don't 
understand the concept of gender and can't decide they are a different sex than they 
were born, but suddenly we're nodding along while mothers on TV proudly tell us 
how they transitioned their two-year-olds because "he only liked to play with his 
sister's dolls!"
None of this is helping children. It's harming them, cruelly and irreparably. And I 
know that Democratic legislators won't recognize that, but I had to say it anyway 
because I couldn't live with myself if I didn't.

