Jonathan Schmidt
Bowdoin
LD 1735
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary.  My name is Jon Schmidt, I am a resident of 
Bowdoin, and I am submitting this testimony to express my strongest OPPOSITION 
to LD 1735.
This bill is frankly so frightening in its nefarious objectives, perversion of the law, 
and authoritarian overreach, I hardly know where to begin citing its alarming faults.
LD 1735 is clearly intended to establish Maine as a magnet for minors seeking to 
change their natural-born sexual characteristics, even if doing so directly contravenes 
the will of those minors’ parents.  In an attempt to “justify” this policy, the bill inserts 
legal wording which preposterously classifies parental objection to “gender-affirming 
health care” as child abuse. The bill even goes so far as to protect extra-parental 
persons from legal consequences for illicitly aiding and abetting children to “escape” 
from the custody of their own parents and cross into Maine (in an honest world, this 
would be called “trafficking”) for the purpose of what this bill perversely calls 
“gender-affirming health care”.  Finally, it encourages scofflaws from other states to 
migrate to Maine by affording a legal phalanx of protections to those lawbreakers 
from prosecution and extradition for violations committed in their home states. Were 
this bill to pass, each and every state so disrespected would justifiably retaliate 
pointedly and forcefully.
Every one of these proposed measures is disturbing beyond measure and should 
seriously alarm every Mainer who understands the damage they would inflict, and the
dangerous precedents they would set.
Parental involvement in decisions regarding their minor children’s physical and 
mental health is indispensable.  The prospect of this state actually encouraging 
troubled, confused, sometimes mentally disturbed, juveniles to run away from their 
parents, and co-opting those juveniles as wards of the state, for the express purpose of
performing irreversible physiological alterations on them through chemical ingestion 
and anatomical mutilation, is unspeakably horrifying, both in terms of its 
humanitarian impact and its legal implications.
How can such an outrageous nullification of parental rights and responsibilities by the
state even be considered?  In what twisted world should vulnerable minors be not 
only allowed, but encouraged, to make life-altering decisions without parental 
guidance, approval, and support?  How arrogant, devious, and reckless must 
advocates of these measures be that they would purport know to what is “better” for 
children’s well-being than the children’s own parents, and who would wield  the 
power of the state to divide children from their parents for the sake of advancing their 
nightmarish ideological fixation?
Such authoritarian overreach and disregard of human dignity may be standard In 
North Korea, but it has no place in Maine.  Not a Maine I want to live in, at least.
This bill has not a single redeeming feature; it is wrong-headed, dangerous, and 
destructive.
 Please vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS.  Thank you.

