 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 Sewall Street  
Augusta, Maine 04330 -6822 
TTY/Voice: (207) 626 -7058 
www.maineequaljustice.org    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kathy Kilrain del Rio  
Advocacy & Programs Director  
 (207) 626 -7058, ext. 210  
kathy @mejp.org  
 
  
MEJ Testimony in Support of LD 1735 , An Act to Safeguard Gender -affirming Health Care  
 
May 12 , 2023  
 
Good  afternoon , Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the Judiciary 
Committee . My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio , I use she/her pronouns,  and I’m the Advocacy and 
Programs Director for Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider worki ng to increase 
economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. Today we are testifying in 
suppor t of L D 1735.  
 
Ensuring that Maine can be a safe place for transgender youth , their families, and their medical 
providers is a goal we should all be pr oud to support. Further , freedom of travel between the 
states has long been protected in the U.S. Constitution.1 For these reasons , we are glad to b e 
able to supp ort LD 1735. Maine should and must be able to determine what safeguards  should 
be enacted in this state in the face of increasi ng attacks on the safety, health, and existence of 
transgender people  across parts of  our country. We must act to prote ct m edical providers in 
our state who provide legal and necessary care to transg ender youth . And m ost of all we must 
act to protect transgender youth who access gender affirming care – care which is lifesaving 
and necessary to the physical and mental wellbeing of transgender youth.  
 
The American Academy of Pediatrics has made clear the impo rtance of gender affirming care 
for youth:  “Proper gender -affirming care can mitigate a patient’s clinical distress and lead to 
significant improvements in the overall well -being of youth and adolescents who are at risk of 
or have been diagnosed with gender dysphoria … studies show that transgender adults who 
received appropriate treatment during adolescence had a lower incidence of lifetime suicidal 
ideation than those who wanted but could not obtain such treatment.”2  
 
We understand that there will likely be further work done on this legislation to make sure it is 
the best le gislation for Maine . We strongly  support the goals of LD 173 5 and urge you to 
support it.  This legi slation provides an opportunity for Maine to live up to our state motto, 
“Dirigo ”. By supporting LD 1735 , we can ensu re that Maine truly leads when it comes to 
protecti ng the needs of transgender youth. Thank  you.  
 
1 https://texaslawreview.org/tr avel -rights -in-a-culture -war/   
2 https://www.aclu.org/news/lgbtq -rights/five -things -to-know -about -gender -affirming -health -care   
