Katie Wieninger
Cherryfield
LD 1735
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Maine Committee on 
Judiciary, 
My name is Katie Wieninger of Cherryfield, Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to 
testify today. I am writing to urge you to vote against LD  1735, An Act to Safeguard 
Gender-affirming Health Care, on the grounds that it is detrimental to children, 
violates parental rights, and protects kidnappers, predators, and child-traffickers. 
First, it is unethical to allow a child to be surgically mutilated and genetically altered. 
The state recognizes that children are not capable of making permanent life-altering 
decisions in areas such as marriage, getting a tattoo, buying cigarettes, signing a 
contract, etc. Even more relevant, Maine state law sets the Age of Consent at sixteen, 
meaning that anyone under the age of sixteen is legally unable to consent to a sexual 
act. Anybody who engages in a sexual act with a child (with or without their consent) 
is guilty of a crime and can be prosecuted. By the same standards, I would argue that 
anybody who sexually alters a child, with or without their consent, is guilty of a 
crime. They should be prosecuted, not protected by a bill such as LD1735. Adults 
who make the decision to have hormonal therapy and castrations or double 
mastectomies in an attempt to alter their biological sex often regret their decisions and
mourn their loss of fertility. Forcing children to live with the irreversible physical and 
emotional scars and side effects of such mutilation is unethical and abusive. 
Secondly, parents have a God-given right and responsibility to raise and to protect 
their children from those who would harm them. Passing LD 1735 will strip parents, 
both in and out of Maine, of that right and give government an unconstitutional 
amount of power. By wrongfully classifying the refusal of gender-affirming practices 
as mistreatment or abuse, children can be taken or kept out of loving homes simply 
because their parents do not want them to be mutilated, given hormone-altering drugs,
or brainwashed into believing the lie that they are a sex that they are not. 
Thirdly, LD 1735 will offer protection to anybody who claims that they are helping a 
child get gender affirming health care. This would make Maine a safe-haven for every
child predator and trafficker who uses that pass phrase, and the law would have no 
legal grounds to rescue children from those abusers, even if they came from a state 
with laws that prohibited the gender altering procedures of minors.  LD 1735 will 
literally make it possible for anybody to abduct a child, encourage people to confuse 
and mutilate children, and set a precedent for the state to strip parents of custody. 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Maine Committee on 
Judiciary, on behalf of the majority of voters who oppose this bill, I beg you to protect
our kids from becoming lab rats in this Frankenstein-like experiment to alter God’s 
design. Do not pass LD1735. Thank you for your time. 

