Kristen Day
Windham
LD 1735
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the Judiciary 
Committee,
My name is Kristen Day, and I’m mother of three, my youngest a freshman. I was 
born and raised in Maine, and have been a resident of Windham for 20 years. I am 
writing today in opposition of LD1735.
My daughter's close girlfriend at the time came out as trans during covid. He is one of
the lucky ones who was raised to be strong, and is smart enough not to make 
permanent chemical or physical changes while he is still growing. His parents do not 
acknowledge his gender for personal reasons and he understands it is a hard change 
for everyone. They are a loving family with understandable problems, and he is 
thriving. Real life is complicated, and State legislature cannot rightfully presume to 
step in and make life-altering decisions for parents for their children. 
The loose definitions in this bill will lead to the destruction of otherwise healthy 
family units and will enable Maine’s most vulnerable children (no age limit is given) 
to be subjected to irreparable changes, often harmful. This bill is not a reasonable step
to achieving optimal health and mental health care for children with gender dysphoria.
It is a nuclear option that puts parent’s rights and children themselves on the chopping
block right here in Maine – and for children across the nation since Maine would be a 
Sanctuary State. This is not the kind of industry that Maine needs. 
If health care or mental health care is not given to a “child” by their parents, they may
become wards of the state. THIS IS RADICAL. Does mental health care mean a 
parent not acknowledging their new perceived gender? This is a very new 
phenomenon for Mainers to adapt to, and this bill makes it up to the court’s discretion
to how parents respond to their children’s troubles. Most Mainers, myself included, 
would 100% love and support their child, but would want to encourage their child to 
seek healthcare for gender dysphoria and more importantly, underlying contributing 
issues, and do anything possible to delay chemical and physical changes until they are
adults. We cannot govern based on a political wave of social blackmail. 
My whole life I have lived in Maine - that was Vacationland, and “The Way Life 
Should Be.” This bill is one of several that are radical moves that will drastically 
change the fabric of Maine on a dime under the nose of most Mainers. A vote to pass 
this bill is grossly overstepping the trust given to Representatives and Senators to 
govern Maine for what is best for our people. 
Please vote no on LD135. Thank you for your consideration.
