Lauren  Flanagan
Augusta
LD 1735
To whom it may concern, 
I would like to express my SERIOUS concern over the proposed bill to "safeguard 
gender-affirming health care" for children in Maine. This is an incredibly 
irresponsible and dangerous proposal for Maine and for the children of our country. 
With the long-term effects of gender-affirming surgery in children essentially 
unknown at this time, and the obvious speed at which children are going from office 
visit to operating room, we need to take a step back and consider what this means for 
our children. (With an over 4,000% increase in children being referred for gender 
surgery the UK in the last few years, we should be raising our eyebrows!)
There is a dangerous precedent being set in our children's care that is seeing the 
mental health and factors of trauma in their lives be minimized in an effort to fast 
track them to the medical assembly line. We can do better than that. Once they get on,
they'll never get off. We are dooming them to a lifetime of medical intervention. 
I concerns me a great deal that we are putting the decisions about significant 
surgeries, most of which bear serious health risk, into the hands of children who are 
still going through enormous physical and mental shifts and changes. How many of 
you still feel as strongly now about what you did in 6th grade? And yet we are saying 
that at this age, and younger, a child is ready to make a decision that will permanently
damage their body, their organs. We will piece their body apart, bit by bit, through 
surgery with little regard to their long-term mental and physical health, because we 
want to be "relevant" to the changing culture around us. 
We have lost our common sense in this issue. We have lost our heart. It's not even 
remotely logical to section out a child's body for a whim that may be here today and 
gone tomorrow. As adults, most people are capable to making rational well-thought 
out decisions. This is America. People have freedom to do as they please. But 
children are not adults. They may feel very strongly about something that they could 
not possibly understand the nuanced (and inherit) dangers of. 
The list of vocal detransitioners is growing... fast They are being silenced at every 
turn, but I urge you to hear their concern. They have lived it. They have felt what it 
was to feel abandoned by their medical providers, their parents, the justice system. 
Some have been given tools to begin the transitioning process in as little as ONE 
office visit! They have had massive mental and emotional needs swept under the rug 
for a "quick fix" that has left them broken forever. Transitioning does not "solve the 
problem." A Reddit group for destransitioners grew from 3,000 to over 16,000 
members in a matter of a few months! 
This bill is far to radical for Maine. I opposed it with all my being. We have no 
business overriding what other states have voted for. Let their government run their 
government. They actually have states that care about the well-being of the children, 
rather than the politicization of "care" and "well-being." To see how those words have
been twisted and abused is sickening. 
You have a chance to speak up. To say, "Slow down!" To guard the most vulnerable 
among us. Won't you please do the right thing? 

