Liliana Thelander
Bristol
LD 1735
My name is Liliana Thelander, and I am from Bristol. I am a mom that objects to LD 
1735 because that bill does not allow me to protect my child. This bill specifically 
prevents me from receiving health care information about my child. What is the 
reason for that? 
I encourage transparency, like the bills proposed yesterday in the Education 
Committee, LD 1129, HP0714 or LD 1199, HP0759. Let ME decide what is best for 
MY child. Is that unreasonable?
This bill is a disturbing government overreach and abuse of power. It attempts to 
remove parental rights and that is not okay. 
A parent's job is to protect their children from the outside world. This bill seeks to 
strip children from that protection.
This bill would divide families by giving troubled teens an easy out to have the state 
shelter them without parental consent just by uttering a few words.
Under this bill, parents could lose custody of their children immediately without the 
constitutional requirement of due process or legal recourse if a child of any age claims
a trans identity and their parent will not approve of hormones or surgeries for the 
child. There shouldn't be a situation where a parent is not notified about the location 
of their child when there is not record of the parent harming them. A parent should 
never be told that they don't have a right to know where their child is. There is already
a foster care system in place for children who have experienced abuse or neglect, and 
if abuse is occurring, there is an emancipation process in place.
Minors are not mature enough to make decisions about gender-affirming care, 
children's brains are still developing until age 24 or 25.
 
This bill would turn children over to families that would support the 
gender-transitioning treatment industry. If a child believes he is a pirate, we don't cut 
his foot and hand and take his eye out. These treatments create irreversible effects on 
people. It will invite runaway kids to come to Maine where they will be vulnerable to 
trafficking.
European entities have questioned the use of medical interventions to treat gender 
dysphoria and have recommended psycho-social interventions before rushing in to 
allow children medical interventions without parental notification, we should wait for 
the evidence on these interventions.
These treatments are being significantly restricted in countries such as the United 
Kingdom, Finland, Sweden, and Norway, but the American medical associations still 
support these treatments because they are very profitable.
In Maine, children need written consent of a parent or legal guardian to get a tattoo, 
piercing or smoke, but will be able to get all kinds of surgery and everything else. 
This will open up the taxpayers to lawsuits when children change their mind about a 
body-altering surgery such as Gender-affirming care that includes genital mutilation 
and castration. 
The state should not drive a wedge between children and their parents.
This bill ought not to pass.
