Linda McMahon
Harpswell
LD 1735
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Judiciary 
Committee,
My name is Linda McMahon. I am a concerned citizen of the great State of Maine
I am writing in opposition to LD 1735 - An Act to Safeguard Gender-affirming 
Health Care. I am requesting you vote “Ought Not to Pass” for the following reasons.
Maine should not seek to be in the business of becoming a transgender sanctuary for 
out of state children. This proposal breaches parental rights and puts the affected 
children in extreme jeopardy.
Maine cannot even take care of its own wards. Maine ranks #1 in neglect or in the 
sanitized term “child maltreatment.” How can Maine caseworkers be expected to take 
on additional cases when they are already overworked and understaffed? In addition, 
the exhausted caseworkers continue to wait for the Governor to remedy the 
long-standing present chaos. On another note, our legal system is already severely 
bogged down with no resolution in sight.
Maine ranks worst in US for child maltreatment, report says | newscentermaine.com
AUGUSTA, Maine — The Kids Count data book shows there are 4,263 Maine 
children who were abused in 2020. That's up from 3,286 in 2017.
Maine children continue to struggle in pandemic's wake (yahoo.com)
The number of children confirmed to have experienced maltreatment increased 30% 
in Maine between 2017 and 2021, from 3,286 to 4,263. In 2020, Maine's rate of child 
maltreatment was more than double the national average, with 19 per 1,000 children 
experiencing maltreatment compared to 8.4 per 1,000 on the national level.
Science is not on the side of gender-altering surgery for children. Little is known 
about the long-term effects of “puberty-blockers.” It is known these drugs, GnRH 
analogs, which the children will need for the rest of their lives, can cause 
osteoporosis, increase of blood clotting- which can result in heart attacks and strokes, 
infertility, and sterility. These are not insignificant risks.
It is well known that the frontal lobe of children’s brains is not fully developed before
age 18. The frontal lobe is responsible for planning, decision making, and the ability 
to recognize consequences of actions. So how can children be capable of 
understanding the relevance of these decisions? Who will bear the responsibility of 
informed consent necessary for this irreversible surgery? In a recent conversation with
a teenager about school transgender conversations at school, there was shock in 
learning that transgender surgery involved the removal of genitals and/or breasts. 
Apparently, that “detail” was not mentioned. 
Lack of procedure standards is another pitfall. In the 1990s at the hospital where I 
worked bariatric surgery patients had to complete a medical checklist before surgery 
was done. It included a psychological profile to assess the patient’s readiness to 
resulting drastic transformation. 
Let us not confuse the importance of children’s mental and medical health with the 
self-serving activism desires of parents, teachers, counselors, and lawmakers.
Legal aspects-Will the taxpayers of Maine be held liable in the legal wrangling of all 
the disputes from custody cases, court orders, subpoenas and malpractice suits that 
undoubtably result because of this proposal?
As a last note, all the lawmakers who recently proclaimed that the government should 
not be involved in patients’ medical decisions-why would they support this unethical 
proposal?
Please vote “Ought Not to Pass” LD 1735
Respectfully,
Linda McMahon
Harpswell

