Maura Murphy
Lewiston
LD 1735
Vote NO On LD 1735 
Time to Reject the Premise, Time to Expose the Bit
The time has come for those of conscience who have stayed silent thus far for fear of 
being “canceled” to come out of the closet and give the children of Maine – and 
beyond – the protection they urgently need and have an unequivocal legal, moral right
to, but which has been stripped from them by adults peddling rainbows, sparkles and 
blinding fairy dust. Maine transgender-youth industry profiteers, proselytizers and 
politicians want to expand their reach by drawing minors to Maine from other states, 
depriving the children of both the laws that protect them in their home states, as well 
as the 14th Amendment, which protects them as US citizens. LD 1735 lays bare the 
eager collusion of Maine-based “professionals” in education, healthcare, social 
services, nonprofits and politics to prey upon children from across the US as 
commodities to be brokered across state lines, as the momentum of their movement 
grows. 
Make no mistake about it: LD 1735 seeks to legalize the interstate kidnapping and 
human trafficking of children, a horror the very same sponsors of the bill would gasp 
and wring their hands about if such trafficking was in the service of prostitution, 
female genital mutilation, a religious cult, child labor or even an acrimonious custody 
dispute.
Too many otherwise, good, thinking people have had their critical faculties soothed 
out of them by toxic tides of words such as “affirmation”, “inclusivity”, “safety”, 
“care”, “support”, “kindness”, which have been co-opted as disguises and shields 
obscuring the thousands of seemingly innocuous actions that have coalesced to funnel
Maine children – the same children the law deems not old enough to get married, 
drink alcohol, get tattoos and piercings, drive, serve in the military or cast a vote – 
into a massive, multi-billion dollar, youth gender-transition industry and experiment. 
Within the malignant maelstrom of abuse, boundary violations, manipulations, social 
contagion, cult-like group-think, alienation, public/nonprofit “partnerships” that feed 
off and profit from the emotional, psychological, chemical and surgical mutilation of 
children, a fundamental question arises repeatedly: How is it “affirming” in any way 
whatsoever to, say, tell children that they were “born in the wrong body”? That the 
“doctor made a mistake” and “assigned” them the “wrong” gender at birth? That a girl
who is what used to be called a “tomboy” must “really be a boy” and by the way, 
here’s a binder to flatten the breasts that you should hate and not have (and let’s keep 
all of this secret from your parents!)?
How many beautiful, perfect gay and lesbian kids are being snuffed out in the 
madness that ghoulishly uses “LGB” as a sacred shield for “Let’s put you on the 
conveyor belt to T!” Child transgender “affirmation”, for the most part a social 
contagion created by adults who benefit in a wide and stunning variety of ways, is 
another form of “conversion therapy”, is it not? 
If a child expresses genuine gender dysphoria or distress, the child’s parents, as the 
child’s legal and sovereign guardians, have the right to decide with their child what 
the course of action will – or will not – be. Child transgender activists and profiteers 
from the State of Maine have no legal or moral right to effectively kidnap children 
from other states and strip them of their state and federal rights and protections as US 
citizens, as well as attempt to deny parents from other states their 14th Amendment 
rights, all in the service of providing more fresh fodder for a morbid machinery that 
requires a constant supply of fuel that Maine children are not providing enough of.
