Michael Granger
Myself
LD 1735
Back when people were of a higher character than they are now, people would debate 
the merits of "Little White Lies", lies that you tell someone that aren't true, but are 
nice to say. "You look great in that dress" is one of the classic examples. It was a 
common trope in TV and entertainment that a character would tell a lie, and then it 
would necessitate the telling of another lie, and then a third lie to keep it going. 
Eventually, the lies would snowball out of control and they'd have to come clean.
We're beyond the "Snowball" point with the whole trans thing. I understand the desire
to tell someone that they're definitely Lauren and they are super feminine and that 
they look great in that ball gown when they're actually Larry and they have a massive 
Adams apple and definitely look like a clown in the ball gown. I understand the 
temptation to just tell a little lie in order to be nice to someone who is clearly 
delusional. The problem is that eventually you have to come clean, and tell the truth 
even if it hurts. It is cruel to keep the lie going, and the longer you hold your tongue 
and refuse to tell the truth, the more it will hurt when the truth finally comes out.
The truth is that you cannot change your sex, gender is not a spectrum at all, and it is 
not a choice. The truth is that it's very rare for a trans person to "Pass" as the sex they 
are not. Everyone knows. Everyone can tell. The truth is their behavior is very 
obviously different; women pretending to be men are leagues more sensitive than real 
men, and the overwhelming majority of men are still going to treat them like a woman
even if they demand that they are a man. Men pretending to be women look nothing 
like women, act nothing like women, and are usually playing up female stereotypes in
ways that are incredibly obvious. I am guilty of "Playing Along" with trans people, 
and I now have the hindsight to know that it was a mistake.
Even though it seems nicer to play along, the right thing to do is to stick to the truth, 
because if we don't then we end up in a crazy world where young girls are being 
sterilized and confused kids end up being castrated. The earlier we hop off the crazy 
train, the better for everyone.
That doesn't mean you have to be rude about telling the truth. You don't have to go 
out of your way to tell people you don't know that they're deluding themselves, (even 
if they are). You should, however, on principle refuse to encourage delusion. This 
means that you should refuse to use someones "preferred pronouns". You should 
refuse to use their "trans name". You should instead calmly, politely, 
compassionately, but honestly tell them the simple truth: They aren't who they claim 
they are, no amount of social acceptance or surgery or chemical cocktails can change 
the fundamental biological reality of who they are, and encourage them to accept 
themselves for who they are, who they really are, and not adopt fake personas in order
to try and be more comfortable about themselves. 
Please oppose LD1735. Child Castration is wrong. 
