Testimony in Opposition to LD 1735 / Gould / Page 1 of 2
May 7, 2023
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1735
An Act to Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary:
My name is Nathan Gould. I am from Winterport. I am submitting testimony in opposition to 
LD 1735, “An Act to Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care. ”
This is a despicable bill. This further fragments our Union, forces taxpayers to fund radical 
elements of a culture war, and causes irreparable harm to minors. It doesn’t take long, when taking an
honest look at sex-reassignment surgeries, to learn that they cause permanent damage. Muscles and 
tissue are removed and replaced in an unnatural way to create façades of organs that do not function 
properly. This is not empathetic, and this life-altering decision is not something that should be pushed 
on minors.
Sex ultimately cannot be reassigned. Objective truth shows plainly that our sex is determined 
in our DNA, formed by our Creator. Any attempt to circumvent this elementary axiom is a delusion, 
and any attempt to force that delusion on minors is a repugnant abuse and an attack on morality and 
dignity. The post-surgery suffering of those groomed into this lifestyle is attested to by those who 
detransition and tell of how they were used to further the ideological goals of the transgender 
movement with no regard to their own well-being. It is not compassionate to ignore Gender Identity 
Disorder, to play along and damage children physically and mentally. That is cowardice. At worst, it is a
knowing complicity in trafficking and exploitation.
Children are not allowed to vote, they are not allowed drink alcohol, and they are not allowed 
obtain a learner’s permit to drive until they have reached fifteen years of age. Our society clearly 
recognizes that there are decisions children, their brains still developing, are not yet prepared to 
make. Why, then, would we permit them to choose such a life-altering change, especially at that 
volatile period of life that is adolescence? It is the parents’ job to guide and protect their children, 
especially with the rampant social contagion and peer pressure in schools and online manipulation 
that bring about these ideas of changing one’s sex. It is a horrendously vile notion that our State 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1735 / Gould / Page 2 of 2
would circumvent parents’ ability to protect their children from these fringe deviants and 
opportunistic misanthropic sadists under the guise of “safeguarding health care.”
This insidious effort to manipulate children into self-mutilation is as abominable a cult as the 
Skoptsy of the Russian Empire, if not more so. No sane society would permit this flagrant assault on 
the rights of parents, this defiance of the natural order, and this heinous cruelty towards vulnerable 
children. Resist the propaganda and emotional blackmail of this bill’s proponents, recognize the 
fundamental truths of humanity and Natural law that this bill tries to ignore, and soundly reject this 
bill. No civilization can withstand such an intense twisting of truth used to justify the mutilation of 
children if such deceptions are allowed to fester. Safeguard the People of Maine, the vulnerable 
citizens from other states, and the tenuous future of our now fragile Republic, lest our nation join that 
grim register of nations spewed from the land and reduced to dust for rejecting their Creator and 
being given over to vicious depravity.
I strongly and emphatically ask the Committee to vote Ought Not to Pass. Please, do not pass 
LD 1735.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
