LD1735 —]ud1c1ary Committee 
First, let me introduce myself I am Nicky Heart from Parents Rights Maine 
Life is about learning and seeing things from different views with an open mind 
Sometimes it's truly listening rather than speaking and reacting I agree we need to 
learn to set aside our differences, but I also know there 1S great strength and 
accomplishment within those differences. 
I have walked a very hard and challenging path in life which has led me to why I am 
standing here before you all today I come here as a mother, as a lesbian from the 
LGB community, as a 13-year experienced foster parent who provided therapeutic 
care, and as a child survivor of the abuses of trusted safe adults. 
I was that child that is being marginalized today by all this propaganda being 
pushed upon our children 
I suffered from gender dysphoria at the age of 7, and by the age of 10, I became that 
vulnerable child with learning disabilities, a dysfunctional home, and depression 
At the age of 14, I was victimized by a so-called safe adult who was a trusted pillar of 
the community by the schools and by my parents I had to survive that trauma alone 
and scared for the value of a trusted safe adult no longer existed 
Suicidal ideation then led me to the custody of DHS There, you were either one of 
the lucky ones who found a good home amongst strangers or not so lucky and were 
sexually abused, neglected, or trafficked by the strangers you were placed with 
Fortunately, I got lucky and began healing and finding myself. 
Not long after, I started attending BAGLY which is Boston Alliance of Gay and 
Lesbian Youth. It was amazing to be celebrated, cared for, labeled, and proud. The 
words - "We are your family now" were all it took to be blinded by what was yet to 
come. 
There were predators amongst them who targeted and preyed upon those of us who 
came with dysfunctional vulnerable backgrounds. I was easily softened, groomed, 
desensitized, exploited, victimized, and trafficked by this Rainbow cult all in the 
name of equity and inclusion
If it wasn't for‘ a saving grace who rescued me, teaching me self-acceptance and that 
it's ok to be gay, I am positively sure I wouldn't be where I am today. 
What is happening in our schools and communities should be extremely alarming to 
all of us P0l1C|Il9S and bills are being introduced and pushed by those who have lost 
sight of what it truly means to safeguard the most vulnerable and defenseless 
amongst us - and that is our children. 
Scientific data from the CDC showed that Maine is experiencing a severe mental 
health crisis from the impacts of the pandemic which has placed students at greater 
disadvantages of vulnerability and even more so for the students who already had 
faced these challenges 
We did not see our schools prepare for the mental health crisis upon their return back 
but did observe our schools embracing the over-sexualization of our children and 
the gateway drug to what s coming 
We are seeing 
desensitize, s sexually explicit materials being pushed in schools that normalize, 
ten, blur boundaries, and create trauma or trauma triggers for those 
who have been victimized This is abusive and damaging to the health and well- 
being of children 
We are seeing 
that soften and sexually explicit materials being pushed in schools that normalize it, 
desensitize children to it that blur boundaries of what is appropriate 
(between teachers and students and between peers’), and that creates trauma or 
trauma trigge 
We know that 
this overreach for those who have been victimized 
‘providing sexually explicit materials to minors is illegal. We are seeing 
of abuse because of a loophole in Maine state law that allows school 
libraries to contain these materials and provide them to minors It is obvious that this 
exemption isb 
The segregati 
The pressuri eing taken advantage of by our school system 
of our children by their sexuality is starting to create hostile indoctrinating them into a particular Rainbow Trans Cult movement which is just 
l
. 
. . 
of.
I 
. . 
rs 
K8 of children to choose a sexual identity that outs children who dont on 
environments of harassment/sexual harassment (and bullying?) within our schools 
I 
I I I I 
fy want to identi as such is hurting them and their friendships.
