Nicky Heart
Augusta
LD 1735
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the Judiciary 
Committee,
I am Nicky Heart, a lesbian mother, resident of Maine, and Co-Director of Parents 
Rights Maine
I am here in opposition of LD 1735.
Life is about learning and seeing things from different views with an open mind. 
Sometimes it’s truly listening
rather than speaking and reacting. I agree we need to learn to set aside our differences,
but I also know there
is great strength and accomplishment within those differences.
I have walked a very hard and challenging path in life which has led me to why I am 
standing here before you
all today. I come here as a mother, as a lesbian from the LGBTQ community, as a 
13-year experienced foster
parent who provided therapeutic care, and as a child survivor of the abuses of trusted 
safe adults.
I was that child that is being marginalized today by all this propaganda being pushed 
upon our children.
I suffered from gender dysphoria at the age of 7, and by the age of 10, I became that 
vulnerable child with
learning disabilities, a dysfunctional home, and depression.
At the age of 14, I was victimized by a so-called safe adult who was a trusted pillar of
the community by the
schools and by my parents. I had to survive that trauma alone and scared for the value
of a trusted safe adult
no longer existed.
Suicidal ideation then led me to the custody of DHS. There, you were either one of 
the lucky ones who found a
good home amongst strangers or not so lucky and were sexuallyabused, neglected, or 
trafficked by the
strangers you were placed with. Fortunately, I got lucky and began healing and 
finding myself.
Not long after, I started attending BAGLY which is the Boston Alliance of Gay and 
Lesbian Youth. It was
amazing to be celebrated, cared for, labeled, and proud. The words - "We are your 
family now" were all it took
to be blinded by what was yet to come.
There were predators amongst them who targeted and preyed upon those of us who 
came with dysfunctional
vulnerable backgrounds. I was easily softened, groomed, desensitized, exploited, 
victimized, and trafficked by
this Rainbow cult all in the name of equity and inclusion.
If it wasn’t for a saving grace who rescued me, teaching me self-acceptance and that 
it’s ok to be gay, I am
positively sure I wouldn’t be where I am today.
What is happening in our schools and communities should be extremely alarming to 
all of us. Policies and bills
are being introduced and pushed by those who have lost sight of what it truly means 
to safeguard the most
vulnerable and defenseless amongst us - and that is our children.
Scientific data from the CDC showed that we are experiencing a severe mental health 
crisis from the impacts
of the pandemic which has placed students at greater disadvantages of vulnerability 
and even more so for the
students who already had faced these challenges. 
We did not see our schools prepare for the mental health crisis upon their return back 
but did observe our 
schools embracing the over-sexualization of our children and indoctrinating them into
a particular Rainbow 
Trans Cult movement which is just the gateway drug to what's coming. 
We are seeing sexually explicit materials being pushed in schools that normalize it, 
that soften and desensitize
children to it, that blur boundaries of what is appropriate (between teachers and 
students and between peers?),
and that creates trauma or trauma triggers for those who have been victimized.
We know that providing sexually explicit materials to minors is illegal. We are seeing
this overreach of abuse
because of a loophole in Maine state law that allows school libraries to contain these 
materials and provide
them to minors. It is obvious that this exemption is being taken advantage of by our 
school system.
The segregation of our children by their sexuality is starting to create hostile 
environments of
harassment/sexual harassment and bullying within our schools. The pressuring of 
children to choose a sexual
identity that outs children who don’t want to identify as such is hurting them and their
friendships.
The inclusivity and equity policies being implemented are placing one protected class 
over another. This is
excluding protected classes which is a violation of the Maine Human Rights Act by 
which we are all equal
under the law.
Policies are being changed to separate, to keep secrets, and to alienate safeguarding 
parents from their
children. It is proven that parental involvement reduces suicidal ideation, drug use, 
bullying, and dropout rates,
and contributes to higher grades and academic achievements. This is robbing parents 
of their rights to support
and provide safe and adequate care for their children.
None of this is equity or inclusion. This is grooming and teaching children that 
members of the LGBTQ
community are nothing but mere sexual objects and that the extent of their value is 
nothing more than that.
That is not what my community is about. The most nurturing and healthy way to 
support a child that identifies
as LGBTQ is to value them for who they are and let them know it’s ok to be gay.
No child should ever have to be placed in a position where they feel their academic 
future is in jeopardy, nor
should they ever be exploited in any manner by trusted safe adults, whose ethical 
oaths are only to provide for
their core academics. Children deserve to just be kids and the school's focus needs to 
be prioritized on their
core academics- which current tanking state test scores prove.
The LGBTQ community has been infiltrated by this Rainbow Cult using transgender 
identities to push and
normalize pedophilia, MAPS, and trans-Age to gain access to children and are being 
given the protections to
do so. For decades they have been trying to include themselves in the homosexual 
movement which the
LGBTQ communities have been fighting against to purposely exclude.
With all the indoctrinating, grooming, policy changes, and bills being introduced 
without safeguards for
children’s rights in mind. It is clear The Rainbow Cult is using our children and the 
school system as the 
gateway to once again push for their rights and protections to victimize children under
the guise of equity and 
inclusion. This explains why boundaries between adults and children are being 
minimized and the separation 
of children from safeguarding parental protections. 
That is why bills like LD 1735 are extremely dangerous to the health and welfare of 
every child no matter how 
they identify. This bill and many others like them will allow predators to gain 
complete access to traffic, exploit, 
mutilate, and victimize children while tying the hands of safeguarding parents and law
enforcement agencies 
from protecting children from this irreversible destruction. 
Permanently changing a child’s physical appearance is like telling them that there is 
something physically
wrong with them.,Telling children they need a label to be accepted is like telling them
no one will accept them
without one., Focusing on a child’s sexuality is like telling them that sex is love. And 
removing a child’s parents
or guardians is like telling children they were never wanted or loved.
This is why we need to stand together and safeguard our most valuable and vulnerable
defenseless children
and protect parental rights.
That's why I'm here today to ask you to vote NOT to pass LD1735. Thank you
