Prisha Mosley of Michigan ~ Detransitioner 
MAINE LD1735 Committee: Judiciary 
My name is Prisha Mosley. At 15 years old, I was targeted online by 
trans-identifying adults and convinced that I had been born in the wrong 
body. 
At 17, a WPATH certiﬁed therapist wrote me a letter of recommendation 
for hormones after one appointment. I brought this letter to a pediatric 
endocrinologist and began a high dose of testosterone which worsened 
my mental health and took away my physical health. I continue to suffer 
with these effects to this day. One year later, my healthy breasts were 
removed. I currently suffer with phantom breast syndrome every day. 
During my time in the trans community, I was found by a "glitter 
family.” A glitter family is an ideologically aligned group of people who 
convince a child that their natal family does not love them because they 
are not affirming them, but the new family will love and affirm the child. 
This is a tactic used by cults and sex-traffickers. 
Being so mentally ill and suicidal, I was easy to convince that I was 
unloved and that my own family didn't love me or want me. I moved 
away from my parents to a place I had never been to live with peopleI 
had only met online. They called the members of the glitter family “The 
Horde.” 
These people love bombed me, but they also sexually, mentally & 
physically abused me. I had to sleep under a table for years. My 
relationship with them ended when I secretly quit testosterone and hada 
psychotic break due to the effects of quitting cold turkey with no medical 
care. I moved away, to another new state, but this time, by myself. 
Luckily, I am in contact with my parents again. 
I am currently in contact with parents all over the world who are losing 
their children this way.
These chil 
because th 
identity. dre 
eY n are being convinced that their parents do not love them 
don't want them to be mutilated and sterilized for a gender 
Gender affirming care is experimental, harmful medicine with 
irreversible 
If this billp 
hidden fro 
chemically 
Wanting to 
is not abuse. 
and turn them 3 side effects. 
asses, confused children who run away from home will be 
in their parents as wards of the state, and tax payer money will 
n . . . . . 
d then surgically sterilize and mutilate these children. 
save your children from experimental, low-quality medicine 
Don't allow your state to traffic trans-identifying children 
into medical experiments like me.
