Rhiannon Olson
Machias
LD 1735
Madam/Mister Chair & Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee,
My name is Rhiannon Olson and I live in Machias, Maine. I am writing this testimony
in opposition of the LD-1735 bill. What are we allowing to be done to our children? 
What are we doing to our children? Our role in the lives of these precious children is 
to guide them, care for them, and protect them.. Yet this bill goes against every inch 
of that. 
Our children, here specifically, our underage children, are being targeted, 
indoctrinated, put in danger, experimented on, sexualized, desensitized, groomed, and
exploited. They are being mislead, confused, and used even in the school systems by 
the prompting of sexual identity, prompting of using different pronouns and names, 
exposure to sexual material including masturbation, encouragement to explore sexual 
curiosities and confusion with radical measures that begin with chest binders, penis 
tucking, hormone replacements, that lead to and promote more extreme, permanent, 
and sadistic measures that include separation from parents, mutilation, double 
mastectomies, chemical castration, physical castration, child and trans kidnapping, 
sex trafficking, and even suicide. 
We need to wake up and see the evil being done in this world and to our children! 
Children who have an imagination, who go through seasons of confusion, or may 
have an actual mental disorder called gender dysphoria and are being neglected 
proper attention. Children who  under 18 years old need parental presence and 
permission to get tattoos or piercings, children that are not old enough to buy 
alcoholic beverages or nicotine, children that cannot enlist in the service without 
being 18 OR having parental consent, children whose brains are not fully 
developed..who really just need safety, truth, love, guidance, and protection, yet 
instead this bill is what is  being considered. 
Please I urge you to speak up and protect our children by voting no on bill LD-1735.
