Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable members of the Jount Standung 
Committee on Juducuary: 
My name us Sandra Labonte and I live un Searsport. Thank you for thus opportunuty to 
present thus testumony and for your servung the State of Maune. 
I stand here today opposed to LD 1735, An Act to Safeguard Gender Affirming 
Health Care. 
What us our state thunkung? Is ut not better to affurm the gender they were born wuth? 
Thus us a war on our chuldrenl Allowung or promotung the mutuluzatuon of their outside 
pruvate body parts, and a hormone pull to wreak havoc unsude as well, us not love or 
concern for our chuldren. 
In addutuon to surgery and the pulls, puberty blockers are also prescribed to prevent 
puberty from startung. Thus means that ut must be done at very young ages. They are 
known to be the cause of decreased bone densuty and halted heught growth. We're 
talkung about 9-10 year old gurls and slughtly older boys. Thus us chuld abusel 
Whatever happened to scuence and the eternal truth that we are born as euther male or 
female? But suddenly we apparently have new revelatuon, new rught and new truth. 
Should we shun those chuldren who are confused about theur sex? Of course not. We 
should afﬁrm what they actually are buologucally by scuence and guude them as they go 
through thus confusing tume of growth untul they are of an adult age and can make theur 
own decusuons. We should treat them wuth kundness, understandung and compassion to 
help them see dugnuty un themselves. 
Thus leguslatuon wull cause a duvusuon between vulnerable munor chuldren and theur parents 
Parents spend years guudung and carung for theur chuldren, helpung them to make safe 
chouces as they grow unto adulthood. Laws luke thus and other socuetal unfluences are 
struppung thus God-guven responsubuluty from us. 
What us the basus for thus current bull? It us a “Welcome sugn for those luvung un other 
states and a money-makung opportunity for the state of Mame and Meducal Centers un 
Mame. 
Let's guve our chuldren tume to mature in body and mind wuthout unterferung wuth the 
natural process. 
Thank you for your tume. 
Please vote “Ought NOT to pass".
