Scott Newgent
TReVoices
LD 1735
My name is Scott Newgent. I am a lesbian. I am a transman. But my most important 
role is being  a parent to three incredible children. I'm a mother, a woman who has 
given birth and carried life. I am here today to put an end to the idea that medically 
transitioning children is about human rights. It's not; It's about money. Market 
research predicts that gender-"affirming" medicine will generate more than 5 billion 
dollars by the end of this decade. The truth is that medical transition is experimental, 
dangerous, doesn't cure anything, and no one knows the future for these children. 
We now have children's hospitals all over Europe halting and banning all childhood 
medical transitions and calling the medical transition of children the worst medical 
scandal in modern history.
Yet, yet here in the US? We think it's about human rights! 
I underwent close to $1 million dollar’s worth of surgeries and hormone therapies to 
change from Kellie, a woman, to Scott, a transman. I almost died in the process and I 
certainly have cut years off of my life now that I have constant infections from 
surgeries that I never should have had.
 
I tried to kill off my female self because I was sold a lie. I was told that I was actually 
a man trapped in a woman’s body, that my masculine traits and strong personality 
were proof that I was really a man. I was told all of my pain and self-loathing would 
magically disappear if only I pumped testosterone into my body, removed my breasts 
and altered my genitalia. I was tricked. You cannot transition your pain away, you 
only add to it. 
 If only I had embraced my differences. If only the medical providers and my partner 
would have told me that I was perfect just as I was. If only they said there is no right 
way to be a woman, a woman comes all different ways.
We need to let children have the time to learn to love their natural bodies and embrace
their differences. With gender interventions, there are no take backs, puberty blockers 
are not merely a pause button – there are over 10,000 complaints against Lupron by 
people who used them for precocious puberty. Testosterone use is irreversible. Males 
on estrogen can be permanently sterilized within 4 months. 
Are you really going to put stock in the AAP that follows WPATH, an entity that 
accepts Eunuchs as a gender even for minors?
 With the current rate of kids that are being transitioned, we are going to have a whole
generation of sterile humans and life-long medical patients without them ever having 
a disease. If I as an adult couldn’t resist the allure of a quick-fix elixir, do you really 
think someone with an immature frontal lobe can understand the long-term 
consequences of gender interventions.
I ask that you do the hard thing today. Because what we consider a bigot today is a 
hero tomorrow. My question is are you able to take the heat to be a hero for these 
kids!
 
Please support this bill.
