Shannon Bryant
Fremont
LD 1735
Dear Sir/Madam:
I was just alerted to a proposed bill in Maine that could threaten the safety of families 
in New Hampshire. LD 1735, an ACT to safeguard gender affirming care, proposes a 
litany of protections for "gender affirming care".  This bill is scheduled for hearing 
tomorrow, and is a heinous state overreach into family dynamics.  I urge you to 
strongly oppose it.
Section 6 of this bill refers to "abandoned child" and reads: "Abandoned child; 
emergency. A court of this State has temporary emergency jurisdiction if the child is 
present in this State and the child has been abandoned or it is necessary in an 
emergency to protect the child because the child or a sibling or parent of the child is 
subjected to or threatened with mistreatment or abuse or because the child has been 
unable to obtain gender-affirming health care or gender-affirming mental health care."
Essentially this means a child whose parents object to "gender affirming care" could 
run away to ME and become a ward of the state to receive said "gender affirming 
care".
Section 8 modifies the Maine Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement 
Act to encourage non-custodial parents or temporary guardians, such as friends or 
relative to transport a child to Maine for the purposes of obtaining "gender affirming 
care". "Prohibition. In making a determination under this section, a court may not 
consider as a factor weighing against the petitioner any taking of the child, or 
retention of the child after a visit or other temporary relinquishment of physical 
custody, from the person who has legal custody, if there is evidence that the taking or 
retention of the child was for the purposes of obtaining "gender-affirming health care"
or "gender-affirming mental health care" for the child and the law or policy of the 
other state limits the ability of a parent to obtain gender-affirming health care or 
gender-affirming mental health care for the parent's child."
The consequences of this bill, if it passes, will have far-reaching, irreversable and a 
likely catastrophic impact on a developing child who is not mature or aware enough 
to anticipate the end results of such a decision.  I implore you to strongly oppose this 
bill, and any that follow it, in support of children and families, where any such 
decision-making clearly belongs.
