Shawn McBreairty
Maine Source Of Truth
LD 1735
Shawn McBreairty
Hampden, ME
Maine Source Of Truth
LD1735 - An Act to Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care
This is a bill to promote trans-trafficking, kidnapping, sex-trafficking and child 
mutilation, leading to suicides.
It promotes trans-tourism and is a copycat law to California and Washington state 
which recently passed similar bills.  
Around this Mothers Day weekend, democrats will have taken away the chance for 
babies to be born due to your murderous abortion law, have taken parental rights 
away with LD685, Chapter 117 where every democrat voted to have school 
counselors keep secrets from parents and now LD1735 creates the ability for 
trans-trafficking of confused and mentally ill children across state lines. 
Do democrats hate mothers?  We know democrats love emotional manipulation. 
Maine democrats of this legislature will be known as creating the Classroom To 
Clinic pipeline, with your pockets lined by organizations such as Planned Parenthood,
Out Maine, GLAD, Maine Trans-Net, Big Pharma and medical doctors willing to 
mutilate and butcher children for profit.  All grifters.
It creates lifelong wards of the State.
That is because democrats want life long customers in the pharmaceutical industry. 
Brainwashing vulnerable children into being life long meal tickets, if they live at all, 
due to much higher rates of suicide AFTER transition.
Why on earth would you deny morality, if not for personal gain?  
Ask yourself, what does this give you besides eternal damnation?  
The headline of LD1735 should be, “Maine children are for sale to mutilate as you 
wish.”
Those Sinful Seven sponsoring LD1735 and those of you on this committee voting for
it are demonic.  There is no other way to describe it.  
There is zero scientific evidence that this bill will help anyone, but those profiting on 
the social contagion of children.  Minors.  Those you took an oath to protect.
According to Dr. Anderson, ”The most thorough follow-up of sex-reassigned people, 
extending over 30 years and conducted in Sweden, where the culture is strongly 
supportive of the transgendered-—documents show their lifelong mental unrest. 
Ten to 15 years after surgical reassignment, the suicide rate of those who had 
undergone sex-reassignment surgery rose to 20 times that of comparable peers." 
This demonic bill, LD1735 will place the blood on your hands democrats. 
20 times greater chance of suicide AFTER medical transition.  
Sex reassignment is quite literally impossible.  Surgery can’t actually reassign sex, 
because sex isn’t “assigned” in the first place.  Gender is a social contagion made 
popular by a pedophile named John Money.  
Reality isn’t “assigned” at birth or any time after.  Sex—maleness or femaleness—is 
established at a child’s conception, can be ascertained even at the earliest stages of 
human development by technological means, and can be observed visually well 
before birth with ultrasound imaging. 
Pronouns, chest binders, cross-sex hormones and cosmetic mutilation surgery don’t 
change biological reality.
Nothing is reversible. 
People who undergo sex-reassignment procedures do not become the opposite 
sex—they merely masculinize or feminize their outward appearance.  
Without ever dealing with the underlying cause of why they mutilate themselves. 
Social contagion, sexual trauma, mental illness, virtue signaling teachers, school 
counselors, or legislators. 
This bill, LD1735 as currently written, allows minors at any age, to define their own 
mental health issues and self-prescribe body mutilation.
Phalloplasty shreds the radial muscle tissue of a healthy child’s forearm, scaring it for 
life to make a fake penis, which often is necrotic, or dead and will fall off, due to 
infection.  
They will be incontinent for life.
That is after doctors tear out their vagina and cut off their breasts.  All healthy, 
functioning organs, of a healthy body, minus their mental health issue that never is 
addressed in this bill, LD1735.  
Or the practice of inverting a young boy’s penis to create a fake vagina, an open gash,
a bloody sore, something this boy’s body will reject for the rest of their life.  
Children, Manipulated.  Extorted.  Profited from. 
God help your child when a taxpayer paid trans-activist in your local school, 
brainwashes them, kidnaps them and straps them down to the operating table, without 
your parental rights and cuts off healthy body parts.
The new slogan on the highway sign should read, “Maine - The way child abuse 
should be.”  
LD1735 Ought Not To Pass, but we know it will…because you democrats have now 
decided it’s ok to mutilate children, if of course, they make it out of the womb, or the 
classroom.  
It’s not gender affirming healthcare, it’s mutilation of minors for profit. 
Follow the money.  
