P 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
i AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
= 
(207) 287-1400 
Anne Graham TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
97 Farms Edge Road 
North Yarmouth, ME 04097 
Cell Phone: 846-0049 
Anne Grahamz?13;le2islature.mainexzov 
May 23, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Anne Graham introducing 
LD 1936, An Act to Allow Certiﬁed Nurse Practitioners to Provide In-home Care Without 
a Home Health Care Provider License 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Insurance and Financial Services 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and the esteemed members of the Health 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee, I am Representative Anne Graham and I serve the 
communities of North Yarmouth and Gray, House District 105. I am here to present to you 
LD 1936, An Act to Allow Certiﬁed Nurse Practitioners to Provide In-home Care Without 
a Home Health Care Provider License. 
Maine nurse practitioners (NP) earned the right to practice independent of a physician in the 
mid-1990s, following completion of at least 24 months of supervised work by a physician or 
another NP. More recently, they also gained the right to be credentialed as participating 
providers, and to become primary care providers in managed care organizations (MCO). 
Maine’s NPs practice in a wide variety of clinical and other settings, including hospitals, private 
and public clinics and practices, educational institutions, correctional facilities and more. 
Because of this ﬂexibility, they have expanded the health care workforce in primary and 
specialty care all over the state. NPs reach thousands of patients often who have no primary care 
provider. 
While these dedicated individuals have fought hard over the years to gain independent practice in 
order to provide care in non-traditional settings and to those who otherwise would not access 
health care at all, current law still limits their scope of practice in a way that is especially harmful 
to Mainers most in need. 
Currently, licensed nurse practitioners are prohibited from providing in-home care to patients 
unless they are employed by a MCO like a home health agency.‘ 
Many older Mainers, especially those who live in rural communities like are unable to access 
traditional ofﬁces and require in-home care. Nurse practitioners are a vital component of the 
‘ https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/22/title22ch0sec0.html 
District 105: North Yarmouth and Gray
health care network but are currently unable to help ﬁll gaps in these cases if they do not work 
for a home health agency. This leaves vulnerable, elderly patients without care at home. 
Currently, physicians, nutritionists and hospice providers are able to provide home care 
independent from a home health agency. This bill adds nurse practitioners to the list of providers 
that are exempt from this restriction. 
As a member of the Health and Human Services Committee, we hear almost daily about our 
workforce shortages on every level. Allowing nurse practitioners to provide in-home care 
without having to be employed by a home health agency adds one more tool to our tool box as 
We strive to provide health care to all. 
I thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to try to answer any questions you may 
have. 
District 105: North Yarmouth and Gray
