  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester,  Maine 04351 -0227   
Ph: 207 -213-6125   |  Fax: 207-213-6127  
www. Home CareAlliance.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services ; my name is 
Laurie Belden, a resident of Durham and the Executive Director of the Home Care 
& Hospice  Alliance of Maine (Alliance). The Alliance is a network of home health 
care, hospice, home care and personal care providers across our State delivering 
in-home care to older adults and disabled individuals of all ages, allowing them to 
stay in their home and community .  
I’m here today to testify neither for nor against LD 1936, An Act to Allow 
Certified Nurse Practitioners to Provide In -home Care Without a Home Health 
Care Provider License.  
Similar to physicians, nurse practitioners (NPs) in primary care diagnose, treat and 
manage acute an d chronic diseases, while emphasizing health promotion and 
disease prevention. Primary care delivered in the home allows  physician s and/or  
NPs to assess patients in their own environment, gaining valuable insights into 
their living conditions, support syst ems, and lifestyle factors. This perspective 
enables more personalized care plans tailored to the individual's specific needs, 
leading to improved health outcomes.   
This bill before you exempts NPs from the provisions of the Maine Revised 
Statutes, Title 2 2, chapter 419, which concerns home health services and the 
licensur e of home health care providers.  
It is our understanding that NPs are already excluded under the sole practitioner 
provision at 22MRS §2147(3) Exclusions:  
“3. Sole practitioners.  Sole pr actitioners otherwise licensed by the State.”  
We haven’t been fully briefed on the is sues that generated this bill , thus our 
testimony NFNA so we are on record regarding nurse practitioner home visits and 
our support for the curren t sole practitioner exclusion. We have no concerns with 
resolving add itional regulatory barriers regarding nurse practitioners providing in 
home primary care visits.  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on this legislation to ensure 
the safety and wellbeing of our fellow Mainers.  
Laurie Belden , Executive Direc tor 
laurie@homecarealliance.org  Board of Directors  
 
President  
Colleen Hilton  
Northern Light Home Care  
 
Vice President  
Daryl Cady  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Treasurer  
RJ Gagnon  
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Secretary  
Laurie Bourgoin  
Home Hope & Healing  
 
 
Members  
Ken Albert  
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Patricia Aprile  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Kyra Chamberlain  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Elaine Collins  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Chris Costello  
CHANS Home Health& Hospice  
 
Zetta Fogg  
McKesson Medical -Surgical  
 
Lisa Harvey -McPherson  
Northern Light Home Care & Hospice  
 
Adam LaMonica  
Maxim Healthcare Services  
 
Amy McVety  
Mount Desert Nursing Association  
 
Greg Pizzo  
MaineGeneral HomeCare & Hospice  
 
Amy Shawley  
St. Joseph Homecare and Hospice  
 Testimony Neither for nor Against  
LD 1936 , An Act to Allow Certified Nurse Practitioners to Provide In -home 
Care Without a Home Health Care Provider License  
May 23 , 2023  
 
