{kl 
.5 tiff; 
,"” ‘L 
'i1e::¢a§ti~1
. 
Janet T. Mills 
GOVERNOR STATE OF MAINE 
BOARD or OPTOMETRY 
113 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
04333-0035 
TESTIMONY OF 
THOMAS NADEAU, BOARD PRESIDENT 
MAINE BOARD OF OPTOMETRY 
IN SUPPORT OF DPFR-05, LR 146 
"An Act to Repeal and Replace the Laws 
Regarding Optometry Practices" 
Sponsored by Representative Jennifer 
Poirier 
BEFORE THE HEALTH COVERAGE, 
INSURANCE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES Thomas Nadeau, O.D 
BOARD PRESIDENT 
Good morning, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the HEALTH 
COVERAGE, INSURANCE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
The board greatly appreciates your time and consideration of LD 1956 An Act to Amend the 
Laws Governing Optometry, which the Board developed over the past several years. We also 
wish to thank Representative Jennifer Poirier for sponsoring the bill. 
My name is Thomas Nadeau, I have practiced optometry in Boothbay Harbor for the past 45+ 
years. I have served on the Maine Board of Optometry for the past l0 years and as board 
president for the past two years. Our current board members are Dr. Paul Cote, Dr. Parise 
Chamberlain, who both practice in Lewiston, Dr. Pat Smith who practices at the Togus VA 
hospital and Jim Murphy who is our esteemed consumer member. 
I am here to assist you with your consideration of this repeal and replace legislation which the 
board deems necessary to bring the law of optometry current with evolutions of practice. 
Optometry is a regulated profession. How we practice, everything we do professionally, must be 
authorized by our optometric law. This is not a scope of practice bill. It is the board full intent to 
maintain the existing scope of practice while not adding any services which an optometrist can 
provide under the existing optometric law. 
OFFICE LOCATED AT: 
76 NORTHERN AVE., GARDINER, MAINE 04345 
TEL: (207)624-8691 I FAX: (207)624-8637
In broad strokes, the changes consist of changing the Board’s structure, enhancing enforcement 
capability, changing in licensure requirements, clarifying license levels changes, streamlining 
continuing education requirements, and adding sections for telemedicine, licensure by 
endorsement, and closure of practice. In addition, the Board needed to update grammar, 
language, organization, and do some general statutory clean up. 
The following is a brief synopsis of the major changes in the law. Please feel free to ask me any 
questions you have at any time. I am here to help you understand this legislation. LR 146 
represents the Board’s efforts to present an updated statute that addresses the myriad of issues 
involved in aligning the Board’s authorizing statute with how optometry services are delivered 
today. In an effort to assist the Committee, I have highlighted the most important proposed 
changes: 
I am here to assist you with the reasons the board deems this necessary... 
A) § 19101 Deﬁnitions: 
i) Moving from ll to 27 deﬁned terms to add clarity and insert terms used in new 
sections of the statute. This enhances licensees ’ understanding of legal expectations 
and the Board’s enforcement authority. The deﬁnition of optometrist/patient 
relationship deﬁnition is important speciﬁcally to the newly passed telehealth law and 
forthcoming regulations. 
B) § 19202 Powers and duties of the board: 
i) Expands powers and duties of the board and removes from this section standards of 
licensure and the deﬁnition of a minimum eye examination which are better moved 
elsewhere. Makes explicit board powers and adds the authority to order a mental or 
physical examination if a licensee may be impaired to the extent that they may be 
unable to practice safely. It also creates broader rulemaking authority for rules 
necessary for implementation of this chapter. 
ii) The new examination provision relating to impaired providers provides authority to 
take actions that protect the public. 
C) §l93Ol Requirements for licensure: Overall, the changes in this section heighten 
requirements for licensure to ensure competently trained optometrist at the same time as 
easing entry into licensure by optometrists who are licensed in other states and US 
territories with equivalent licensing standards as Maine. 
i) Updates licensure accreditation requirements. 
ii) Removes age requirement. 
iii) Adds a licensure by endorsement provision for optometrists in good standing who are 
licensed in other states or U.S. territories; 
iv) Speciﬁes that for licensure, applicant must have graduated from a school accredited 
by ACOE (previously, no standard for accreditation). 
v) Renewal; Reinstatement; Continuing Education; Inactive Status. This section 
streamlines language that applies to all categories of licensure. 
vi) Expiration section clariﬁes that an applicant has 90 days to renew late upon payment 
of late fee, up from the previous law which provided 60 days. After 90 days, late 
ﬁling optometrists must meet all requirements of ﬁrst-time licensure. 
OFFICE LOCATED AT: 
76 NORTHERN AVE., GARDINER, MAINE 04345 
TEL: (207)624-8691 I FAX: (207)624-8637
D) 
E) 
E) 
F) 
G) 
H) 
1) 
J) 
K) $19303 Licensure bv endorsement 
i) The board establish a process to issue a license by endorsement for applicants 
who present proof of licensure by another jurisdiction of the United States with 
comparable licensure requirements. 
ii) The Board shell adopt rules to implement this section. 
§l9304 Levels of licensure and license requirements for use of pharmaceutical agents: 
i) Currently, three levels of licenses are renewed for which there is no statutory 
authority. The new statute identiﬁes those levels of licensure and the scope of license 
and organizationally pulls all licensure sections under one subchapter. ii) Clearly 
deﬁnes the existing levels of licensure, removing one that was obsolete. 
iii) Creates a previously non-existent pathway to higher levels of licensure, allowing 
advancement in the profession through enhanced skills. 
iv) Adds the ability to dispense drug samples in limited circumstances. 
§19305 Licensing: 
i) Increases cap on annual fees. Propose new cap is $600 which is closer to those in 
other medical professions. The actual fees are in board rules. 
§19306 Display of license: 
i) Location of display of License, required to be in a public area of the ofﬁce for 
greater transparency of license level to public. 
§l9307 Continuing education: 
i) Continuing education requirements can be via remote learning. Revised rules will 
issue for speciﬁc requirements. 
§l9308 Standard of care: 
i) Clariﬁes that the standard is a state standard of care versus a community level. 
The higher standard enhances public safety. This requires prompt action. 
§l9309 Minimum standards for eye examination: 
i) Updates standards updated to minimum eye examination which is relevant 
also to the kiosk law (new section §l93l l). 
ii) Removes refraction as a required part of minimum eye exam which comports 
with current practice of most if not all optometrists. This provision is critical and canno 
wait years. Currently, most if not all optometrists are in violation of the existing statute 
since not every eye examination requires refraction. This requires prompt action. 
§l93lO Record keeping: 
i) Establishes records retention requirement of l0 years which will enhance 
continuity of care, particularly in the retirement context. 
§193ll Operation of kiosks: 
i) Makes explicit that anyone operating a kiosk must also do a minimum eye 
examination under new § 19312 which includes a physical examination of the 
eye. This comports with the legislative history of the original kiosk law. 
OFFICE LOCATED AT: 
76 NORTHERN AVE., GARDINER, MAINE 04345 
TEL: (207)624-8691 I FAX: (207)624-8637t
L) §l93 12 Minimum prescription requirements: 
i) Clariﬁes minimum prescription requirements that a prescription may not contain 
an expiration date longer than 2 years unless there is an explanation. Further, the 
prescription elements are organized between spectacle and contact requirements. 
ii) Adds a new section to make clear that a prescription may not be based only ona 
diagnosis of a refractive error of the human eye as generated by a kiosk. 
iii) Adds the ability to provide drug samples. 
iv) Requires release of contact and spectacle prescriptions which is already a federal 
requirement but was not explicit under Maine law, now giving the Board clear 
jurisdiction of such violations. 
v) Reorganizes all the prescription sections to one location in the law. 
M) §19401 Investigations: 
i) Adds provisions for discipline as an afﬁliated board. 
ii) Authorizes Board to investigate and clariﬁes conﬁdentiality. 
iii) Provides authority as an affiliated Board similar to § 8003(5-A) 
N) §l9402 Disciplinary actions: 
i) Provides authority as an affiliated Board to take enforcement action on a variety 
of complaint factors. 
ii) Adds provisions for discipline as an afﬁliated board. 
O) §19601 Telehealth: § 19601-§ 19605 all New 
i) Clariﬁes expectations of professional behavior and conﬁdentiality and authorizes 
rulemaking. 
P) §19701 Succession in practice: 
i) Adds section requiring a written directive identifying a successor licensee 
accepting responsibility for former licensee ’s practice. 
ii) Enhances public safety by ensuring continuity of care and recipient of Protected 
Health Information. 
Q) §19702 £3i>_S_ing.P1 iEi¢@1 
i) This section is NEW and requires that licensees provide notice to Board when the 
licensee closes their practice to permit communication of requirements. This is in 
response to several complaints regarding consumer experiences with retired 
optometrists who are difficult to reach, particularly when consumers seek copies 
of medical records to provide to their new practitioner. This is a frequent 
complaint and requires prompt action. 
The Board would like to change the wording to provide clarity on §l9701 
Section 19701 provides, “Written directive identifying successor licensee. A licensee who is 
closing a practice shall within 30 days of closure create and maintain a written directive 
identifying a successor licensee who is willing to assume the responsibility of the licensee's 
practice, to maintain continuity of treatment, to transfer medical information and to ensure 
patient health and safety.” 
OFFICE LOCATED AT: 
76 NORTHERN AVE., GARDINER, MAINE 04345 
TEL: (207)624-8691 I FAX: (207)624-8637
Upon reﬂection, I think this is vague and could be read that the list can be prepared 30 after 
closure. To provide clarity: 
19701 “Written directive identifying successor licensee. A licensee who is closing a practice 
shall no later than 30 days before closure create and maintain a written directive identifying a 
successor licensee who is willing to assume the responsibility of the licensee's practice, to 
maintain continuity of treatment, to transfer medical information and to ensure patient health and 
safety.” 
Given some of the more urgent items, I respectfully request that this be passed as emergency 
legislation that should not wait the 90 days from end of session to become effective. Waiting the 
90 days from end of session is not only in the best interest of the consumers but would delay the 
enactment of rules that have been prepared in anticipation of this new repeal and replace 
legislation. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be glad to answer any questions now or at 
the work session. 
OFFICE LOCATED AT: 
76 NORTHERN AVE., GARDINER, MAINE 04345 
TEL: (207)624-8691 I FAX: (207)624-8637
