 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST -  LD 301 ‘ An Act to Exempt Employers from Providing  
Earned Paid Leave for Certain Employees’  
 
Dear Senator Tipping , Chair, Representative Roeder , Chair, and Members of the Committee on Labor and Housing , 
 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association  
(MGFPA). MGFPA is a business trade association representing more than 200 businesses within Maine’s food 
community; Main Street businesses including independently owned and operated grocery stores and supermarkets, 
food and beverage producers and processors, manufacturer s, wholesalers, distributors, and supportive service 
companies.  
 
LD 301 seeks to exempt “a part -time or temporary employee in a retail trade or a service -related industry” from being 
covered by the law that requires employers to offer earned paid leave to  employees. Related, the Earned Paid Leave Law 
currently expressly exempts seasonal employees as defined by the Employment Security Act.  
 
In the grocery and food manufacturing industries there are peaks and lulls quite similarly to seasonal employment  and 
the current designated exempted industries . The summer months , into the fall, and through the winter holiday season 
are much busier than Q 1 & Q2  of each year . “Temporary ” (or similar to what our industry would view as seasonal staff ) 
is brought on for a specific time frame when the stores are indeed busier.  The stores hire the staff expressly so , and the 
employers seek out and accept  the posi tions  based on the specific timeframe of the role.  
 
We have heard from our employer members that it is especially onerous  to record and maintain information on 
seasonal / ‘temporary employees.’  They often are keeping records for those who will likely not utilize the time nor 
return based on the temporariness of the position.   
 
Further consideration should be given to the definition of “temporary employee.” Currently, seasonally exempt workers 
are those who work less than 26 weeks a year. Could  a ‘temporary employee’ definition be defined as employees who 
are hired  for a contract ed period of time ? How does this apply to employees who are currently hired throu gh a hiring 
agency  for a set period of time ? 
 
We respect the process and collaboration that went into developing Maine’s Earned Paid Leave law . MGFPA value s the 
time and effort that both the state  and private sector have invested into ensuring compliance. We support revisiting the 
narrow component specific to the temporary retail trade employee exemption.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.   
 
 
Christine Cummings   
Executive Director  
February 1 6, 2023  
