M a i n e C e n t e r Street: 1 Wesmhilgiziggizg 
- I Augusta, ME 04332 
' 
207 622 7331 
1 Economic Policy 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 301, "An Act to Exempt Employers from Providing Earned Paid Leave 
for Certain Employees" 
February 16, 2023 
James Myall, Economic Policy Analyst 
Good Afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing. My name is James Myall, and lam an economic policy analyst at the Maine 
Center for Economic Policy. l’m here to testify in opposition to LD 301, ”An Act to Exempt Employers 
from Providing Earned Paid Leave for Certain Employees." 
Our opposition to this legislation is straightforward. We believe that earned paid leave should be 
available to all Maine workers, regardless of their occupation or employer. All Mainers deserve the 
economic security that comes with earned paid leave, and should not have to face the hardship that 
comes with having to choose between their health and their paycheck. 
The current earned paid leave legislation already contains a significant exemption for the smallest 
employers and for seasonal businesses. We argued against the need for those provisions in 2019 and we 
maintain that the legislation should include as many workers as possible. There certainly do not need to 
be any more exceptions made. 
The legislation already accounts for temporary and part time employees with its current language. 
Employees are only permitted to use leave if they work with an employer for at least 120 days ina 
calendar year. What's more, leave is only accrued at a rate of one hour of leave for every hour worked. 
Most of the employees who would be impacted by LD 301 will only accumulate a small amount of leave 
in a year, and those who are truly short-term temporary employees will not be with their employer long 
enough to use the leave. 
However, we urge you to keep the law as it is to account for cases in which a substitute or temporary 
employee is employed repeatedly or for a longer period of time than is first envisaged. Passage of LD 
301 would risk a situation where an employer could classify a worker as temporary and nonetheless hire 
them multiple times over the course of a year in order to get around the legal requirement to provide 
paid leave. 
In summary, we would urge you to vote "ought not to pass" on LD 301, and to ensure that as many 
workers as possible continue to enjoy the security offered by Maine's earned paid leave law. 
Thank you. l'm happy to answer any questions. 
Board of Directors 
Barbara Burt, Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair Maulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica Maurer
