TESTIMONY OF JONATHAN MOODY Superintendent of Schools MSAD #54 Canaan, Cornville, Mercer, Norridgewock, Skowhegan, Smithfield   SUBMITTED TO THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOR AND HOUSING   IN SUPPORT OF LD 301   February 14, 2023  Chairpersons Roeder and Tipping, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, I am Jonathan Moody, Superintendent of Schools in MSAD #54, serving the towns of Canaan, Cornville, Mercer, Norridgewock, Skowhegan and Smithfield.   Like many schools, we have been impacted by the Earned Paid Leave law that went into effect on January 1st of 2021.  I was honored to come before the committee in April of 2021 arguing in favor of LD 838, which would have exempted Maine Schools from the unintended impacts of the law and am again pleased to submit this testimony in support of LD 301 An Act to Exempt Employers from Providing Earned Paid Leave for Certain Employees.    The Earned Paid Leave (EPL) law passed in 2019 has been an especially challenging law for school districts, which have traditionally provided far greater benefits to employees than those minimums outlined in the law.  Districts across the state have worked hard to provide quality benefits that honor the needs of employees while also ensuring that their students aren’t negatively impacted by those benefits.  LD 301 adjusts the language of “Employee” under the current law, to expressly exclude “A person employed by a school administrative unit as a substitute teacher or in another substitute position, as a coach or as a temporary employee…”.  The superintendents in my region and those I’ve talked to around the state have universally seen adverse impacts to our students as as a result of the Earned Paid Leave law.  For the reasons I’ve shared, and the reasons cited below, I respectfully request that the committee consider the passage of LD 301.     The earned paid leave law has created significant challenges to school districts as described below:  - EPL is incredibly challenging in a school setting period, but especially challenging with substitute teachers, coaches, and temporary employees.  These employees—who are either provided a stipend for a season (coaches, generally 9-12 weeks), or who work on an “as needed” irregular and limited basis (substitutes, tutors)—are not regular employees in a school district.  These employees are paid to work with students for short periods of time based on need.  To have these employees take EPL when they are being asked to work has and will continue to leave student needs unmet.   - School districts across the state struggle to find substitute teachers and coaches.  All of the Superintendents in our Kennebec region have indicated that their schools have continued to experience substitute teacher shortages that have impacted classrooms.  EPL has provided substitutes the ability to “call-in” for leave days after they themselves have 
been called in to substitute for a teacher.  When subs are not available, this impacts not only our students, but also our other staff, who lose important prep time, lunch time, etc. to ensure that our students are safe and their needs are met. - Although school is not considered a seasonal industry, the argument that these employees should be excluded is strengthened when one examines the law and the exclusion of seasonal employees (https://bit.ly/3ueiajV); district substitute and temporary positions fall significantly under the 26 weeks described in several sections of the seasonal industry exemptions and are reasonable to exclude from the EPL law. - #46 of the Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ; January 2021) on the Maine Department of Labor website (https://bit.ly/2PFtve1) indicates that an employer is not required to always provide time off, including the ability to not allow leave (other than emergency) during a holiday season or “busy seasons or days.”  I would argue that students are in school 175 days a year, and that is a school district’s busy season.  Our part-time employees generally only work during this time.  To not have them available to our students has and will continue to have an impact on our ability to staff our schools.  - Substitute and temporary school employees are important employees, but they are employees who cannot be compelled to work and in fact work for schools at their own convenience.  If they are unavailable on the day we need them, we don’t employ them.  To both track and execute the EPL leave time for these employees is challenging and counter to the role their positions serve in schools.  - Coaches are generally paid a stipend for their work with our kids.  We do not dock them pay when they miss time for emergencies or challenges and support them as issues arise.  Although MSAD 54 has not had a coach take non-emergency EPL time, to formally provide EPL time for coaches has neither been necessary nor practical and like substitutes, could potentially leave students without adequate supervision. - Finally, and this applies to nearly all school positions, the EPL law allows staff to take time in one-hour increments. This provision puts an incredible burden on schools, which are charged with taking care of and educating students.  Finding substitute positions for staff for one-hour increments is often not possible and has compounded the challenges of EPL and negatively impacts students and staff.  LD 301 will at least mitigate the impact of needing to provide leave to the very staff districts rely upon for coverage when our full and part-time staff are not able to be in school.  In April of 2021 the committee opted not to support LD 838 and instead to wait to see the impacts of the EPL law on schools.  The loss of substitute teachers and coaches have impacted schools and our staff.  In MSAD 54 much of that impact has been mitigated as our staff have chosen to not take time that would negatively impact students.  I would urge the committee to consider passage of LD 301 to avoid future potential impacts to schools and welcome any questions you might have. Thank you,   Jonathan Moody 
