Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Opposition 
LD 301: An Act to Exempt Employers from Providing Earned Paid Leave for Certain Employees 
0 
Nate Williams, Director of Collective Bargaining & Research 
Before the Labor and Housing Committee 
February 16, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and the other esteemed members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing: 
My name is Nate Williams, and I am the Director of Collective Bargaining and Research for the Maine Education 
Association (MEA) which represents 24,000 teachers, education support professionals, and retired educators 
across Maine. 
I am here to testify in opposition to LD 301, An Act to Exempt Employers from Providing Earned Paid Leave for 
Certain Employees. 
Many districts, especially during this pandemic, have hired full-time substitutes or temporary employees who 
have worked the entire school year. While their time in their current position may come to a definite end, they 
still work the same hours as other employees in the district, and therefore should be entitled to the same 
protections as other employees doing the same work but with longer—term commitments from the district. 
Long-term substitute teachers have been used quite frequently in Maine’s public schools over the years, not just 
during the pandemic. They fill in for teachers on medical leaves, sabbaticals, or other extended leaves, for 
example, and help maintain the continuity of school operations and our students ’ education. During this 
pandemic, long-term substitutes or temporary contract workers have helped students return to school when 
permanent employees could not return to the classroom. They have also helped carry the load with online or 
remote learning. The least the state can do for them is allow them to accrue earned paid leave like their co- 
workers. 
This legislation does not make a distinction for an employee who is labelled as a substitute but works several 
months or the entire year for one district. It would not be an undue burden on the school districts to track the 
hours worked of employees who work only for their district and credit them with their earned paid leave, the same 
as they do for their other employees. 
In addition, the spirit of Eamed Paid Leave is to ensure that all employees in Maine have access to paid time off 
for any reason. Tracking time for substitute employees can be done at the same time payroll and hours worked is 
calculated, and the employer is only responsible for providing the earned paid leave eamed while working at that 
place of employment. 
For these reasons, MEA encourages you to vote “Ought Not to Pass” on LD 301. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME OM01 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 06736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME OM06 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.0rg
