Testimony of Nate Cloutier
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing
February 16, 2023
In Support of LD 301, An Act to Exempt Employers from Providing Earned Paid Leave for Certain 
Employees  
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing: My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf of HospitalityMaine. HospitalityMaine 
represents more than 1,000 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across the state. Thank you for the 
opportunity to offer support of LD 301. 
We thank Representative Poirier for submitting legislation that addresses some of the concerns employers 
share with Maine’s earned paid leave law. LD 301 would exempt temporary and part-time employees from the 
2021 law. The hospitality industry often will hire temporary (or seasonal) workers throughout the year to fill 
vacancies (especially in the summer months) that otherwise would be filled by an active and participatory 
workforce. These seasonal positions also often have understood start and end dates. We have heard from 
employers that it is a cumbersome process to record and maintain information on these employees. There is 
also a high likelihood that the leave will not be used given the brief duration of employment, making it a 
fruitless requirement.
For consideration:
The definition of “temporary employee” may need re-visiting. It is often inconsistent across statute 
and has been interchangeable with “seasonal” and “intermittent” employees.  
The Fair Labor and Standards Act does not define “part time” and is generally established by the 
employer, leaving uncertainty around who is covered under the law. 
A provision in the law allows employees to take leave in one-hour increments, which can be especially 
strenuous on the hospitality industry in months when we hire seasonal employees. 
Maine’s earned paid leave law was thoroughly crafted and well-intended, but as can be the case with new 
large-scale programs, it comes with unintended consequences. As part of its oversight duties, we urge the 
Department of Labor to regularly collaborate with employers across the state to gather more facts about what 
is working and what is not. 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments. 

