 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association (MMA)  
 
In Support Of   
LD 301, An Act to Exempt Employers from Providing Earned Paid Leave for Certain Employees   
 
February 22, 2023  
 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor & Housing 
Committee . My name is Rebecca Lambert and  I am providing testimony in support of  LD 301 on 
behalf of M aine Municipal Association ’s (MMA) elected 70-member Legislative Policy 
Committee  (LPC). For clarity, the LPC provides direction to the advocacy team at MMA and 
establishes  the position on bills of municipal interest.   
  MMA works closely with the members of its 33  Affiliate Group s, who largely consist of 
municipal employee  groups, such as clerks, assessors, and public works director s, to name a few.   
The relationship with our a ffiliate group members not only helps to inform the programs and 
services MMA provide s, but the interactions help to guide our policy committee’s decision -making 
process . 
 It is for that reason  the LPC supports the Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association 
(MTCCA) request for a friendly amendment to LD 301, seeking to include election clerks in the 
definition of employees impacted by this bill.  
Municipal clerks routinely use election clerks , largely volunteers, to assist with the conduct 
of elections,  including the tasks preformed prior to the election, on election day, and some  post-
election work. The pay for e lection clerks var ies across Maine with some paid at  the minimum 
wage rate, as  a stipen d—ba sed on a half day or whole day of work, and with some even opting to 
forego payment altogether and  generously volunteer their services  to the municipality.  
According to the MTCCA, the  temporary stints that election clerks work rarely result in 
more than 20- 60 hours per election cycle and many of these positions turn over from year to year. 
Elections have proven to be one of the busiest times for municipal officials engaged in the election 
process and MMA would argue that adding the additional burden of trac king paid hours would 
take away from the time needed to perform other important duties. 
I appreciate your time and t hank you for considering the municipal perspective on this 
issue .  

