Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and 
honorable members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
and Labor and Housing: my name is Rebecca Scarborough, and I live in Camden.
I am writing to ask this committee to set aside $65 million to fund start-up costs for Paid 
Family and Medical Leave. 
This is a personal issue to me.
About a week after I turned thirty, I had an aortic dissection (a tear in my aorta) that 
caused a stroke. I had emergency heart surgery and spent three weeks in in-patient rehabilitation, 
relearning how to walk and regaining strength on my left side. A month later, I was hospitalized 
again due to an infection in the surgical site. I stayed for four weeks, enduring seven surgeries.
During these difficult months, my mother took time off from work to be with me. For 
almost the entire time I was in the hospital, she was beside me and able to help me when nurses 
were unavailable. When I was released from the hospital after the infection, I still needed IV 
antibiotics, and my mother learned how to give me those medications herself. 
My mom ended up retiring early from a full-time position to take care of me. She took 
care of me physically and took over the logistics of scheduling doctor appointments and 
outpatient therapies that I did not have the mental capacity to handle. 
We were fortunate, and even with the loss of my mother’s income my family was able to 
take care of me while I healed. We were all safe. Unfortunately, too many people in Maine are 
not in the same situation. No one should have to go into debt or lose their house or job to care for 
themselves or a loved one. Paid leave would allow Mainers to care for themselves and loved 
ones during medical crises and recoveries. 
Maine’s PFML commission has made recommendations for establishing a paid and 
family medical leave program in Maine. I urge you to set aside the money necessary to make 
Paid Family and Medical Leave a reality for Mainers. Thank you. 
