Testimony of Sandra MacArthur, Superintendent of MSAD 13/RSU 83
In Support of LD 301
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing.  My name is Sandra MacArthur I am a resident of Madison 
and Superintendent of MSAD 13 serving Bingham and Moscow.  Today, I am submitting 
testimony in support LD 301.  I want to thank the bill sponsors for their commitment to 
addressing issues that are negativity impacting our local school districts. 
MSAD 13 is a small rural district that serves 185 PreK-12 students in Somerset County.  Since 
the Earned Paid Leave (EPL) law passed in 2019 it has created additional work for our already 
overworked bookkeeper.  The MSAD 13 school year and year around staff have and continue to 
receive paid sick leave, personal days, and vacation days.  Our employees are also covered by 
the Family Medical Leave Act.   The additional bookkeeping that is required to track substitute 
teachers, substitute educational technicians, substitute custodians, substitute food service 
personnel etc. as well as coaches is very time consuming.  
Substitute employees work on an as needed basis and are not regular employees in a school 
district. Substitute teachers do not expect to work every school day.  They work as needed when 
it is convenient for them to work and when there is a school employee absent for a day or several 
days.  Law currently defines temporary positions as less than 26 weeks.  
School Districts are required to track EPL by the hour.  Substitute teachers do not always work a 
7 hour workday.  They may substitute for a quarter of a day, half day, or a full day.  The time has 
to be entered manually into an excel spreadsheet and tracked for each substitute.  Then when 
they decide to request the EPL they are allowed to take the time in hourly increments.  Once 
again the leave has to be manually entered into the excel spreadsheet for each individual 
employee.  This has created a hardship for our district.  
When a coach is hired there is no expectation that they will receive the benefits of a full-time or 
school year employee.  They are hired as a seasonal worker for the sport or extracurricular 
activity that they coach.  A season is usually 9-12 weeks.  Most practices are held after school 
several times per week for 2-3 hours per practice.  Coaches receive stipends for coaching our 
students.  The coaches receive their full stipends based on a season not on the number of days, 
hours, etc that they coach.  If they miss a practice the amount of the stipend is not reduced.  
Substitute and temporary school employees are employees who cannot be compelled to work.  
Substitutes work for schools at their own convenience.  If they are unavailable on the day we 
need them, then we don’t employ them. Here is a possible scenario, the district hires a substitute 
teacher for the day.  The substitute has EPL available to them.  They accept the full day 
substitute position but then request 2 hours of EPL.  Now the district must hire another substitute 
to cover the position for 2 hours.  The district is now hiring a substitute for the substitute.  
Please take this opportunity to remove a burden from your local school districts by supporting 
LD 301.  Thank you Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing for taking the time to read this testimony.  If I can be of any 
assistance in answering your questions please feel free to contact me.
Sandra MacArthur, Superintendent MSAD 13
Sandra.macarthur@sad13.org
207-672-5502
