 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone : (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF  
 
L.D. 301  
 
AN ACT TO EXEMPT EMPLOYERS FROM PROVIDING EARNED  
PAID LEAVE FOR CERTAIN EMPLOY EES 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and member s of the Labor and Housing Committee, I am Victori a 
Wallack , director of communications and government  relations at  Maine School Management Association 
testifying on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School 
Superintendent s Association in support of L.D. 301.  
 
This bill would  offer Earned Paid Leave to a group of persons  we believe it should cover – full-time staff.  
 
While we value all our employees, there are several important distinctions between full -time teachers , full -
time staff  and teacher substitutes or other temporary employees hired to fill a short -term vacancy.  
 
We also take issue with the notion that teachers serving as coaches should get Earned Paid Leave when many 
of them are being paid with stipends for their coa ching duties.  Coaches who are otherwise not full -time 
employees should not be considered in the sa me way for EPL as full -time teachers or other full -time staff.  
 
Given the number of substitutes and coaches within districts, the manual hours needed to consi der, approve, 
and keep track of the requested Earned Paid Leave is monumental. The strain on centr al office personnel 
within payroll and human resources is not a small factor within this equation.  
 
Above all the Earned Paid Leave law has the potential, i f misused  even by a few , to affect the quality of 
education we are giving our students. Students are  and must remain the center of our mission as educators and 
school leaders.  
 
Teachers are essential to that mission , not only in front of the classroom but also the caring adult s in 
children’s lives . We want our teachers to take the leave they need . We sup port the intent of this bill to contain 
the provision for  Earned Paid Leave to full -time staff and remove substitutes and coaches, for whom we never 
thought the leave was intended . 
