BK FINANCE MHHORITY 0F MAINE 
Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
Neither For Nor Against L.D. 1873 
An Act to Provide Heating Relief with Tax-free 
Home Energy Savings Accounts 
May 18, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Peny, and Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am 
testifying today Neither For Nor Against L.D. 1873, An Act to Provide Heating Relief 
with T ax-free Home Energy Savings Accounts. 
FAME is a quasi-independent state agency that provides financial solutions that 
help Maine people achieve their business and higher education goals. We create business 
and educational opportunities through our willingness to invest at greater risk based on 
public beneﬁt. Our vision is to help create a Maine workforce with good paying jobs by 
focusing on the nexus of economic and educational development. 
This bill would establish the Home Energy Savings Account Program at FAME to 
allow individuals and married couples to open a home energy savings account into which 
annual deposits of up to $2,500 for an individual and $5,000 for a married couple may be 
made. The amount deposited would be exempt from Maine income tax and may be used 
only for the weatherization of the account holder's residence or the payment of fuel or 
electricity costs incurred for heating the account holder's residence. Funds withdrawn and 
used for any other purpose would be subject to Maine income tax. The residence must be 
located in Maine. Balances in the accounts would not lapse but be carried forward each 
year. 
We appreciate Senator Brakey’s interest in providing incentives for Mainers to 
prepare and pay for needed home energy Weatherization and heating/electricity costs. It is 
an innovative idea and we do not quarrel with the underlying goals of such a program, 
but FAME respectfully submits that we are not the appropriate administrator for sucha 
program. The proposed initiative really does not align well with FAME’s mission of
l
business and higher education ﬁnance. Perhaps another agency with expertise in 
homeowner concerns or energy efﬁciency programs would be more suitable? Perhaps a 
state administrator is unnecessary and participating individuals could deal directly with 
their lending institutions? 
It is difﬁcult to estimate the likely costs for this program should FAME be tasked 
with its administration. We are unaccustomed to developing and operating sucha 
program. It is hard to estimate how many Mainers and lending institutions will 
participate, as well. If the bill were to move forward as drafted, we could not absorb the 
costs associated with its design, implementation, and operation and estimate that we 
would need to hire additional staff. It also is unclear to us exactly what roles our local 
lending institutions would play in the program. 
Thank you for your consideration of my comments and I will be happy to answer 
any questions.
2
