 
   
 
2 Thomas Drive |  Westbrook | Maine 04092                                    207.791.8400                                        www.mainebankers.com 
 
May 1 8, 2023   
 
Testimony to the 131st Maine Legislature  
Committee on Taxation  
 Good afternoon, Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , honorable members of the Committee –  my 
name is Josh Steirman and I am Director of Government Relations for the Maine Bankers Association.  We 
are the state- wide trade association representing Maine’s banks  and o ur membership includes twenty -
nine banks active across the state of Maine.  T he association advocates for Maine’s banks and their critical 
role in a vibrant, stable, and inclusive economy.  Our banks employ over 9,000 Mainers, provide safe and 
secure deposi t services for our communities, and are a critical source of financing for home -ownership 
and small businesses.   Last year, our banks provided over $4.7 billion in business loans, and another  $4.6 
billion in residential real estate loans.   
We are testifying today in support of  L.D. 1873 , An Act to Provide Heating Relief with Tax -free Home Energy 
Savings Accounts .  This is an innovative concept which offers a practical solution  to the very real  challenge 
of rising home heating costs .  Building on a  framework similar to  Health Savings Accounts ( HSA’s), th e tax-
free deposit accounts proposed in the bill offer consumer s much needed choice, flexibility, and savin gs.  
Since their creation in 2003, HSA’s have grown dramatically and are widely used by millions of Americans  
to pay for eli gible medical expenses.  The concept is proven and continues to grow in popula rity.  When 
applied to the essential challenge of home heating, the proposed H ome Energy Savings Accounts could 
provide si milar savings for consumers  across our state .   
Notably, th e aims of this program could be accomplished with minimal government  infrastructure.  HSA’s 
are offered by many banks , and apart from tax treatment, they function very similarly to a standard 
deposit  account .  Similarly, Home Energy Savings Accounts could also be offered by existing local banks 
and credit unions.  This program need not be overseen by a government agency:  with enabling legislatio n 
as a legal framework, these accounts might be administered by financial institutions who already have 
deep consumer relationship s and decades of experience offering  similar products.  
In conclusion , if this program is enacted , we encourage cooperation wi th financial institutions to write 
administrative details of the program, to take advantage of our existing expertise with si milar products .   
 
We thank the Committee for its consideration and are happy to answer any questions.  
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
 Joshua Steirman  
Director of Government Relations   
