, »:"*,. 
ri 1»7 
NATHAN M. CARLOW. 
_ T5? AK 
st/we REPRESENTATIVE\, _" i a‘ 5?a 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION ;§_. ___-it ll 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 l q;_,_' , 
,1 
(207) 2a1-1440 \ i - 
.2- it 
(201) 207-1449 (FAX) a;A~m'@. 
NATHAN CARLOW@LEGlSLATURE.MAlNE.GOVl 
jllllaine étate legislature 
AUGUSTA, MA|NE Q4333-0002 
April 18, 2023 
Members 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333-0100 
RE: Testimony in Support of LD 1007 (HP 643) An Act to Ban the Video Hosting Service TikTok 
on All State-owned Devices. 
Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Honorable Colleagues: 
It’s an honor to submit this testimony in support of my bill, LD 1007, An Act to Ban the Video 
Hosting Service T ikT 0k on all State-owned Devices. 
Following the introduction of this bill title, the Administration directed executive employees to 
remove the TikTok application from their work devices, and any personal devices connected toa 
state network. This was the right thing to do, and I commend them for taking this action. 
Unfortunately, this doesn’t go nearly far enough. 
The consensus of the intelligence community is overwhelming: TikTok isn’t just a video-hosting 
mobile application, it is a clear and present danger to our national security, and the executive, 
judicial, constitutional, and legislative employees who use this application on their Work devices 
are endangering not only their own privacy, but the conﬁdential records that are maintained by 
the State on behalf of the thousands of people and businesses who deal with state agencies and 
departments. 
In order to recognize the need for this legislation, we must fully understand the scope and 
breadth of TikTok’s corporate turpitude. 
In an effort to suppress critical articles and internal leaks, TikTok admitted to tracking the 
personal, physical movements and IP addresses of individual reporters covering the technology 
industry, and in doing so, they demonstrated not only their capacity, but also, perhaps more 
importantly, their capability, to do the unthinkable. They are now under federal criminal 
investigation for this appalling breach of privacy. 
TikTok has told the world that they have no compunction about collecting information about 
speciﬁc individuals and then proceeding to use that information for nefaﬁous purposes.
REP CARLOW TESTIMONY CONTINUED 
PAGE2 
But this is not the extent of my concern: TikTok is owned by ByteDance, which is based in 
China and subject to Chinese law. 
Companies based in China are required to turn over documents and records upon request of the 
Chinese Communist Party, and if TikTok has the capability to suweil journalists, then we have 
no reason to believe they can’t or won’t spy on State employees, and covertly collect the 
conﬁdential information of our constituents. 
In one loud voice, the current and previous Presidential Administration, the Department of 
Homeland Security, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the 
National Security Agency, and the Director of National Intelligence, are all telling Americans to 
delete this application. 
This legislation would direct all state employees to do just that, because we must do all in our 
power to prevent this dystopia from inﬁltrating our networks and endangering the conﬁdential 
information of Maine citizens. 
Thank you for your time, I would be happy to take any questions you might have. 
Sincerely, 
/ill/w‘~"”,£“”Q"“‘( 
Nathan Carlow 
State Representative
