~ 
,
% 
MAINE PHARMACY ASSOCIATIQN 
PO Box 5257 ] Augusta, ME I 04332 
March 16, 2023 
The Honorable Donna Bailey, Chair 
The Honorable Anne Perry, Chair 
The joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
RE: Testimony in favor of LD 899 An Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by Pharmacy Technician and Reduce 
Vaccine Administration Training Requirements for Pharmacists 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Committee: 
My name is Amelia Arnold and I am a resident of Winthrop, Maine, a licensed pharmacist employed by 
Community Pharmacies and the Legislative Liaison for the Maine Pharmacy Association. The MPA is the state 
pharmacy organization that addresses the advocacy, continuing education and professional needs of all licensed 
pharmacists, pharmacy technicians and student pharmacists in Maine. Our mission is to promote public health by 
advocating for the profession of pharmacy. On behalf of the Maine Pharmacy Association, I am testifying today in 
favor of LD 899. 
The bill in front of you today asks you to consider adding Maine to a list of growing states that have been 
working to codify a provision of the PREP Act that has allowed pharmacy technicians to administer certain 
vaccines. I'd love to tell you an exact number of States who have added this successful public health measure into 
law, but many are in the same position as Maine and are addressing this now. What I can tell you is the list of states 
who have already signed this into law includes both rural and urban states and spans the U.S.- including New 
Hampshire, Massachusetts, Alaska, Virginia and Florida to name a few. 
Today you will hear testimony that these technicians had a profound and positive impact in both large scale 
mass immunization clinics, and smaller retail pharmacies. You'll hear that both pharmacists and technicians alike 
found that allowing technicians to do this increased their job satisfaction, decreased their stress level, and 
increased their productivity. At last count, there are 543 pharmacy technicians licensed in Maine who are able to 
administer vaccines every day. During such a trying time in the health care world, could you imagine the impact on 
public health by allowing 543 trained technicians, some of whom have been vaccinating for over 2 years, to simply 
have to stop? 
We recognize that COVID brought extraordinary times and now that we are looking to get back to normal 
we should ask ourselves, what changes are worth hanging on to? Pharmacy technicians form the backbone of 
pharmacy practice- both in the community setting and in health system settings. By allowing pharmacy 
technicians to work to the full potential of their license while under the supervision of a pharmacist, we allow 
pharmacists to focus on the clinical items and patient care tasks that cannot be delegated to others. 
In addition, this bill looks to update requirements for pharmacists to become immunization certiﬁed. It is 
important to note that this law would not change what training is required, but would instead remove the 
timeframe during which this training must have been completed. When the Maine Pharmacy Act was initially 
updated allowing pharmacists to administer vaccines, a 3-year window was put in place for pharmacists obtaining 
licensure to have taken the training. Most often this training was toward the end of their pharmacy school 
education, so the 3-year time frame was not an issue. However, even before COVID, trainings were often being 
done earlier in the curriculum allowing student pharmacists to have more real-life hands on vaccine
2 
administration done under the direct supervision of their preceptors. Now with COVID, student pharmacists who 
quickly met the demand and were trained often took that class during their 15* professional year, meaning that 
when they graduate this spring they are likely more than 3-years out from their training. We face an entire class of 
interns graduating this May, and potentially again in future years, who would have to repeat this training. By 
removing this this 3-year window the law will catch up with the fact that these trainings and continued supervision 
and education of our interns means that interns will not need to spend the time and money to sit through the same 
training course that taught them the skills that they have been putting to use for our patients. 
The Maine Pharmacy Association is happy to answer any questions and work with the committee on this 
legislation. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Most Sincerely, 
.,;»w_ , ~;_,< (M or <_ a,\ 
Amelia Arnold, PharmD 
Legislative Liaison | Maine Pharmacy Association
