Christopher N Buchanan
Director, Public Affairs & State & Local 
Government Relations 
31 Home Depot Drive
PMB 295
Plymouth, MA 02360
Phone 617.997.2971
Chris.Buchanan@walmart.com
www.walmart.com
March 10, 2023
Representative Robert Nutting        
Cross Building, Room 220
c/o Legislative Information Office
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333
Re:  Support of LD 899 
Dear Representative Nutting:
Community-based pharmacists, pharmacy technicians, and pharmacy interns are integral 
members of the community that bring significant value to the individuals they serve.  The 
role of pharmacists is expanding in many locations, and pharmacists are in a unique position 
to provide a variety of clinical services intended to improve patient health outcomes while 
at the same time serve racially diverse communities.  This can include not only delivering 
effective and tailored pharmaceutical care, counseling, and education about medications, 
diet, health, and wellness, but also establishing meaningful, personal connections and 
building positive relationships.  Pharmacists are trusted health care professionals and, as 
the role of pharmacists expands, we could be a first stop on a patient’s health care journey, 
most frequently due to availability, affordability, and/or geography.  Nearly 90 percent of 
Americans live within 5 miles of a community pharmacy.1 
Doctors have historically had primary responsibility for providing care to patients, and we 
expect that to continue, but pharmacists can play a critical and complimentary role in 
providing essential clinical care to the public, particularly in health professional shortage 
areas. 
1 https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/prep-act-guidance.pdf 
From both a policy and patient health perspective, to reach the most vulnerable patient 
populations, pharmacists and pharmacy technicians must be able to practice to the full 
extent of their education and training.  Expanding the role of the pharmacy technician to 
other activities that do not explicitly require the professional judgment of a pharmacist, 
such as vaccine administration, will allow the pharmacist more time to furnish direct patient 
care. With this increased capacity, a pharmacist will be able to spend more time with 
community members, providing preventive services, educational counseling, medication 
therapy management, and more, which has the potential to contribute to better outcomes 
and support broader health and wellness in the population. 
Walmart is strongly supportive of LD 899, which amends the Maine Pharmacy Act to allow 
pharmacy technicians who are trained in vaccine administration and under the supervision 
of a pharmacist to administer vaccines.  Passage of this bill will help to maximize the use 
and value of pharmacy technicians without sacrificing patient safety, as well as help to 
reduce health disparities and bridge the gap for those who live in rural and medically 
underserved areas.  Because of our local accessibility, community pharmacies can help to 
advance health equity among patients, many of whom are medically or socially vulnerable. 
All individuals must have equal access to the quality, affordable health resources they 
deserve.  Modernizing pharmacy practice by recognizing the essential role that pharmacy 
technicians, working hand in hand with pharmacists, have in caring for Maine’s population 
will facilitate an important step towards advancing health equity in the state.
Thank you for your consideration and I urge your support of LD 899.
Sincerely, 
Christopher Buchanan
Director, Public Affairs and State and Local Government Relations 
Walmart Stores, Inc.
