__,; 45 Melville Street, Suite1 
‘§S§c.|l,- ‘ﬁn! ‘IQ Augusta, ME 04330 
M N E Phone: 207.6211 149 
VoiceofMaineRetail www.retailmaine.0rg 
March 16, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Chair 
Members of the Health Coverage lnsurance and Financial Services Committee 
RE: Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 899, An Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by 
Pharmacy Technicians and Reduce Vaccine Administration Training Requirements for 
Pharmacists 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage lnsurance and 
Financial Services Committee: 
My name is Curtis Picard and l am the President and CEO of the Retail Association of Maine.I 
am a resident of Topsham. We have more than 350 members statewide and represent retailers 
of all sizes, including chain and independent pharmacies. We are here today to testify in 
support of LD 899. Thank you to Representative Nutting of Oakland for submitting this 
legislation on behalf of Maine's pharmacists and pharmacy technicians. 
It has been almost three years to the day when COVID-19 changed all of our lives, anda 
number of professionals stepped up to help mitigate the crisis in a variety of settings. 
Pharmacists and pharmacy technicians were critical front line essential workers that helped 
with testing in the early days, and then helped vaccinate the majority of the population under 
the federal PREP Act authorization. Now that we have all come to manage that health risk 
better, the federal PREP Act will go away, and that may potentially include the authorization 
that allowed pharmacy technicians to administer vaccines to people who want them. Hundreds 
of pharmacy technicians are trained to administer vaccines, and l\/laine should make sure that 
authorization can continue. 
Let's face it. A lot of things changed during the pandemic, and the ability of pharmacy 
technicians to provide this service is one of the positives that came out of the pandemic. LD 899 
simply codifies the existing authorization and clarifies the time period when training occurs. The
Maine Board of Pharmacy is suggesting some reasonable changes that will help further clarify 
the existing authorization. if rules need to be promulgated, we strongly suggest that they are 
permissive so that technicians can continue to deliver this service without interruption. 
This bill has an emergency preamble. We are hopeful that the committee can work this bill 
quickly, and provide your unanimous support to this common sense piece of legislation. I urge 
you to vote LD 899 Ought to Pass. 
Sincerely, 
Curtis Picard, CAE, 
President and CEO
