The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people
TO: Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services
FROM: Dan Morin, Director of Communications and Government Affairs
DATE: Thursday, March 16, 2023
RE: SUPPORT with amendments 
LD 899; Authorize Vaccine Administration by Pharmacy Technicians and Reduce 
Vaccine Administration Training Requirements for Pharmacists
The Maine Medical Association appreciates the opportunity the submit the following comments 
in support of LD 899, Section 1. The MMA is the largest statewide professional association of 
physicians representing over 4,300 current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, 
organizations, and practice settings.
The is no public health issue more important than immunizations to protect families and 
communities against illness and death. Preventing the spread of disease is very important for 
people with weak immune systems. These people may not be able to get vaccines, or vaccines 
don't work well for them. Their only protection is for others to get vaccinated.
Vaccines are critical to support public health:
They cost less than getting treated for the disease,
The risk of getting a disease is much greater than the risk of having a serious reaction to 
the vaccine,
They are often needed to attend school, day care, employment, or when traveling to 
another country,
They reduce time missed from work or school due to illness or caring for a sick loved one,
They greatly reduce risks of community outbreaks of contagious diseases.
Pharmacy staff, and specifically pharmacy technicians, played a crucial role throughout the 
pandemic. LD 899 allows those critical contributions to be codified after the pandemic and any 
public health emergency.  It will improve public health, produce positive clinical outcomes, and 
reduce long-term health care costs for many Mainers.
Cont …
Direct Supervision
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. The Maine Pharmacy Act does not define direct supervision despite numerous mentions. 
We recommend adding a definition and suggest the following:
"Direct supervision" means that the pharmacist is onsite, personally approves and 
authorizes vaccine administration, and evaluates the person being immunized before they 
are dismissed.
Suggested Amendment
Evidence shows that having access to regular primary medical care helps prevent illness and 
death while improving health outcomes. In addition to its relationship to better health outcomes, 
access to regular primary medical care is associated with lower total costs of health services. 
Therefore, in the interest of maintaining care coordination, we respectfully present the following 
amendment for consideration after Section 6
Sec. 1.  32 MRSA §13831, sub-§7 is enacted to read:
7.  Documentation and other requirements.  A pharmacist or pharmacy technician who 
administers vaccines pursuant to this section shall:
A.  Provide the person receiving the vaccine with a written record of the vaccines administered 
that includes the dates of administration. 
B.  Establish an immunization information system to document vaccines administered and 
provide to the person’s primary care practitioner a record of the vaccines administered that includes 
the dates of administration to keep patient vaccination records up to date to ensure complete and 
accurate information about the  patient’s immunization history for the primary care practitioner.
The Maine Medical Association thanks the committee for accepting our comments. We look 
forward to participating in discussions prior to, and during the work session.
