1 STATE OF MAINE 
1 "* 3 
- 
-:- 
. DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL
l 
g AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 
Q‘, #1-\‘ 
~ ' ‘ 
- 
OFFICE OF PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL - 
,i5‘"‘*i,1"' .'i’t 
REGULATION 
I 
35 STATE HOUSE STATION A""° ‘~- Head 
"r;;;{¢£ ‘-E."i§£iii; ” A 
AUGUSTA, MAINE A 
°° 
,'5‘:l‘;Zfi??f§1:< ‘3’1‘{F“ 
Govemor 04333-0035 
TESTIMONY OF GERALDINE BETTS- 
BOARD MANAGER, OFFICE OF PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL 
REGULATION
' 
_ 
IN SUPPORT OF‘ L.D. 899 
“An Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by Pharmacy Technicians and Reduce Vaccine 
Administration Training Requirement for Pharmacists ” 
Sponsored by Representative Robert W. Nutting 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMIVIITTEE ON- 
HEALTH COVERAGE, INSURANCE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
1 
p Public Hearing: March 16, 2023, 1:00 PM 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Committee, my name is Jeri 
Betts, and I am a Regulatory Board Manager With the Ofﬁce of Professional and Occupational 
Regulation (OPOR). I am a board manager for the Board of Pharmacy, six (6) other allied health 
boards, and a licensing program. I am here to speak in support of LD 899 on behalf of OPOR. 
While we recommend supporting this bill, we do so with the caveat that the proposal needs 
additional training, supervision and administrative requirements and needs to reinstate a 
requirement which it eliminates for pharmacists. 
This bill authorizes licensed pharmacy technicians who obtain board certiﬁcation to administer 
vaccines under the direct supervision of a pharmacist. The bill also removes the timing 
requirement that phannacists must complete certain training within three (3) years prior to 
applying for board-certi ﬁcation to administer drugs or vaccines.A 
Licensed pharmacy technicians were ﬁrst authorized to administer vaccines during the COVID- 
l9 public health emergency (PHE). Pursuant to the Eighth Amendment to Declaration Under the 
Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness Act for Medical Countermeasures Against 
COVID-19 08/04/2021 (“Prep Act”), pharmacy technicians have been permitted to administer 
vaccines upon completion of certain training and registering with the Board of Pharmacy during 
the duration of the federal Public Health Emergency (PHE) for COVID-19. The federal PHE is 
set to expire at the end of day on May ll, 2023 HI-IS.gov 02/09/2023 F act Sheet: COVID-19' 
Public Health Emergency Transition Roadmap. 
4 " ‘ OFFICES: GARDINER ANNEX, 76 NORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE' 
PHONE; (207)624-8511 (VOICE) 'I'l‘Yusers: callMaineRelay71l FAX: (207)624 8595 
Geraldine.L.Betts@maine.gov (207)44 1-146l
Prep HCIFS.— L.D. 899 — Public Hearing March l6, 2023 
Testimony of Jeri Betts, DPFR/OPOR 
Page |2 
Pharmacy technicians have generally been successfully administering vaccines for 
approximately three years under the Prep Act. However, it is important to note that the only 
prerequisites for a Maine pharmacy technician license are to pay an application fee and be 
employed by a pharmacy. It is therefore essential that any state law permitting pharmacy 
technicians to administer vaccines include sufﬁcient training and supervision requirements. 
"
\ 
Pharmacies, like all health care settings, are experiencing signiﬁcant stafﬁng shortages. Without 
the assistance of properly trained and certiﬁed pharmacy techs, pharmacists may not be able to 
keep up with demands for pharmaceutical health care. There are currently 2,868 pharmacy 
technicians licensed by the Board, of which 541 are board-certi ﬁed to administer vaccines under 
the Prep Act. There are currently 2,381 pharmacistslicensed by the board, of which 1,378 are 
board-certi ﬁed to administer drugs and vaccines.» 
Please consider the following recommendations: - 
The bill, as drafted, provides a pharmacy technician must ﬁrst complete a certiﬁcation 
program approved by the board and have at least 6 hours of vaccine-related training that 
includes, at a minimum, training on the safe and effective administration of vaccines, 
including potential allergic reactions to vaccines. These minimum requirements omit 
required CPR training. By comparison, the Prep Act deﬁned a training program and included 
CPR training.- 
We recommend that the bill be amended to give the board explicit rulemaking authority to 
set training standards that must, at a minimum, include hands on injection technique, clinical 
evaluation of indications and contraindications of vaccines, the recognition and treatment of 
emergency reactions to vaccines, and basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation. We also . 
recommend that the amendment clarify that any requirements in the bill are the minimum of 
what the Board must require for training and that the Board is granted the authority to 
promulgate routine technical rules to implement this section. As the science and protocols 
related to vaccines and vaccine administration evolve rapidly, the Board will need sufﬁcient 
ﬂexibility through rulemaking to deﬁne training and other requirements to keep up with 
those rapid changes. 
The bill does not deﬁne direct supervision. Under the Prep Act, direct supervision is 
described as requiring the supervising pharmacist to be readily and immediately available to 
the immunizing qualiﬁed pharmacy technician. We recommend including rulemaking 
authority for the Board to deﬁne direct supervision. 
We recommend that administrative requirements such as an application and fee be included. 
While the Board did not assess a registration fee during the pandemic, going forward the 
Board will need to assess a fee to cover expenses associated with application and 
qualiﬁcationcredential review, processing, and issuance of the certiﬁcation. 
Finally, with the respect to pharmacists, the bills repeals the 3-year timeline by which the 
pharmacist ’s training must be completed prior to an application for board-certi ﬁcation in 
drug and vaccine administration. ' 
Eliminating the 3-year timeline means that a pharmacist
l
2
l
2
i
3
2
E
E
5
1
5
l
1 
A Prep HCIF S — L.D. 899 — Public Hearing March 16, 2023 
Testimony of Jeri Betts, DPFR/OPORP 
Page |3 . 
could qualify with training that could be 5, 10, or 15 years old. Again, we stress that vaccine 
and vaccine administration evolve rapidly, and it is essential that a\pharmacist ’s training be 
current. We recommend maintaining the current requirement of a 20-hour course of study 
and training speciﬁcally around drug and vaccine administration within the three years prior 
to applying for the certiﬁcation.A 
Thank you for your time and I will be happy to answer your questions now or at the work- 
session.
