4 SCHOOL OF 
i\Qv§; 11$ PHARIVIAGY 
March 16, 2023 
The Honorable Donna Bailey, Chair 
The Honorable Anne Perry, Chair4 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
RE: Testimony in support ofLD 899 An Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by Pharmacy Technicians and 
Reduce Vaccine Administration Training Requirements for Pharmacists 
Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage and Financial Services Committee: 
My name is Kaitlyn Dunham and I am a second-year pharmacy student at Husson University. -I got the opportunity 
to take my immunization training as a technician the year before I started my professional phase of pharmacy V 
school. Thanks to this opportunity my clinical experiences have been more beneficial to not only me and my 
education but also to my patients and the pharmacists I have worked with. 
I got certified when the COVID vaccine first came out and worked every Tuesday and Thursday at the highly 
praised mass vaccination site at the Bangor Cross Insurance Center vaccination clinic for almost the entirety of the 
clinic. During this time, I was able to immunize roughly 50-60 people per day thanks to my training. Not only wasI 
able to help get everyone possible vaccinated to hopefully stop the spread of COVID-19 but the experience I gained 
from this was irreplaceable. My confidence and technique improved thanks to this experience that I would not 
have gotten if I was not able to do my immunization training early on in my schooling. 
This past summer I was at Walgreens on Broadway in Bangor for my first clinical rotation or IPPE. During my time 
there I was able to do every adult vaccine that came in, which was around 20 a day. Since I was certified and able to 
do this the one pharmacist that was working was able to continue checking the hundreds of prescriptions they had 
to verify. On average I saved that pharmacist at least an hour a day by being able to administer the vaccines. That is 
an hour that they got to continue verifying new orders from doctors, verifying filled prescriptions and making sure 
that our patients coming in got their medications safely and on time. This also allowed me to have even more 
practice giving vaccinations and get to communicate with patients. Some of my most valuable moments from that 
clinical rotation was during the time I was giving vaccinations to patients. I can also say that all of my patients were 
very excited to see my Husson University white coat and thought it was amazing that I was able to be gaining this 
experience so early in my schooling. 
Without the opportunity to take my immunization training so early in my career I would have missed out on the 
opportunity to give hundreds of vaccinations. I also would have missed out on the opportunity to grow my 
communication skills with patients and the pharmacist I worked with would've lost hours of their time getting 
medications out to our patients. 
Husson University's School of Pharmacy is happy to answer any questions and work with the committee on this 
legislation. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Most sincerely, 
WW ibllw 
Kaitlyn Dunham, Doctor of Pharmacy Candidate 
Husson University 
1Co||ege Circle Bangor, ME 04401-2929 l 800.448.7766 l 207.941.7000 I fax 207.992.1954 I hussonedu
