Kellie Daigle
Lincoln, Maine
LD 899
March 15, 2023
The Honorable Donna Bailey
The Honorable Anne Perry
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
RE: Testimony in support of LD 899-An Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by
Pharmacy Technicians and Reduce Vaccine Administration Training
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage and 
Financial Services Committee:
My name is Kellie Daigle, a pharmacist at Hannaford Pharmacy in Lincoln, the 
community where I reside. I have been practicing pharmacy for 24 years. I am 
submitting testimony in support of LD 899. 
This bill is very important to authorize the growth and development of our 
technicians, allowing them to be stronger support to all pharmacists, our teams, and 
ultimately healthcare. I have three certified immunizing technicians at my location, 
with a fourth certifying soon. They are each invaluable to me. A stronger team 
provides me with increased efficiency, faster and safer service to our customers and 
allows me more time to be available to the people who seek my professional guidance
every single day. 
This is an incredible opportunity for all pharmacies to support our Maine 
communities. Our customers deserve the increased and dependable availability we 
will be able to consistently provide. I am proud of the hard work and dedication of our
pharmacy technicians. They feel more valuable, more appreciated and as a result, they
have become superior at their job performance. They are compassionate and 
supportive. They are competent and willing. They are making a difference.  
One of my immunizing technicians lost her mother to COVID only one month before 
vaccine became available. This technician has been a great help in offering 
vaccinations. She takes this opportunity very personal and enthusiastically vaccinates 
to prevent illness and death. She does not want anyone to experience the loss she did. 
I am very dedicated in advocating and administering immunizations to anyone 
seeking this service. I do not turn those away seeking immunizations, sometimes 
vaccinating as many as 50 customers by myself in a day. Pharmacists and technicians 
are on the front lines, available every single day, 7 days per week, mornings and 
evenings.  We are the most accessible healthcare providers. We are reaching some of 
the population who do not have a primary care provider, so they come to see us for 
guidance and immunizations. Our communities trust their pharmacies and we owe it 
to them to always provide the best service and protection. Allowing our technicians to
assist us with vaccinations with be beneficial in providing this service. 
In Lincoln, I had customers that drove 4 hours to receive a COVID vaccine at the start
of the pandemic. I remember one senior female who had not left her house in over a 
year. Her son drove her all the way up to Lincoln from 3 hours away to receive the 
vaccine and she was very emotional and grateful.  It is our duty to provide care and 
protection to our communities. Technicians who vaccinate support our role in offering
this care and protection to our population. These technicians will assist me, and all 
pharmacists, in providing more vaccinations that will result in illness prevention and 
saving lives. This is one of the greatest responsibilities of our profession and our 
leaders. This is a great privilege.
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to testify in support of LD 899. I am 
honored and proud to work in pharmacy. I truly believe we can make a positive 
difference in our Maine communities. 
Respectfully,
Kellie Daigle, Rph.
Hannaford Pharmacy
Lincoln, Maine

