. 
j SCHOOLOF 
2; 118 PHARMACYA 
March 16,2023 
The Honorable Donna Bailey, Chair 
The Honorable Anne Perry, Chair . 
The Ioint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services' 
RE: Testimony in support of LDLB99 An Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by Pharmacy Technicians and Reduce Vaccine 
Administration Training Requirements for Pharmacists 
Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage and Financial Services Committee: 
My name is Kelsie Snow, and I am a resident of Carmel, Maine. I am a licensed pharmacist employed by Husson University in 
the pharmacy program where I teach a number of topics, including pharmacy law. I am also one of the very few that can teach 
both the pharmacist and technician immunization programs. 
I am certain that the intent of the original law and the stipulation that the training be completed within three years of licensure 
was to ensure that pharmacists are recently trained to best serve the public; however, it is having the opposite effect. The 
updates in LD 899 will ensure optimally trainedimmunizers. The Doctor of Pharmacy program issix years long. Once 
completed, the graduate must pass two licensing exams before they can practice, which is often a lengthy process. To meet the 
requirementsof the law interns do not take the training until they are within two years of graduation. This has resulted in 
pharmacists that have only ever administered the practice injections during the training program before they are practicing 
independently. I have seen this multiple times in my short tenure as an instructor. Other states do not have this time limit and 
train their interns far earlier in the program. As one of my students explained, by removing this time limit the students will 
gain, at a minimum, 240 hours of directly supervised experience during their rotations. The difference I have seen in the 
current pharmacy interns has been astounding; their conﬁdence and competence has skyrocketed relative to those that 
matriculated prior to the PREP Act's authority. 
Though the title of the bill is misleading, I fervently support LD 899. This bill will NOT reduce training that pharmacists 
receive. In actuality, the training they will receive will increase significantly. The content of the training does not change, the 
interns will simply be receiving it earlier. 
The other key part of this bill is to allow trained technicians to continue to administer vaccines under a pharmacist ’s direct 
supervision. I staunchly support this for reasons that I will outline, but I would like to start with what this bill does NOT do. 
First, it does not reduce training requirements and it does not permit technicians to make clinical judgements that require the 
training and education of a pharmacist. Placing a needle in a patient's arm is technical and does not require clinical judgment, 
but it does require patience, attention, and the ﬂexibility to spend an extra five, ten, or fifteen minutes with that patient if 
necessary. This bill makes sense for the people of Maine and the healthcare landscape by increasing access to care, which is 
sorely needed. 
Maine consistently has the lowest vaccination rates in New England and the highest need for healthcare workers. Pharmacy is 
well-positioned to help address that void, but the support of capable and trained technicians is needed. Given the state of 
healthcare and the poor working conditions in many pharmacies, reducing the resources available to provide critical services 
does not make sense. This bill helps to remedy that. If you are still not convinced after hearing the testimonies in support of 
this bill, I invite you to complete the technician training program and CPR courses, both of which are required before 
administering immunizations. 
Husson University's School of Pharmacy is happy to answer any questions and work with the committee on this legislation. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Most sii cerely, 
létii/,Iilgi.MM 
Kelsie Snow,kP’harmD 
Assistant Professor of Pharmacy Practice 
Husson University 
lCollege Circle Bangor, ME 04401-2929 | 800.448.7766 1 207.941.7000 | fax 207.992.1954 | hussonedu
