March 16, 2023 
The Honorable Donna Bailey 
The Honorable Anne Perry, 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
RE: Testimony in support of LD 899- An Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by Pharmacy 
Technicians and Reduce Vaccine Administration Training 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage and Financial Services 
Committee: 
My name is Laurie Raven, a resident of Appleton, Maine and a pharmacy technician at the Camden 
Hannaford. I am submitting testimony in support of LD 899. I have worked as a pharmacy technician for 
over 6 years. Prior to my work as a pharmacy technician, I was a medical assistant for 5 years anda 
medic for 20 years before my retirement from the Air Force. I have been an active immunizer in all these 
settings. 
When the PREP Act was put in place to allow pharmacy technicians to immunize, I was happy to take the 
opportunity to provide this service. I am a strong believer in prevention from immunizations being a lot 
better than treatment from not being protected. I believe the strong COVID immunization rates in the 
state of Maine were impacted by the ability for technicians to immunize. We are helping get more 
patients vaccinated and protected. Continuing to allow technicians to immunize after the PREP Act also 
provides added abilities to the skill set of technicians and the career path. 
Throughout the COVID pandemic, we saw more patients turn to the pharmacy for their vaccination 
needs beyond just the COVID vaccine. We need technicians to be able to continue to administer vaccines 
to meet the needs of our communities and maintain high vaccination rates. 
Technician immunizers help spread the workload throughout the pharmacy department and take 
pressure off the pharmacist. Many pharmacies have one pharmacist on duty which sometimes limits 
how many immunizations can be administered in a day. Although the technician is giving the shot, the 
pharmacist is always available to counsel and answer questions while continuing to process prescriptions 
and keep the bench from getting backed up. Technicians certiﬁed to immunize can continue to take care 
of the customers waiting for vaccines. 
In my experience, patients who come in for vaccines feel conﬁdent the technician immunizer will take 
care of them. By the patient using the pharmacy for the vaccination needs, they can do it at the 
convenience of their schedule without having to wait at a doctor's ofﬁce or pay a copay for a doctor's 
appointment. 
I am proud to be a technician immunizer and to have the ability to help serve my community. Thank you 
for the opportunity to provide testimony for this important bill LD 899.
