 
P.O. Box 261 Augusta, ME 04332 | 207-204-8800
March 16, 2023
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair
Representative Anne Perry, Chair
Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee
RE: Testimony, LD 899 Resolve, An Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by 
Pharmacy Technicians and Reduce Vaccine Administration Training Requirements for 
Pharmacists
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health Coverage and Financial 
Services Committee:
My name is Matthew Marston, I am a resident of Hampden and the Legislative Liaison on the Maine 
Society of Health System Pharmacists Board of Directors. Today I am submitting testimony on 
behalf of the Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists, an organization that has more than 300 
members statewide and primarily represents individual Pharmacists, Technicians and students who 
practice in a health-system setting. I am testifying today in support of LD 899.
Under the Federal PREP Act pharmacy technicians were granted the ability to undergo a 6 hour 
accredited training course on safe injection technique to administer COVID-19 vaccinations under 
the direct oversight of a pharmacist to patients over the age of 3.  This amendment to the Act took 
place in October of 2020 across the United States and pharmacy technicians have been vital since in 
enabling pharmacies to keep up with volume demands on vaccinations.  In fact, organizations that 
monitor for medication safety events such as the Institute for Safe Medical Practices (ISMP) have 
noted no demonstrable increase in medication safety events with vaccinations as a result of this 
change.
For sake of comparison, a Medical Assistant (MA), working in a physician practice under the 
supervision of a physician in the State of Maine require no specific accredited training on vaccine 
administration or professional license to be able to administer vaccines to any age group including 
those under the age of 3.  MAs provide the majority of vaccinations in a physician practice setting 
and have safely for decades.  What is being proposed in this bill to allow for pharmacy technicians 
to continue having the ability to vaccinate patients over the age of 3 under the supervision of a 
pharmacist with specific training requirements validated by the Maine Board of Pharmacy, 
represents a greater restriction than what we have in place for other disciplines and will provide 
immense relief for our already strained community pharmacy infrastructure in our State.
The elimination of the requirement for pharmacists to have completed an accredited vaccine 
training program within the last 3 years to obtain a license to vaccinate in Maine is also highly 
supported by MSHP.  With pharmacies in our State challenged to recruit pharmacists, it places 
unnecessary barriers to require a pharmacist from out of State to retake a 20 hour vaccine training 
program who has already completed one and has been vaccinating patients in their prior work 
within other States.  Maine is an outlier in specifying a time limit for when this training was 
completed and this bill will help position Maine for greater success in recruiting talent into our 
workforce.
 
P.O. Box 261 Augusta, ME 04332 | 207-204-8800
The Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists would be happy to work with the committee in 
any way we can on LD 899. Please reach out if we can be of service.
Kind Regards,
Matthew Marston, PharmD, MBA, BCPS, BCOP
Legislative Liaison| Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists
