The Honorable Donna Bailey, Chair
The Honorable Anne Perry, Chair
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
RE: Testimony in support of LD-899. An Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by Pharmacy Technicians and Reduce Vaccine Administration 
Training.
March 16th, 2023
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage and Insurance and Financial Services Committee
My Name is Paul J Martel and I have had the honor and pleasure of being a retail pharmacist for the past 28 years. From the moment I walked 
into Western New England College of Pharmacy back in 1990 in Springfield Massachusetts to present date, I have been able to influence 
patient’s quality of life through my caring demeanor, my patient focused decisions, and my true passion to help others.
My first assignment in pharmacy school was in a class called “history of pharmacy” and I was asked to write about what/whom I thought would 
help to write the next chapter about the innovation of pharmacy in the year 2025.  The first thought that came to mind was something that I’ve 
believed in since I was first hired at Laverdiere’s Drug stores back in 1985 in Rumford Maine.  I wrote a researched and what I knew to be a fact 
based and innovative paper on the evolution of the pharmacy technician as the future of Pharmacy.  Due to my professor’s disagreement with 
my belief, I received a D on that paper and ended up fighting for the pharmacy technician by going to the Dean of the school and having him 
weigh in on what my final grade should be.  Bias and bigotry I wasn’t going to accept then and won’t to this day.
So why did I tell you that story, it is because I have always known and felt deep down that profession of pharmacy would evolve into an 
amazing part of the healthcare model for many reasons.  A pharmacy technician however,  I have always believed would be the next 
underutilized part of the team that could help us achieve the next level of patient safety and care.
LD899 is an Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by Pharmacy Technicians which I support completely as evidenced above.  This Act has the 
ability to improve workplace safety and working conditions, give more patients access to life saving vaccinations, continue the great work many 
technicians performed during the pandemic, and allow the evolution of the Pharmacy technician role into a career instead of just a job.  This 
Act has the ability to also help our pharmacists in the retail setting reduce stress and fatigue, improve patient vaccination compliance, balance 
the workload to allow for more patient interaction and counseling, as well as improve our relationships and impact on the communities and 
patients that we are blessed to serve each day.
As a local Mainer who loves the state and the people I have grown up with for the past 51 years, my passion and motivation each day are the 
individuals I work with- my technician team.  I could not do the work I do each day without my Pharmacy technician’s as they are the glue that 
allows it all to come together. Becoming nationally certified, providing exemplary customer service, assisting the pharmacist on the bench etc 
are just a few of the asks of our pharmacy technicians yet we don’t allow them to administer life saving vaccines to patients who need and 
deserve the best chance at living a long and healthy life.  Pharmacy technicians are an untapped valuable resource that want to expand their 
scope of practice through vaccine administration to improve our vaccination rates for the communities we serve while improving patient access 
to much needed and much deserved quality healthcare.
Eleanor Roosevelt said it best, “I am who I am because of the choice I made yesterday.  Pharmacy technicians have made the choice to step up 
to the plate and take their rightful place on the pharmacy team especially during the pandemic.  If they were good enough to provide vaccine 
administration through one of the toughest periods in our lives, have they not earned the trust and respect of the American public to continue 
providing these life altering vaccines each day. These unique and talented individuals have chosen that improving public health is their passion 
and the motivation to evolve within the healthcare team.  
I know your dying to know- the Dean agreed with me on my passion to fight for the pharmacy technician. He gave us both an A on that paper 
back in 1990.  The question is will you give pharmacy technicians the same opportunity as he did and allow them the ability to administer 
vaccines to patients who want and deserve them just as the PREP act did?
Thank you for your consideration on LD899
 
Paul J Martel Rph 
