March 16, 2023 
The Honorable Donna Bailey 
The Honorable Anne Perry, 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
RE: Testimony in support of LD 899- An Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by Pharmacy 
Technicians and Reduce Vaccine Administration Training 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage and Financial Services 
Committee: 
My name is Robert Bryant and I am a pharmacist at Hannaford Pharmacy. I have been practicing 
pharmacy for over 30 years and I am a current resident of Farmington. I am submitting testimony in 
support of LD 899. 
Pharmacists. We are an interesting bunch, aren't we? We stand behind a counter, seemingly counting 
pills, and spring into action when a patient has a question, or a consultation is required. But what does 
being a community pharmacist really mean these days? To me, it means being the most accessible part 
of a patient's healthcare team, 7 days a week. I would say it means an ever-changing day of prioritization 
while possessing the ability to wear various hats, and all with the same goal in mind: to safely dispensing 
accurate prescriptions and immunizations while building positive relationships with your patients. The 
early days of the pandemic challenged all of that, placing stresses on our teams that we had never seen. 
While businesses shuttered and working from home became the new norm, pharmacies remained open 
and the stressors on pharmacists were increasing exponentially. Thankfully, the PREP Act came along 
allowing Certiﬁed technicians to undergo further training, and the ability to immunize patients. 
This was such a critical step in combating the pandemic. What started out as a single shot, quickly 
expanded to one, then two, then multiple booster shots. These immunizations were quite literally, 
lifesaving. Were it not for the expanded role of the pharmacy technicians and their ability to provide 
COVID19 immunizations, accessibility to health care would have been substantially diminished. It is 
paramount that we keep this intact and allow pharmacy technicians the ability to serve their 
communities by administering vaccines. They want to help and their proven skills warrant such. 
I was very much an early proponent of my technicians becoming certiﬁed immunizers, encouraging them 
to complete the training, CPR, etc. In doing so, it elevated their skillset, their self-confidence and their 
overall performance. Although they have always been an essential component to any pharmacy ’s 
success, they too were now providing life saving vaccines to their patients and helping to keep their 
community safe. 
Simply put, we are at a turning point in the decisions we make surrounding LD-899. Do we take a step 
backward and return to pre-pandemic practices, or do we seize the opportunity to advance healthcare 
access in Maine forward? If we are to provide this increased access, it is only logical that pharmacy 
technicians be authorized, under the supervision of a licensed pharmacist, to perform immunizations. 
Please consider the following when making your decision: 
-pharmacy school enrollments are down and many Maine pharmacists are approaching retirement 
-prescribers under greater demands, which makes pharmacists a logical choice in providing 
immunizations 
-pharmacists are the most accessible portion of a patient's healthcare team, 7 days a week. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. It has been an honor.1
l
I
i
2
I
I
I
I 
‘E 
I.
I
l
