MaineH.ealth 
Local Health Systems 
Franl<li.n Conununity 
I-lc'.~\l.th N ctwork 
Lincohillealth 
l\'IaineI~Iealtli ’Care At Home 
l\’lai.ne Behavioral I-Iealthcare 
lvlenizwrial Hospital 
Maine Mctlical Center 
l\/lid Coast‘-Parkview Health 
NorDx 
Penliay Medical Center 
Southern l\/laine Healthi Care 
VValdo County General Hospital 
Vi/Testern Maine Heairli 
Part of the 
MaineHealth Family 
MaineHcalth Accountable 
Care Organization 
MaineHea1th Afﬁliates 
l\'iaioeGeneral Health 
New Englnml Rehabilitation 
Hospital of Portland 
St. Mary‘s Health System l\/laineHealth 
Testimony of Tom Edge, MaineHealth 
in Support of LD 899, “An Act to Authorize Vaccine 
Administration by Pharmacy Technicians and Reduce Vaccine 
Administration Training Requirements for Pharmacists ” 
Thursday, March 16, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services, my name is Tom Edge, Director of Retail Pharmacy Services at 
MaineHealth, and I am here to testify in favor of LD 899, “An Act to 
Authorize Vaccine Administration by Pharmacy Technicians and Reduce 
Vaccine Administration Training Requirements for Pharmacists. ” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-proﬁt health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to communities throughout Maine and 
New Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support 
our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest 
in America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty 
physician services to a continuum of behavioral health care services, 
community and tertiary hospital care, home health care and a lab. 
I have worked in retail pharmacies since 2014. Before the Public 
Readiness and Emergency Preparedness Act, it could be difﬁcult to 
manage vaccinations in a busy retail pharmacy. On a typical day, you 
have many competing priorities to juggle: answering patient questions in 
person and on the phone, ﬁlling and verifying prescriptions, directing 
technician staff, and administering vaccinations. When ﬂu shot season 
comes around, you can have as many as 100 or more ﬂu shots to work into 
that already busy day. These were accomplished exclusively bya 
pharmacist. If you were lucky you might get some extra staffing during 
ﬂu shot season, but many pharmacists were expected to just ﬁgure it out. 
When the federal government first started discussing the colossal effort 
that was going to be needed to deliver the ﬁrst rounds of the COVID 
vaccine, there must have been a pharmacist in the room, thank goodness. 
There was no way that that undertaking would have been successful using 
the same structure as had been used in the past. 
When the announcement came that properly trained technicians would be 
allowed to vaccinate, I was very excited. The day that I announced this in 
my pharmacy at Pen Bay Medical Center, I had an experienced technician 
sign up right away. She was in one of the ﬁrst training classes, and braved 
a snowstorm to get to Portland for the skills training portion. She was 
110 Free Street * Portland, ME 04101 Phone: 207—66l—700l Fax: 207--661-7029 mainehealtli org
with us from the very beginning of our public COVID vaccination clinics. She personally 
delivered around 2500 vaccines professionally and safely, and that was just one technician. 
Multiply that by the probably hundreds of technicians that were certiﬁed to vaccinate, and you 
can see that we would have had a much harder time reaching the numbers that We did without 
them. 
For her, this was a point of pride. It gave a technician who had 20 plus years of technician 
service under her belt something new to learn, something new to accomplish, and something 
important to assist with. I don’t see any reason to remove that permission now. It is good for 
community access to vaccinations, it is good for pharmacists, and it is good for pharmacy 
technicians. 
I also am in favor of the piece of the bill that removes the “within 3 years” portion of the training 
requirement for pharmacists. Immunizing pharmacists are required to stay up-to-date on 
immunizations through yearly CEs, and there are many resources available to pharmacists who 
would like to refresh their training beyond those CEs. 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
