The Honorable Donna Bailey
The Honorable Anne Perry, 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
RE: Testimony in support of LD 899- An Act to Authorize Vaccine Administration by Pharmacy 
Technicians and Reduce Vaccine Administration Training
March 16, 2023
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage and Financial Services 
Committee: 
My name is Wendy Boynton, and I am a pharmacist and the Director of Pharmacy Operations at 
Hannaford Supermarkets. I am submitting testimony in support of LD 899. I have been a practicing 
pharmacist for 30 years. Although I am currently a resident of Scarborough, Maine, I have practiced 
throughout Maine including  in Millinocket and Lincoln for many years at the beginning of my career. 
Hannaford Supermarket and Pharmacy operates 58 pharmacies in Maine that provide access to 
medication and professional expertise throughout our state.  Hannaford has always been proud of our 
pharmacy teams and their dedication to communities, this especially came through during the 
pandemic.  Our hardworking, caring and highly educated pharmacists are proud about how our 
profession was recognized for the work that we do in our communities.  
Now is the time to also recognize the key role technicians play in the pharmacy community.  They work 
alongside our pharmacists and are a vital part of the team.  During the pandemic, the pressure was on 
pharmacy teams and we stepped up by delivering care and expertise to our communities. And we were 
able to do so with the support of our technicians.  And in fact, we couldn’t have provided the service we 
did to our communities without them.  
Hannaford took the lead early in the pandemic by utilizing the Public Readiness and Emergency 
Preparedness Act (PREP)to provide training to those technicians who wanted to assist our pharmacists 
immunize and help our communities. Hannaford technicians were eager and proud to enhance their 
knowledge, help where they could, and be one of the crucial resources for the public during this health 
crisis.  Allowing technicians to be trained immunizers, gave the Hannaford Pharmacy team the ability to 
provide vaccines to those who wanted them without compromising other important pharmaceutical and 
service needs.   
This additional training and responsibility also increased technicians’ ability to enhance their 
contributions to the team and customers and grow their career potential.  As a result, they provided 
thousands of vaccines to community members over the course of the last two years—and did so without 
negative incident.
Hannaford believes this protocol should be allowed to continue.  Our communities will continue to need 
the services that our pharmacies provide.  To ensure that there is proper and timely access for our 
communities, our technicians must be allowed to continue being trained immunizers and provide this 
service to assist our pharmacists with the ever-increasing demands as our state is experiencing 
pharmacist shortages in the community setting
As you may know, Hannaford operates in four other states besides Maine, including New Hampshire, 
Vermont, New York and Massachusetts. Both Massachusetts and New Hampshire have recently passed 
laws to continue this practice.  Our teams are excited by this, and we have adjusted our training and 
development to support them.   
Thank you for your time and I hope that LD899 will be supported by this committee.
Wendy Boynton
Director Pharmacy Operations
Hannaford
