MAINE ASSOCIATION 
gY 
HEALTH PLANS 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt 5/9/23 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
In Opposition to LD 590 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to Health Care 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. Our private 
and non-profit insurance caniers provide or administer health insurance coverage to about 
600,000 Maine people. Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people 
by promoting affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
A Constitutional Amendment establishing a right to health care without a clear path to achieving 
that objective could upend the state’s health coverage progress and set Maine on a path toa 
destination it can neither afford nor achieve on its own. 
Last Fall, Governor Mills announced that Maine led the nation in reducing its uninsured rate and 
that nearly 95% of Mainers are now covered by health insurance. ‘ Coverage rates are even 
higher among Maine children. We have made progress but can always do more to expand access 
to quality care and improve affordability. We also need to ensure that Mainers who gained 
coverage through the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency remain covered through 
red etemiination. 
Maine has already learned that we cannot make the journey alone. 
In 2021, the Maine Legislature enacted “An Act to Support Universal Health Care.” The law 
establishes the Maine Health Care Act to provide all medically necessary healthcare services for 
all residents of the State. The effective date of the legislation is contingent on the enactment of 
federal law authorizing a state to obtain a Waiver to establish a state-based universal health care 
plan and to receive federal financing for that plan? 
Amending the Maine Constitution to include a right to health care means Maine and the 
Legislature will not be able to wait for the federal government. Activists and litigators will take 
1 https:[/wwwmaine.gov[governor/mills/ne ws/ maine -has-I arge st-decline-uninsured-rate~under-governor-mil|s- 
according —new-federal-data-2022 
Z htt(.1[/wwwmaineleglslature.org/legis/bills[getPDF.asp_?paoer=HPO773&item=3&snum=130 
P.O. Box I93, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
to the court system to force action without consideration for fiscal constraints or the need for 
collaboration with the federal government. 
For example, the right to food amendment added to the Maine Constitution has prompted a 
lawsuit suggesting the state’s ban on Sunday hunting is now unconstitutional.3 
Maine now devotes 23% of its GDP to healthcare expenditures. That is seven percentage points 
higher than the national average and is second only to West Virginia in terms of the state 
economic output consumed by health care expenses.4 
At nearly a quarter of the economy, health care is already a Maine priority consuming our 
attention and too many resources. We need to work better and together to develop a plan that 
improves outcomes, expands outcomes, and keeps health care affordable. 
The proposed Constitutional Amendment does not offer us a plan, and we urge you to vote 
Ought Not to Pass on LD 590. 
3 
httos:Z/www.bangordaiIvnews.com/2022/O4/27/politics/m aines-sundav-h un ting-b an-tarszeted-bv-lst-Iawsuit- 
xoasg1i29i[ 
4 https:[/www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-svstems/statistics —trends-and- 
reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/nationalhealthaccountsstatehealthaccountsresidence 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
