 
Testimony in Support of LD 590: 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish  
a Right to Health Care 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee 
May 9, 2023 
Daniel C. Bryant, M.D. 
Cape Elizabeth, ME 
 
My name is Daniel C. Bryant, MD. During my medical career, patients of mine have 
dropped out of care or declined referrals or tests because they had no, or inadequate health care 
coverage; and I’ve seen others in the Emergency Room who couldn’t afford critical follow up 
care. Experiences like these compel me to offer the following testimony in support of LD 590. 
 
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights1 states that “Everyone has the right to a 
standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, 
including… medical care” and the World Health Organization Constitution2 states that 
“Governments have a responsibility for the health of their peoples.” Yet, “the United States has 
no formally codified right to health, nor does it participate in a human rights treaty that specifies 
a right to health.”3  
 
A University of Pennsylvania study4 of health care provisions in state constitutions found 
that “[c]lose to a third of states’ constitutions recognize health,” and that “state constitutions, 
although providing stronger textual support for health care rights than the U.S. Constitution, do 
not, when applied, provide significantly greater guarantees.” Since then, however, Oregon has 
passed a Right to Healthcare amendment5. 
 
As for Maine, the only reference to health in Maine’s Constitution is to emergency bills 
(Article IV, Section 16), though the reference (Article I, Section 1) to an “unalienable right” to 
“enjoying and defending life” could be interpreted as implying a right to health care.  
 
LD 590 states that health care is both a “right of the people” and “necessary to ensure the 
strength of the State.”  
 
Regarding health care being the “right of the people,” the “implementation and 
enforcement” language suggests that this “right” is a “positive” one, imposing a duty on 
government to ensure everyone has health care, rather than a “negative” one, ensuring that 
people are not actively prevented from seeking health care. A soon-to-be-released Maine poll6 
found that “the vast majority of voters think that all residents… should have access to low-cost 
healthcare,” which sounds like voters feel all residents have a right to it in the “positive” sense. 
As the Pennsylvania study observed, “[s]tate constitutions are charter documents expressing 
citizens’ values, priorities, and aspirations.”  
 
As for health care being “necessary to ensure the strength of the State,” “prevent[ing] and 
treat[ing] physical and mental illness” would almost certainly improve the health of the 
population7; benefit businesses by this improvement of the health of the workforce; theoretically, 
at least, reduce the cost of foregone care; and make Maine an even more appealing state in 
general. 
 
Of course, “implementation and enforcement of this right” would cost money but, as 
many studies have shown8, there are ways to do that without increasing total state health care 
expenditures. Passage of this amendment would encourage legislators and policy makers to look 
into those ways. The Pennsylvania study again: “state constitutional recognition of health, as 
well as proposed state constitutional amendments that would expressly recognize health rights, 
serve as important catalysts for federal and state legislation.” 
 
In conclusion, because of the problems of health care access I’ve seen in my own 
practice, because respected authorities cite health care as a human right, because Maine’s 
“unalienable right” to “enjoying and defending life” implies that right, because “the vast majority 
of voters think that all residents… should have access to low-cost healthcare,” and because 
establishment of a positive right to health care would likely improve the “strength of the State” 
and encourage system reform, I support LD 590 and urge the committee to vote “ought to pass” 
and send it on to the full Legislature.   
 
1 Universal Declaration of Human Rights , 1948  
2 Constitution of the World Health Organization , 1946  
3 AMA J Ethics. 2021;23(3):E235-239. doi: 10.1001/amajethics.2021.235. 
4 Elizabeth W. Leonard, State Constitutionalism and the Right to Health Care, 12 U. PA. J. CONST. L. 1235 (2010). 
Available at: https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jcl/vol12/iss5/2 
5 Ballotpedia on Measure 111  
6 Consumers for Affordable Health Care  
7 Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on the Consequences of Uninsurance. Washington (DC): Care without 
Coverage: Too Little, Too Late. 2002. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK220636/   
Borgschulte M, Vogler J. Did the ACA Medicaid expansion save lives? J Health Econ. 2020 Jul;72:102333. 
Available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32592924/   
8 Listing of Single Payer Studies , Assessing the Costs and Impacts of a State-Level Universal Health Care System in 
Maine,  and Feasibility of a Single-Payer Health Care Model for the State of Maine  
Daniel Bryant
Cape Elizabeth
LD 590
 Testimony in Support of LD 590:
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish 
a Right to Health Care
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee
May 9, 2023
Daniel C. Bryant, M.D.
Cape Elizabeth, ME
 
My name is Daniel C. Bryant, MD. During my medical career, patients of mine have 
dropped out of care or declined referrals or tests because they had no, or inadequate 
health care coverage; and I’ve seen others in the Emergency Room who couldn’t 
afford critical follow up care. Experiences like these compel me to offer the following
testimony in support of LD 590.
 
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights[1] states that “Everyone has the right to a
standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, 
including… medical care” and the World Health Organization Constitution[2] states 
that “Governments have a responsibility for the health of their peoples.” Yet, “the 
United States has no formally codified right to health, nor does it participate in a 
human rights treaty that specifies a right to health.”[3] 
 
A University of Pennsylvania study[4] of health care provisions in state constitutions 
found that “[c]lose to a third of states’ constitutions recognize health,” and that “state 
constitutions, although providing stronger textual support for health care rights than 
the U.S. Constitution, do not, when applied, provide significantly greater guarantees.”
Since then, however, Oregon has passed a Right to Healthcare amendment[5].
 
As for Maine, the only reference to health in Maine’s Constitution is to emergency 
bills (Article IV, Section 16), though the reference (Article I, Section 1) to an 
“unalienable right” to “enjoying and defending life” could be interpreted as implying 
a right to health care. 
 
LD 590 states that health care is both a “right of the people” and “necessary to ensure 
the strength of the State.” 
 
Regarding health care being the “right of the people,” the “implementation and 
enforcement” language suggests that this “right” is a “positive” one, imposing a duty 
on government to ensure everyone has health care, rather than a “negative” one, 
ensuring that people are not actively prevented from seeking health care. A 
soon-to-be-released Maine poll[6] found that “the vast majority of voters think that all
residents… should have access to low-cost healthcare,” which sounds like voters feel 
all residents have a right to it in the “positive” sense. As the Pennsylvania study 
observed, “[s]tate constitutions are charter documents expressing citizens’ values, 
priorities, and aspirations.” 
 
As for health care being “necessary to ensure the strength of the State,” “prevent[ing] 
and treat[ing] physical and mental illness” would almost certainly improve the health 
of the population[7]; benefit businesses by this improvement of the health of the 
workforce; theoretically, at least, reduce the cost of foregone care; and make Maine 
an even more appealing state in general.
 
Of course, “implementation and enforcement of this right” would cost money but, as 
many studies have shown[8], there are ways to do that without increasing total state 
health care expenditures. Passage of this amendment would encourage legislators and 
policy makers to look into those ways. The Pennsylvania study again: “state 
constitutional recognition of health, as well as proposed state constitutional 
amendments that would expressly recognize health rights, serve as important catalysts
for federal and state legislation.”
 
In conclusion, because of the problems of health care access I’ve seen in my own 
practice, because respected authorities cite health care as a human right, because 
Maine’s “unalienable right” to “enjoying and defending life” implies that right, 
because “the vast majority of voters think that all residents… should have access to 
low-cost healthcare,” and because establishment of a positive right to health care 
would likely improve the “strength of the State” and encourage system reform, I 
support LD 590 and urge the committee to vote “ought to pass” and send it on to the 
full Legislature.  
[1] Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948
[2] Constitution of the World Health Organization, 1946 
[3] AMA J Ethics. 2021;23(3):E235-239. doi: 10.1001/amajethics.2021.235.
[4] Elizabeth W. Leonard, State Constitutionalism and the Right to Health Care, 12 U.
Pa. J. Const. L. 1235 (2010). Available at: 
https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jcl/vol12/iss5/2
[5] Ballotpedia on Measure 111
[6] Consumers for Affordable Health Care
[7] Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on the Consequences of Uninsurance. 
Washington (DC): Care without Coverage: Too Little, Too Late. 2002. Available at: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK220636/ 
Borgschulte M, Vogler J. Did the ACA Medicaid expansion save lives? J Health 
Econ. 2020 Jul;72:102333. Available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32592924/ 
[8] Listing of Single Payer Studies, Assessing the Costs and Impacts of a State-Level 
Universal Health Care System in Maine, and Feasibility of a Single-Payer Health 
Care Model for the State of Maine
