Testimony on LD 590  
Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services Committee 
May 9, 2023 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance, 
and Financial Services Committee.  My name is David Jolly and I live in Penobscot.  I am also a member 
of the board of Maine AllCare.  I would like to speak in support of LD 590. 
I have a doctorate in public health, and for a number of years I taught a policy course on access to health 
care at a historically Black university in North Carolina. For their first assignment students wrote about 
personal experiences with the U.S. health care system—their own or a family member's. Most of my 
students came from working class or poor families, and too often health care was a luxury beyond their 
reach.  Their eye-opening stories were often maddening and gut-wrenching.  They wrote about lengthy 
waits in emergency rooms, the only place many of them went when sick because their families couldn’t 
afford to see a personal physician.  They wrote about episodic and discontinuous care as parents lost 
employer-based health insurance when they were laid off or as parents lost Medicaid when they got a 
job that didn’t offer health insurance as a benefit or only offered a plan they couldn’t afford.  They 
wrote about being treated differently in clinics when they had and did not have insurance.  And 
sometimes they wrote about family members who died because they waited too long to seek care they 
didn’t think they could afford. Their stories made clear that our current system of health care is failing  - 
and above all failing those who live on the margins of society, too often with tragic results. 
The United States is the richest country in the world and the only industrialized nation not to provide 
some form of universal health care to its citizens.  All other industrialized countries treat health care as a 
public good, something people should be guaranteed, right along with education, roads, police 
protection, and fire services.   
In 2023 most of us would agree that health care is a very basic human need.  Should it not then be 
considered a basic human right as well?  LD 590 would let the citizens of Maine weigh in on this 
question, and if, as I suspect, a large majority answer in the affirmative, then you and other members of 
our legislature can move forward with efforts to develop a plan for universal health care in Maine that 
assures all our citizens have that basic human right. 
Thank you. 
 
David Jolly
Penobscot
LD 590
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services Committee.  My name is David Jolly and
I live in Penobscot.  I am also a member of the board of Maine AllCare.  I would like 
to speak in support of LD 590.
I have a doctorate in public health, and for a number of years I taught a policy course 
on access to health care at a historically Black university in North Carolina. For their 
first assignment students wrote about personal experiences with the U.S. health care 
system—their own or a family member's. Most of my students came from working 
class or poor families, and too often health care was a luxury beyond their reach.  
Their eye-opening stories were often maddening and gut-wrenching.  They wrote 
about lengthy waits in emergency rooms, the only place many of them went when 
sick because their families couldn’t afford to see a personal physician.  They wrote 
about episodic and discontinuous care as parents lost employer-based health insurance
when they were laid off or as parents lost Medicaid when they got a job that didn’t 
offer health insurance as a benefit or only offered a plan they couldn’t afford.  They 
wrote about being treated differently in clinics when they had and did not have 
insurance.  And sometimes they wrote about family members who died because they 
waited too long to seek care they didn’t think they could afford. Their stories made 
clear that our current system of health care is failing  - and above all failing those who
live on the margins of society, too often with tragic results.
The United States is the richest country in the world and the only industrialized nation
not to provide some form of universal health care to its citizens.  All other 
industrialized countries treat health care as a public good, something people should be
guaranteed, right along with education, roads, police protection, and fire services.  
In 2023, most of us would agree that health care is a very basic human need.  Should 
it not then be considered a basic human right as well?  LD 590 would let the citizens 
of Maine weigh in on this question, and if, as I suspect, a large majority answer in the 
affirmative, then you and other members of our legislature can move forward with 
efforts to develop a plan for universal health care in Maine, a plan that assures all our 
citizens have that basic human right.
Thank you.

