 1 Testimony on LD 590 at public hearing of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Elizabeth Solet 
Blue Hill, Maine 
May 9, 2023 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee, thank you for the 
opportunity to testify today, and for all of your work on health care. My name is Elizabeth Solet 
and I live in Blue Hill. 
 
I am here to speak in favor of LD 590, “RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Establish a Right to Health Care,” because I believe that every resident 
of Maine should have health care, as a common human need and as a public good.  
Four years ago today, I testified before this committee in support of LD 1611, “An Act to 
Support Universal Health Care.” On that day, I shared with the committee my family’s 
experience with medical debt and the cost of insurance, as well as a difficult choice we faced 
when I urgently needed to have an ovarian cyst removed, about a month before switching to new 
health insurance. The choice was: have the cyst removed right away and tested for cancerous 
cells, and owe $4000 under the high-deductible plan I had; or wait a little more than a month, in 
which time the cyst could have ruptured, and owe a few hundred dollars under the new 
insurance. My mother had ovarian cancer and the choice was clear in medical terms, but 
agonizing in financial terms. 
 
Contrast that to another surgery I needed a few years later, a hysterectomy to remove uterine 
fibroids that also ended up revealing very early-stage uterine cancer. At that time, I had excellent 
health insurance, and we paid a modest amount for the wonderful care I received.  
 
Having excellent health insurance was the closest I’ve come in my adult life to just having health 
care, when I needed it, without having to go into debt. In fact, it allowed my family to pay off 
most of the medical debt we’d incurred in the years we’ve both had high-deductible health 
plans—which has been most of the time.  
 
My husband and I work full-time, own a very modest house, both drive older cars. We want to 
pay our fair share and we’re not looking for a free ride. But we also want, and need, to have 
health care without going into debt. 
 
I’m now back on a high-deductible insurance plan because that’s what we can afford, and the 
medical debt is piling up again. I can tell you that the peace of mind of just having health care 
was significant. My stress levels were lower. We were able to save more for retirement and make 
progress on some needed home improvement projects.  
 
I also know that we are very lucky, and many people have much more difficult health and 
financial situations than we do. I’m writing and testifying to you on my and my family’s behalf, 
but also for everyone who is not or cannot be here today and whose voices need to be heard. 
 
 2 I am involved with Maine AllCare, the nonprofit working toward universal health care for 
Maine, and I deeply appreciate all the work that many legislators are doing to help Maine people 
have access to affordable health care. I know that work is not easy, often goes unrecognized, and 
pays little. And the Legislature has achieved important successes, including the passage of LD 
1045, “An Act to Support Universal Health Care,” in 2021. 
 
Many of the bills that are pursued seek to address a part of the broken “system” we have. But 
what we really need is to change the underlying model, and treat health care as a public good, 
needed by all, and supportive of a healthy society. Such a system is best organized with everyone 
in, no one out, for greater simplicity and to get the best value for the considerable financial 
investment needed to provide health care.  
 
I’m here to support LD 590 because I see it as a step in that direction. And because it affirms the 
moral side to the health care equation: that everyone should have health care, without needing to 
go into debt, because it’s the right thing to do. 
 
As you know, the United States is the only wealthy, industrialized nation that doesn’t choose a 
system where everyone has health care. We have the resources, but we don’t use them wisely, 
allowing health care to be a profit center for a few. We can do better. Maine can lead the way.  
 
I urge you to support LD 590. 
Thank you. 
 
