Julie Pease
Topsham 
LD 590
Testimony in support of LD590
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee:
I am submitting this testimony to express my strong support for LD 590, the 
Resolution proposing an amendment to the Constitution of Maine to establish a right 
to health care.
I have been a supporter of universal healthcare for several decades. I firmly believe 
that everyone deserves healthcare, that it is a human right and not a privilege.
While researching the topic of “the right to health care“ for ideas for my personal 
testimony, I came across this essay that was written for the NPR program “This I 
Believe”. It was written by Miriam, of Greenville, North Carolina. I am sharing it 
with you in its entirety. I share Miriam’s beliefs in their entirety.
“I believe health care is a right, not a privilege. Access to health care has become a 
privilege in our society. Millions of people have died because they do not have this 
privilege. This, I believe, is unconscionable. We live in one of the richest, most 
resource abundant nations in the world, yet we cannot guarantee adequate health care 
for all of our citizens. That does not make sense. We help other nations, but we are 
failing our own.
Our declaration of independence states that we possess the inalienable rights to life, 
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. How can we pursue liberty and happiness if we 
do not have life? In this nation, we are guaranteed a quality education through our 
public schools, access to books at our local library, mail delivery, protection from the 
police and fire departments; yet we have millions of families going bankrupt because 
they cannot afford medical care. How can we sleep at night knowing this is going on 
in our nation, our city, our neighborhood?
Three years ago, I was in an accident in which I broke my leg in six places and 
shattered both sides of my ankle. I was covered by a very prominent health insurance 
company, provided by my employer, which paid 80% of my health care costs. Yet, I 
still owe tens of thousands of dollars that I will never be able to pay. I was operated 
on 3 times, almost lost my leg to a bone infection caused by e.coli on hardware in my 
leg, lost 75% of my hair as a reaction to the bone infection, almost lost my job 
because of so much time spent in the hospital, and was harassed at work by my 
supervisors because they were intolerant of health issues. I had no choice but to put 
up with the harassment and do everything I could to keep my job because I needed the
health insurance. No one should have to stay in an environment where they are 
taunted because of any health issue. But I didn’t have a choice. It was either lose my 
leg to infection or put up with daily harassment. We, as a nation, deserve quality 
affordable health care for all that is not dependent on employers.
I often wonder what if I was a single mother working for minimum wage? No health 
coverage, maybe no family to support me, and children to feed. How could I have 
made it through to recovery? I barely got through with the health coverage I had, but 
what if I didn’t have any? What if I had to make the decision between eating and 
paying for my wheelchair? Or between living in my apartment and paying for 
life-saving antibiotics? These are decisions no one should have to make. I believe that
we, as a nation, should take care of everyone through providing equal access to health
care so that we can all pursue our inalienable right to life. We deserve nothing less.”
The original essay can also be viewed at https://thisibelieve.org/essay/50854/

