 
 
     May 9th, 2023  
 
The Honorable Donna Bailey  
The Honorable Anne Perry  
Members, Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Cross Building, Room 220 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 590, RESOLUTION , Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of  
Maine to Establish a Right to Health Care; neither for nor against  
 
Chair Baile y, Chair Perry , Members of the Committee,  
My name is Sam Hallemeier , Director of  State Affairs . I am writing on behalf of the 
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association (PCMA)  to provide comments as neither for nor 
against  LD 590. PCMA is the national association representing America’s pharmacy benefit 
managers (PBMs). PBMs administer prescription drug plans and operate mail -order and 
specialty pharmacies for more than 275 million Amer icans  with health coverage through large 
employers, health insurers, labor unions, and federal and state -sponsored health programs.  
 PBMs exist to make drug coverage more affordable by aggregating the buying power of millions of enrollees through their plan sponsor/payer clients. PBMs help consumers obtain lower prices 
for prescription drugs through price discounts from retail pharmacies, rebates from 
pharmaceutical manufacturers, and using lower -cost dispensing channels. Though employers, 
health plans, and public programs are not required to use PBMs, most choose to because 
PBMs help lower prescription drug coverage costs . 
 
PCMA  is concerned that LD 590 is too broad and  difficult to interpret. PBMs use various  tools to 
increase competition in the market to keep costs down,  for ex ample, a PBM  formular y. 
Formu laries are extensive lists of commonly prescribed prescription drugs  covered  by a health 
plan. Formularies optimize patient care by promoting access to clinically  appropriate, safe , cost-
effective drugs. Formularies are more than a covered drug list;  formularies often include 
additional prescribing guidelines and clinical information to help  healthcare professionals 
promote high- quality , affordable patient care.  Is that an infringement if a formulary prefers one 
drug over another ? Similarly , are copay s and premiums considered an infringement as well?  
  
 
 
 
 
PCMA appreciates the legislation’s intent  to provide a right to health care,  but we request that 
the committee narrow the language to avoid any unintended consequences. Thank you for 
allowing me to comment as nei ther for nor against LD 590.  
 
 Sam Hallemeier  
 
Director, St ate Affairs  
shallemeier@pcmanet.org 
(202) 579- 7647  

