 
  
 Daniel W. Walker 
 dwalker@preti.com 
  
 
  
 
 
20407333.1 
TESTIMONY OF  
ON BEHALF OF MAINE ASSOCIATION OF INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS 
 
In opposition to  
LD 1420, An Act to Strengthen Maine's Elementary and Secondary Education 
System by Clarifying Purposes and Procedures for Reviews of Schools 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
 
May 1, 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education Committee, my name is 
Daniel Walker, and I am an attorney with Preti Flaherty, and I am here today on behalf of Maine 
Association of Independent Schools (MAIS) to testify in opposition to LD 1209.   
 
MAIS’s 23 members are a diverse group of educational institutions, including Maine’s earliest 
secondary school (Berwick Academy) dating to the 18th century with charters signed by Governor 
John Hancock, as well as much newer schools, schools with varied missions, schools which serve 
primarily public-tuition students, and some sectarian schools.  MAIS schools educate 9000 
students in pre-K through Grade 12, with 4600 publicly funded and 4400 privately funded.   All 
MAIS schools are accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges. 
 
According to the bill summary, LD 1420  
 
adds compliance with the Maine Human Rights Act to the standard of review of 
public and private schools, adds investigation of a complaint to the purposes for 
inspecting a private school and provides for a comprehensive review of public 
schools and school administrative units and private schools approved for tuition 
purposes. 
 
We are opposed to LD 1420 because we do not believe that these legislative changes are necessary, 
as the current protections in place are more than enough. We have not heard any concern that 
would warrant this big of a change to the statutes. We are always open to discussing any issues 
and we were never approached about this bill or the concerns it seeks to address. We believe that 
implementing changes without strong indication of need is a concerning way to legislate.  
 
Specifically, there are three main reasons why we are opposed to this bill.  
 
First, as to section 1 of the bill. Our schools are already necessarily compliant with the Maine 
Human Rights Act. Section 4552 of Title 5 defines an educational institution as  
 
any public school or educational program, any public post-secondary institution, any 
private school or educational program approved for tuition purposes if both male and 
 
PRETI FLAHERTY 
Page 2 
 
 
20407333.1 female students are admitted and the governing body of each such school or program. For 
purposes related to disability-related discrimination, "educational institution" also means 
any private school or educational program approved for tuition purposes.   
 
Therefore, requiring the Commissioner to determine our compliance with the MHRA is 
unnecessary because it is duplicative. The Maine Human Rights Commission already requires our 
commitment to the process which we are more than willing to do.  
 
Second as to section 2 of the bill, as stated above, our schools are already required to be compliant 
with conditions of the Maine Human Rights Act. As an initial matter, “complaint” is not defined 
in this bill and we are assuming, based on the context of the bill, that “complaint” means a 
complaint to the Maine Human Rights Commission.  Or does “complaint” refer to a separate 
unidentified process within the Department of Education?  Additionally, what would be the 
standards of a sufficient complaint?  Would an anonymous complaint be sufficient?  The initiation 
of a complaint is just the beginning of the process which allows for both sides of the issue to weigh 
in, to conduct a preliminary investigation, and for ample process to ensure that the issue remains 
confidential until the matter is appropriately resolved. Allowing the Commissioner to inspect our 
schools based on a complaint would complicate the Maine Human Rights Commission process 
and would .  
 
Third, as to sections 3 and 4, although we appreciate that this provision would apply to all primary 
and second schools in the state, we also think that this is an unnecessary because we are already 
approved by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC). This ongoing cycle 
of comprehensive internal and external assessments is an important tool for our schools to ensure 
compliance with all of the NEASC standards. This includes a visiting site team which is a 
comprehensive review of all parts of our schools.  This NEASC process is appropriate and has 
served Maine well, rather than a randomized target of schools that adds more to the Department 
of Education’s plate.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today. We are happy to continue conversations about any 
concerns that the sponsors might have about our schools. We have been an important partner in 
the education system of Maine since the beginning and we only want to provide the best for our 
students, staff and community.  We urge you to oppose LD 1420. 
 
### 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRETI FLAHERTY 
Page 3 
 
 
20407333.1 MAIS MEMBERSHIP 
 
The Bay School, Blue Hill Berwick Academy, South Berwick 
Bridgton Academy, North Bridgton Carrabassett Valley Academy, 
Carrabassett Valley 
Cheverus High School, Portland Chewonki Foundation, Wiscasset 
Erskine Academy, South China John Bapst Memorial HS, Bangor 
Fryeburg Academy, Fryeburg Foxcroft Academy, Dover-Foxcroft 
Gould Academy, Bethel George Stevens Academy, Blue Hill 
Hyde School, Bath Hebron Academy, Hebron 
Lee Academy, Lee Kents Hill School, Kents Hill 
Maine Central Institute, Pittsfield Lincoln Academy, Newcastle 
North Yarmouth Academy, 
Yarmouth Maine Coast Waldorf School, 
Freeport 
Washington Academy, East Machias Thornton Academy, Saco 
Waynflete School, Portland  
 
 
