Testimony of Jeffrey S Burroughs, Head of School, Lincoln Academy, In opposition to LD 1420 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs May 1, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, my name is Jeff Burroughs and I represent Lincoln Academy, which is a member of the 
Maine Association of Independent Schools. I testify in opposition to LD 1420 
Lincoln Academy has proudly and faithfully served students and families since its founding in 1801.  Co-
Educational since our inaugural class entered the school in 1805, we have always strived to be 
responsive and responsible in our educational practices and policies.  As an approved private school for 
tuition purposes, we are bound by our NEASC Accreditation, Maine Human Rights Commission, Title IX 
in terms of what our policies must be to ensure equal access, treatment, and assurance of an excellent 
education in the state of Maine.  We employ an attorney to ensure that we meet all requirements and 
perform yearly reviews of our policies to ensure the meet and exceed these standards. LD 1420 appears 
to be an attempt to assert a level of oversight that is unnecessary in its confusion and redundancy and 
directly contrary to the long-established tradition of local control of education in Maine. 
Private schools like ours are approved and accredited according to statute and are attended by students 
as a matter of choice with a price per pupil set by the state.  We provide low-cost quality education to 
more than 5000 students and offer access to wonderful facilities without any cost to taxpayers in our 
communities.  We accept oversight from the Commissioner as written in statute as well as the Maine 
Human Rights Commission and Title IX.  Our policies are clearly communicated in our handbooks and the 
processes for raising complaints meet and exceed best practices in the state and region.  We take these 
situations very seriously as any student that is not satisfied with their educational experience has the 
power to choose to change school and with it would go the monthly payment we would receive from the 
town of residence. 
I am forced to once again assume that the lack of understanding of the differences between public 
schools and private schools approved for tuition is driving this further attempt to convert our schools into a 
public school.  I have a deep appreciation for public schooling in our state and in our nation.  The fact that 
I represent a unique model should not be seen as a threat to public schooling in Maine. On the contrary, I 
welcomed this role to provide a public service to my community through a private model.  Since my 1st 
day on the job here in Newcastle I have worked tirelessly to preserve the educational institution that is 
Lincoln Academy.  I have met with any and all constituents to talk about the school, welcomed opinions 
positive and negative and forged productive working relationships with AOS93 Superintendent and all 
local school boards.  I have revised policies to ensure we are most inclusive of difference in our school 
and managed the school through one of the most difficult periods of it 222-year history, navigating the 
pandemic.  Simply put, if I do not provide an educational experience that meets a family’s needs I will not 
receive that tuition.  
I accepted the role of head of school knowing that I would teach a class, coach the soccer team, and 
spend a considerable amount of my time raising money to bridge the gap between state determined 
maximum tuition and the money I needed to run our school for 580 students employing nearly 100 
people.  This is not a public-school model, but it is a model that has been accepted in my community and 
requires intentional conversation.   
Once again, I feel compelled to ask for the committee’s willingness to support our difference to learn and 
fully understand how our models are different but absolutely dedicated to providing education to our 
communities.  Where is the evidence that a system like this, where the commissioner supersedes the 
Superintendent and their board in the public model or the Head of School and all of the accepted policies, 
needs to exist?  What is a complaint? Who defines it? Does the Commissioner now take authority over 
the Maine Human Rights Act?  Does this bill allow the State of Maine to take over a private school by 
issuing a corrective action plan and threatening to suspend collection of town funds for students served?  
How is there any equivalence in the conditions for Private vs Public?  Removing the public school’s basic 
approval will not stop the SAU using the approved budget but we would not be able to collect money 
forcing us to close… 
As a member of MAIS, I know I speak for my colleagues and their schools, we are part of the 
educational landscape and we have been successful in our model of education with our 
communities even with our differences and I am asking respectfully that it is time that the 
Education Committee and the Department of Education see us as allies in a local and national 
landscape fraught with divisive and difficult situations and bring us to the table in real 
conversation about how to work together. 
 
