Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
State of Maine 
(207) 287- 3531   
  Douglas A. Farnham  
Major  General  
Commissioner  
(207) 430- 6000  
 
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management  
33 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333- 0033 
 
 
 
 
LD 195 “An Act to Exempt Gold Star Parents from Income Tax”  
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
January 31, 2023 
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and honorable members of the Taxation Committee , I 
am Scott Young, Deputy Commissioner of the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency 
Management . I writing to provide some information regarding LD 195, An Act to Exempt Gold 
Star Parents from Income Tax . 
 Upon receipt of the bill, I first broke it down to understand the qua lifying elements of someone 
who may receive the tax exemption. As I read it there are essentially three. A person must be a someone who can demonstrate receipt of a report of casualty form or a notification of loss who qualifies for a gold star lapel button who is a parent. I should note the Gold Star Lapel Button is awarded to Gold Star families for the death of service members as far back as  April 6, 1917 
(WWI).  
 Relative to qualifying elements 2 and 3, parents who qualify for a gold star lapel button are  
determined by Title 10, United S tates C ode, §1126, Gold Star Lapel Button: Eligibility and 
Distribution  and Department of Defense Instruction 1348.36, Gold Star Lapel Button, Service 
Flag, and Service Lapel Button. T hey include mother, father, stepmother, stepfather, mother 
though adoption, father through adoption, and foster parents who stood in loco parentis . Anyone  
who meets one of these parent designations is entitled to receive a pin. Relative to qualifying element 1, I have not been able t o determine which of the next -of-kin receive the report of 
casualty form or notification of loss .  
 
Our department doesn’t have a comprehensive registry or tracking mechanism for Gold Star 
families or parents. Given this, we would not be able to provide da ta that would be very helpful 
with a fiscal note.  
 Finally, while it is obvious this bill is to acknowledge and recognize the sacrifices of Gold Star parents, there may be a sense of omission since key next -of-kin, such as spouses and children, 
are not aff orded the same benefit.  
 If our department can be of further assistance, please reach out to me at Scott.a.young@maine.gov. 
 
Scott Young
Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management
LD 195
DVEM has submitted a letter of information for the committee's consideration.
