1.27.23
Gabe Perkins, February 7, 2023
Inland Woods + Trails
Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 216  “An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Storm 
Water Management to Provide an Exemption for Trails for Hiking and Other 
Similar Activities” 
 
Good Morning Members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee. My 
name is Gabe Perkins and I am here on behalf of Inland Woods + Trails.  I am a 
resident of Bethel and I am here today to urge you to vote in SUPPORT of LD 216.
 
Inland Woods + Trails is a 501c3 nonprofit with a mission to connect communities in 
western Maine through the sustainable management of high quality, durable trails and 
woods for all seasons. We maintain over 85 miles of multiple use trails in six towns and 
townships, own 1500 acres and manage trails on an additional 10,000 acres of public 
and private land. This growth has been rapid and is a direct result of communities 
asking for access to high quality, sustainable recreation. This has led to both locals 
recreators and tourists making a choice to utilize these well-made and managed trails. 
These trails are all built with already existing best practices from a host of reputable 
institutions-the US Forest Service, state BMP’s, the International Mountain Bike 
Association. It is our duty as trailbuilders and land managers to build these community 
trails because we want to utilize these resources just like any of you may. By passing 
LD 216 you will remove an unnecessary regulatory burden on the small organizations 
such as mine and scores across the state that help make outdoor recreation a major 
part of the Maine’s economy. The small organizations and small businesses that make 
up the overwhelming majority of groups that build and maintain these trails simply 
cannot afford to be burdened unnecessary regulation. 
We are in a moment in this state when it comes to recreation. It’s palpable. The Outdoor 
Rec economy is a major force in this state. Help us seize that moment by passing this 
common sense legislation.
 
Thank you for your time and I would be glad to answer any questions.
Sincerely,
1.27.23Gabe Perkins
Executive Director
