Testimony in Support of LD 216: An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Storm Water 
Management to Provide an Exemption for Trails for Hiking and Other Similar Activities
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Jeff Romano. I appreciate this opportunity to provide 
testimony on behalf of Maine Coast Heritage Trust in support of LD 216. Joining our testimony 
are eleven land trusts from around the state.
Maine Coast Heritage Trust conserves and stewards Maine's coastal lands and islands for their 
renowned scenic beauty, ecological value, outdoor recreational opportunities, and contribution 
to community well-being. We provide statewide conservation leadership through our work with 
land trusts, coastal communities, and other partners. Over the past four decades, we have 
conserved more than 150,000 acres in Maine.
MCHT also works in partnership with more than 80 land trusts around the state including the 
eleven organizations that have joined this testimony. Collectively, Maine’s land trust 
community provides public access to more than 2,500 miles of recreational trails for hikers, 
snowmobilers, mountain bikers, and ATV riders.
Enactment of LD 216 will support our efforts to expand and enhance this vast network of 
outdoor recreational trails. Through this modest expansion of the current exemption included 
under Title 38 §420-D, hiking, snowshoeing, and walking trails would be treated the same way 
as other linear projects of much larger scale and impact, including logging roads and motorized 
trails up to 24 feet wide. At the same time, to enjoy the exemption under the current law, all 
recreational trail corridors will still need to be no more than six-feet wide, be built according to 
best practices, and be designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
In the end, this small change could be made without detriment to the natural resources, while 
freeing up DEP’s finite resources to meet more pressing needs. 
Kennebunkport Conservation Trust
Mahoosuc Land Trust
Loon Echo Land Trust
Rangeley Lakes Heritage Trust
Midcoast Conservancy
Kennebec Land TrustKennebec Estuary Land Trust
Western Foothills Land Trust
Freeport Conservation Trust
Frenchman Bay Conservancy
Southern Maine Conservation Collaborative
