Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The uniﬁed voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 908 
"Resolve, to Establish a Comprehensive Integrated Co-occurring 
Behavioral Health Home Model Within the MaineCare Program" 
Sponsored by Representative Holly Stover 
bave McCluskey, President April 5' 2023 
Community Care 
meg B°‘"°|;s' 1g‘”°°""°“"°“‘ Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the 
Bob DescO::aur) ‘f2ndVice_ Health and Human Services Committees. My name is Malory Shaughnessy and l am 
President the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The 
Mai"@G@"e'al Beha‘/l°Fa' Health Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine's 
Kagirzm 3/:;';i:a"y community based mental health and substance use treatment providers, providing 
I Euen semis, Treagurer services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance advocates 
Aioosiook Mentai Heaith center for the implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to 
Eric Meyer, Past President enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
Spurwink “' 
Officers "'
l 
.. 
Board Members ., On behalf of the Alliance, l am here today to speak in support of LD 908, ”Resolve, to 
Establish a Comprehensive Integrated Co-occurring Behavioral Health Home Model 
Adcare Educational lnstitute Within the MaineCare Program. ” 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
g\:terna ﬁ‘ .'e ﬁeWic‘:'::'E;|$c' This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services to establish a new An oscoggin ome e care _ _ _ _ 
Assistance Pius health home model that includes services for substance use disorder and co-occurring 
caihoiic Charities, Maine mental health diagnoses in one model with a new payment model. 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
I christiawévigzi ﬁenter Currently, we have the Behavioral Health Home (BHH), which is working well for many 
Common Ties people with mental health challenges across the state to provide case management, 
Community caring miiaborative access to a team of providers to provide support and coordination of care. We also have 
Community Health & Counseling an Opioid Health Home (OHH), which was created to address the growing need in Maine 
COR Health for medication assisted treatment and counseling for those struggling with Opioid use 
Crisis & Counseling Centers disorder Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsyghiatry However, a client has to choose which health home to go into if they are dealing with 
Kermebeﬁ Behavivral Health both mental health issues and opioid use disorder, or a co-occurring disorder. There are 
1 
Mai“eOBehaYl°;_ “" Heakh also some concerns with the OHH playing out in the field right now that need to be 
rganiza ion 5 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare addressed ’ 
Milestone Recovery ‘ 
NFI North, Inc. Right now, if you are running an BHH, but someone you are working with also has an 
N°"ihe'" Light/Nadia 
‘ OHH, you cannot be paid directly for your services. And due to HIPPA and CFR 42, 
Pmland Re°c‘:3‘ﬁ2;c°mm“"'ty chapter 2 protections, you cannot find out if your client is also in an OHH until you bill 
Pathways of Maine MaineCare and then get denied. At that point, you have to approach the provider of the 
Rumford Group Homes OHH sen/ices to get them to pay you a share of the rate they are getting for that client. 
Brighter Heights Maine It is causing a lot of problems in the field of care. Many OHH providers are not working 
5““"S‘; Opl°t°'tr “"'t'°S with clients getting case management services through a BHH or Section 17 unless they 
Tricounty M;/:5 zzalth Services are receiving them through their own agency due to the heavy administrative burden of 
Weiispringl inc, trying to sort this all out. 
Wings for Children & Families 
W°°df°'°'$ Famlli’ 5°“’l°°$ The Centers for Medicaid and Medicare will not allow a state to pay out for two 
types of Health Homes simultaneously. This bill, by creating one behavioral health 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 “' Phone 207.621.8118 "’ Fax 207.621.8362 "‘ theAllianceMaine.org
l 
home model grounded in solid case management and care coordination, with add on components for 
substance use, or co-occurring, would address this issue. 
The department is now working to create health homes for those faced with substance use disorder other 
than opioids, which is important as alcohol continues to be one of the largest substances misused in Maine 
today, and other drugs are on the rise as well. 
When the OHH was first proposed, the Alliance weighed in with comments to urge that a new health home 
not be created, but that there be add on components to the Behavioral Health Home instead, so someonei 
would get the basic behavioral health home case management and care coordination, but also be able to 
have their substance use disorder addressed while staying with the same basic team.
l 
Now that the department is seeking to develop other health home models for different substances, we again 
urge that these health homes be based in the BHH, that could have added components much like a cafeteria 
plan of care. 
An agency could provide a basic BHH model (there are many that might only want to provide this level of 
ca re), or if they were seeking to offer services for substance use or co-occurring disorder, they would offera 
BHH model with the added components for substance use or co-occurring. The bottom line is that most 
people seeking treatment for substance use within MaineCare, could also benefit from the case management ~ 
and care coordination of a BHH. 
By eliminating the OHH and not developing various other health home models for substance use, but building 
on the BHH with add on components, we would eliminate a lot ofthe administrative burden that is being 
created right now. 
We urge you to pass this legislation forward. Thank you.
l
|
I
l 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 “' Phone 207.621.8118 "‘ Fax 207.621.8362 " theAllianceMaine.orgI
