  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 5 , 202 3 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 908 – Resolve, to Establish a Comprehensive Integrated Co -occurring Behavioral 
Health Home Model Within the MaineCare Program  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information on LD 908, Resolve, to Establish a Comprehensive 
Integrated Co -occurring Behavioral Health Home Model Within the MaineCare Program . This 
resolve directs the Department to establish a new health home model that includes services for 
substance use disorder and co -occurring mental health diagnoses in one model and a new 
payment model.   
 
P.L. 2021, ch. 635 (LD 1995) expanded the Opioid Health Home model to serve all MaineCare 
members with substance use di sorder. MaineCare has engaged with stakeholders and is in the 
process of developing this model. A component of this expansion is supporting clinical 
interventions for co -occurring disorders, as we recognize the importance of treating the whole 
person and n ot creating treatment models that fragment the individual’s care. We are interested 
in exploring the integration of the two models but believe this would be a best next step after the 
development and implementation of the expanded Substance Use Disorder Health Home 
(SUDHH), as directed by the 130th Legislature.  
 
MaineCare is concerned that a shift in the current path would impact the roll out of the 
development of the newly expanded model.   The expansion or merger of the Behavioral Health 
Homes a nd the newly expanded Opioid Health Home model will take careful consideration of 
what the framework and policies would need to be. If this bill is passed , the Department requests 
adequate time be allowed to build out this combined model, and to consider h ow it might be 
implemented without disrupt ing current work underway on the newly expanded SUDHH  model .  
 
Lastly, MaineCare is unclear of the intent behind Part I, Section 2 of the proposed bill, “A new 
payment model that allows a MaineCare member to have a ccess to services as needed beyond 
the services provided by the health home team.”  Further  clarification to fully understand the 
bill’s potential impact  would be required should the bill continue to  develop . 
 
 
 
 We wanted you to be aware of the above informat ion as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

