 
 
 
 
 
 
NEITHER  FOR NOR  AGAINST  LD 908 
Resolve,  to Establish  a Comprehensive  Integrated  Co-occurring  
Behavioral  Health  Home  Model  Within  the MaineCare  Program  
 
Senator  Baldacci,  Representative  Meyer,  and honorable  members  of the Health  & Human  
Services  Committee,  
 
I’m Wendy  Anders , Senior  Director  of Community -Based  Services  at Sweetser  and I’m here  today  
to testify  Neither  For Nor Against  LD 908, Resolve,  to Establish  a Comprehensive  Integrated  Co-
occurring  Behavioral  Health  Home  Model  Within  the MaineCare  Program . 
 
We appreciate  the leadership  of Rep.  Stover  and the intent  behind  this bill in addressing  the 
Opioid  Health  Home  or OHH  service  structure.   
 
As a large  provid er of Behavioral  Health  Home  or BHH  services,  we would  encourage  the 
committee  to work  with  the provider  community  and the bill sponsor  to clarify  and modify  the 
bill language.  
  
While  the intent  is about  retaining  BHH  while  having  the option  for modifiers  for additional  
services  for individuals  with  co-occurring  disorders,  like in OHH,  the actual  bill language  opens  
the door  to replace  BHH  entirely  with  a new  model  and rate.  OHH  and BHH  are two very  distinctly  
different  services  and require  different  staff ing requirement.  There  would  be some  value  in 
keeping  them  separate.  
 
The current  BHH  model  works  well and is an important  program  that providers  like Sweetser  
offer  to clients  across  the state.  We suggest  not altering  that existing  structure  or rate for BHH. 
Don’t  fix what  isn’t  broken,  especially  when  trying  to fix an entirely  different  service.  The bill 
before  you could  push  DHHS  to change  the current  successful  structure  BHH  has in place.  This 
would  need  to be clarified  before  proceeding  with  the bill.  
 
We agree  with  the bill’s  sponsor  that the current  situation  in which  the OHH  provider  has to 
establish  a MOU  with  a BHH  provider  and pass  through  money  to BHH  provider  does  not seem  
to be working  well.   
 
 
 
 April  5th, 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
If the issue  is OHH  not being  able  to include  case  management  in their  bundle  of services  then  
possibly  the structure  that needs  to be flushed  out further  would  be to allow  both  services  to be 
provided  concurrently.  
 
We are happy  to work  with  the committee,  the bill sponsor,  and the department  on finding  a 
path  forward.   
 
 
 
Sincerly,   
 
Wendy  Anders,  LCSW  
Senior  Director  of Community -Based  Services  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
