  
 
 
 
 
May 30, 2023 
 
 Senator Nicole Grohoski and Representative Joe Perry  
Maine Committee on Taxation  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
Re: Surplus lines retaliatory tax  
 
Dear Senator Grohoski and Representative Perry : 
 
The Wholesale & Specialty Insurance Association
1 (WSIA) appreciate s the opportunity to provide 
comments in support of LD 1979 which would eliminate the retaliatory tax provision on surplus 
lines policies . 
 
The statute in question  would require surplus lines brokers  to impose tax rates from other 
states on Maine insureds . A change to the enabling statute in 2022 has now operationalized this 
statute and without legislative action, Maine insureds will pay higher taxes on their surplus lines insurance policies in 2023 and beyond.  
 
The pur pose of retaliatory taxes is to deter other states from enacting discriminatory or 
excessive taxes upon insurance companies domiciled in the state of Maine. For several reasons, 
this provision is neither useful, nor practical for use on surplus lines polic ies because of the 
unique legal structure that governs surplus lines transactions.  
1. The existing provision does not deter other states or punish insurance companies outside of Maine for higher taxes in other states. Instead, the retaliatory  premium tax 
impo sed by 36 MRSA §2531 simply amounts to a tax increase for insureds whose  
principal  residence, or principal  place of business is located in Maine.  
2. Even if the retaliatory  tax were imposed on the insurance carrier  rather than the 
insured, Maine has no domest ic insurers dedicated to writing surplus lines business. The 
need to protect a domestic surplus lines industry simply does not exist. Furthermore, 
surplus lines insurers are nonadmitted in the states where they do business so all 
 
1 WSIA is the U.S. professional trade association representing the wholesale and specialty insurance 
market and the wholesale distribution system  including the vast majority of the 2,354 surplus lines 
brokers licensed in the state of Maine . WSIA represents approximately 400 wholesale broker member 
firms, 100 surplus lines insurance companies, and 200 associates and service providers to the surplus lines 
market . Our membership operates in more than 1,500 offices representing tens of thousands of individual 
brokers, insurance company professionals, underwriters and other insurance professionals worldwide – 
all of whom are committed to the wholesale di stribution system and the U.S. surplus lines market.  
 
 
surplus lines business in Maine must be written by an insurer that is not domiciled in 
Maine.  
3. Surplus lines premium taxes are not remitted by the carrier upon which the “ retaliation” 
is supposedly directed. Instead, the tax is clearly itemized and detailed to the consu mer 
and collected and remitted by the licensed surplus lines broker. To impose the 
retaliatory tax provision would place a significant regulatory burden on the surplus lines 
broker because it will be impossible to automate such a complex compliance 
requirement . Instead, brokers will have to revise their production systems to manually 
account for insurance policies written in Maine, which will only add time and cost. These 
manual processes will be particularly prone to error and may require brokers to go back 
to the insured to collect additional tax, otherwise they may be in violation of  state anti -
rebating laws. Small local and reg ional brokers with Maine residency will face the most 
hardship in calculating and remitting a retaliatory tax, putting them at a disadvantage to large national brokers who may eventually be able to automate this process or pay large 
amounts to service prov iders willing to take on the task.  
For these reasons, no other state in the country imposes retaliatory taxes on surplus lines insurance policies.  If the existing statute remains unchanged, Maine would be the first and only 
state in the country to impose a retaliatory tax on surplus lines insurance policies.  
While retaliatory tax provisions may  be useful to protect the domestic industry on admitted, or 
standard lines of insurance business, they are entirely useless in the stated goals as they pertain to surplus lines policies. Furthermore, a surplus lines retaliatory tax will only harm Maine 
insureds and Maine brokers. For that reason, we urge your support for LD 1979.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
John H. Meetz  
Director of Government Relations  
john@wsia.org   
816.799.0863 

