1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May 30, 2023 
  
LD 1979 – “An Act Regarding Surplus Lines Insurance Tax” 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
providing testimony at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1979, “An Act Regarding Surplus Lines Insurance Tax.” 
This bill repeals the retaliatory tax under Title 36, Section 2531, sub-section 
2 on insurance premiums for direct insurance and annuity considerations that are 
subject to the Maine nonadmitted insurance premiums tax (for insurers 
incorporated outside the State).  The tax rate for all nonadmitted insurance 
premiums would be 3%.   
Under current Maine law, nonadmitted insurance premiums subject to Maine 
tax are gross direct insurance premiums and annuity considerations paid by 
insureds whose home state is Maine, to insurers that do not have certificates of 
authority to do business in Maine.  For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 
2023, a retaliatory tax applies to nonadmitted insurance premiums subject to Maine 
tax.  The Maine tax rate is equal to the greater of 3% and the highest tax rate that 
applies to nonadmitted insurance premiums in the state, district or possession of 
the United States, or a province of Canada in which the insurer is incorporated.  
The retaliatory tax applied to nonadmitted insurance premiums is similar to the 
2 
 retaliatory tax under 36 M.R.S. § 2519 applicable to other insurance premiums 
paid to foreign insurers subject to the Maine insurance premiums tax. 
The Administration notes that the bill will ease the complexity of 
determining the applicable Maine nonadmitted premiums tax rate, especially as it 
is affected by the rate imposed by the insurer’s State of incorporation. 
The Administration also notes that the bill should be amended to include an 
application date retroactive to January 1, 2023. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is negligible. 
The estimated administrative costs are nominal and can be absorbed by the 
Bureau.  
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.  
