 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 22 , 202 3 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 587 – Resolve, To Automatically Increase a Residential Care or Nursing Facility 
Resident’s Personal Needs Allowance Under the MaineCare Program When the Consumer 
Price Index Increases  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 587, a Resolve, To Automatically Increase a 
Residential Care or Nursing Facility Resident’s Personal Needs Allowance Under the 
MaineCare Program When the Consumer Price Index Increases . The resolve would require the 
Department, by July 1, 2024, to amend its MaineCare rules to apply an annual cost -of-living 
increase to the personal needs allowance for MaineCare members residing in nursing facilities 
and residential care faciliti es.  This cost -of-living increase applies the metrics used by the 
Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, CPI -W, for the 
Northeast Region.   
 
MaineCare members within nursing and residential care  facilities pay most of their income to the 
facility for their care , with the Department covering the balance of the cost .  The personal needs 
allowance is an amount the individual is permitted to keep for personal needs that are not covered 
by MaineCare, such as clothing, haircuts, and personal care items.  The Department pays the 
balance of the cost of care  that remains after the individual ’s income and personal needs 
allowance is deducted .  The proposed increase in the personal needs allowance would resul t in an 
additional balance which is the responsibility of the Department. The personal needs allowance 
for nursing and  residential care residents ha s not been increased in decades . 
 
We estimate that there will be a fiscal impact from this bill . This fiscal  impact occurs because 
residents would pay less toward the cost of their care and consequently the Department , not the 
client,  would pick up more of the costs.  Additionally, there will be a cost to changing the 
technology  system to accommodate this policy change.  
 
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) will need to approve the personal 
needs allowance increase at initial increase and each occurrence thereafter,  for nursing facility 
residents.  The initial approval from CMS, r ulemaking and technology  system changes  would 
take approximately 18-24 months , making it impossible for the Department to achieve the July 
1, 2024 implementation date required in this bill.    
 
 
 
Finally , the Department recommends for calculation purposes that any rounding required  if this 
bill should pass be  at the discretion of the Department.  Cost of care calculations are often 
completed manually by staff and whole numbers are preferred to simplify the pro cess and 
understanding for staff, providers and MaineCare  members.   
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
Anthony Pelo tte 
Anthony Pelotte, Direct or 
Office for Family Independence  
