 
 
 
 53 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 202   |  Portland, ME 04101  
 Phone: 866 -554-5380  | Fax: 207-775-5727  | TTY: 877-434-7598  
 aarp.org/ me  |  me@aarp.org  |  twitter: @aarp maine  
 facebook.com/ aarpmaine  |  instagram.com/aarpme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 March 22, 2023  
Testimony in favor of LD 587 : Resolve, to Automatically Increase a Residential Care 
or Nursing  Facility Resident's Personal Needs Allowance Under the MaineCare  
Program When the Consumer Price Index Increases  
 
Greetings  Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee Health and Human Services. I am  Bridget Quinn, Associate State 
Director of Advocacy and Outreach for AARP Maine.  
 
AARP is the nation’s largest nonprofi t, nonpartisan organization dedicated to empowering 
Americans 50 and older to choose how they live as they age. On behalf of our more than 
200,000 members statewide, thank you for the opportunity to share testimony.  Today I am 
testifying in favor of LD 58 7: Resolve, to Automatically Increase a Residential Care or 
Nursing Facility Resident's Personal Needs Allowance Under the MaineCare Program When 
the Consumer Price Index Increases .  
 
As you are aware, Medicaid is the largest public financing program provi ding health and 
long -term care coverage for people with low -incomes in the United States.  The program 
helps finance care for more than two -thirds of all nursing home residents. AARP believes 
long term services and supports should emphasize the independenc e, dignity, autonomy, 
and privacy of individual consumers so they can maximize their physical and psychosocial 
potential, and the personal needs allowance helps to do so.   
 
While Medicaid residents in long -term care often have outside income, such as Soci al 
Security or a small savings, Medicaid takes most of that money to defray care costs, leaving 
residents with little to spend on personal items, such as toothpaste, deodorant, snacks they 
enjoy and gifts for family members. The personal needs allowance al lows residents to 
recoup some of those costs , $40 for those in Nursing Facilities and $70 for adults living in 
residential care facilities for example assisted living other than nursing facilities. Especially 
at a time when the cost of everyday needs are r ising it is time to increase the personal 
needs allowance.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.  If you have questions for me, I can be 
reached at bquinn@aarp.org  or at 207 -272 -8563 .  
 
Bridget Quinn  
AARP Maine  
