>5?! 
\ Qa 
Y " at sl 
9},/@?3%% 
Eric Brakey 131*‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
L.D. 587, "Resolve, to Automatically Increase a Residential Care 
or Nursing Facility Resident's Personal Needs Allowance 
Under the MaineCare Program When the Consumer Price Index Increases" 
Before the Maine LegisIature ’s Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services 
Wednesday, March 22, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services: I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New 
Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. I am before you today to present L.D. 587, Resolve, to 
Automatically Increase a Residential Care or Nursing Facility Resident's Personal Needs 
Allowance Under the MaineCare Program When the Consumer Price Index Increases." 
This legislation is one of several bills I am bringing forward this session to address, through 
various areas of state stature, the growing inﬂation crisis that is impacting the people of Maine. 
When I submitted this bill, I was pleased to discover that Senator Mike Tipping submitted the 
same legislative request. Therefore, we decided to sponsor this legislation together. 
During the 127th Maine Legislature, this committee considered legislation (LD 90) to increase 
the personal needs allowance of residents at residential care and nursing facilities, brought 
forward by Rep. Peter Stuckey of Portland. This allowance is the small amount of funds— 
currently set at $40/month for nursing home residents and $70/month for assisted living residents 
— which residents get to keep from their Social Security checks to be able to purchase the 
simple niceties of life, including personal shampoo and deodorant. Rep. Stuckey noted at the 
time that the dollar amounts had not been increased since 1987. At the time, a bipartisan majority 
determined that — facing massive funding shortfalls for our nursing homes — increasing the 
personal needs allowance was not an immediate priority. 
Today, however, as price inﬂation (which is largely generated by currency debasement at the 
Federal Reserve Bank in order to ﬁnance the federal government ’s massive and growing deﬁcit) 
wipes out the purchasing power of the dollar, I believe we should index the personal needs 
allowance of residents to the annual Consumer Price Index. This would ensure that, at very least, 
the value of that allowance is not shrinking year-after-year as the federal government destroys 
our money. 
Especially after the restrictions our seniors in assisted living and nursing facilities have endured 
these last few years through COVID, they deserve a little basic human dignity. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions to the best 
of my ability.
