March 22,2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and 
Honorable Members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee. 
My name is Kandie Cleaves, and I reside in Garland. I am here to 
testify in favor of, LD 587 “Resolve to Automatically 
Increase a Residential Care or Nursing Facility 
Resident's Personal Needs Allowance Under the 
MaineCare Program When the Consumer Price Index 
lncreases ” 
Currently individuals living in residential care facilities are 
allowed to keep $70. for personal expenses. Even when 
their benefits go up, that amount doesn’t. While I was 
doing Validations for the Home and Community Based 
Settings (HCBS) I saw the impact of this. Different settings 
had different rules around what an individual was 
responsible for out of the “personal allowance ” . While 
some had everything covered, including Internet, activities 
etc., others didn’t even cover foods if an individual wanted 
to try a special diet to lose weight, if it wasn’t the same 
others in the home were eating. A friend even reached out 
to me for help when her group home refused to purchase 
the foods her doctor had told she needed to eat to be 
more heart healthy; They told her it was her responsibility. 
Ultimately what I saw was that most people only had $20. 
to spend on things they desired verses what they needed.
Last week, to get ready for a new job, my husband gota 
haircut, a simple crew cut, it cost $18. plus, a tip. We then 
went to Walmart, to buy him a pair of basic black, non- 
sneaker shoes, the cheapest pair was $28. A pair of pants 
were $22., a pack of razor blades $9. Those are basic 
items that many need to purchase just for everyday use. 
Not including the other needed items, we purchased, the 
above already goes over the $70 amount, and it wouldn’t 
even allow extra to purchase a favorite coffee or soda with 
fnends. 
We can do better by them, and we need to. In closing I 
ask that you vote “ought to pass “on LD 587 
Sincerely, 
Kandie Cleaves 
Garland
