295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 587 
"Resolve, to Automatically Increase a Residential Care or Nursing Facility Resident's 
Personal Needs Allowance Under the MaineCare Program When the Consumer 
Price Index Increases " 
Sponsored by Senator Eric Brakey  
March 22, 2023  
 
Good afternoon,  Senator Bald acci, Representative Meyer , and hardworking 
members of the Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory 
Shaughnessy and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and 
Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the 
majority of Maine’s community based mental health and substance use 
treatment providers , providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and 
children . The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies and 
evid ence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of 
our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 587, "Resolve, 
to Automatically Increase a Residential Care or Nursing Faci lity Resident's 
Personal Needs Allowance Under the MaineCare Program When the Consumer 
Price Index Increases. ” We are all aware that the cost of living has gone up across 
the board and that is why we support this  proposal – with caution.  
 
Our caution is that in implementing this increase, we need to ensure that the cost 
isn’t passed on to the providers.  
 
As we understand the proposal, t he increase in the personal needs allowance 
would only apply to MaineCare members who hav e cost of care assessed. The 
personal needs allowance is essentially an income disregard and is intended to 
assure that members with limited incomes who spend over a month in a nursing 
facility of private non -medical institution (PNMI)  have some funds left over for 
personal expenditures.   
 
If the personal needs allowance is increased, the disregard is also increased, so in 
order to avo id the costs coming from the providers, the department would need 
to make up the difference in the cost of care  – creating a fiscal note. Your analyst, 
upon  our inquiry, has informed us that, a s far as which PNMIs this applies to – 
cost of care is assessed for Cs and Fs. There is a question whether cost of care is 
assessed for Bs and Es . We are hoping to hear that information from the 
Department today . 
 
So, i n conclusion, everyone’s cost of living has increased, and it is for that reason 
that I urge members to vote ought to pass on LD 587  and to ensure the 
Department will fund the increase. I am happy to answer any questions you have .   
 
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

