219 Capitol Street, Suite7 
Co-ﬁsuﬂser ﬁourzcii System of ﬁﬁoiiirae Augusta’ ME 04330 
A Voice for Consumers of Mental Health Services M.
‘ 5 
Phone: 207.430.8300 
Fax: 207.430.8301 
Toll-Free: 877.207.5073 
www.maineccsm.org 
March 22, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Sen/ices Committee, 
My name is Simonne Maline. I am the Executive Director for the Consumer Council System of Maine 
(CCSM). I am here today on behalf of the CCSM to testify in support of LD 587 “A resolve, to 
Automatically Increase a Residential Care or Nursing Facility Resident ’s Personal Needs Allowance 
Under the MaineCare Program When the Consumer Price Index Increases ” 
The Consumer Council System of Maine is a public instrumentality written into State Statute by the Maine 
Legislature to sen/e in an advisory capacity and to provide legislators with guidance and advice regarding 
the delivery of effective and appropriate adult mental health services from those served by them. 
The reason we support this Resolve is because it would help many of our fellow peers who live in both 
residential care facilities (aka) group homes and nursing care facilities. 
Currently individuals can keep $70 in personal allowance each month. It has stayed at this same amount 
for decades. This very small allotment must cover all personal needs, which could include specific foods, 
vitamins, dietary supplements, clothing, and personal hygiene items. Also, some facilities do not offer 
personal internet and cable costs for residents. This does not give a resident much leeway to pay for things 
that they would like to do for recreation, or even be able give a birthday card to a family member etc. 
Giving an increase is vital to an individual ’s spending allowance It is so important for living a full life inside 
and outside these facilities. It should not fall to family and friends who might not have the resources to 
meet these basic needs for individuals. Autonomy is a very important need for any person. Let’s give 
people their dignity to pay their own way in their lives! 
Sincerely, 
Executive Director
