 
            Steven W. Bai ley                                                                                               Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF  
 
L.D. 1263  
 
AN ACT TO REQUIRE SCHOOL IDENTIFICATION CARDS TO INCLUDE THE  
TELEPHONE NUMBER OF A SUICIDE PREVENTION HOTLINE  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee.  I 
am Eileen King, deputy executive director of  Maine  School Management Association, testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association , in suppo rt of L.D. 1263 . 
 
Mental heal th crises and suicides in teens have been up since before the beginning of the COVID -19 
pandemic in late December 2019. A June 2021 study published by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control 
indicated that mental health -related emergency room visit s were up 3 1% compared to the year before.  
 
Schools today are facing an increasing, and necessary pressure to offer readily available mental health 
resources to students. Districts recognize the need to be aware and proactive in regard to the mental healt h 
crisis amo ngst youths and are ready to take further steps to ensure their students have the resources they need 
at all times.  
 
Adding suicide prevention lifelines to student ID cards is a significant step in the right direction. It puts 
resources directly into the h ands of students who are struggling with their mental health and into the hands of 
friends who can help.  
 
Another approach to support the intent of this bill would be to add the suicide prevention hotline on the 
devices that ar e issued by our schools in ca se the student l oses their ID card, or for those districts who don’t 
issue ID card.  
