Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President | Jesse Hargrove Vice President | Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org
Testimony 
                                     In Support of  
LD 1263 An Act to Require School Identification Cards to Include the 
Telephone Number of a Suicide Prevention Hotline 
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
April 5, 2023 
  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee,  
 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certified teacher.  The MEA 
represents nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-12 schools as well 
as in our institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine 
Community College System, along with students in teacher preparation programs as well as many 
retired educators. 
 
I am here to testify on behalf of MEA in support of LD 1263, An Act to Require School Identification 
Cards to Include the Telephone Number of a Suicide Prevention Hotline.  
 
While we are in support of this proposal, it is incredibly sad that we find ourselves in a situation where 
there is such a proposal being made. Yet we recognize that, given the results of the most recent Maine 
Integrated Youth Health Survey (MIYHS)1 which showed that nearly one-fifth of high school age 
students and one-sixth of middle school age students seriously considered attempting suicide, we must 
do what we can to prevent a possible tragedy.  
 
Having the phone number for a suicide prevention hotline readily accessible on a student’s id card can 
only help. However, not all schools provide identification cards for students. And of course, cards can be 
lost. We would hope that all schools, especially those that are not able to provide id cards, consider 
additional ways to make such phone numbers known to students and have them accessible through 
whatever means they can, and that the schools that do not provide cards explore a way to provide them 
also. 
 
Most of all, we urge the Committee to view favorably the other legislation that has been proposed to 
help address the mental health needs of our students, such as LD 829, An Act to Improve Behavioral 
Health Support for Students in Public Schools. 
 
Thank you for doing all you can to support our students and to keep them safe. 
 
1https://www.wmtw.com/article/survey-shows-increase-in-maine-students-feeling-hopeless/41757983 
 
