Hon. MaryAnne Kimiey 
40 Maple Ln 
Knox, ME 04986 April 5, 2023 
Testimony in support of LD 1263 An Act to Require School Identiﬁcation Cards to Include the 
Telephone Number of a Suicide Prevention Hotline 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, members of the Education and Cultural Affairs committee, my name 
is MaryAnne Kimiey from Knox, ME and I am here to testify in support of LD 1263 An Act to Require School 
Identiﬁcation Cards to Include the Telephone Number of a Suicide Prevention Hotline. 
As I was ﬁnalizing my written testimony yesterday (Tuesday, April 4, 2023) I was remembering a young lady 
who, while a student at Erskine Academy chose to take her own life 12 years ago yesterday (4/4/2011) rather 
than seek help. Haley was I month shy of her 17th birthday. When I read a Facebook post of NH Governor 
Chris Sununu signing a bill on August 3, 2022 “require(ing) every public school ID in NH to include the 
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline number” it made me think that Maine could also implement this simple act 
and possibly save countless lives. 
There will be others testifying with statistics around suicide ntunbers among school aged children so I will not 
bore you with those stats. My own daughter is almost exactly the same age Haley was when she took her life, 
Theresa will be 17 at the end of this month. That suddenly brought home why I needed to tiy and have this 
become standard in Maine’s schools. I have read many a news headline in recent years of school aged children 
as young as 8 years old committing suicide in area schools. Sadly, during the lockdowns around Covid-19, 
those stories became more frequent. 
In talking with my daughter about possibly having her government class come and testify on this bill, she was 
very intrigued. Her teacher was hoping to bring the whole class but scheduling conﬂicts this week prevented 
them from being here today. After a meeting last week with the high school principal at Mt. View High School 
in Thorndike, I commented on the fact that the school had an 8 1/2 x ll paper posted at the entrance of the school 
with the 800 # for the suicide hotline in the window. I took a moment to mention LD 1263. He was very much 
interested and planned to submit testimony electronically. Please take a moment to ﬁnd his testimony when you 
can, his name is Tom Gray, he and I had several emails back and forth about this so I want to make sure his 
testimony is not overlooked. 
With the newly created 3 digit nmnber (988) for the hotline, it is hopeful that more awareness will be brought to 
this resource for those who are troubled. Having the number on all student ID’s will bring awareness even to 
those who are not contemplating ending their own lives. It has the potential to put the nmnber in the hands of 
someone who could make the call for advice on how to help a friend in need. 
I’1n sure there are many others who can far better answer questions on this issue than I, but if you have any for 
me I will do my best to answer them. 
Thank you for your time, r 
3 , 2’ 
1 2 
Hon. MaryAnne Kimiey 
Knox, IVIE
