 Roman Cat holic Diocese of Portland  
 
510 Ocean Avenue     Telephone: (207) 773 -6471 
Portland Maine 0410 3-4936     Facsimile: (207) 773 -0182 
Suzanne C. Lafreniere, JD  
Office of Public Policy  
 
 
 
Comments  of Suzanne Lafreniere, on behalf of the Roman Catholic Diocese  
Written testimony in support of LD 1263  –  
 
An Act to Require School Identification Cards to Include the Telephone Number of a 
Suicide Prevention Hotline  
Senator  Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and members of the Joint Standing Committee  on 
Education and Cultural Affairs , my name is Suzanne Lafreniere and  I represent the Roman Catholic 
Diocese of Portland in support of LD 1263 .  The Diocese has a population of over 279,000 Catholics* or 
one-fifth of the total population of the state of Maine.  In addition to its  141 churches organized into  
48 parishes, it has nine  elementary schools,  one private elementary school,  one diocesan hig h school and 
one private high school. It also includes one Catholic college, Saint Joseph's College of Maine in 
Standish.  Within the diocese, there are also  seven subsidized housing units, four rehabilitation and 
residence facilities,  and two  child -care centers. There are three Catholic hospitals operating independently 
of the diocese as well as Catholic Charities Maine, the state's largest social service agency, which operates 
as a separate corporation.  
The Roman Catholic Diocese of Portland advocates for  enacting and enforcing laws that create  
safe communities and promote the common good. This issue is important to Catholics because as people  
of faith a primary concern is the moral and ethical considerations that should be at the root of our decision  
maki ng. We all are created in God’s image. We all —each of us --possess a basic human dignity. The  
Catholic Church teaches that human life is sacred and that the dignity of the human person is the  
underpinning of a moral vision for society. This belief is the fo undational principle of Catholic social  
teaching.  
 
 Suicide is the second leading cause of death in young people .  Suicide is always a tragedy.   This 
loss of life is preventable.  Suicidal  crises pass, and treatment is available that can reduce suicidal 
thoughts and behavior.  
 
 This bill  is a simple and inexpensive way to make sure young people know there is  help available  
and have an easy way of finding that help.  
 
Please vote LD 1263 as Ought to Pass. Thank you for your time and consideration today.  
 
*www.pewforum.org/religious -landscape -study/state/maine/  
 
 
 
 
