1131st Legislature
Senate of 
Maine 
Senate District 23 
Senator Mattie Daughtry
Assistant Majority Leader
3 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0003
Office (207) 287-1515
Testimony of Senator Mattie Daughtry introducing
LD 255, An Act to Require Campaign Finance Reports for State and County 
Candidates Other than Governor to Be Filed on the 42nd Day Before Any 
Election”
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
February 6, 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Mattie Daughtry, and I proudly represent 
Senate District 23, which includes Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, 
and part of Yarmouth. Today I am pleased to introduce my bill LD 255, “An Act to Require 
Campaign Finance Reports for State and County Candidates Other than Governor to Be Filed on 
the 42nd Day Before Any Election.” I also have an amendment that I will describe in this 
testimony.
LD 255 would promote transparency by requiring candidates running for state and county offices 
to file pre-election finance reports. In Maine, we have strong campaign finance disclosure laws, 
but LD 255 would make them even stronger. Voting members of the public deserve to know that 
the candidates they are considering for state and county offices are following Maine’s campaign 
finance laws—before voters go to the polls. We are already require gubernatorial candidates to 
file these pre-election finance reports. It’s time that state and county offices do the same.
My proposed amendment would exclude Maine Clean Election Act (MCEA) candidates from 
filing these reports since these reports would duplicate pre-existing reporting requirements. Also, 
the amendment specifies that municipalities that already have a 42-day report filing requirement, 
such as the City of Portland, could keep it.
My overarching goal with this piece of legislation if to create parity between traditional and 
MCEA financed candidates. No matter how your campaign is funded, voters deserve to see—at 
the same time—how a candidate is spending their resources. Currently MCEA candidates are 
required to file a seed money report before a traditional campaign is required to make any filing. 
This enables traditional candidates in competitive primaries who are running against MCEA 
candidates to get a preview of their opponents campaign before they have to file anything 
2themselves. Having experienced this myself, I have seen first hand how beneficial it would have 
been to have all candidates filing at similar times. 
At this time, I would be happy to answer any questions.
Thank you for your consideration and time.
Mattie Daughtry
Assistant Senate Majority Leader, Senate District 23
Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, and part of Yarmouth
