1 
20362799.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Support to L.D. 1719,  
An Act to Establish Substance Use Disorder Treatment Centers
May 2, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the distinguished 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Charles Rumsey. I am 
the Chief of the Cumberland Police Department, and President of the Maine 
Chiefs of Police Association. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine 
Chiefs of Police Association in support to LD 1719.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This  bill  requires  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  to 
establish  2 treatment centers for substance use disorder treatment. 
The Maine Chiefs are in support to this bill and others like it this session because 
we are sworn to protect lives, and Maine has a crisis with illicit drugs. We have set 
records in overdose deaths for three straight years and, in 2022, we lost 716 people. 
Each of these people had dynamic lives and left behind loved ones.  Their lives 
were cut short, and we believe that our community is worse off for it.  
We have and want to be supportive of every single initiative that might save just 
one of those lives. Substance Use Disorder treatment centers that are accessible to 
all are at capacity across the State. We need to be building up resources that make 
getting help as easy as possible.  
We are in full support of legislation that assist people in their journey to stopping 
their use of illicit drugs which can wreak havoc on their own lives, their family’s 
lives and the community. For these reasons, we would ask you to support LD 1719 
and vote ought to pass on this bill. On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police 
Association, we want to thank the committee members for your work on this 
Committee.  
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
