Joe  Hebert
Peru,ME Serenity At Summit 
LD 1719
Hello, My name is Joe Hebert, I am a Community Outreach Coordinator for a 
inpatient Detox and Residential Facility in Massachusetts. I am someone in long term 
recovery and grew up in a small town in Maine. I am writing this today with my 
concerns with the scarce number of inpatient SUD beds in Maine. My everyday job is
to effectively and efficiently place individuals into treatment based off there needs, 
what there insurance will work with and which facilites will transport in a timely 
manner. In this battle that many of us fight, mainecare placement for inpatient SUD 
treatment has always been a problem, when someone reaches out to me for help, I 
usually have about a 30-60 minute window from the time they ask for help to finding 
a bed for them and getting them set up to getting transportation. That being said, I 
now reside in the state of New Hampshire, which is much different then maine. I 
come here today to share some statistics…
Mainecare Beds- Under 30
New Hampshire Medicaid Beds- Over 300
Mass Health Beds- Over 300
From working in addiction treatment for a little over 3 years now, I can tell you, it is a
24/7 operation, essentially working as a emergency center for Substnace use disorder, 
and with that brings lots of overhead and cost, in my experience, with New 
Hampshire being an example, doing slight changes to reimbursement rates for your 
state insurance you offer, can go along way. Let a private sector do the work and let 
our state thrive, the reason we have no treatment beds in our state IMO is due to the 
reimbursement rates being to low. Organizations who open and operate inpatient 
treatment centers have to be reimbursed in order to continue to employ our dedicated 
health care employees, and have the 24/7 access to treatment beds  that dig in the 
trenches to make a difference everyday. 
Inpatient treatment beds for mainecare are needed in our state and I feel as though 
little changes to reimbursement rates can change that for us, and gain that access for 
our people who need help. It will also create jobs and opportunities for people, I can 
tell you first hand I love my job, and feel very fortunate to be able to help someone in 
there then of desperation and hard times, but what makes my job hard is not having 
any options for someone with Mainecare. 
Lastly, I want to thank everyone involved who let me take this time to write this 
message, I know that everyone is coming together to make a change, and I am deeply 
involved to help the great state of Maine win this battle.
Best Regards,
Joe Hebert
