 
Written Testimony of Leslie Clark 
In Favor of LD 1719: 
An Act to Establish Substance Use Treatment Centers 
 
 
Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re: LD 1719 
 
May 3, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services,     
My name is Leslie Clark. I am a person in long-term recovery from substance use disorder 
(SUD) and serve as the Executive Director of Portland Recovery Community Center (PRCC). I 
am speaking to you today on behalf of PRCC in favor of passing LD 1719. 
There is a dire need for more treatment beds with medically managed withdrawal in our state. 
According to our state’s online database, Maine Drug Data, 4,672 Mainers lost their lives due to 
pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical drug overdoses between 1997 and mid-2020. From 
2021-2022, approximately 1,352 fatal overdoses were reported in Maine. And these numbers do 
not include the huge number of people who die from alcohol related causes. The data reflects 
what we already know to be true. Our friends and family members are dying at rapid rates and 
there needs to be more beds available to help people safely withdraw from harmful substances 
and begin their journey to recovery.   
The lack of accessible treatment options for SUD is one of the top barriers for Mainers seeking 
help. The journey to finding and sustaining recovery often requires medically managed 
withdrawal aka “detoxification”. Many people cannot stop using addictive substances without 
medical help, and withdrawing from substances like alcohol and benzodiazepines can potenitally 
be fatal without medical supervision. Following detoxification, indivudals need additional 
support through recovery support services, inpatient treatment, intensive outpatient programs 
(IOP), recovery residences, recovery community centers, and more. The lack of treatment 
facilities with detoxificaiton services is a gaping hole in the continuum of care. 
If passed, LD 1719 will add at least 20 treatment beds that will include medically managed 
withdrawl services and the coordination of services post-treatment. Importantly, LD 1719 
requires that a portion of the beds in the treatment centers must be open for individuals with 
MaineCare. This requirement is critical to removing cost as a barrier to treatment.   
 
We know that the window of time in which a person with SUD has a moment of clarity and 
seeks help is often short. When a person with SUD decides they are ready to seek recovery, it is 
important that treatment beds are readily available before their resolve subsides. Increaseing the 
number of treatment beds in Maine will save lives, connect more people to recovery resoures, 
and decrease the gap in the continuum of care for SUD that currently exists in Maine.  
We know that recovery from SUD is a realty for 26 million Americans. Our hope is that this 
legislation will give more Mainers the chance to find recovery, more families the chance to be 
reunited, and more communities the chance to be recovery-ready. On behalf of PRCC, I strongly 
urge this committee to vote ought to pass LD 1719.  
 
Leslie M. Clark 
Executive Director 
Portland Recovery Community Center  
102 Bishop Street 
Portland, Maine 04103 
207-553-2575 
 
