295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1719  
“An Act to Establish Substance Use Disorder Treatment Centers ” 
Sponsored by Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross  
May 3 , 2023  
 
Good afternoon , Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Health 
and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy,  and I am the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance 
is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s community -based  
mental health and substance use treatment providers , providing services to over 80,000 
Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance advocates for the implementation of 
sound policies and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am h ere today to speak in support of LD 1719 , “An Act to 
Establish Substance Use Disorder Treatment Centers .” The Alliance thanks Speaker 
Talbot Ross for bringing this bill forward. Substance use disorder treatment centers offer 
individuals struggling with add iction a safe and supportive environment to receive the 
care and resources they need. We do not have  nearly  enough of these centers in Maine . 
These centers will provide evidence -based treatments such as behavioral therapies, 
medication -assisted treatment, and coordination with services after treatment.  
 
An additional  extremely important piece of this proposal is the inclusion of medically 
managed withdrawal beds. Formerly referred to as "Detox Beds" this service for 
substance use disorder is a critical comp onent of the continuum  of care for our 
community members suffering from substance use disorder, including not only opioid 
disorder but alcohol use disorder. Medically managed withdrawal is the process of 
safely and gradually removing substances from an individual’s body. Withdrawal fr om 
drugs or alcohol can cause severe physical and psychological symptoms, and in some 
cases, it can even be life -threatening. It is often the first step in addiction treatment, and 
it can be a challenging and uncomfortable process.  
 
There are not enough medically managed withdrawal  beds in Maine. In fact, advocates 
on the front lines of the opioid epidemic can spend their entire days just calling  – and 
calling and  calling again -- to find a bed.  And then there’s the issue of paying for the 
service. These  services  can be costly, making them inaccessible for some individuals.  
 
The need for MaineCare -covered withdrawal beds and treatment services for substance 
use disorder cannot be overstated. That is why the Alliance was pleased to see that this 
proposal requires at least 40% of the occupancy to be available to individuals with 
MaineCare. The current severely limited number of MaineCare -covered  substance use 
disorder treatment services represents a profound  barrier to recovery.  
 
More treatment centers are badly needed across our state and MaineCare -cover ed 
withdrawal beds and other treatment services will allow individuals struggling with SUD 
and AUD to  access the care they need to begin the process of recovery.  I urge 
committee m embers to support this important proposal. Thank you.  
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  Mental Health  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Concepts, Inc.  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Couns eling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
KidsPeace Maine  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Pathways of Maine  
Portland  Recovery Community 
Center  
Rumford Group Homes  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

