 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY , ESQ.  
 
Ought to Pass  – LD 1719  
 
An Act to Establish Substance Use Disorder Treatment Centers  
 
Submitted to the  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES  
 
May 3, 202 3 
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services , greetings .  My name is M eagan Sway , and I am the 
Policy Director  at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and 
prese rving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. I am 
here today to testify in support of  LD 1719 , which woul d establish two treatment centers for 
substance use disorder with at least 10 beds each, marking an important step towards providing 
access to crucial health care for people in Maine.  
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration estimates that between 
7 and 9.22 percent of Mainers meet the criteria for drug dependence but are not receivi ng 
treatment.1 This gap is due to numerous factors: decades of under -investment in community -based 
health care, a significant uptick over the past 3 years in the number of people turning to drugs and 
alcohol to self -soothe, and a lack of financial resourc es, among other things.  
When there are insufficient treatment options and recovery supports available, society 
increases its dependence on the criminal legal system to address public health problems. 
Criminalizing people because of their health conditions violates principles of equal protection and 
due process of law, and, what’s more, it is far less effective than treatment and support to achieve 
long-term recovery and stability. Passing this bill will be a small but significant step in recognizing 
the unm et need in our state, and avoiding harmful and liberty -denying techniques that have failed 
us as a state. We ask you to vote ought to pass.  
 
1 Maine Drug Data Hub, Treatment, available at https://mainedrugdata.org/maine -drug -data -hub/maine -drug -
data/treatment/  
