   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in Opposition to Income Tax Cut Bills 
May 3, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee, my name is 
Maura Pillsbury and I am an analyst at the Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am testifying in 
opposition to the income tax cut bills before you today. 
 
LD 1434, An Act to Abolish the Maine Income Tax and Establish a Zero-based Budget , 
sponsored by Rep. Laurel Libby would eliminate the income tax by 2026, which would have 
devastating impacts on the ability of the state to raise revenue to provide important services 
Mainers need, like safe roads, good schools, and access to health care. It would also result in a 
tax system that is less fair for low- and middle-income households who would likely see higher 
sales and property taxes to make up for lost revenue. 
 
LD 1638, An Act to Lower the State's Individual Income Tax, sponsored by Sen. Eric Brakey 
would lower Maine’s income tax brackets from 5.8, 6.75, and 7.15 percent to 5.2, 6.3, and 7.05 
percent in 2023 and 2024, and then further reduce them to 5, 6, and 7 percent for years after 
that. This tax cut would largely benefit Mainers with greater wealth, while reducing the state’s 
ability to pay for important services Mainers need, like affordable housing and affordable child 
care. 
 
LD 1671, An Act to Reduce the Income Tax to 4.5 Percent on the Lowest Tax Bracket and 
Remove Low-income Families from Taxation, sponsored by Rep. Jack Ducharme  would 
reduce the bottom income tax bracket from 5.8 percent to 4.5 percent. Contrary to the title of 
this bill, it would provide the greatest benefit to Maine tax filers earning over $150,000 
according to analysis from the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy (see chart on the 
following page).i As we have previously testified, lowering income taxes on the lowest bracket 
has a greater benefit for taxpayers with higher earnings because of Maine’s large standard 
deduction and personal exemption.  
 
Better Policy Alternatives 
If the Committee wishes to pursue tax cuts that address the needs of Mainers, MECEP believes 
increasing the child tax credit and making it refundable, increasing the sales tax fairness credit, 
and increasing the earned income tax credit are better options to support working Mainers 
and families with low and middle income. 
   
The Committee could also pursue increasing the standard deduction to reduce the amount of 
income subject to tax. The standard deduction phases out for higher income earners, making 
this option more progressive than a blanket cut to the bottom tax rate. Any tax cuts like this 
should be paired with another policy, such as Rep. Collings’ proposal for a surcharge on high 
 
  
 incomes (LD 667), to offset the cost. This will ensure benefits go to those who need it most 
while also holding important state programs like school funding and health care whole. 
 
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Contact information: maura@mecep.org   
 
 
 
 Source: Data from Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i Maine Center for Economic Policy, “Impacts of proposed income tax rate reduction.” 29 March 2023. 
https://www.mecep.org/blog/impacts-of-proposed-income-tax-rate-reduction/   

