 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee, thank you 
for taking the time to hear testimony on this important bill. My name is Alex Powell (zie/zhir), and I live in 
Marlborough, MA.   I am writing today to ask you to support LDs 1435 An Act to Reduce Commercial 
Sexual Exploitation and 1436 An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation for Survivors in Maine and throughout the country. 
 
While I do not live in Maine, I do have family in Maine, and this legislation is an issue that is very important to 
me. I am nonbinary, a Survivor of the sex trade, a person in long-term recovery, and the Coordinator of Youth 
Services at Living in Freedom Together, a nonprofit in Worcester, MA that provides direct services to survivors 
and is working to end the sex trade. 
 
This bill will protect survivors by decriminalizing the act of being bought and sold (thus decriminalizing 
Survivors) and by shifting the language used to Survivor-centered language. Language is incredibly important 
and influences how we view issues, and shifting to Survivor-centered language can shift community 
perspective. Survivors are often dehumanized and seen as ‘other’ and ‘immoral’ in their larger communities. 
The bill also supports survivors by initiating a legal protocol for response to suspected exploitation and 
trafficking and by holding perpetrators accountable for their actions. 
 
The reality is most adult Survivors are forced into the sex trade at a young age, whether by a trafficker, 
homelessness, poverty, or substance use disorder. Because of this, many Survivors do not have access to 
important resources to meet basic needs and build skills for independent living, which thus sets us up for 
further victimization. For some Survivors, by the time we hit 18, we may have spent years of our life already in 
the sex trade; exiting feels impossible as this is all we’ve known.  
 
The harm of the sex trade impacts and spans multiple generations in families and communities as we are 
continuously othered and objectified. If arrested, we face barriers for obtaining employment and housing due 
to our CORI status. This increases vulnerability for revictimization and vulnerability for our children. 
 
Full decriminalization is often pushed under the guise that this is the only means of income for marginalized 
individuals, specifically transwomen. We should instead be pushing to expand opportunities and access to 
 
basic needs to reduce vulnerabilities. We deserve safe access to communities and real employment, not to be 
pigeon-holed into violence as our only means of income. BIPOC women and girls and LGBT folx are targeted 
by exploiters simply due to our identities. As Survivors, we become repeated targets of violence and are often 
invisible at best in the larger community. Personally, being queer and nonbinary contributed significantly to 
my entry into the sex trade and delayed exit. 
 
As a Survivor, I have struggled for years with severe complex and chronic PTSD, chronic and debilitating illness 
resulting from ‘the life,’ and the loss of normalcy in any human interaction. Substance use disorder, 
homelessness, and the repeated and violent sex acts take a significant toll on all aspects of our health. Places 
and people that were once considered ‘safe’ are no longer. Everyone is a buyer, and if they aren’t, they still look 
like one. 
 
We cannot punish Survivors for what happened to us. We also cannot give a free pass to those who are 
benefiting from the blatant paid rape of survivors. This is not an industry – it is the commoditization of 
violence and oppression, and it needs to be abolished. Supporting survivors means supporting the equality 
model and ending demand for good. 
 
Please vote “ought to pass” on LDs 1435 and 1436.   
Thank you, 
