 
 
 
 
DATE:  4/10/2023   
 
ATTN: Judiciary  Committee    
 
FROM: Ane Mathieson , LMSW, Project Director, the EMPOWER Center, Sanctuary for Families  
  
SUBJECT: LDs 1435 An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation and 1436 An Act to Provide 
Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation  
 
 
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the  Judiciary  Committee,  
 
 Thank you for taking the time to hear testimony on this important bill. My name is Ane Mathieson , and I live 
in Brooklyn, NY. I am writing today to ask you to support LDs 1435  An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation and 1436  An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation  
 
I was born and raised on a small dairy farm in Montville, Maine.  After graduating  with a bachelor’s  degree in 
philosophy  from the University  of Maine,  Orono,  I began  working extensively on the issue of 
prostitution/commercial sexual exploitation.  For over eleven  years, I have worked with  adults and children  
bought and sold in the commercial sex trade . I co-founded and  currently  run the EMPOWER Center,  a 
multi -disciplinary service center . for people  harmed by the commercial sex  industry. We provide legal, 
medical, social, mental health, and economic empowerment services to survivors.  
 
 
Research on the Equality Model  
 
From 2012 -2013, I completed a Fulbright Fellowship in Sweden researching the Equality Model a progressive 
policy model that recognizes prostitution as a form of gender -based violence. This model decriminalizes only 
those people bought and sold in the sex trade providing them with services and avenues to exit the sex trade , 
while criminalizing  the harmful social practices of sex buying  (patronizing) , promoting (pimping), and 
trafficking.  LDs 1435  An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation and 1436  An Act to Provide Remedies for 
Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation  are inspired by this model . The Equality Model , as implemented in 
Sweden, Iceland, Norway, Northern Ireland, France, Canada, Republic of Ireland, France and Israel: 
Criminalizes  sex buying and third -party profiteers; decriminalizes  sex selling  and offers social services  for 
survivors to exit and heal .  In 1999 Sweden criminalized sex buying  and pimping  and decriminalized sex 
selling.  
●  After 1999, a Swedish Special Inquiry (2008 -2010) found that prostitution in Sweden dropped 40%  and 
has remain ed at this lower level.1  
● The Swedish Special Inquiry found that the number of men purchasing sexual services dropped from 
13.6% to 7.8% after the introduction of legislation criminalizing sex buying.2  
● The criminalization of sex buying  in Sweden resulted in the shrinking  of the prostitution market and 
a decline in human trafficking inflows.  
 
                                                 
1 As cited in Ekberg, G. (2015). Swedish laws, policies and interventions on prostitution and trafficking in human 
beings: An Overview, 6. Retrieved from https://feminismandhumanrights.files.wordpress.com/2014/06/brief -law-and-
policies -on-prostitution -and-thb-sweden -gunilla -s-ekberg -150216.pdf  
2 Id. 
 
 
 
Harms of the Sex Trade  
 
There is a large body of global and national research on violence against women in prostitution. The sample 
sizes are often smaller because of the limitations posed by researching this illicit trade, but the numerous 
studies consistently indicate that buye rs and exploiters subject survivors of prostitution  to very high rates of 
intersecting forms of violence  including rape, sexual assault, emotional, economic, and physical abuse, food 
and sleep deprivation, murder and acts of torture. A study based in Colo rado Springs, found that women in 
the sex trade were nearly 18 times more likely to be murdered than w omen of a similar age and race.   
 
Victims  of prostitution  often present with numerous medical issues including malnourishment, broken bones, 
burns, stab w ounds, head injuries, ano -genital injury (rectal prolapse, vaginal injuries), internal injuries, hip, 
neck, and jaw pain, STIs, and reproductive issues. Many survivors are left physicall y or developmentally 
disabled;  according to one estimate, a third of s urvivors are disabled from  the trauma and physical injuries  
they endure while in the sex trade . The trauma victims/survivors experience is incomprehensible. Survivors 
struggle with feelings of guilt, shame, depression. Many struggle to remember details of their life because of 
memory damage, blocked traumatic memories, or dissociation. Survivors are documented to have high rates 
of psychiatric disorders including depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, eating disorders, substance abuse 
disorder, suicidal ideati on, self -injury, post -traumatic stress disorder and dissociative disorders. These mental 
health struggles arise because of the trauma and violence inherent to c ommercial sexual exploitation. 
Survivors of the commercial sex trade need and deserve services, not jail or criminal records.  
 
The majority of people pushed and pulled into the trade are members of our communities with the least 
social power. Their body is purchased or rented by someone who has greater disposable income and 
positional power. Over 95%  of buyers are men; whereas the people being bought are overwhelming female, 
members of the LGBT community, poor, addicted, homeless, and adolescents.  
 
 
Harms Caused by Sex Buyers, Pimps, and Traffickers  
 
Sex buyers play an  integral role in sustaining the  sex industry. Prostitution is not characterized by sexual 
mutuality and reciprocity but rather it is base d on unequal power and control, w here one person’s pleasure is 
met at the expense of another person’s wellbeing, phys ical and psychological health. The pimps and sex 
buyers decide who they will exploit, who they will buy, how much they will pay, if they will rape the person 
they’ve bought, if they will use a condom. Extensive research from around the world, documents that sex 
buyer and pimp violence is an embedded aspect of CSE. In one Chicago study, 43% of buyers stated that if a 
man pays for sex, the woman bought should do anything he asks. In the same study, 40% of the buyers 
admitted that they had paid for sexual acts with women they knew to be under  the control of a pimp or 
trafficker.² Sex buyers and pimps intentionally recruit people when they are most vulnerable, when they are 
young, homeless, addicted, living in poverty. They primarily target women and girls, especially of color, the 
LGBTQ commun ity, youth in foster care, folks w ho are developmentally disabled.  
 
Sex buyers show a greater acceptance of rape myths when compared to non -sex buyers; In a Boston study, 
two thirds of sex buyers  in this study  observed that a majority of women are lured, t ricked, or trafficked into 
prostitution; s o they knew that that women they were buying were not pro -actively choosing to be in the sex 
industry, but this knowledge did not deter buyers from buying.  When sex buyers were compared to non -sex 
buyers, they sco red higher on measures of hostile masculinity and had less empathy for women in 
prostitution.  Buying sexual access to another person’s body creates a sense of power in buying. Buyers often 
believe it is their right to do whatever they want to the person t hey have purchased. Many buyers seek power 
and sexual satisfaction by demanding particularly violent and degrading sex acts and demanding access to a 
variety of women including in age, racialized identity, and body type.  
 
 
 
 
Research on buyers indicates that  they typically have jobs, wives and children, and come from every 
profession and socio -economic strata. They are men with disposable income and in many cases men with 
social power. They are the opposite, frankly, of those who are exploited.  
 
Demand Aboli tion commissioned a survey about sex -buying behavior among 8,201 adult men across the US 
between December 2016 and January 2017. Findings from that survey:  
 
 Perceiving a risk of arrest has a diminishing effect on sex buying. Two factors increase this 
perce ption: (1) a buyer’s own arrest history, and (2) the extent to which he shifts his purchasing 
activities in response to police presence.  
 “High -frequency” buyers purchase so often that their actions account for a disproportionately large 
share of the illega l sex trade. About 25% of active buyers report purchasing weekly or monthly, and 
their activity accounts for nearly 75% of market transactions. These buyers are more likely to have 
started at a young age and with the help or encouragement of others in thei r social networks.  
 
In the prostitution transaction, sex buyers, pimps, and traffickers hold the power. If the sex trade is to be 
curbed, bills like LDs 1435  An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation and 1436  An Act to Provide Remedies 
for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation  must be passed to deter sex buying and pimping by  holding 
exploiters accountable . People exploited in the sex trade should be treated as victims of a crime, not 
criminals, and provided  with need social and exit services.  
 
I hope that this information and data helps you to make an informed decision when considering LDs 1435  
An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation and 1436  An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial 
Sexual Exploitation . 
 
 
With gratitude for your work.  
 
Truly,  
 
 
 
Ane Mathieson, LMSW  
Co-Director  
The EMPOWER Center  
Clinical Department  
 
Sanctuary for Families  
P.O Box 1406  
Wall Street Station  
New York, NY 10268 -1406  
 
 
T: 212 -349-6009 x 381  
C: 646 -496-3036  
F: 212 -349-6810  

