avg 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
42 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS cot. WILLIAM G. ROSS 
CHIEF GOVERNOR 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LTC. BRIAN P. SCOT1" 
COM]vﬂSSIONER DEPUTY CHIEF 
Testimony of Lt. Col. Brian P. Scott 
c 
131st First Regular Session 
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1435 AN Acr T0 REDUCE COMMERCIAL SEXUAL EXPLOITATION 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on judiciary, my name is Lt. Col. Brian P. Scott, and I am here today to 
testify on behalf of the Maine State Police and the Department of Public Safety in 
Opposition to LD 1435 An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation. 
In preparation for this testimony, I spoke with the Bills’ sponsor, Rep. Reckitt, so 
that I could clearly understand what she was trying to accomplish. I learned that 
she is very passionate about trying to reduce the demand for what we currently 
know as “prostitution, ” so that we can reduce or eliminate the number of victims 
who are forced into having to unwillingly participate in this horrible practice often 
to ensure their own personal safety. While we could not agree more with the 
intent of Rep. Reckitt’s position, we are not sure that this bill could or would 
actually reach its goal. While the Department of Public Safety takes no position on 
Sections 1 through 7 of this bill, I would note that a similar bill dealing with this 
topic was vetoed by Governor Mills by Governor Mills in the 1305‘ Legislature. ‘ 
However, we are opposed to Section 8, which would require that the Department 
of Public Safety (DPS) to establish a protocol for law enforcement to treat a person 
who is experiencing or has experienced human trafﬁcking or commercial sexual 
exploitation. The DPS does not have the staff capacity or expertise to fulﬁll this 
requirement. We anticipate that in order to comply we would need to spend many 
hours of staff time engaging with stakeholders over several months, and likely 
contract with experts or send staff to be trained, in order to learn what we would 
need to understand before we could begin rulemaking on. Then, the rule making 
‘ L.D. 1592, An Act to Remove Punishments for Sex Selling and Decrease Demand by Increasing Penalties 
for Sex Buying, (l30“‘ Legis. 2021).
process would require dozens more hours; in the end resulting in hundreds of 
hours of staff time that we simply do not have. 
We are dealing unprecedented low levels of stafﬁng where we are very close toa 
crisis. We are seeing more employees retiring or resigning faster than We can 
recruit, hire, and train. \/Vhile our stafﬁng levels have down our responsibilities 
have gone up. Maine has seen drug overdose deaths skyrocket; homicides double, 
and fatal car crashes increasing throughout the state. The DPS has many 
incredibly hard-working individuals who are doing everything that they can to try 
and reverse these horrible trends, however they only have the capacity to do so 
much. ~ 
We also don't have the ability to predict when the next crisis will hit the state of 
Maine. We must be ﬂexible and dynamic and shift priorities on the spot when 
unpredictable emergencies arise so we may mitigate and reduce risks associated 
when such occurrences strike. Each time statutes require the DPS to take on 
additional duties without providing additional resources or stafﬁng we are forced 
to stop doing something else that our training, education, and experience tells us 
requires our attention. We no longer have the ability to decide what the priorities 
are in making Maine a safer place to live, work and visit, as our priorities and 
deadlines are determined by state law, such as what this bill proposes. We have 
always prided ourselves on the fact the Department of Public Safety can do 
anything that we set our minds to, however we cannot do everything. Our 
capacity bubble has burst, and we can no longer take on additional duties without 
additional stafﬁng.4 
Also, LD 1436 would require the DHHS to form a stakeholder group to identify 
funds and services available to victims of commercial sexual exploitation by 
December of this year. We would surely need to have this information before we 
could begin rulemaking, which this bill would require by Ianuary of next year. So, 
the timeline to establish this protocol is impossible. 
For these reasons, I urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1435, however, we 
would be happy to work with the sponsor of the bill and any stakeholders in an 
attempt to be part of a solution in an effort to reduce victims of commercial sexual 
exploitation. 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police, I thank 
you for your time and would be happy to try and answer any questions that you 
might have. 
45 COMMERCE DRIVE, SUITE 1, 42 STATE HOUSE STATION, AUGUSTA, ME 04333-0042 
TEL: (207) 624.7200 I TTY: (207) 287.3659 I FAX: (207) 287.3042.
