Testimony Submitted 4/11/23 to the Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary 
Re: An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation — L.D. 1435 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Judiciary Committee: 
my name is Christina Reese and I am a resident of South Portland. I am speaking today in 
support of LD 1435: An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation. 
While I support this bill in its entirety, I will focus my testimony on why the crime of engaging 
in prostitution should be repealed, as LD 1435 would do. 
For background, I am an attorney currently employed as a prosecutor in Maine. Prior to that,I 
worked at a local non-profit organization for a little over 2 years. For much of that time, I wasa 
case manager working exclusively with survivors of commercial sexual exploitation. I am not 
making a statement as to the position of any NGO or State office. I am, however, speaking asa 
citizen of Maine with a background working alongside survivors. 
As the Statute for “engaging in prostitution ” is currently written, there are available defenses that 
could allow someone to avoid conviction based on their status as a victim, acknowledging the 
circumstances people are in when they commit this so-called “offense. ” There is also a provision 
allowing the only penalty to be a fine, taking away the possibility of incarceration. These strike 
me as well-intentioned attempts to make it difficult to obtain a conviction, or to at least soften the 
associated punishment. However, this creates a catch-22. 
If a prosecutor cannot seek jail time, an individual no longer has the right to counsel. A court 
cannot appoint an attorney to represent them. That means that anyone charged with engaging in 
prostitution has to either retain an attorney, or represent themselves. Most people who are being 
charged with this crime do not have means to hire an attorney. They are left to generate a 
complicated legal defense for themselves. Or, perhaps more simply, survivors will avoid the re- 
traumatization, ﬁnancial loss, and emotional stress of ﬁghting the charge, and accept a ﬁne and 
criminal conviction on their record. 
As a case manager, the ﬁrst conversation I often had with clients revolved around an individual ’s 
goals. Usually, this included housing and employment, which are made all the more difficult to 
obtain with a criminal record. The crime of engaging in prostitution is stigmatized and hard to 
explain without having to disclose intimate details about your life. Having to make a personal 
disclosure like that to anyone would be challenging — let alone making that disclosure toa 
prospective landlord or employer, the gatekeepers to much-needed resources and opportunities. 
To think that continuing to criminalize someone’s exploitationcan somehow save or empower 
them is misguided. We need a new approach and that approach is before you today in LD 1435. 
For these reasons, and the reasons set forth by others testifying before you today, I urge you to 
vote in support of LD 1435. Thank you for your time and consideration of this important issue.
