Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee Thank you 
for taking the time to hear testimony on this important bill. My name is Cora Grey and I believe 
in these bills. There are so many women, children, and men falling into the system that should 
not be there. They should be getting services provided to find a way out. l believe that if we 
focus on penalizing the buyer and seller then we will have a better chance of getting help for the 
exploited as well as able to help rehabilitate the buyer and seller. I was charged with theft trying 
to maintain my habit while being exploited and that has stopped me from gaining important 
employment so that I may better the future for my child and me. I feel so strongly about this 
because there are so many women that are held back. Our dignity is being exploited as well. On 
top of losing our integrity and morals we now have to relieve this story every time we look to 
gain employment or anything in life our kids our family. it truly affects all people in our circle the 
shame and guilt never go away. We are reminded daily of the things that held us hostage for so 
long. l was incarcerated for stealing and Preble Street informed me about courage lives which is 
a safe house that saved my life. I would still be in exploitation if I was not taken under their arms 
and shown how to live a healthy life. Taken back in when l slipped again. There are not enough 
safe houses there are not enough services for survivors. We can go to a rehabilitation center 
that focuses on the substances but it doesn't truly allow us to heal from the pain and hurt of the 
past. It's nice to be with a group of women and men that understand what your going through 
and don't look at you in pity when you share pieces of your story. Just to be understood. ls so 
important to the healing process of a sun/ivor. There are many people out there who are not 
even aware of the amount of exploitation that takes place on the streets of Maine. We don't 
always share our stories because of the backlash we receive. The misunderstanding eyes that 
stare into your soul. These bills are so important for the future of all sun/ivors. Together we can 
take a stand and move fon/vard with helping the one that needs it the most. The one who is 
slipping in the cracks not getting services and being left to sit in jail while the one who needs the 
rehabilitation just as much goes free trafficking more people. Both bills LD 1435 and Ld 1436 
are crucial to the rehabilitation of our future growth and healing. Thank you for hearing me and 
taking the time to hear my survivor's family as well. Thank you for your votes
