Henri June  Binks
The Ishtar Collective
LD 1435
Hello and thank you for your audience today,
My name is Henri Bynx. I am the co-founder and co-director of the Ishtar Collective; 
an anti-trafficking and sex worker rights organization in your neighboring state of 
Vermont. We work through policy, mutual aid, and direct services to uplift survivors 
and sex workers in Vermont.
I have been serving my community beside trafficking survivors and consensual sex 
workers for three years, since I founded Ishtar Collective during the early months of 
the Pandemic.
 As I testify today, two trafficking survivors that were served by members of our 
collective are transitioning into their new home, uplifted by community members who
spent the weekend moving them. 
I am here today from a place of experience as a consensual sex worker and a 
community organizer to express my concerns around the language of this bill. Firstly, 
I’d like to bring attention to section 2 of this bill which would create a protocol for 
law enforcement interactions with survivors and sex workers.
Subsection 2- A requires department of public safety to consult with “relevant 
stakeholders” - anti-trafficking organizations, sexual assault organizations, domestic 
violence advocacy organizations and crisis services to adopt a model protocol - this 
omits sex worker-run/focused orgs and harm reduction groups - law enforcement will 
inevitably interact with adult consensual sex workers, but the protocol may not have 
any guidance for those interactions. Law enforcement historically have had abusive 
and unsafe interactions with sex workers disproportionate to other populations they 
interact with - this ends up spilling over to trafficking victims as well. 
 We need to make sure that as law enforcement navigates these waters, that they have 
ample resources and support to best know how and when to interact with sex workers 
and survivors alike, and for this reason I believe section two needs further review.  In 
order to provide robust care, there must be further protocol established to protect 
trafficking survivors and sex workers while dealing with police.
Secondly, I’d like to address the language change in terms of prostitution based 
language versus “commercial sexual exploitation.”
 I feel it conflates instances of consensual sex work with exploitation, and in that, 
feeds a larger narrative that oftentimes erases the needs and wisdom of survivors and 
sex workers alike, whose expertise should be lended to in matters like labour 
exploitation. 
Painting in these broad strokes around the interactions that only the people we are 
speaking of can define is a dangerously disempowering move toward the people we 
need to be protective of, as it allows little room for context and nuance, and may 
endanger more people  who are NOT committing violent offenses by vilifying a 
spectrum of interactions with sex workers, not least of all contacting them in the first 
place. 
The bill’s language struck down the term “prostitution” in favor of “commercial 
sexual exploitation” in more than one subsection, and while neither terminology is 
picture perfect, at least the criminality of the word “prostitute” connotes a person 
giving consent, as a person charged with prostitution could be assumed to have 
consented to an act of prostitution at the time of arrest.
As a consensual sex worker, I am part of a demographic that will not be accurately 
represented by language like this, and in that I fear there won’t be the positive impacts
you’re hoping for in this policy. I am confident that you, our neighbors in the state of 
Maine will continue to consider this bill carefully. 
Thank you for your time.

