4;. 
HOUSE OP REPRESENTATIVES 
§=,, 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
gt AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Holly T_ Sargent TTY: Maine Relay 7ll 
625 York Street 
York, ME 03909 
(207) 358-4793 
Hollv Sar2ent@le2islaturemaine.20v 
April ll, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Holly II Sargent in support of 
LD 1435, An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Good aftemoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Judiciary. I am Holly Sargent, and I proudly represent District 147, which is the 
town of York. I am testifying today in favor of LD 1435, An Act to Reduce Sexual 
Exploitation. 
Many of you know that I am newly elected and, like my fellow freshmen, I am learning to 
navigate the political pathways of power and policy. I don’t think my mentors would necessarily 
be pleased that one of my ﬁrst co-sponsored bills has the word “sex” in its title, but the topic is 
too important, the problem is too pervasive for me to Shirk. I am honored to stand by the 
courageous and bold Lois Reckitt to support this bill. 
I have spent a great deal of my career studying, advocating for and establishing programs 
advancing gender equity and securing the rights of women around the world. While I was 
Associate Dean at Harvard’s Kennedy School I founded the Harvard Women’s Leadership Board 
and helped develop the Women and Public Policy Program. The program both trains women 
leaders and addresses the public issues that profoundly affect women and girls. 
One cannot spend decades in support of women and not collide with the ugly reality of sexual 
exploitation. It is as old as the Bible and as new as the latest pornographic meme. It is global and 
local. It is here in Maine, whether in a 13-year-old girl pimped by her stepfather in Buxton or 
in a woman from Eastern Europe trafﬁcked into our state for sex. It is entwined with poverty and 
abuse. It is often ampliﬁed by our culture and strengthened by a lingering misogyny. 
LD 1435 takes it on and turns the tables. Rather than continuing the centuries old approach of 
blaming and shaming the so called “provider, ” it faces the issue of demand. Who is the buyer 
and What responsibility should they bear‘? How do we raise the stakes and focus on the 
“business ” of sexual exploitation reducing the demand‘? As the non-proﬁt Demand Abolition 
puts it, “No Buyers— No Business. ” This bill takes aim at those who buy sex with children and 
disabled adults. It recognizes the impact of trafﬁckers who lure and entrap young people, largely 
women, into this life. It removes labels and some of the stigma by decriminalizing the seller. It is 
a ﬁrst step toward a new life.
This bill is fashioned after the partial decriminalization model that has been called the Nordic 
Model because of its origins in Scandinavia. Early results in Sweden show declines in street 
prostitution and dramatic positive results for survivors. 
LD 1435 is not a panacea. The issue in entrenched and complicated. We will need to observe 
results and guard against unintended consequences. What LD 1435 might be called is the ﬁrst 
step in a reckoning. I hope you will take the courageous step to give it a chance. 
I appreciate your time and consideration. I am happy to answer your questions and be available 
for the work session.
