Senator Carney, Representative l\/loonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee Thank you 
for taking the time today to hear all the testimonies on this critical bill. My name is Kasie 
Kirkham, l live in Union Maine. l have lived in Maine for many years. in fact, much of my 
exploitation happened here in this state. l am asking you to support LDs 1435 an act to Reduce 
Commercial Sexual Exploitation and LDs 1436 an act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of 
Commercial Sexual Exploitation. l spent many years incarcerated for crimes committed while in 
the life. When l say life l mean while prostituting or being exploited by another. In fact, one of my 
worst crimes was when l was found unresponsive next to a man living the same lifestyle. My 
children were removed and I was charged with endangering the welfare of a child. That charge 
has followed me through my life making it impossible to obtain employment in any area that 
includes being a Mainecare billable agency. I am a recovery coach as well as a peer support 
specialist, and a survivor of exploitation mentor also. to be honest l am overqualified for many 
positions l was not able to jump into because of the many charges on my record. How 
degrading to have to explain and how retraumatizing to have to tell my story to stranger atter 
stranger just to obtain employment to feed my children or to help others. it has been seven 
years since l lived in sexual exploitation and it still haunts me every day. it's not enough thatl 
lived it. l have to tell people why my record is so colorful each time l am told a background 
check will be done. l go to church and in order to work with children l have to explain why l have 
prostitution charges and many other petty thefts on my record. This makes life so much more 
difficult when you have done as much work as l have on myself. l was at my hardest use of 
substances while being exploited and would have done anything to just feed my habit, the habit 
that was holding the pain. Now my story is different in many ways as is all of ours. l did not have 
the resources available to me when coming out of exploitation and was living in a faith-based 
home for substance use. There were many walls that continued to be hard to climb over 
because my story and experiences were different. l needed different help that is why Bill LDs 
1436 is so important. it wasn't until my testimony was heard from another survivor that l then 
became a part of a group of women that were healing from the wounds that were caused at the 
hand of another. l am fully in support of both bills being passed today. l believe the seller should 
not be charged and l believe the buyer should be held responsible and able to ﬁnd some type of 
program available to heal as well. We are all doing what we have been taught works. But cannot 
start until held accountable for their actions. Also, l am in support of LDs 1436 because we all 
need to be guided out of the darkness to be led to the light. l had some amazing women take 
my hand and lead me to finding the root causes of why l continued to think that the way l was 
living was ok and it wasn't until then that I was able to heal. l hope that my words have made an 
impact today and continue to be heard by anyone that is being exploited and just doesn't seea 
way out. Thank you for your time your help and the backing from the state of Maine. l believe 
we can help all the men and women being exploited ﬁnd their way home. And all those who are 
selling and buying find themselves ﬁnally held accountable for their ways as well.
