         
         
           
           
           
           
         
         
           
           
           
           
           
           
           
 
 
Kent Avery, Chair 
Adam Silberman, Secretary-Treasurer 
Shira Burns 
Elizabeth Coleman 
Amanda Doherty, ex-officio 
Melissa Martin 
Matthew Ruel 
 
April 19, 2023 
 
Re:  L.D. 1435 – An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
 
I am writing on behalf of the Sex Offender Management and Risk Assessment Advisory Commission, 
neither for nor against LD 1435, but to provide additional information regarding the bill. 
 
Committee members should be aware that the term “sexual exploitation” is already being used in 
Maine sex offense statutes.  Specifically, Title 17-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 12, is named “Sexual 
Exploitation of Minors,” See 17-A M.R.S.A. §281-285.  Also, there is a sex offense within Chapter 12 
entitled “Sexual exploitation of minor.”  See 17-A M.R.S.A. §282.  There are also several other uses of 
the term throughout Maine statutes in other contexts, that may be impacted by this bill.  The 
commission suggests that the committee and/or the Revisor’s Office look carefully at the terms that are 
used to identify offenses to address legal implications and potential confusion if the same terms are 
used in multiple statutes and contexts. 
 
Although the commission takes no position on whether the subject offense should be a Class D or Class 
C offense, committee members should be aware that elevating the offense from Class D to Class C also 
elevates the SORNA Tier from Tier I (10 year registration) to Tier II (25 year registration).  Finally, the 
committee should know that there is no need to amend SORNA of 1999 since the statute at issue was 
enacted in 2017 and does not implicate SORNA of 1999.  SORNA of 2013 also needs no amendment 
based on this bill because registerable sex offenses in SORNA of 2013 are grouped by Class and not 
specifically enumerated by statute number. 
 
The commission is happy to assist the committee or the sponsor in drafting language for this bill and 
will be available for any work sessions. 
 
Kent Avery 
Chair, Sex Offender Management and Risk Assessment Advisory Commission 
STATE OF MAINE
SEX OFFENDER MANAGEMENT AND RISK 
ASSESSMENT ADVISORY COMMISSION
