.,>J1' -=-..
' 
I1=2_ -" Y ~
A 
» HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
‘ea 1; 2 STATE HOUSE STATION ‘tr’ AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
Laurie ()Sil(-Bl ‘ , Pill) 287_1400 13 M Stt 
OmnOf1yV ‘1’ E({jj73 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
Phone: (207) 944-6743 
Laurie.Osher@legislaturemaine.gov 
April 11, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Laurie Osher in support of 
LD 1435: An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation 
LD 1436: An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Senator Camey, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Judiciary Cormnittee. I 
am Rep. Laurie Osher and I represent District 25, most of Orono. Thank you for providing me 
the opportunity to express my support LD 1435: An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation and LD 1436: An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial 
Sexual Exploitation. 
Maine, like the rest of the world, has a sexual exploitation problem. According to the Maine Sex 
Trafficking and Exploitation Network, three to four hundred individuals are sex trafﬁcked in 
Maine annually. Those interviewed included individuals as young as fourteen. 
Prostitution is an industry that is perpetuated by people who buy sex. Their actions encourage 
the exploitation that is the commercial sex trade. Those who engage in prostitution should not be 
seen as the perpetrators of crimes, but as citizens who are survivors of the crime of trafﬁcking. 
LD 1435 replaces the crime of engaging in prostitution with a new crime of “Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation ” . That new term uses survivor centered language. 
LD 1435 Repeals the crime of engaging in prostitution and provides sex trade survivors a 
defense to conspiracy to commit commercial sexual exploitation and a defense of sex 
trafﬁcking. It also changes the term “prostitution of a minor” to “commercial sexual exploitation 
of a child”. 
LD 1435 makes commercial sexual exploitation of a child and solicitation of a child for sexual 
exploitation Class C crimes. 
LD 1436 Enables survivors of prostitution to seal records of convictions and creates a 
stakeholder group to make recommendations for improving services to survivors. 
District 25: Orono (pait)
And, near and dear to my scientist heart, LD 1436 requires data collection and reporting on 
crimes involving commercial sexual exploitation. Without data, we don’t have the information 
needed to make decisions based on facts. 
These bills are modeled after the laws of Norway which have decriminalized the sale of sex. The 
purchase of sex there is still a crime. 
I thank Representative Reckitt for introducing this bill. She's worked diligently on these bills 
that address the problem of prostitution in Maine in a way that will reduce prostitution and 
support those who are survivors of sex trafﬁcking's. 
District 25: Orono (part)
