P0 Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.ac|umaine org 
AMERIEAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION' 
Maine 
. TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 1435 
An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
April 11, 2023 _ 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, andI 
am the policy director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and 
U.S. Constitutions. ,' 
The American Civil Liberties Union advocates for the full decriminalization of 
sex Work, including both the buying and selling of sex. This position is rooted in the 
rights to equal protection, privacy, and free speech. For this reason, we have been 
gratified that the bill sponsor has worked tirelessly over her time in the legislature 
to remove the crime of prostitution from our statutes. 
Decriminalizing sex work is a matter of equal protection: laws against selling 
sex have been historically vastly disproportionately enforced against women. As early 
as 197 5, the ACLU of Maine recognized the criminalization of people who sell sex as 
one of the more pernicious forms of sex discrimination in our laws. 
Decriminalizing sex work is also consistent with recognizing the right each of 
us has to privacy, and that what consenting adults do in private is their business. 
Finally, decriminalizing buying sex is a matter of First Amendment principles, 
and should follow from the decriminalization of selling sex, because the government 
does not have a compelling interest to criminalize the buying of something, the selling 
of which is legal. 
In October 2020, the ACLU released an Issue Brief, Is Sex Work 
Decriminalization the Answer? What The Research Tells Us.1 This Brief reviewed 83 
empirical research pieces across the globe to analyze the impacts of decriminalization 
or legalization of consensual sex Work among adults. A review of the literature found, 
1 
Available at https://www.aclu.org/report/sex-workdecriminalization-answer-what-research 
tells-us. -
among other things, that (1) criminalization of sex Work, including criminalization of 
buying bit not of selling sex, increases the risk of violence and threatens the safety of 
sex workers; (2) decriminalizing sex work, combined with more targeted 
interventions, can lead to greater access to health care and improved health outcomes 
for sex workers; (3) LGBTQIA people, particularly transgender women, people of 
color, people with disabilities and immigrants are most endangered by the 
criminalization of sex work; and (4) there is a lack of consensus about the relationship 
between legalization or decriminalization of sex work and human trafficking. 
This bill has portions that We unequivocally support: removing prostitution 
from our statutes in Section 14, and changing some of the language in our criminal 
statutes that refers to victims to be person-first language, in Sections 1, 16, and 17. 
However, the bill also has two sections that give us serious pause, and that We ask 
you to think carefully about before voting. 
Renaming “prostitution ” uniformly throughout our laws as “commercial sexual 
exploitation, ” regardless of Whether the behavior involves an adult or child, is nota 
change that the ACLU of Maine can support. Making this change would deny 
people—primarily women—their inherent sexual autonomy, freedom and privacy. Of 
course, not all acts that are captured by the prostitution statute are voluntary. For 
non-consensual acts, the legislature has created the crimes of sex trafficking and 
aggravated sex trafficking? as Well as gross sexual assault, unlawful sexual assault 
and various sexual crimes against children,3 among. others. But many acts that are 
defined by statute as prostitution are voluntary acts, and renaming prostitution as 
commercial sexual exploitation suggests that adult Women can never have the ability 
to consent to exchange sex for money.' 
Finally, as we always do when legislation proposes increasing the severity of 
a criminal punishment, we note our opposition to Section 4 of the bill. Increasing 
criminal penalties does not deter abhorrent behavior, but instead swells our already 
full prisons and jails. We encourage the legislature to look into preventative 
measures, such as investing in housing, health care and other areas that create 
robust families and communities, and to leave failed methods of addressing social 
problems behind. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 
2 See l7-A M.R.S. §§853, 852 
3 
Id. §§253, 255-A, 259-A, 259-B
