April 10, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee, thank you 
very much for taking the time to hear testimony on LD 1435 and LD 1436l. My name is Robin 
Miller, and I am an advisory council member for the Oregon Department of Justice’s Human 
Trafficking Advisory Committee, a board member for the “ EPIK  Project” and a founding 
member of the “ Northwest Survivor Alliance ”. I am writing today to ask you to support LDs 
1435  An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation and LD 1436  An Act to Provide 
Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation. 
As a survivor and lived-experience expert of the sex trade, as well as a direct service provider to 
youth, young adults and adults impacted by the sex trade, I stand firm in support of the proposed 
legislation. In the six years I was trafficked in street prostitution, I cannot tell you how many 
times I was arrested. I was beaten and raped by the men who bought me and the man who sold 
me. Neither party(s) were ever held accountable for the abuse, but I was. I can attest to this still 
happening today across the country, because not only do I serve youth and young adults who are 
held in detention for crimes directly related to their trafficking and who are bound to fines and 
restitution to be paid directly to the adult men who purchased them for sex, as well my 
colleagues and national partners are reporting the same thing.  
By supporting LDs 1435, you can put an end to the abuse of marginalized groups in the sex trade 
by holding the true criminals responsible while providing services and care to those bought and 
sold. I am fortunate to have had the opportunity to vacate most of my prostitution charges from 
my record and strongly believe that had I not, I wouldn’t be where I am today. For years before 
my record was cleared, I walked into every interview with trepidation and fear. Despite my 
education and relevant experience, I knew I would be judged. I recently had to go through an 
intensive background check for a job I have intermittently held since I was 15, working at a 
gymnastics club. The thought of not passing the screening nearly made me quit. Because of my 
access to vacatur, I still have that job as well, the job I have working in direct service with 
victims and survivors, some as young as 12 years old. Most individuals in the sex trade enter as 
children or young adults through means of force, fraud, or coercion. They also enter the trade 
because there is little to no other choice for them to meet their most basic needs (housing, food 
insecurity, lack of employment opportunities). When there are real alternatives, we create off-
ramps for those exploited in the commercial sex industry and we shrink the sex trade and reduce 
exploitation.  
Please vote yes on LD 1435  An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation and LD 1436  
An Act to Provide Remedies for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation. Please feel free 
to reach out to me for any additional comment or questions you may have regarding my 
testimony and lived experience in the sex trade. Thank you again for your time and attention to 
this matter and for serving your constituents in Maine.  
Sincerely, 
Robin Miller 
360-314-8283 
Robinm227@gmail.com  
