 
 
WRITTEN TESTIMONY  
 
BILL NO S: LD 1435/ LD 1436  
TITLE: An Act to Reduce Commercial Sexual Exploitation; An Act to Provide Remedies 
for Survivors of Commercial Sexual Exploitation  
COMMITTEE:  Joint C ommittee on Judiciary   
DATE:  April 11, 2023 
POSITION:  SUPPORT  
 
 
Dear Chairperso n Carney  and Committee Members:  
 
Shared Hope International is a national  NGO focused on addressing the root causes of commercial sexual 
exploitation for the purpose of preventing child and youth sex trafficking in the U.S. Since our organization’s 
inception in 1998, we have proactively pursued and supported policies that protect the inherent right of 
individuals to be free from sexual violence, including commercial sexual exploitation. Shared Hope strongly 
supports  House Bill 1 592 because it centers necessary policy reform on the wellbeing  of youth and adult survivors 
of the sex trade.   
 The harm experienced by those in the sex trade is neither diminished nor eliminated once a person reaches age 18. 
While psychological, sexual, emotional, and physical abuse and exploitation may impact children differently, 
youth and adults engaged in commercial sex experience horrifically high levels of violence and long-lasting har m 
at the hands of sex buyers, traffickers, and facilitators. Yet, our laws and systems of justice treat those “selling” 
sex as offenders of their own victimizatio n. LD 1435/ LD 1436 seek to rectify this injustice and hold true 
offenders to account.  
 
Repealing the  prostitution law, while reclassifying the purchase of sex as “commercial sexual exploitation” 
importantly recognizes the conflation of “choice” and consent. For a vast majority of youth and adults in the sex 
trade, engagement in commercial sex reflects th e presence of coercion, force, fraud, fear, or survival. However, 
“choosing” sex to survive is not consent and treating the youth or adult as a consensual actor not only misplaces 
criminal liability, it directly re -victimizes the individual. A majority of those in the sex trade carry years of 
trauma, economic vulnerabilities, and  abuse, significantly influencing the notion of “choice” and safer 
opportunities. Some youth and adults have trusted a nefarious or malicious actor, been fed a false promise, or 
have fallen for an exploiter who later sold the person to another who was all too willing to pay for the chance to 
rape him or her. Persons with unsafe or unstable housing may find the streets safer and, resultantly, trade sex in 
exchange for something to eat or a place to sleep. This is not the presentation of c hoice; youth and adults living 
with such realities deserve, at a minimum, access to care, systems of support, and services, not the traumatizing  
and long-lasting impact of arrest, detention, prosecution, or criminal records.  
 
LD 1435/ LD 1436  seeks to adopt a well -established  policy to reduce such harm and increase justice.  We 
appreciate the Committee’s dedication to this issue and for allowing Shared Hope the opportunity to highlight the importance of legislation that seeks non -criminal, service-oriented responses for survivors.   
 
 
Respectfully,  
 
Sidney E. McCoy 
Director of Advocacy  
sidney @sharedhope.org  

