Testimony of Genevieve McDonald  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
In FAVOR of LD 866 
An Act to Improve Visibility and Restore the Beauty of Maine's Roadways by Limiting 
Signs in the Public Right -of-way 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee o n Transportation, I am Genevieve McDonald, a resident of Stonington, and I am 
testifying before you today as a private citizen in support  of L.D. 866, An Act to Improve 
Visibility and Restore the Beauty of Maine's Roadways by Limiting Signs in the Public Right -of-
way. 
 
During my time as a member of the Maine Legislature I was proud to represent one of the most 
beautiful House districts in the state —the islands of Penobscot Bay and Western Frenchman 
Bay. I recognize L.D. 866 will be applicable to numerous kinds of tempor ary signage messaging , 
but please allow me to share my specific experience with political signs.  
 
Prior to an election , special  interest groups plaster hundreds of signs  along the road ways  
through out my island communities. I am familiar with the laws regarding placement , and many 
of these “sign dumping ” events were not within the bounds of the law  regard ing the required 30ft 
spacing. On more than one occasion , I removed signs that were placed on our veteran’s 
memorials .   
 
In the  weeks following an election, hundreds of these same signs  were  not removed  and were  left 
abandoned . Eventually , after receiving numerous complaints from constituents and out of 
concern for our environment , as well as the public percept ion of the political  process , I would 
remove these signs myself . All the  while hoping that no one driving by would think I was the 
one who had place d them, or if they were of a different party, that I was doing something 
nefarious  by removing them. Many of the signs are made of cheap plastic that I would find in 
roadside ditches and waterways . The abundance of signs is too immense to expect the 
Department  of Transportation  to be able to remove them all, and there are still s igns from the 
November  election  in the right -of-way today.  
 
In this digital age, there are countless ways for people to get information , about their political  
candidates , or the other types of information often displayed on signs placed in the right -of-way. 
There remains an abundance of private property options  for business es and individuals to place 
signage. The placement and abundance of signs in the right -of-way was a concern I heard often 
from citiz ens in my coastal  communities  who do not want signs  littering our scenic islands.  
Please consider making the allowance of signs in the right -of-way a matter of local control , and I 
urge you to vo te ought to pass on L .D. 866.   
 
