1Glasmeier, Dr. Amy K., “Living Wage Calculator.” Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Accessed March 18, 2021. 
https://livingwage.mit.edu/states/23 
2https://www.epi.org/publication/ib381-update-overtime-pay-rules/ 
 
 MAINE AFL-CIO  
A Union of Unions Standing for Maine Workers 
21 Gabriel Drive, Augusta, Maine 04330 
Tel. (207) 622-9          
(207) 622-9675 
Visit our website: www.maineaflcio.org  
 
President 
Cynthia Phinney Vice President 
Pat Carleton Secretary Treasurer 
Doug Born 
 
 Testimony of Maine AFL-CIO Legislative & Political Director, Adam Goode, in Support of LD 513, "An 
Act Regarding Overtime Protections for Certain Maine Workers" 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of Labor & Housing Committee, my name is Adam 
Goode. I’m the Legislative and Political Director of the Maine AFL-CIO. We represent 40,000 working people 
in the state of Maine. We work to improve the lives and working conditions of our members and all working 
people. We testify in support of LD 513.  
 
Nearly a century ago we made the good decision to pass labor laws protecting the 40 hour workweek and 
ensuring extra pay for extra work by creating overtime pay for all workers, except those that are highly paid. It 
is common understanding that hourly workers receive overtime when they work more than 40 hours. Salaried 
workers who earn less than a “salary threshold” set by overtime regulations are also due time and half pay for 
overtime. That salary threshold is now $41,000 a year.  
 
The federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FSLA) is supposed to ensure that low-wage workers are automatically 
eligible for overtime. The salary threshold is a tool to do that. Unfortunately, the impact of the threshold has 
gone down in recent decades. LD 513 proposes to gradually raise the salary threshold until 2026, resulting in 
overtime pay for all workers who earn less than $68,625 a year. This amount would mean that no worker is 
made to work long hours without either receiving overtime pay or a living wage1.  
 
Working people should be compensated for their labor, and should not be expected to work for free. If you are 
currently an assistant store manager at the Dollar General or Best Buy and you make $44,000 a year, you could 
very well be working 50 hours a week. This means you are working 10 hours each week for free. If you work 
60 hours a week, you are working 20 hours for free. 
 
The last time this tool was significantly updated was 1975. At that time, 62% of salaried Americans earned 
below the threshold amount2, and were therefore eligible for overtime. A broadening of the categories of 
salaried workers ineligible for overtime has resulted in only 11% of salaried Americans below the threshold as 
of 2013.  
 
LD 513 restores the intent of the FLSA. Work has changed, and workers are increasingly expected to respond to 
work tasks at any time of day. This pressure from employers puts strain on the work-life balance of working 
people. It is only fair that employees be paid if it is expected that employers will have their attention via 
smartphones and email when they are eating dinner with their family, watching their children at an after school 
function or visiting their parents on a Sunday. 
 
Printed In House with Union Labor

This bill helps people who are generally supervisors and low-level managers whose jobs currently qualify them 
as overtime exempt. They earn below $69,000 a year, making them generally middle-class workers who 
shouldn’t be expected to work long hours without extra pay.  
 
It will likely be argued that these changes will have a cost impact on business. If a business wants to avoid costs 
incurred by this change, they can move away from expecting employees to work unpaid hours when they are 
not technically at work. There is also the option of providing compensatory time instead of overtime pay. That 
way a worker can take time off during the slower time of year to make up for working longer hours in peak 
season. 
 
We urge you to vote ought-to-pass on LD 513. 
 
