 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA 
members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, 
amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers 
from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alison  Sucy,  Chief Operating Officer and Director  of Government  Affairs,   
on Behalf  of the Maine  Tourism  Association  
 
In Opposition To 
 
LD 513, An Act Regarding  Overtime  Protections  for Certain  Maine  Workers  
 
 
April 25, 2023 
 
Senator  Tipping, Representative  Roeder, and Members  of the Joint  Standing  Committee  on 
Labor  and Housing:  
 
My name  is Alison  Sucy  and I am the Chief  Operating  Officer  and Director  of Government  
Affairs  for the Maine  Tourism  Association.  The Maine  Tourism  Association  is the state’s  
largest  tourism  organization  supporting  our 1500  members  in every  type of tourism  business  
such  as lodging,  restaurants,  campgrounds,  retail,  guides,  outdoor  recreation,  amusements,  and 
historical  and cultural  attractions.  We’ve  been  promoting  Maine  and our members  for over 100 
years.  I present  this testimony  in opposition  to LD 513. 
 
Employers in the tourism sector simply will not be able to keep pace with the rapidly increasing 
salary adjustments set forth in this bill. If passed, LD 513 will ultimately force employers to 
recategorize trusted and valued salaried employees as hourly employees. This can have the effect of  
eliminating status, a predictable weekly wage, bonuses or incentives, and networking and career 
building opportunities. 
 
Under  current  Maine  law, the salary  threshold  for the overtime  exemption  is calculated  at 
3000x  the prevailing  minimum  wage  ($13.80/hour)  or, currently,  $41,400.  With  annual  
increases  in the minimum  wage,  this amount  will continue  to rise. In addition  to the cost-of-
living  increases  already  set in statute,  other  increases  to the minimum  wage  are proposed  every  
session.  Should  one of these  be enacted,  such  as LD 1376  which  would  increase  Maine’s  
minimum  wage  to $15 per hour  in 2024  with an increase  of at least  $1 per hour  every  year 
thereafter,  the salary  threshold  would  be around  $72,000  within  a two years.  
 
The Biden  Administration  is expected  to address  this issue  at the federal  level  in May.  We 
believe  following  the federal  regulations  is the more  appropriate  course  to take.  
 
I urge you to oppose LD 513.  Thank you for your time and consideration of this testimony. 
 

