'6: Spectrum'!/fllJP Healthcare Partners
April 24, 2023 
Hon. Michael Tipping, Senate Chair 
Hon. Amy Roeder, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Labor & Housing 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta ME 04333 
RE: L.D. 513, An Act Regarding Overtime Protections for Certain Maine Workers 
Dear Senator Tipping and Representative Roeder: 
I am writing on behalf of Spect rum Healthcare Partners ("Spectrum Healthcare") in opposition to L.D. 
513, An Act Regarding Restore Overtime Protections for Certain Maine Workers. Spectrum 
Healthcare is Maine's largest physician-led, multispecialty practice group, employing more than 600 
people in clinical and non-clinical capacities. Spectrum Healthcare provides one or more of its 
specialty services throughout most of the State of Maine, and is both a MaineCare provider and a 
Medicare provider participant. 
Spectrum Healthcare provides its employees with a total rewards program that includes a competitive 
compensation package along with an extensive offering of company -sponsored benefits. The total rewards 
program is designed to attract, 
motivate, and retain talented employees who drive the organization's success. Our compensation philosoph y 
is to provide base salaries that meet market benchmarks and, for many positions, provide opportunities  for 
employees to earn incentive pay and bonuses. In addition, we offer a robust benefit package which includes: 
►a robust healthcare insurance benefit: Spectrum Healthcare Partners pays 80% of the health
insurance premium for our employees and their families
►an BSA benefit: Spectrum matches up to $3,000 per year to the employee's Health Savings Account
►a generous Paid Time Off benefit.
►voluntary company-paid wellness programs.
►a national award-winning 401K plan: Spectrum matches 4% of the employee's contribution to the
401 (k) plan; Additionally, Spectrum contributes an amount equal to 6% of employee's total
compensation as profit sharing to the employee's 401 (k) account. This combined benefit represents an
additional 10% of total compensation.
If LD 513 is enacted, Spectrum Healthcare would be placed in the unfortunate position of having to choose 
between two undesirable options: 1) scale back the non-base salary compensation and benefits we currently 
offer to our employees to compensate for the additional cost in salaries for the employees who will be 
impacted by this legislation; or reclassify some of our positions as non-exempt. Spectrum Healthcare must 
Spectrum Healthcare Partners I 324 Gannett Drive, Suite 200 I So. Portland, ME 04106 I 207.482.7800 I spectrumhcp.com 

