 
   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
     mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler   Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
 Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in Support of LD 513 , “An Act Regarding Overtime Protections for Certain Maine Workers ” 
March 30, 2023  
James Myall, E conomic Polic y Analyst  
 
Good  afternoon Senator Tipping, R epresentative Roeder,  and members of the J oint Standing Committee 
on Labor and H ousing. My name is James Myall. I ’m an Economic Policy Analyst at the Maine Center for 
Economic Policy. I ’m here today to testif y in support of L D 513, “An Act Regarding Overtime Protections 
for Certain Maine Workers .” 
All Mai ners deserve to be paid fai rly for the work they do.  When workers go above an d beyond 
expectations, they  should be paid accordingly.  However, for too many Maine workers today, earning as 
little as $4 2,000 a year can allow their employer to make them work 50 or 60 hours a week without any 
extra pay. Th at was neve r the intention of federal or state la bor laws, and this bill would fix that.  
For many decades we had a common  definition  of a sta ndard work week in this country that was 
enshrined  in the Fair Labor Standards Act. Eighty -five yea rs ago, this legislation set the foundation  of 
modern labor law , including the definiti on of the fort y-hour work week as standard , and the right of 
most workers to receive overtime pay if they worked beyond that.  
The FL SA and Maine law  still require  that almost all hourly workers are  eligible for overtime pay, as well 
as salaried workers who are not in “executive , administrative, or professional ” roles. These employees 
can be defin ed either b y their job responsib ilities or by their salary level. In recent de cades, the salary 
level has increasing ly become the most important test, as employers have found w ays to man ipulate the 
so-called “duties test ” to their advant age. I t has become too eas y for an employer to give an employee a 
supposed “promotion ” which consists of a phony job title and a salary with no additional 
resp onsibilities , and make them work more hours without any extra pay. In fact, a recent study found 
that this practice is widespread, and cheats employees out of billio ns of dol lars in unpaid overtime each 
year .i 
LD 513 would address  this situati on by strengthening the alternative “salary test ” for overtime eligibility . 
Currently, most salaried workers in Maine are eligible for o vertime if they earn more than 3,000 times 
the minimum wage on an annual basis (currently $41,400). This currently protects 13 percent of salaried 
workers. As a sign of how much the law has eroded over the past few decades, bac k in 1 977, the s alary 
threshold covered 66 per cent o f workers.ii  
LD 513 is not so ambiti ous as to  restore the 1977 standard. However,  it would increase the number of 
covered workers to just under one th ird of salaried workers by 20 26, res toring some of the protections 
lost to workers  over the pas t fifty years .iii This would b uild on Maine ’s own t radition of having stronger 
overtime protections tha n the federal standard, and join five other states which have taken similar steps 
recently.iv  
LD 513 recognizes that some  nonprofit organ izations  might st ruggle to pay their staff overtime at these 
levels. So it introduces  the ability for nonprofit  organizations to offer their workers comp ensat ory time 
in lieu of  overtime pay. This would all ow nonprofits that have busy seasons to balance out their staff 
schedules  and offer additional paid time off in  slower per iods.  
MECEP estimates that approximately 26,000 more workers in the for -profit  sector would b e overtime -
eligible by 202 6 under LD 513, along with 6, 000 nonprofit workers . (Public sector  workers in local 
governments are not covered by Maine ’s overtime statute ). However,  most of these workers do not 
actual ly work mor e than 40 hours a week. We estimate around 8,600  people  would receive additional 
pay each year, and 1,000 p eople would receive additional compensatory time. This amounts to $8.4 
million in additional wages.v That ’s a meaningful  amount for th ese individuals – but to put it into 
perspective , that represents  much  less than one tenth of o ne percent of all payroll costs in the state.vi It 
should  be easily absorbable by employers . 
Neither is the administrative burden for emplo yers particularly  great. Employers would simply have to 
record hours worked whe never eligib le salaried workers  exceed forty hours a week. Most employers 
already have some nonex empt salaried or hourly staff, and every major pay roll system is already 
equipped to handle overtime pay. Ther e are many way s for employers to comply with this bill  with 
minimal impact.   
Ensuring that workers ar e paid fai rly for t he full amount of ho urs they w ork will improve their  economic 
secu rity and h elp families make ends meet in an era of rising costs. It will also counter the temptation 
that some employer s may feel to sque eze additional hours out of  their salaried workers in thi s strong 
labor ma rket.  
LD 513 would begin to restore a fundame ntal right that Mainers took for granted for most of the 20th 
centur y – a forty hour work week with overtime pay for overtime worked.  
Thank you for your time. I ’m happy  to answer any questions.  
 
Notes  
 
i Laura Cohen, Umit Gurun  and Bu gra Ozel, “Too Many Managers: The Strategic Use of Titles to Avoid Overtime 
Payments .” National Bureau of Economic Research . Working Paper 30826. Jan 20 23. 
https://www.nber.org/papers/w30826   
ii MECEP calculation  based o n US Census Bureau, Current Populat ion Survey, Annual Social and Economic 
Supplem ent, 1977 -2022 data  via the Integrated Public Use Microdata S ystem (IPUMS).  
iii MECEP calculat ions based on US Census Bureau, Current Populat ion Survey, Annual Social and Economic 
Supplem ent, 2008 -2022  microdata.  
iv Alaska, C alifornia, Colorado, New York and Washington all have overtime salary thresholds above the federal 
level.  
v Ibid. 
vi US Bure au of Labor Statistics, Quarterly Cen sus of Employment and Wages, 2022. Annual payroll for Maine 
employees in 2022 was over $33 billion.  
