Testimony of Jim MacNeill to the Labor & Housing Committee  
RE: Opposition to LD 513, An Act Regarding Overtime Protections for Maine Workers  
April 25, 2023  
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and the distinguished members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee: My name is Jim MacNeill and own the Maine Diner in Wells. I am submitting testimony in 
opposition of LD 513, An Act Regarding Overtime Protection for Maine Workers. An increase to the 
salary threshold of salaried employees will more than likely have a negative impact on salaried 
employees. Many salaried employees receive fringe benefits such as health & dental insurance, 401K 
matching percentages, and v ehicle usage to name a few. To keep things simple, a currently salaried 
employee with a salary of $52,000 per year, receiving health/dental insurance and a 4% match for their 
401K plan, actually receives compensation of roughly $66,000 annually. This is as suming the salaried 
employee is single with no children. If the health/dental insurance were for a family, the insurance would 
double, and the compensation would be closer to $81,000 annually.  Forcing salaries higher would likely 
result in the reduction/el imination of salaried employees and/or the elimination of benefits received by 
the salaried employee.  
Please also keep in mind that there are many seasonally based occupations in the great state of Maine. 
Landscaping companies, paving companies, pool compa nies, ski areas and many other outdoor based 
outfits commonly maintain weekly paychecks for their salaried employees. If the salaries of these 
employees become cost prohibitive, layoffs will more than likely occur, placing a burden on our 
unemployment syst em.   
I believe the goal of LD 513 is to compensate the salaried employee equivalently to that of an hourly 
employee . The concept of the bill is admirable. I simply believe that LD 513 will have a negative result 
exponentially greater than the good that is  intended to come from it. Proposing an increase from 
$41,400 (currently based on $13.80/hour x 3000) to $67,500 (assuming the cap of $15/hour  remains the 
same multiplied by 4500) results in a total increase of $26,500.  
From a mathematic al perspective,  the increase d earning s do no t make sense. You would like to force an 
increase of salaried wages of $26,500  by January 1, 2026. If you look at a minimum wage employee, over 
time the ir earnings will only increase  by $2 ,496, going from $13.80/hour to $15.00/hour. A dishwasher , 
in the southern  Maine  beaches area, starts at $16/hour and will likely get promoted to be a cook if they 
are moti vated. T his motivated person will only increase their earnings  by $4,160. An upper  echelon line 
cook, currently valued at $25/hour, assuming a n annual wage increase of $1/hour , will only increase 
their earning s by $12,320.  All of this data is based on a 40 hour work week , assuming no bad weather , 
forcing closure. Where is the equity?  
Over the years, many employees have shown a commitment to our business and have earned 
promotions to salaried positions. We are pleased to offer salaried benefits that our employees have told 
us they enjoy. However, this bill will likely force some Maine based companies like mine to peel bac k or 
eliminate  the benefits they offer to their employees and/or eliminate jobs.   
Thank you for your consideration. I urge you to please vote LD 513 ought not to pass.  
