STATE OF MAINE 
1. DEPARTMENT or LABOR 
ii 54 STATE HOUSE STATION 
1% AUGUSTA, MAENE 04333-0054 i 
Aiéiii 
Lama A. Foitman 
COMMISSIONER Janet T. Mills 
GOVERNOR 
Testimony of Mike Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards 
Maine Department of Labor 
Neither For Nor Against LD #513 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, April 25, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. l'm Mike Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards 
at the l\/laine Department of Labor. I'm here today to testify neither for nor against LD 513, An 
Act Regarding Overtime Protections for Certain l\/laine Workers 
This bill seeks to accomplish two things: 
0 incrementally increase the minimum salary for exemption of an employee from Maine's 
minimum wage and overtime provisions, essentially from 1.5 times the minimum wage 
now to 2.25 times beginning in 2026. 
o Allow compensatory time to be provided in place of time-and-a-half pay for employees 
of nonprofit corporations. 
The Department appreciates that the sponsor has chosen to retain the link between Maine's 
minimum wage and its salary cap for exempt employees. We believe this has worked well in 
recent years to maintain a relatively constant level of the salary cap in real dollars, and at this 
point is well understood by the regulated community. 
We have no strong opinion about the actual salary level and are pleased to implement 
whatever the Legislature arrives at through its deliberations. But we also note that the US 
Department of Labor may soon publish its own revised salary cap, which if higher would 
supersede Maine's at least temporarily. 
The proposed change to allow compensatory time for employees of nonprofit corporations 
would be largely moot because the federal Fair Labor Standards Act allows comp time only for 
public employees and covers many if not most nonprofits. This is not a direct conflict because 
26 MRSA §664, sub-§4, already states "to the extent permissible" under the FLSA, but section 2 
PHONE: (207) 623~79O0 I’iY users C1llMilﬂL Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-5292 
The Maine Depntmei nl l3bt>i proxides equ il opportunity in £liiPl()Vl'|"H ‘l'IL arid pr0g,r'iins 
Auxiliary 3!(i'§ and ScIVlCtS aic 'iVali%iI>l € upon iequcst to inditiduals with dlSablilllLS
of the bill would simply be ineffective. For that reason, we believe that rulemaking as required 
by section 3 would be unnecessary. 
We would also like to remind the public and the regulated community, as we have in the past 
when similar legislation was proposed, that the salary level is only one determinant of whether 
an employee is truly exempt from minimum wage and overtime requirements. An exempt 
employee ‘sjob duties must also conform to certain categories (administrative, professional and 
executive) as further delineated in the Bureau's Rules Chapter 16 and determined by the 
Department. 
Regardless of the outcome of this legislation, and whatever salary cap is in effect at any 
particular time, the Bureau will continue to engage in a vigorous effort to educate employers 
and others about the various requirements of our minimum wage and overtime statute and the 
limited exemptions to it. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have now or at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to serving Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth.
