Testimony of Chief Edward Peter Paul 
Mi’kmaq Nation 
Wednesday, May 31, 2023 
Hearing before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
L.D. 1620, “Mi’kmaq Restoration Act” 
Quay, good morning Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, 
and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Edward Peter Paul and I am the Chief of 
the Mi’kmaq Nation. Thank you for the opportunity to speak in 
support of L.D. 1620, the Mi’kmaq Restoration Act. 
It is difﬁcult to explain fully the impact this bill will have on the 
Mi’kmaq people in the limited time I have before you today 
But if I can leave you with just two takeaways, they are that‘ 
30 years. For the ﬁrst time in 30 years... 
(1) this bill will provide jurisdictional parity for the Mi’kmaq 
Nation with the rest of the tribes in Maine, and 
(2) this bill will enable the Nation to properly to begin its nation 
building efforts and provide essential governmental services for 
the health, Welfare and safety of my people.
As I Wlll d1SC11SS in the next few minutes, this legislation is 
critically necessary because there are major disparities that exist 
here in Maine regarding Native Americans. I am not just talking 
about the disparities between the jurisdiction that the Wabanaki 
have here versus tribes elsewhere. No, I am talking about the 
very signiﬁcant and problematic disparities that exist even 
among the federally recognized Wabanaki Nations. 
For the past 30 years, the Mi’kmaq Nation is the only tribal 
nation here in Maine without an agreed upon jurisdictional 
arrangement with Maine. We are federally recognized by 
Congress, but under state law we are not considered to have the 
same jurisdictional powers as the Maliseet, the Passamaquoddy 
or the Penobscot. The other nations have existing provisions of 
state law that allow them to operate courts and to establish 
police departments. We have no such agreement with Maine as 
of now, and as a result, we have no court or law enforcement 
that the Nation is permitted to operate under state law on our 
trust lands. This bill is about addressing some of those basic
disparities, which have held back my nation’s self- 
determination. = 
The Mi’kmaq Nation has a very long and proud history, having 
lived and thrived in this part of Turtle Island since time 
immemorial. While I hope everyone takes the opportunity to 
learn more about our Nation and our history, for today’s 
purposes, I will mention only a few key moments in time. The 
ﬁrst was just two weeks after the United States declared its 
independence from Great Britain. The Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts, on behalf of the United States of America, 
signed a “Treaty of Alliance and Friendship ” , today known as 
the Treaty of Watertown, with the Mi’kmaq Nation and other 
tribes, to establish a military alliance against Great Britain. 
Thus, since the very birth of this country, the Mi’kmaq people 
were recognized as sovereign and of equal status to the new 
nation. 
Fast forward to the 1970s when the State of Maine negotiated 
with the Maliseet, Passamaquoddy and Penobscot and entered
into the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act of 1980 (MICSA). 
The Nation was not a part of the discussions leading up to the 
passage of MICSA and was not included in its provisions. 
Finally, in 1991, the United States acknowledged the fact that 
the Nation also had land claims throughout the State of Maine 
and entered into a separate congressional settlement act with the 
Nation. Among other things, this agreement authorized the State 
of Maine to enter into its own agreement with the Nation 
regarding the authority of the State of Maine to exercise 
jurisdiction over Mi’kmaq Nation lands. 
Prior attempts to reach agreed upon jurisdictional agreements 
with the state have failed or have been ignored by state ofﬁcials. 
Thus, unlike the other three tribes in Maine, the Nation has gone 
more than thirty years without state recognized authority to 
govern itself and its territory. 
As a result, the Nation has been left Without the tools necessary 
to face great community challenges. Not only does Mi’kmaq fall 
behind the non-tribal Mainers with respect to per capita income,
but we also fall behind the other tribes. For example, in 2019, 
Mi’kmaq’s annual per capita income was $11,431, compared to 
$18,809 for Penobscot Nation and $34,593 for the State of 
Maine. In 2019, the ﬁve-year average poverty rate for children 
in Maine was 15.1%. For Passamaquoddy at Indian Township, it 
was 40.2%. For Mi’kmaq Nation it was a staggering 76.9%. 
This is a stunning level of inequality that must be addressed. 
This bill removes the stark distinctions between the Mi’kmaq 
Nation and the other three tribes, the Passamaquoddy, Penobscot 
and Maliseet caused by MICSA in most regards. And while the 
Maine Indian Claims Task Force identiﬁed that immense 
progress still needed for all tribes in Maine, this is a critical ﬁrst 
step forward for the Mi’kmaq Nation’s people. 
This Act represents an agreement between the l\/Ii’kmaq Nation 
and the State of Maine regarding the allocation of jurisdiction 
within Mi’kmaq’s trust lands as they stand today.
This legislation acknowledges Mi’kmaq’s sovereign authority 
over its people and lands. 
Importantly, it also recognizes that the Nation is building its 
capacity to fully exercise that authority and ensures that there 
are not gaps in jurisdiction while that happens. 
By explicitly recognizing the Nation’s exclusive jurisdiction 
over internal tribal matters, this bill enables myself and Tribal 
Council to properly govern our own citizens. It contemplates the 
development and operation of a Mi’kmaq tribal court where the 
Nation will handle criminal and civil matters arising within 
Mi’kmaq Trust Lands. 
This law also recognizes Mi’kmaq authority to regulate hunting, 
ﬁshing and trapping Within our trust lands, an integral part of 
our culture and relationship with the earth and our animal 
relatives.
30 years. If passed, then this Bill will ﬁnally bring jurisdiction 
parity to the Mi’kmaq Nation. If passed, then this Bill will 
ﬁnally give the Mi’kmaq Nation the tools it needs to begin its 
nation building efforts and allow it to properly provide for the 
health, welfare and safety of its citizens. 
In closing, members of this committee, this jurisdictional 
agreement achieves equality for the Mi’kmaq Nation with the 
other tribes in Maine and recognizes the Nation’s expertise and 
ability to govern ourselves. 
This legislation does not full address all of the past injustices to 
my people, but it does represent an incremental and extremely 
important step for the Mi’kmaq Nation. 
It also shows that where injustice is found, it can be addressed 
by meaningful discussion, and negotiated agreement. 
I wish to close my testimony by thanking the both the House and 
Senate Leadership... of both parties, as well as the Governor 
and AG’s Offices for engaging in the discussions that produced 
this Bill.
Please support LD 1620 and vote it favorably out of committee 
Woliwoni,..I thank you for your time and your consideration. 
Edward Peter Paul 
Tribal Chief of the Mi’kmaq Nation
