 
1 
  
 
Testimony of the Wabanaki Alliance  in support of  
LD 1620  An Act to Enact the Mi’kmaq Restoration Act  
Submitted to the Maine Legislature’s  Committee on Judiciary  
June 6 , 202 3 
 
Sen. Carney , Rep. Moonen , and members of the  Joint Standing Committee  on Judiciary ; 
my name is John Dieffenbacher -Krall. I reside in Old Town, and I am the Executive Director of 
the Wabanaki Alliance . Please accept the Wabanaki Alliance ’s testimony in  support of LD 1620  
An Act to Enact the Mi’kmaq Restoration Act . We thank  Speaker Talbot Ross for sponsoring 
this bill and in general for her championing justice for Wabanaki Nations .  
 One of the starker inequities in the State of Maine’s relationship with the Wabanaki 
Nations has been the applicability of restrictive provisions of the Maine Indian Claims 
Settlement Act to the Mi’kmaq Nation without the Mi’kmaq Nation enjoying provisions that 
recognize and  enhance their right of self -determination.  This situation has persisted for decade s. 
LD 1620 would rectify several of those inequities by making some of the provisions of the 
Maine Implementing Act (M.R.S. Title 30, Chapter 601)  applicable to the Mi’kmaq Nation. 
Chief Peter Paul specifically cited in his testimony to this committee how LD 1620 would 
support the creation of a Mi’kmaq tribal court and regulation of fishing, hunting, and trapping on 
Mi’kmaq trust lands, an essential  management activity to strengthen Mi’kmaq culture and 
expand access to wild foods that can boost nutrition and provide critical protein in people’s diets.  
 
 Earlier this year the Maine Legislature had the opportunity to attend a presentation by Dr. 
Joseph  Kalt who presented the findings of the report the Economic and Social Impacts of 
Restrictions on the Applicability of Federal Indian Policies to the Wabanaki Nations in Maine1. 
You heard Dr. Kalt describe the stark difference  in economic prosperity enjoye d by the citizens 
of tribal nations outside of Maine for the period of 1989 -2018 who averaged per capita income 
growth of 61% while Wabanaki citizens experienced the meager amount of 9%. Wabanaki 
citizens lagged not only far behind their fellow Indigenous individuals across the United States 
but also as compared to other Mainers who enjoyed per capita income growth of 25% for the 
same period.  
 
 The question arises what accounts for that tremendous differen ce in economic prosperity  
for Indigenous individuals  outside Maine and what the Wabanaki experience d here? Dr. Kalt and 
his report co -authors found the degree to which tribal nations have fully developed governmental 

 
2 
 programs and institutions  makes a critical difference. The Mi’kmaq Nation has been greatly 
hindered by enduring all the negative restrictions of the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act 
with none of the benefits. LD 1620 represents a significant rebalancing allowing for much 
greater parity in terms of jurisdiction and governmental development as c ompared to their fellow 
Wabanaki nations. The Wabanaki Alliance notes that both Attorney General Aaron Frey and 
Chief Legal Counsel Gerald Reid on behalf of Governor Mills support LD 1620.  
 
 We also applaud that LD 1620 is the product of direct negotiation s between the Mi’kmaq 
Nation, Governor’s Office, and Office of the Attorney General. The Mi’kmaq Nation was not a 
party to the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act but it was made subject to it. That reality 
violates a number of tenets of basic fairness and human and indigenous rights instruments 
including the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. The manner in which LD 
1620 was negotiated is important and hope fully sets a standard for  government -to-government, 
mutually respectful discussion and  negotiation that characterize all Wabanaki -Maine relations.  
 
The Wabanaki Alliance urges the Judiciary Committee to vote ought to pass on this bill.  
 
1 Kalt, Joseph P., Medford, Amy Besaw, Taylor, Jonathan B. (2022) Economic and Social  
Impacts of Restrictions  on the Applicability of  Federal Indian Policies  to the Wabanaki Nations  
in Maine . Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development, 
https://ash.harvard.edu/sites/hwpi.harvard.edu/files/ash/files /wabanaki_report_vfin_for_dist_202
2-12-09.pdf?m=1670635016 , p. 16.  
