 
 
 
 53 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 202   |  Portland, ME 04101  
 Phone: 866 -554-5380  | Fax: 207-775-5727  | TTY: 877-434-7598  
 aarp.org/ me  |  me@aarp.org  |  twitter: @aarp maine  
 facebook.com/ aarpmaine  |  instagram.com/aarpme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 March 28, 2023  
 
Testimony In Favor LD 999 An Act to Support Family Caregivers by Expanding Family 
Medical  Leave  
 
Greetings, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee On Labor and Housing . I am Bridget Quinn, Associate State Director of Advocacy 
and Outreach for AARP Maine.  
 
AARP is the nation’s largest nonprofit, nonpartisan organization dedicated to empowering 
Americans 50 and older to choose how they live as they age. On behalf of our mo re than 
200,000 members statewide, thank you for the opportunity to share testimony. Today, I am 
here to testify in support of LD 999 An Act to Support Family Caregivers by Expanding 
Family Medical Leave .  
 
Maine is home to nearly 166,000 unpaid family car egivers. According to AARP’s  2018  
report “ Millennials: The Emerging Generation of Family Caregivers ”, one in four family 
caregivers is a Millennial and approximately 22%  of them provide care to a grandparent. 
Further, almost three in four Millennial family caregive rs are employed, they are more 
likely than other generations of caregivers to be working.1  
 
I do also have a personal connection to this legislation I would like to share with the 
committee. I have been a caregiver providing support to loved ones in my famil y, 
specifically to both of my grandfathers . The first time my family needed my support to help  
my grandfather I was a college student on summer break  I, thankfully , did not need time off 
work . However , being one of the youngest in my family , my cousins and siblings who were 
already working were not able to provide the same level of support. The next time I found 
myself  supporting family was in 2020 attempting to support my other grandfather, my Pop.  
 
I am g rateful for the big family network that we had . The support that we could rely on 
meant  my time to help was usually on the weekends and I did not need time off work. 
However, I know that if I needed that time,  I have an employer who would g rant me that 
time off to provide this care.  I look back gratefully at the  time  I got to spend with him at the 
end of his life  being able to take over to  give my Nana and parents time off on the weekends 
for their respite .  
 
1 Flinn, Brendan. Millennials: The Emerging Generation of Family Caregivers. AARP Public Policy Institute. 
May 2018. https://www.aarp.org/content/dam/aarp/ppi/ 2018/05/millennial -family -caregivers.pdf   
 
Caregiving for a loved one is truly a privilege and though it can be difficult .  I think those of 
us who have provided care to a loved one would do it all over again. It is important that 
Mainers can use family  and medical leave to provide care for grandparents , great -
grandparents  and ot her loved ones as defined in LD 999.  I urge this committee to support 
LD 999 thank you for the opportunity to testify today.  
 
Bridget Quinn  
AARP Maine  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
