Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Support  
LD 999: An Act to Supp ort Family Caregi vers by Expanding Family Medical L eave   
Rachelle Bristo l – Executive Director , Maine Education Association  
Before the Labor a nd Hou sing Comm ittee 
March  30, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder  and other esteemed members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee,  
 
My name is Rachelle Bristol, and I serve as the MEA Executive Director.  I am submitting this 
testimony on behalf of the Maine Education Association in support of LD 999, An Act to Support 
Family Caregivers by Exp anding Family Medical Leave . The MEA represents 24,000 educators in 
Maine, including educators in nearly every public school in the state and the facu lty and other 
professionals who work in our University of Maine and Community College systems.  
 
The COVID -19 pandemic has certainly heightened the need for working people to have access to leave 
programs. Foundational programs such as the Family and Medica l Leave Act provide basic safety nets 
for times when we need to care for a family member  or an extended family  member who may be ill. We 
know in Maine, and across the country, there are more extended family relationships which cause 
individuals to care for  others  in their lives . More grandchildren are helping to care for grand parents and 
great-grandparents. There are more family situations that are not traditional but no less deserving of the 
rights to care for someone they care about. It would only make se nse to extend the basic FMLA 
provisions to more familial relationships , including the real -life relationships and bonds we create .  
 
LD 999 does two things.  First it expands FMLA protections to grandparents and great -grandparents.  
This will help more work ing people have access to protected leave while caring for these two very 
special groups of people.  In addition, LD 999 extends the relationships protected under FMLA “whether 
related to the employee by blood, adoption, legal custody, marriage or domestic  partnership.”  This 
language more accurately reflects current family structures and is more inclusive of the variety of 
familial relationships that exist in the state of Maine. Acknow ledging  and supporting those relationships 
is essential.  
 
Thank you for your tim e, and please do not hesitate to contact me if I can answer any questions.  
 
