él 61 Winthrop Street ~ Augusta, l\/IE 04330 
1-800-499-0229 ~ Fax 207-6210509 
’ l\/ILTCOP@l\/laineOrnbudsmari.org 
Illu N/liIln=: I 011;?-'l grint mt: 
OMBUDSMAN I’r< >§.:i1lm 
TESTIMONY 
In Support of 
LD 999 An Act to Support Family Caregivers by Expanding Family Medical Leave 
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
March 30, 2023 
Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. 
My name is Laura Harper and I am a Senior Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. I am here 
today to present testimony in support of this legislation on behalf of the Maine Long-Term Care 
Ombudsman Program. 
The Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program is a non-profit agency that provides 
statewide advocacy services for residents of nursing homes, assisted housing, assisted living 
and for recipients of home care. Additionally, the program provides assistance to patients in 
hospitals who experience barriers in accessing the long-term services and supports they need 
when they are ready for discharge. 
This legislation adds grandparents and great-grandparents with serious health conditions to the 
list of persons related to an employee for whom family medical leave may be taken. It also 
provides that an employee may take family medical leave for any of the persons listed witha 
serious health condition who are related by blood, adoption, legal custody, marriage or domestic 
partnership. 
Over and over again, Ombudsman Program staff have observed the enormous value and 
dedication of family caregivers. These individuals step in often with little support, to provide care 
to keep a loved one at home. Their role has become even more critical as Maine has 
experienced a significant direct care workforce shortage. Across the state, there arean
estimated 166,000 family caregivers. Valuing the Invaluable 2023 Update: Strengthening 
Supports for Family Caregiving, AARP Policy Institute. Often these family caregivers are 
employed, managing both work commitments and the care of a loved one. In fact, sixty-one 
percent work either full or part time. AARP and National Alliance for Caregiving 2020 
Expansion of family medical leave to include grandparents and great-grandparents required by 
this legislation is an important step forward that will provide needed support to family caregivers 
who are employed. As Maine’s population over sixty-five is the most rapidly expanding, the 
need for the care of a grandparent and great-grandparent is likely to occur more often. 
Additionally, Caregivlng in the U.S. 2020 indicates that 17% of caregivers reported taking care 
of grandparents or grandparents-in-law. 
There is a direct benefit to the employer when family medical leave is provided, promoting 
retention of employees and reducing costs for recruitment. Support for employed family 
caregivers is critical in maintaining their employment and in preventing the loss of a job and 
economic hardship. 
About one in seven of us is serving as a family caregiver. All too often, family caregivers go 
unrecognized and unsupported. Family caregivers are in many ways as important to providing 
care as are direct care staff. Fortunately, more attention is being focused on this important 
group. Congress passed the RAISE Family Caregiver Act of 2017 that established the RAISE 
Family Caregiver Advisory Council to advise and provide recommendations to the Secretary of 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Sen/ices to support family caregivers. One of the 
recommendations of the Council is strengthening state Family and Medical Leave Acts to 
protect the employment of family caregivers. 
We urge your support for this legislation. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
www.maineombudsman.org
