Senator Baldacci and Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee; my name is Huyanna Clearwater and I live in Augusta, Maine. I am a policy 
consultant for a group that works in partnership with many child welfare agencies. I am also a member 
of Maine's Youth Leadership Advisory Team (YLAT), which is a group of current and former youth from 
Maine's foster care system. In YLAT we help each other learn new skills and advocate for change that 
will ultimately help in ourjourney, and our younger peers, to achieve ‘our future goals. As a young 
person who transitioned from Maine's foster care system, I am here today in support of LD 507: An Act 
to Improve Outcomes for Youth Transitioning from State Care by Reducing Barriers to Maintaining 
Health Care Coverage. Entering young adulthood is filled with unknowns and a lot of responsibility, I 
especially for those of us transitioning from the foster care system. While it is a time of opportunity, it is 
also a time when we are faced with ﬁnding stable housing, employment, school, and other supportive 
services around food, heating, and basicaIIy...being an adult. No one enjoys paperwork and one of the 
hardest parts of becoming an adult is keeping track of paperwork. Missing a MaineCare renewal fora 
former youth in care can disrupt important services and require follow up that the young person may or 
may not persist with because of the number of other things that they may be trying to balance. For 
example, in my personal situation, housing stability was challenging, and I moved a lot in my early 20's.I 
didn't have a permanent address when I first transitioned out of care which meant that I had to rely on 
my caseworker for a lot of these items or hope that my mail was forwarded and that I would get 
important paperwork. 
The annual renewal for MaineCare for young adults transitioning from care seems like an unnecessary 
burden on both young adults and caseworkers. I can remember that my caseworker would make the 
time to meet-with me and all the other youth on their caseload each year to complete the renewal. This 
legislation will remove this administrative burden that is time-consuming and takes away from other 
important transitional goals that caseworkers can be supporting young people with. My hope with the 
passing of this bill is that youth aging out of care will shoulder one less unnecessary burden and 
maintain continuous health coverage through their 27"‘ birthday. Thank you for your time and 
commitment to figuring out how to support youth in care as they pursue their hopes and dreams as they 
enter young adulthood. I would welcome any questions. 
Huyanna Clearwater 
huvanna.t\1neshia@_gmaiI.com 
Augusta, Maine
