Senator Baldacci and Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee; my name is Jessica Harris and I live in Bangor, Maine. I have been in and out of Foster care 
since I was only 2 years old and bounced around to over 30 homes before aging out at 18 with only the 
small amount of belongings I could fit into a car.  I graduated from the University of Maine Orono when I 
was 25 years old with a bachelor’s in social work and now actively work in my field.  I have also been a 
member of Maine’s Youth Leadership Advisory Team for over 12 years.  The Youth leadership Advisory 
Team is a community of current and former foster youth who strive to pave a way of success for the 
children of Maine in public advocacy, and a community of support.
I am here today to talk about LD 507: An Act to Improve Outcomes for Youth Transitioning from State 
Care by Reducing Barriers to Maintaining Health Care Coverage. When I was in college for 6 years to get 
my degree I focused on working as much as possible while also educating myself to build the life of 
success I have gotten today, all thanks to support from others to lift me up. One piece from that time 
that still haunts me is the ongoing medical debt I accrued in college for missing a deadline to re-apply for 
my mainecare. To this day, from an incident in the emergency room I had when I was 22 from an allergic 
reaction, I get calls about the debt that, due to me forgetting 2 months prior to re-apply for mainecare I 
still am dealing with the fall out. 
I know the simple idea of re-applying to mainecare seems straightforward and easy, but for people who 
have struggled to find love and a home as youths, only to struggle more and fight harder from nothing 
but a bag of clothes and a car-full of belongings forgetting to do this step can be a serious, catastrophic 
moment that can keep them down for years, keep them unable to build up Maine longer. Many youth in 
our state who have the support of a family and attend university or explore the many technical 
education programs our state provides do not have this obstacle in their way due to the family and 
benefits. Maine children, children our state raised, currently do not have that luxury. 
Many friends of mine have been negatively impacted by this hurdle in documentation. Young people are 
to have health insurance until age 26 regardless of circumstances. The state took on the role of parent, 
and parents love, nurture, and most of all-protect their children. Take this one piece, this one barrier off 
these young peoples plates. Allow them to focus on building themselves up. Allow them to become 
industrial Mainers and protect them during their blossoming into adulthood. 
Please support LD 507 and help more young people protect their health and build themselves up. My 
dream for Maine is all children, no matter their start, get to have a chance to build their life foundations, 
and a small checkbox on a piece of paper should not be the reason we fail these young people.
