Testimony of Melissa Hackett 
Policy Associate, Maine Children's Alliance 
In support of LD 507, An Act to Improve Outcomes for Youth Transitioning from State Care by 
Reducing Barriers to Maintaining Health Care Coverage 
March 17, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee: 
My name is Melissa Hackett, and I am offering testimony in support of LD 507 on behalf of the 
Maine Children's Alliance. Our organization is a public policy, nonprofit improving the lives of 
Maine children, youth and families through research, collaboration, and advocacy. 
The transition from adolescence into adulthood is difficult for most young people, as they begin 
to take on unfamiliar roles and responsibilities in this new phase oftheir lives. For many, this 
transitional period includes employment or educational opportunities. During this time, it is 
critical that youth have strong relationships with parents or other adults who can provide 
ongoing support or guidance to young people navigating this transition, as well as reliable 
access to resources to provide for their basic needs. 
For youth who have experienced the foster care system, the needs are just what all young 
people need to be successful, yet the significance of having those supports is much greater. For 
children who exit the state's custody upon reaching the age of 18 or at the end of an extended 
care agreement, there may not be that permanent connection to another adult who can 
provide a consistent, supportive role in their lives. For many young people, biological parents 
play this lifelong role — helping complete a FAFSA, finding safe and affordable housing, filling 
out a resume or preparing for an interview, navigating a difficult breakup or conflict witha 
teacher or boss. 
It is a significant missed opportunity for our state to not wrap around these young people and 
ensure they have what they need to be successful. This includes ensuring youth have access to 
health care coverage. Young people with foster care experience are entitled to MaineCare 
coverage, providing them with insurance for their health care needs. Yet currently, young 
people are required to reaffirm their eligibility for this coverage annually. These renewals are 
often conducted via mail to a household. Many young adults experience shifts in housing 
situations, given education and employment opportunities during this transitional time in their 
lives. For most young people, a parent can provide support, collecting and sending mail along, 
or even more simply, by having the opportunity to continually renew their health care coverage 
through a parent's policy. For young people who do not have permanent adults in their lives to 
serve in this important role, we want to ensure there are not additional barriers as they 
navigate these systems on their own. A simple way to reduce the likelihood that young people 
will lose access to coverage they are entitled to and that is critical to their health and wellbeing, 
is to automatically renew this group of young people annually in the MaineCare program.
We all benefit when every young person in Maine is prepared for success. As they enter 
adulthood, young people become Maine's workforce, future leaders, and parents. We should 
make our best effort, then, to ensure young people have access to people and programs to 
support their health and wellbeing, so they can make this transition with the greatest 
opportunity to find happiness, success, and a sense of belonging in communities across our 
state. 
Thank you.
