 
 
 
PO Box 5257 | Augusta, ME | 04332  
 
 
 
March 16, 2023  
 
The Honorable Donna Bailey , Chair  
The Honorable Anne Perry , Chair  
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
RE: Testimony  in favor of LD 1615  An Act Regarding Limits o n Medication in Bending Machines  
 
Dear Senator  Bailey , Representative Perry  and members of the Health Coverage , Ins urance  and Financial Services 
Committee :  
 
My name is Amelia Arnold  and I a m a resident  of Win throp, Maine, a lic ensed pharmacis t employed b y 
Comm unity Pharmacies and  the Le gislative Liaison  for the  Maine Pharmacy Association.   The MPA  is the state pharmacy 
organization that addresses  the advocacy, continuing education and professional needs of all  licensed pharmacists, 
pharmacy te chnicians and student phar macists in Maine . Our mission  is to promote public health by advocating for the 
profession of pharmacy.   On behalf of  the Maine Pharmacy Assoc iation, I am testifying  today  in favor of LD 1615 . 
 
The MPA supports this effort to remo ve the limit of  12 differe nt nonprescription items in any one vending 
machine.  The Board o f Pharmacy has recently  been working  toward  completing  the rule making on the 2019 law LD 37 
allowing for nonprescription drug sales  through vending machines .  The MPA feels the safe guard s written into laws and 
rules are sufficient  for safety and managing stock in  the vending machine that there is no need to have a lim it of 12 
items.  While many patien ts may elect t o come to the pharmacy to speak with a pharmacist regar ding OTC 
recomme ndations, we think it is impo rtant  to note that these pro ducts may also be found a t a variety of  nonpharmacy  
loca tions for sale.  These locations include markets without pharmacie s, dollar stores, and even gas stations an d 
convenience stores.  As the Board of Pharmacy rulemaking  on this matter has  established  management o f these vending 
machines, we see no reason that there  should  be a limit  on vending machine s with  the number of  nonprescription  items 
they stock . 
  
The M aine Pharmacy Association  is happy to answer any questions and work with the committee on this 
legislation . Thank you fo r yo ur time and consideration.  
 
Most Sincerel y,  
 
Amelia Arnold, PharmD  
Legislative Liaison  | Maine Pharmacy Associatio n 
