, HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
. 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Maureen Fitzgerald Terry TTY3 Mame Relay 711 
9 Lombard Street 
Gorham, ME 04038 
Cell Phone: 712-9735 
Maureen .Teny@legislature.maine.g0v 
May 4, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Maureen T errjy introducing 
LD 1615, An Act Regarding Limits on Medication in Vending Machines 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee, I am Maureen Terry, representing part of Gorham in House 
District 108. I am here today to introduce LD 1615, An Act Regarding Limits on Medication 
in Vending Machines 
In the 129"‘ Legislature, I introduced a bill that is now law that created a limited exception to the 
prohibition against the sale of drugs via vending machine. The exception would allow for the 
sale of nonprescription drugs in vending machines. 
When I ﬁrst introduced the bill, I was thinking primarily about two things: increasing access to 
safe, over the counter medication and supporting business. 
The impetus for increasing access came from one of my constituents, a college student at USM, 
who wanted to see vending machines in her college distribute over-the-counter items that one 
would typically ﬁnd at a pharmacy, during hours when most stores were closed. For so many 
students, college is the ﬁrst time they’re living on their own. They don’t necessarily have on 
hand Advil, band-aids, cold medicine, etc. I know my kids certainly didn’t at that point in their 
lives. Adding access to these items by way of a vending machine not only helps them better care 
for themselves during this ﬁrst ﬂight out of the nest, but it also expands opportunities for 
businesses who would otherwise not have their merchandise available for sale. 
But this bill didn’t just help students on college campuses. More broadly, this change also 
beneﬁts communities in a number of ways, particularly those in more remote parts of the state. 
For a pharmacy, it makes ﬁnancial sense to put a vending machine at a kiosk outside a 7-eleven 
or a general store. It might not make sense for them to lease space, order a bunch of product and 
hire staff in Albion or East Machias, but standing up a kiosk with over-the-counter items gives 
them an opportunity to expand their reach and help folks across the state access daily necessities. 
House District 108: Gorham (part)
It also expands the hours of operation in areas Where pharmacies due exist, but where they close 
for the day before most folks get home from Work. 
The committee accepted my bill, but with a committee amendment that included several 
provisions, including a requirement that the Board of Pharmacy engage in rulemaking to license 
the vending machines and imposed a limitation that no more than 12 different nonprescription 
drugs be dispensed at a vending machine. This last minute addition was not aligned with my 
intention for the bill, it does not help keep costs down, make medicines safer support businesses 
or communities. 
That is why I am urging you to accept LD 1615 which will remove the unintentionally and 
arbitrarily restrictive provision that ultimately hinders access to safe and necessary 
nonprescription medication. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
House District 108: Gorham (part)
