>"l?(£;.\: T-'5Ti’I 3" 
5* =""1l' ¢g;3' -.2: ~i 
7T: _ ._;~;: .-' 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
Commercial Vehicle Enforcement Unit 
State House Station 20 
Augusta Maine> 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS COL. WILLIAM ROSS GOVERNOR CHIEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOTT COMMISSIONER DEPUTY cmar 
Testimony of Lt. Aaron Hayden 
IN OPPOSITION or LD 918 
An Act to Decrease the Minimum Age to Operate a School Bus 
Senator Chipman, Rep. Williams, and distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Transportation. My name is Lt. Aaron Hayden, and I am the Commanding Officer of the State Police Commercial Vehicle Enforcement 
Unit. I am here today to testify on behalf of the Department of Public Safety and 
the Maine State Police in opposition of LD534. 
This bill is to allow for drivers between the age of 18-20 and who have obtained a 
commercial driver’s license to operate Maine’s school buses. . 
Driving a school bus is a position of great responsibility as those driver’s 
haul Maine’s most precious cargo, our children. We have seen the need for 
additional school bus driver throughout the state but reducing the age 
requirements does not seem to be in the best interest of safety. Yes, there are 
certainly young men and women that have that maturity at 18 years old but again 
statistically crash numbers do not support that thought process as a whole. In 
2022 almost a 3rd of the fatal commercial vehicle accidents in Maine involved 
drivers under 26 years of age. School Bus drivers must be able to operate safely 
while maintaining a vigilant eye on the passenger compartment. Driver’s need to 
evaluate stop locations have traffic awareness before applying the stop lights and 
have the experience that only time allows to be safe and successful in this ﬁeld. If 
passed this bill could allow an 18 to 20 year old drivers to be put in a situation 
where they would need to keep other students of similar age in line with the 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * , EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207)624-8945 (Fax)
school distr-ict ’s bus riding policies. All this while still operating in a safe manner. 
This job is indeed a difﬁcult one that is wrought with distractions. It is our 
feeling that only years of driving experience allows one to master such difficult 
situations. 
The Maine State Police is the lead agency for the Motor Carrier Safety 
Administrative Plan (MCSAP). We apply for this grant on a yearly basis and 
based on the amount appropriated from the US congress, Maine received 2.4 
million dollars in funding (2022). Maine also has outstanding awards for 
upgrades to our weigh -stations and upgrades to BMV’s IFTA and IRP systems 
that exceed an additional million dollars. Those grants all fall under the MCSAP 
umbrella. A State may be subject to the withholding of MCSAP funds for non- 
compliance. The FMCSA may withhold funds based on increasing percentages 
during the ﬁscal year(s) of noncompliance with up to 5% for the ﬁrst ﬁscal year of 
noncompliance, up to 10% for the second ﬁscal year of noncompliance, up to 25% 
for the third ﬁscal year of noncompliance and not more than 50% for the fourth 
and subsequent fiscal years. 
Maine has adopted the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations broadly 
and have not deviated from the passenger carry regulation maintaining a good 
balance in meeting the needs for our state. In looking at LD 918 numerous 
changes would need to be made in other places of our own Maine Statues. An 
example would in 29-A 1253 which states “In the case of any conﬂict between the 
federal statute or regulation and a statute or rule of this State, the federal 
statute or regulation must apply and take precedence. ” This would require this 
committee to open the books on not only Maine’s adoptions but an overhaul of 
the CDL licensing among other things. 
Maine is one of the safest states in the country to operate a commercial 
vehicle including buses. This is a fact my agency is extremely proud of, and it 
takes great partnerships to include our industries. This is about safety and 
keeping our students safe. Today’s school bus drivers not only demonstrate their 
great skills but have also shown us with their experience they can keep our kids 
safe while picking up and dropping off for school. 
For these reasons, we urge you to vote against of LD918. 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police, I thank 
you for your time and would be happy to try and answer any questions that you 
might have. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
