Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Opposition  
LD 918: An Act to Decrease the Minimum Age to Operate a School Bus   
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Transportation Committee  
March  21, 2023  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams  and other esteemed members of the Transportation 
Committee,   
 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him)  and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state an d faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.  
 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in opposition to LD 918: An Act to Decrease the 
Minimum Age to Operate a School Bus.  This bill presents serious  safety concerns for our members and 
for students and we ask the Committee to oppose this legislation.   
 
We are fully aware of the workforce shortages plaguing public schools.  Bus drivers, like ed techs and 
teachers, are in high demand with very short su pply.  Already this session we have seen various bills 
intended to weaken  or relax standards for educators.  We feel the solution is to lift wages for bus drivers 
and other public -school employees, and there are no less than four bills this session to do t hat.  Put 
simply, the public sector is being outpaced here by the private sector.  Wages in the private sector jobs 
have increased significantly due in large part to labor shortages and inflation .  Public sector wages, 
governed by voter -approved budgets an d often relying on property taxes, have failed to catch up.   We 
hope the Legislature will look for other solutions beyond those proposed in this bill to address the labor 
shortages public schools are facing.   
 
Furthermore, driving a school bus requires a  high level of responsibility and skill. School bus drivers are 
responsible for the safety and well -being of the children they transport, which is an enormous task. 
Reducing the age requirement to 18 would put younger drivers in charge of such a vital role , with 
limited life experience and driving practice.  
 
Young drivers are inexperienced and more prone to accidents. Statistics from the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration show that drivers under the age of 21 have a higher chance of being  
 
 
 
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
involved in fatal crashes compared to their older counterparts.1 Considering that school bus drivers on 
average in Maine transport tens of thousands of students every day, the potential risk of an accident 
involving younger, inexperienced drivers is cons iderably high.  
 
Moreover, school bus drivers must manage not only the passengers but also the vehicle itself. School 
buses are heavier and larger than regular vehicles, which means they require additional awareness and a 
good sense of size and dimension ma nagement. An 18 -year-old driver may not have the necessary 
driving expertise to maneuver such a behemoth bus on the roads, which may cause harm to both the 
students and other road users.  
 
Reducing the minimum age requirement for school bus drivers would pu t children at risk and may cause 
more accidents involving school buses. Let us prioritize the safety of our children and keep experienced, 
mature drivers on the roads.  
 
 
 
1 Please see, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Traffic Safety Facts, 2020 Data, found here:  2020 Data: 
Young Drivers (dot.gov)  
