8 A 
...,-4* 
\;» .:i' 
Richard A. Bennett 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 18 Augusta, Maine 04333 iS 
THE MAINE SENATE 
13 l st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
LD 918, "An Act to Decrease the Minimum Age to Operate a School Bus" 
23 March 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Committee on Transportation, I 
am Senator Rick Bermett of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 communities in Western 
Maine in the State Senate. I am pleased to present LD 918, "An Act to Decrease the Minimum 
Age to Operate a School Bus.” 
Reach out to any school district in Maine, and I bet the Superintendent will tell you he or she is 
having a hard time ﬁnding school bus drivers. In October 2022, a WGME news article noted 
Lewiston Superintendent Jake Langlais said their district has had to cancel bus routes due toa 
lack of drivers. He said every morning they have to reach out to parents regarding the changing 
bus schedule. That same article also mentioned South Portland Superintendent Tim Matheney. 
He said the amount of bus drivers he has is about 25% below what it should be. 
Districts are trying to attract new drivers any way that they can: Incentives, bonuses, radio ads, 
and free training have all been offered. LD 918 proposes to increase the age group eligible to 
become drivers. 
Under current law, a driver must be 2l years of age. I, and Rep. Dean Cray, hope that age 
requirement is lowered to 18. Rep. Cray is the Head of Transportation for RSU 19, and is 
therefore, extremely knowledgeable about this subject. I was pleased to work with him on this 
bill. 
Rep. Cray and I hope, that by lowering the age, we can encourage more high school students to 
become drivers. Many may even be able to obtain their training through CTE courses offered 
while they are in school. 
It is important to note, this legislation would not alter any of the other criteria to become a driver. 
Everyone would still need to have held their license for at least one year, and pass the written 
and road exams. It is imperative that all drivers receive adequate training to perform the job 
safely. 
Thank you. I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Fax: (207) 287—1527 * TTY (207) 287-1583 * Message Service I-800-423-6900 * Web Site: legisIature.ma1' ne. gov/senate
