 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community D rive, Augusta, ME  04330  
Telepho ne: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY REGARDING  
 
L.D. 918 
 
AN ACT TO DECREASE THE MINIMUM AGE TO OPERATE A SCHOOL BUS  
 
Senator  Chipman , Representative  Williams  and members of the Transportation Committee. I am Victoria 
Wallack , director of government relations and communications  for Maine School Management Associat ion, 
testifying on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School 
Superintendents Association  regarding  L.D. 918 . MSBA supported the bill and MSSA was neither for nor 
against.  
 
School Boards support ed this bill  because  it gives a district the option of hiring a bus driver at age 18 to 
address the bus driver shortage in parts of the state . The current age in law is 21.  The impetus for the bill is 
our older drivers are retiring  and there is no longer a pool of app licants 21 or older to fill the vacancies.  
 
Superintendents , while recognizing the shortage , were concerned about the transition from the high school 
day, where students would be in class together, and then that classma te or a school mate only a year ago  could 
be driving the bus and trying to enforce bus rules.  
 
That said, both association s agreed  the bus driver shortage is a very real problem that needs to be addressed.  A 
recent article about a school in Washington Coun ty featured a school administrator dr iving the bus because 
the driver shortage had reached a crisis point.  
 
There is precedent for allowing 18 -year-old drivers to operate large vehicles . They are eligible to earn a 
Commercial Driv er License to operate larg e trucks, including tractor trailers , and in the military they are 
authorized to drive tanks.  
 
All potential drivers would  still need to be interviewed , and there would be a hiring process to determine if 
they have the skills and maturity to be hired . 
