 
       
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association Neither For Nor Against : 
LD 510: An Act to Protect the Public Health by Allowing the Appointment of Associate Health Officers  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Room 209, Cross State Office Building  
Wednesday, March 22, 2023 
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive 
director of Maine Public Health Association.  
 
MPHA is the sta te’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent 
more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people i n Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments t hat underlie health 
inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seri ously. 
 
MPHA is  neither for nor against  LD 510: “ An Act to Protect the Public Health by Allowing the Appointment of 
Associate Health Officers .” This bill would establish a new municipal health  officer position ( “Associate Health 
Officer”) who would report to the  Local H ealth O fficer  (LHO) and assist with their dut ies. 
 MPHA has been a longstanding partner in strengthening Maine ’s public health infrastruc ture, working with 
Maine CDC and other sta keholders  on these efforts . We co -convened the State Public Health System 
Asse ssment in 2020/2021 and published a website  about Maine ’s government al public hea lth system. LD 1523
 
and LD 1693 , intro duced  in the 130th Legislature, would have provided funding for the S tate Health P lan, in 
addition to supporting c ross-sector, public -private p artnerships , health planning, and workforce development 
training  (among other public health activities)  – all in service to sup porting local  community public health . 
 
Most LHOs in Maine work very part -time (4 -8 hours/week)  and are paid a small stipe nd for their work. They 
typically respond to nuisance issues (e.g., rats ), as well as issues related to ho arding and landlord- tenant issues. 
In many areas around the state, they serve as uninte ntional first responders , as many of these issues are 
connected to  challenges related to mental illness, substance u se disorder, and homelessness. As the state is 
rebuilding its public health nursing workforce, bols tering community health worker s, and staffing public health 
units statewide, some LHO s may find themselves without needed support  resources. Certainly , there are 
community action agencies, nonprofit  organizations, health  clinics, and many other  public health and health 
care supports, but with wide geographic servi ce areas and high demands, it can take a long time for needed 
support to be obtained. We appreciate, then, the  impetus for this bill – additional staff capacity at the local level 
to help with public health e fforts. We are unclear a bout the authority the Associate LHO  would have to respond 
to public health ch allenges, or the available workforce (or funding) to fil l the position s. However, we do also 
underst and that this position c ould help with  succession planning and , in communities  that are able to  staff an 
Associate LHO, additional capacity to meet local needs.  Thank you for your consideration of our testimony.  
