www. friendsofbaxter. org 
of Baxter State Park, an organization with a mission to 
Park's wild character in the spirit of Percival Baxter. Our organization has 
Park Authority for 23 years. We attend every single meeting and have 
it on countless occasions. We are intimately familiar with its role and 
responsibilities in managing the Park. 
We are testifying both for and against LD 294. While l am aware that the legislative language 
calls for testifying neither for nor against a bill, such terminology does not truly capture our 
sentiments. 
The overarching intent of LD 294 is to provide for greater Wabanaki involvement in Baxter State 
Park matters — an important goal and one that we fully support. We acknowledge and respect 
the sacred connection between the Wabanaki people and Katahdin - a relationship that has 
existed for millennia and continues to this day. Along with many other Maine conservation 
organizations, we have spent the past ﬁve years learning about Wabanaki history and culture as 
part of the First Light Learning Journey, which has spawned new initiatives within our 
organization to expand our thinking andour work with Baxter State Park to incorporate 
Wabanaki interests. 
We are all aware of Percival Baxter's magnificent gift of Katahdin and the surrounding lands to 
the people of Maine. But the lands were only part of that gift. The other essential contribution 
that Baxter made were the Deeds of Trust to guide the stewardship of these lands free from the 
intervention of government and outside interests, along with an endowment to avoid 
dependence on public funding and outside ﬁnancial pressures. The Baxter State Park Authority 
was given the responsibility of serving as trustees to the Deeds of Trust as articulated by 
Assistant Attorney General Paul Stern. On December 22, 1997, he wrote: 
”The Authority as trustee is required to comply with the intent of Governor Baxter, 
and not with general State policy. Indeed, if the Authority chose to comport its 
decision with general State be a violation of the Trust." 
Documentary History 
2008, pp.226-227)
\ — 
-_.m..._»» —¢¢=M-W->.~,,y¢qW%s.%.>..- 7,?/)}/A'~/Si M /P M.‘ 
www. friendsofbaxter. org 
served the Park and the People of Maine well over 
their administration by the Authority has succeeded in 
Park matters by political and other forces, and in doing so 
Park as a national treasure. 
We understand that the sponsors and supporters of LD 294 have worthy objectives, which we 
share. However, for the Legislature to interfere with the operations of Baxter State Park would 
set a terrible precedent, one that would inevitably lead to future attempts by the Legislature to 
intervene in Park affairs. Baxter State Park would be significantly weakened by this legislative 
intrusion into itsstructure and function — something that Percival Baxter worked so hard to 
prevent. 
Friends of Baxter State Park acknowledges that Wabanaki people are an integral part of the 
past, present, and future of Baxter State Park, and we believe that the Park will be stronger by 
incorporating Wabanaki perspectives. We simply do not feel that LD 294 is the best way to 
accomplish this goal. Instead, we believe that there are other, more meaningful avenues to 
bring Wabanaki voices into the management of Baxter State Park. Moreover, we are prepared 
to invest our own organization's time and resources into helping make that happen. 
In closing, we believe that LD 294 is a well-intentioned proposal, but one that can be better 
achieved without undermining the institutional foundation of Baxter State Park. 
Attached to our testimony is a compilation of citations from the deeds of trust and other 
sources that directly pertain to this legislative proposal.W .7 , » 1-M — 
.;,#@;r:ztz ’z2;;iv>i.<?»?»;;~:@~k_, ‘*:’~ .r ma
\ .-_-__~e_;»- ,, » r%;y>»» 
‘K-ssew.» /~;z" 
64 www fnendsofbaxter. org 
generous gift been presented to a people than has been given by Percival 
to the people of the State of Maine. It is incumbent on them, the recipients, to 
preserve the trust impressed upon them, to ensure for themselves and for future generations 
the fullest use of Baxter State Park consistent with the desires of the donor.” 
"While this area bears the name park, it is not to be confused with the existing state park 
system and is to ”be separately administered free from any connection with the State Park 
Commission. " (Bureau of Parks and Lands) That system, purchased with the funds of the people, 
must change from time to time to accommodate changing circumstances and the varying 
desires of its proprietors; not so, Baxter State Park, purchased by the generosity of one man, 
richly endowed, and presented to the people with specific stipulations. ” 
”SoIemnIy cognizant of the responsibility, it shall always be the purpose of the Authority to 
satisfy the terms of the Trust.” _g 
2.) Memorandum from Assistant AG Paul Stern to members of the Baxter State Park 
Authority, 12/22/1997 
”The Authority as trustee is required to comply with the intent of Governor Baxter, and {lg with 
general State policy. Indeed, if the Authority chose to comport its decision with general State 
policy, it would be a violation of the Trust. in a wide variety of contexts, Governor Baxter made it 
clear that his desire was that the park and its funds be utilized according to his intent, and not 
general State policy.” 
”The choices at times may be difficult, and indeed politically painful, for Authority members, but 
as Trustees of the fund and the Park, Authority members have the duty, obiigation, and 
responsibility to comport their decisions with Governor Baxter's Trust”
er. org 
obviously selected by Governor Baxter himself and ratified by 
of the State's principal officers in the professions of the law, 
management. Both Governor Baxter and the legislature placed 
and integrity of those high state officials. ” 
4.) Attorney General Opinion: Deputy AG Rufus Brown to AG James Tierney, 11/29/1983 
”The Authority was created in 1939 to act as trustee for the State of Maine for purposes of 
Baxter's Trust. This Act, which Baxter ”undoubtably had a major roIe" in planning and 
introducing to the Legislature, JW Hakola, Legacy of a Lifetime, at 139, specified that the 
membership of the Authority should consist of the Attorney General, the Commissioner of Inland 
Fisheries and Game, and the State Forest Commissioner. Of course, that membership has 
remained consistent to the present date." 
"One of the most emphatic letters on the subject of membership of the Authority was written by 
Governor Baxter on February 16, 1967 to the Park Authority in reference to a proposal to 
enlarge the Authority to include State Representatives from Millinocket and Greenville. 
Governor Baxter strongly opposed this change in the membership, writing: 
The citizens of our State, if this matter were placed before them, would not think of 
making any changes. Such an action would break the Trust which I established andl 
should be humiliated /fl were ever called upon to go before a Legislative Committee to 
try to stop passage of this proposed bill." 
"With this background, it appears clear that the present membership of the Authority was that 
intended by Governor Baxter and by such membership Governor Baxter intended to draw upon 
the expertise and the judgment of particular state oﬁicials."
1967 
Baxter State Park, 7.2. Baxter State 
s Autonomy 
Authority provides the kind of governing body I believe the best fitted 
as I want it to be. The three men who comprise the Authority are state 
don t believe their services on the Authority have, or will have, any eﬁect on their 
salary costs to thestate. The Forest Commissioner provides the Authority with a person 
informed in forest land management, the Inland Fisheries & Game Commissioner with an 
interested and informed person in the management of fish and game in forested areas, and the 
Attorney General with a person and interested and knowledgeable in the law and all are 
interested in people. They have successfully administered Baxter Park in conformity with my 
ideas for many years. I want to see their type of administration continued long after I have 
passed from the scene.” 
6.) Attorney General Opinion: Deputy AG Rufus Brown to G. William Diamond and Neil 
Rolde, 12/6/1983 
”Given Governor Baxter's strong views about the existing membership of the Authority, as 
expressed in various extrinsic documents and recognized by our own Law Court, there are 
sufficient grounds to conclude that the maintenance of the existing membership constitutes a 
trust obligation which should not be altered. ” 764 www. friendsofbaxter. org
