TO: Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing        
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
 
FROM:   Janet Hough, 401 S Edmunds Rd, Edmunds T wp, ME 04828   
Member, Friends (Quaker) Committee on Maine Public Policy  (FCMPP)  
 
RE:    LD294 --AN ACT TO INCLUDE A TRIBAL MEMBER ON TH E BAXTER STATE PARK AUTHORITY  
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative  Pluecker, and members of the Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry , my name is Jan et Hough and I am speaking on behalf of the Friends 
Committee on Maine Public Policy --a statewide organization of Quaker a dvocates —to urge a 
vote in favor of LD  294.   In recent years FCMPP has focused  almost solely on being informed 
allies of the Tribes in  Maine in addressing areas  of concern to them  and in strengthening Tribal -
state relations . We do so  in recognition of the deep moral and ethical issues involved in Maine’s 
current relationship to the Wabanaki peoples.  
 
The Baxter State Park Authority now h as three designated  state officials and is supplemented by 
four  voluntary  advisory committees with a total membership of 4 7. Apparently not a single 
Wabanaki  individual is now a serving member.  LD 294 would remedy this exclusion.  
 
The Wabanaki have been  the people s of this land for untold  generations.  Their long legacy and 
cumulative wisdom in caring  for the natural environment across the current state of Maine  
deserves to be recognized and drawn upon in the management  of Baxter State Park. Many of 
the Indigenous tribes in this region revered  Mount Katahdin as their most  sacred site and a 
place of pilgrimage and  prayer.   They still do.  
 
In light of their age -old role as trustees of th is land and the  natural world long be fore European 
settlers appeared on these  shores , it is appropriate to have a Wabanaki  citizen  join fully in the 
current management process. Adding a Wabanaki  member  to the Park Authority would  bring 
valuable information  and seasoned perspectives to the sha red oversight and ongoing  
protection of Katahdin and the larger Park area.  
 
Consistent with our Quaker commitment to  seek just treatment  and full recognition of the 
rights of Indigenous peoples , we urge a positive vote to advance LD  294 toward full passage  in 
the current legislative session.  Thank you.  
Janet Hough
Friends (Quaker) Committee on Maine Public Policy
LD 294
TO:Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
FROM:  Janet Hough, 401 S Edmunds Rd, Edmunds Twp, ME 04828 
Member, Friends (Quaker) Committee on Maine Public Policy (FCMPP)
RE:   LD294--AN ACT TO INCLUDE A TRIBAL MEMBER ON THE BAXTER 
STATE PARK AUTHORITY
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Janet Hough and I am speaking 
on behalf of the Friends Committee on Maine Public Policy--a statewide organization 
of Quaker advocates—to urge a vote in favor of LD 294.  In recent years FCMPP has 
focused almost solely on being informed allies of the Tribes in Maine in addressing 
areas of concern to them and in strengthening Tribal-state relations. We do so in 
recognition of the deep moral and ethical issues involved in Maine’s current 
relationship to the Wabanaki peoples.
The Baxter State Park Authority now has three designated state officials and is 
supplemented by four voluntary advisory committees with a total membership of 47. 
Apparently not a single Wabanaki individual is now a serving member. LD 294 
would remedy this exclusion.
The Wabanaki have been the peoples of this land for untold generations. Their long 
legacy and cumulative wisdom in caring for the natural environment across the 
current state of Maine deserves to be recognized and drawn upon in the management 
of Baxter State Park. Many of the Indigenous tribes in this region revered Mount 
Katahdin as their most sacred site and a place of pilgrimage and prayer.  They still do.
In light of their age-old role as trustees of this land and the natural world long before 
European settlers appeared on these shores, it is appropriate to have a Wabanaki citizen join 
fully in the current management process. Adding a Wabanaki member to the Park Authority 
would bring valuable information and seasoned perspectives to the shared oversight and 
ongoing
protection of Katahdin and the larger Park area.
Consistent with our Quaker commitment to seek just treatment and full recognition of 
the rights of Indigenous peoples, we urge a positive vote to advance LD 294 toward 
full passage in the current legislative session. Thank you.
