Testimony of the Committee on Indian Relations of the Episcopal Diocese of Maine 
In Support of LD 294 An Act to Include a Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park Authority, 
introduced by Rep. Collings of Portland 
Presented for the Public Hearing Before the Maine Legislature’s Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry, February 13, 2023
Sen. Ingwersen, Rep. Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry; my name is John Maddaus, and I serve as chair of the 
Legislative Committee of the Committee on Indian Relations of the Episcopal Diocese of Maine. 
The Episcopal Committee on Indian Relations was formed by resolution of the Diocesan 
Convention in 1991. For over 30 years, we have lived into our mission “to deepen our 
relationship with the Wabanaki of Maine, to stand with the tribes in the pursuit of justice, to 
affirm their inherent sovereignty, and to support the preservation of Native languages and 
culture.”
LD 294 would add a citizen of the Wabanaki nations located in Maine to membership of 
the Baxter State Park Authority. The Authority currently consists of three members, the Attorney 
General, the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife and the Director of the Maine Forest 
Service. The addition of a citizen of the Wabanaki nations would recognize that Katahdin stands 
in the traditional territory of the Wabanaki nations and that Katahdin is the most sacred place in 
that territory to the Wabanaki peoples. Yet the Wabanaki peoples have been excluded from 
decisions about care for the mountain and the surrounding lands for generations. 
For many years, citizens of the Penobscot Nation have organized the Katahdin 100 (or 
K100) on Labor Day weekend. This event consists of a spiritual run and paddle from Indian 
Island to Katahdin, ending with spiritual ceremonies at Katahdin. Members of the other 
Wabanaki nations also participate in this event. For at least 18 years, the Episcopal Diocese of 
Maine, at the request of the Committee on Indian Relations, and in keeping with our mission, has 
paid the campground fees in Baxter State Park for the K100. In 2011, we appealed to the Baxter 
State Park Authority to stop charging fees for this Wabanaki spiritual event. In response the 
Authority reduced the fees, but did not eliminate them. Those fees are currently $704 per year. 
We think that the continued charging of fees for the Wabanaki to conduct their spiritual 
ceremonies on the mountain that is sacred to them is a grave injustice. The ancestors of today’s 
Wabanaki citizens have lived on and cared for this land for over 12,000 years. Can you imagine 
what it would be like if your place of worship were taken by some newcomers, who then charged 
you fees for the opportunity to worship there once a year? 
On September 13, 2007, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the UN 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which declares in part that “Indigenous peoples 
have the right to manifest, practice, develop and teach their spiritual and religious traditions 
customs and ceremonies; the right to maintain, protect, and have access in privacy to their 
religious and cultural sites…” On April 15, 2008, the Maine Legislature passed a resolution in 
support of the UN Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Yet here we are, over a 
decade later, with the Baxter State Park Authority still denying those rights.
Across North America, there is a growing movement of Indigenous peoples working with 
public agencies toward arrangements for Indigenous involvement in the management of public 
lands, sometimes referred to as co-management. Three years ago, Maine Public’s program Maine 
Calling featured a discussion of the topic “Katahdin: The Historic Role and Cultural & 
Economic Importance of Maine’s Highest Peak.” At the conclusion of that program, Barry Dana, 
one of the panelists, a former chief of the Penobscot Nation and an organizer of and participant 
in the Katahdin 100, said, “I’d like to extend the offer to have all the powers that be come to the 
table and see how the original people of the area can become more a part of the mountain, other 
than just visiting for our ceremonies. I’d like to reopen the dialog .. as to what the Native 
involvement is. Some sort of co-partnership in terms of bringing the land back to the Native 
people. I think it’s time to reopen that dialog.”
The members of the Episcopal Committee on Indian Relations agree that it’s time -- in 
fact, it’s long overdue -- for the Wabanaki peoples to have a voice in decision-making about their 
most sacred site, and we believe that adding a Wabanaki citizen as a member of the Baxter State 
Park Authority would be an important step toward the original people of this land having a voice 
at the table. Passage of this bill would be a good step toward accepting Barry Dana’s offer.
