Testimony of John F. Loyd 
Co-Trustee of Baxter Park Wilderness Fund Trust 
In opposition to LD 294 
“An Act to Include a Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park Authority ” 
February 13, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is John Loyd. I am one of three 
trustees of the Baxter Park Wilderness Fund Trust speaking today in opposition to LD 294, “An 
Act to Include a Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park Authority. ” 
This bill as drafted substantively amends Title 12 MRSA §90l by the addition of a fourth 
member of the Baxter State Park Authority who shall be a member of a federally recognized 
Indian nation, tribe or band in the State of Maine. The bill further speciﬁes the procedures for 
the selection of a tribal Authority member. 
The intent of the legislation appears to be a good faith effort and attempt to, in some small Way, 
redress some of the harm and injustices Native Americans have suffered since 1492, but this 
effort is misplaced and an inappropriate means of redress given the unique trust nature of Baxter 
State Park and its creation by Percival P. Baxter (Governor Baxter). 
The bill if passed will fundamentally change the nature and operations of the Baxter State Park 
Authority while substantively interfering with the trust established between Governor Baxter and 
the people of the State of Maine. This is not a question about whether a Native American should 
be added to the Authority, it is a question whether a fourth person, indigenous or not, should be 
added to the Authority to increase its members from three to four. 
Governor Baxter spent 31 years, using his own money, acquiring the 28 parcels of land that 
eventually constituted the core of Baxter State Park. Alter he acquired a parcel, and with the 
agreement of the legislature, he conveyed (donated) the parcel to the State of Maine subject to an 
agreement and promises by the State to hold the land in trust under the legal concept ofa 
“resulting trust.” 
A "resulting trust” is a trust that is implied by law to give effect to the intention of the settlor 
(Governor Baxter). This occurs when a person transfers property to another person on the 
understanding that it will be held for a speciﬁc purpose, but the intended beneﬁciaries (the 
people of the State of Maine) do not take title to the property. Instead, the property is held in 
trust (by the State of Maine) for the beneﬁt of the intended beneﬁciaries. 
The terms of the Baxter State Park resulting trust incorporate the 1939 agreement between 
Governor Baxter and the legislature, and the essential terms of the trust are embodied in Title 12, 
Chapter 211, Subchapter 3 of the Maine Revised Statutes which speciﬁcally state that the Baxter 
State Park Authority is to be composed of three members, each having a speciﬁc role in State 
government, which agreement and legislation effectively designates the three Authority members 
as trustees of Baxter State Park.
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Testimony of John Loyd 
Re: LD 294 
Page 2 of3 
By reconstituting the Authority as a four-person board the legislation creates the distinct 
possibility, if not the probability, of an Authority deadlock. This is a possibility that should be 
avoided at all costs. A deadlocked Authority exposes Park resources, including land, ﬂora, fauna, 
personnel, and endowment at risk, all contrary to the expressed wishes and directives of 
Governor Baxter that all Park resources are to be held for the beneﬁt of the people of Maine in 
perpetuity. Park resources should never be put at risk. 
Title 12 MRSA §900, Purpose, informs this bill and its consideration and argues against any 
changes to the trust. 
On the question of whether there is a trust relationship between Governor Baxter and the people 
of Maine see §900, ﬁrst unnumbered paragraph: 
Seldom has a more generous gift been presented to a people than has been given by 
Percival Proctor Baxter to the people of the State of Maine. It is incumbent upon them, 
the recipients, to preserve the trust impressed upon them. . .. [emphasis added] 
On the question of the unique relationship between the donor, Govemor Baxter, and his desire 
that no changes be made to the trust, see §900, ninth unnumbered paragraph: 
. [The State Park] system, purchased with the funds of the people, must change from 
time to time to accommodate changing circumstances and the varying desires of its 
proprietors; not so, Baxter State Park, purchased by the generosity of one man, richly 
endowed, and presented to the people with specific stipulations. [emphasis added] 
Governor Baxter was cognizant that later generations, such as this generation and this legislature, 
may overlook the unique character of the Park and the trust, see §900, tenth unnumbered 
paragraph, for Governor Baxter’s quote on this issue: 
“While I am living I fear, no encroachments on the park, but as time passes and new men 
appear upon the scene, there may be a tendency to overlook these restrictions and thus 
break the spirit of these gifts.” 
12 MRSA §900 ends with the following which reinforces the trust nature of the Park and its 
manner of creation and the ﬁduciary roll of the Authority: 
Solemnly cognizant of the responsibility, it shall always be the purpose of the authority to 
satisfy the tenns of the Trust. 
12 MRSA §902 reinforces the trust established between Governor Baxter and the State of Maine 
as the trust speciﬁcally relates to the acquired land making up the Park: 
The public reserved lots in the area known as Baxter State Park shall be forever held in 
trusts, and are here declared to be so held, as part of said park not only as respects the 
interests conveyed to the State by Percival Proctor Baxter but as respects the basic title 
originally owned by the State. The basic title of each such lot is declared to be held in the
Joint Standing Cormnittee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Testimony of John Loyd 
Re: LD 294 
Page 3 of3 
same trusts and for the same purposes as are declared in the deed or deeds of the said 
Percival Proctor Baxter conveying to the State his interest in such lot. [emphasis added] 
This bill has no direct impact on the Baxter Park Wilderness Fund Trust (BPWF T) of which I am 
a co-trustee. That said, the Authority is responsible for appointing the trustees of BPWFT and 
applying the unrestricted quarterly distributions to the Park from the BPWFT in an appropriate 
manner, therefore, we trustees have an interest in preserving a responsive and smoothly 
functioning Authority. 
The Baxter State Park Authority has functioned well for eighty-four years, just as Governor 
Baxter intended. This legislature should neither tamper with the Authority nor the trust 
established by Govemor Baxter. It is clear to me and others that adding a fourth Authority 
member, be she or he a Native American or not, is a fundamental change to the terms of the trust 
and threatens the operational integrity of the Authority. The Authority should remain composed 
of three members. 
The committee should be mindful of the words of Governor Baxter in his attachment to his 
February 16, 1967 letter to the Authority expressing his opposition to an attempt to increase the 
number and expertise of the Authority members and his clear rationale for having the 
Commissioner (now Director) of the Forest Service, the Commissioner of IF&W and the 
Attorney General constitute the Authority; to wit: 
The present Baxter State Park Authority provides the kind of governing body that is best 
fitted to continue Baxter State Park as I want it to be. The three [persons] who comprise 
the Authority are state employees. . .. The Forest Commissioner provides the Authority 
with a person informed in forest management, the Inlands Fisheries & Game 
Commissions with an interested and informed person in the management of ﬁsh and 
game in forested areas, and the Attorney General with a person interested and 
knowledgeable in the law and all are interested in people. They have successfully 
administered Baxter State Park in conformity with my ideas for many years. I want to see 
» 
their type of administration continued long after I have passed from the scene. [emphasis 
added] 
I urge the committee to allow this bill die without leaving the committee. 
Thank you for taking my testimony. I will be happy to answer any questions members of the 
committee may have. 
John F. Loyd 
trustees@baxterpai'kwildernessfundtrust.org
