Febr uary 13, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
 
Re: LD 294 , An Act to Include a Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park Authority  
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and I am the 
Government Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this 
opportunity to testify in support of LD 294, An Act to Include a Tribal Member in the 
Baxter State Park Authority.  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends.  Guided by science, we create 
innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that nature and 
people can thrive together. Working in more than 70 countries, we use a collaborative 
approach that engages local commu nities, governments, the private sector, and other 
partners. TNC Maine has been leading conservation in the state for more than 60 years and 
is the 12th largest landowner in Maine, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  
 
Supporting the voice, choice, a nd action of Indigenous Peoples is key to The Nature 
Conservancy’s vision of a world where people and nature thrive. As an organization, TNC 
has endorsed the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) , and  we 
believe that one of the most e ffective and enduring conservation actions we can take is to 
strengthen Indigenous Peoples’ voices, choices, and actions in natural resource 
stewardship. A UN -backed report found that at least a quarter of our planet’s land is 
owned, used, occupied , or man aged by Indigenous Peoples, and biodiversity is better 
maintained  in these places.  
 
Katahdin is sacred to the Wabanaki People, whose relationship with th at region spans 
thousands of years – far longer than the relatively brief time Maine law has been impos ed 
on that land. Their exclusion from the governing bodies that oversee their ancestral lands 
and sacred  places is unjust and should be addressed.  
 
We understand the legal complexities raised by this bill, including the unique nature of the 
Baxter Park Authority and the deeds governing its composition . We acknowledge that trust 
law may consider t his proposed action  to be beyond the purview of the Legi slature. While 
that may be the outcome, we nonetheless support the intent  of this bill, which is to 
integrate Wabanaki People  meaningfully  into the leadership and stewardship of Baxter 
State Park . 
 
TNC sees LD 294 as an opportunity to amplify the critical work of elevating the voice, 
choice and action of Wabanaki people, especially in areas of land management and access . 
Beyond this bill , we encourage all parties to explore meaningful ways to accomplish this 
work  moving forward , and TNC  stand s ready to support this process however we can . 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.  
