Testimony of Maine Conservation Voters
IN SUPPORT OF
“An Act to Include a Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park Authority”
Before the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry
February 13th, 2023
Good Morning Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the
Committee On Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry.
My name is Maureen Drouin and I
am Executive Director of Maine Conservation Voters, a nonproﬁt organization with over
13,000 members and supporters committed to protecting our environment, democracy,
and climate future.
I am pleased to speak to you this morning in support of LD 294, “An Act to Include a
Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park Authority.”
Governor Percival Baxter was a visionary. He used his vast wealth, connections,
perseverance, and creativity to ensure that Maine people would always know and have
access to our shared wilderness heritage through Baxter State Park.
But like many conservationists, including those with the best of intentions, Gov. Baxter
did not recognize or take into consideration the sacred relationship between the
Wabanaki tribes and this land. This resulted in the exclusion of the tribes in the creation
of the park and the structures that now manage it.
The Baxter State Park Authority is the clearest example, but there is little to no
representation from the tribes that I could see on the various Advisory Committees either.
We are the lesser for it. While the three members of the Authority provide invaluable
information on forest land management, the management of ﬁsh and game, and
knowledge of the law, the lack of Wabanaki representation has meant that for close to
100 years now, we have not beneﬁted from the wisdom and connection of the native

people whose roots have been in Mount Katahdin, Pamola Peak, and the surrounding
landscape for millenia.
Conservation is my organization’s middle name and I’m proud of the many lands and
waters collectively that we’ve been able to protect. But it’s time that we acknowledge the
exclusion of indigenous people in the systems we’ve built around conservation and start
repairing them.
This bill does not change the deeds of trust nor does it change the purpose of the Baxter
State Park Authority. This bill is about adding a voice that should have been included
long before today. Adding a member from the Wabanaki Nations would bring to the
Authority more ancestral knowledge and connection than any state oﬃcial could provide.
There is no more meaningful way for the Wabanaki to be involved in the management of
Baxter State Park than to have a seat at the table where the ultimate decisions are made.
For these reasons, Maine Conservation Voters respectfully urges you to vote “ought to
pass” on LD 294.
Thank you.
