Maine Indian Tribal -State Commission  
 
 
  
Chai rperson  
Newell Lewey  
Managing Director  
Paul G. Thibeault  
Projects Coordinator  
Rachel Bell  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P.O. Box 35  
Whiting , ME 046 91 Phone : (207) 271 -7762  
      pthibeault @mitsc.org  
 www.mitsc.org  
  
February 1 3, 2023 
 
RE: Testimony of the Maine Indian Tribal -State Commission On LD 294, An Act to 
Include a Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park Authority  
To: Senator Ingwersen,  Representative Pluecker,  and Members of the Joint Standi ng 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry.  
 
My name is Paul Thibeault .  I am the Managing Director of the Maine Indian Tribal -State 
Commission , and I submit this testimony on behalf of the Comm ission, neither for nor 
against LD 294. 
The Maine Indian Tribal -State Commission (MITSC) was created in 1980 as part of the 
Maine Implementing Act. The primary responsibilities of MITSC are to continually review 
the effectiveness of the Maine Implementing Act and the social, economic, and legal 
relationships between the State of Maine, the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe, and the Penobscot Nation.  In a broader sense , MITSC is tasked 
with supporting effective Tribal -State relations , and emphasizes outreach, networking, and 
education. Based on its ongoing reviews and studies, t he Commission makes legislative and 
policy recommendations to the State and Tribal government s. MITSC also provides 
education and acts as a resource for information on Tribal -State issues.  
MITSC recognizes the importance of Baxter State Park to all the people of Maine. MITSC 
has long recognized , respected,  and supported the special and unique cultural and spiritual 
relationship between Wabanaki people and the Katahdin region. MITSC appreciates the 
actions by the State and the Baxter Park Authority to promote access to the Katahdin 
region by the Wabanaki people. MITSC enco urages the Tribes and the State to consider 
MITSC as a forum for examination of Tribal -State issues involving Baxter State Park. 
Further d iscussion of LD 294 will be on the agenda for the next MITSC meeting on March 
10. Pursuant to its statutory authority and responsibilities, MITSC is available to provide 
analysis and recommendations in work sessions and otherwise as LD 294 moves through 
the legislative process.  
Over the course of many years, MITSC has received numerous communications from 
Tribal leadersh ip about complex issues regarding natural resources and sacred places 
located within the present -day borders of Maine, part of the aboriginal homeland of the 
 
 
 
 2 P.O. Box 35  
Whiting , ME 04691 
 
Whiting, ME  04691 
  
Phone:  (207) 271 -7762  
pthibeault@mitsc.org  
 
 www.mitsc.org  
 Wabanaki people. MITSC has studied these issues and has published many findings and 
recommendation s. MITSC has repeatedly found that t here has been no clear and consistent 
State process for consultation with Tribes on these issues. The effectiveness of the Maine 
Indian Land Claims Settlement and the relationships between the Tribes and the State are  
undermined when meaningful consultation does not take place. Maintaining and 
strengthening the government -to-government relationship between Wabanaki Tribal 
Governments and the State of Maine requires open and transparent conversations about 
issues that e nsure timely sharing of all relevant information before proposals, policies, and 
laws are finalized and publicly announced. MITSC has repeatedly found that th e lack of 
consultative practice undermines many aspects of Wabanaki -Maine relations.  
MITSC does no t view LD 294 as an isolated piece of legislation. It is one part of a larger 
context of promoting effective government to government consultation, with the goal of 
achieving mutually beneficial collaboration. Recent years have brought several positive 
developments which MITSC has encouraged and welcome d, including the new tribal -state 
collaboration statute enacted last year. The designated state agencies have been developing 
their policies to impleme nt that promising statute. Other positive recent developm ents 
include adding Wabanaki seats  to the Maine Criminal Justice Academ y Board of Trustees , 
the UMS Board of Trustees, the IF&W Advisory Council,  and the Marine Resources 
Advisory Council . Passage of LD 294 c ould be viewed as one more logical and important  
step in promoting effective tribal -state collaboration on matters that substantially and 
uniquely impact the Wabanaki tribes and their citizens.   
MITSC also encourages the committee and the legislature to consider LD 294 within the 
framework of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
(UNDRIP) , adopted by the UN General Assembly on September 13, 2007 and supported by 
a Joint Resolution of the Maine Legislature on April 15, 2008 . In recent years MITSC has 
consistently encouraged the use of this framework regarding review of all issues affecting 
the Wabanaki -Maine relationship s.   
All actions affecting the natural resources and lands “traditionally owned, occupied or 
otherwise used or acquired” by the Wabanaki ought to take into account UNDRIP Article 
19, which requires “free, prior and informed consent before adopting and implement ing 
legislative or administrative measures that may affect them.”  The principle of free, prior, 
and informed consent aims for a decolonized approach when consulting with indigenous 
peoples in the uses of ancestral territory and resources. The Declaration recognizes and 
values the distinct relationship that Native people have with lands and waters and requires 
other governments to consult and cooperate with indigenous representatives over matters 
that impact indigenous practices, institutions, and tradition s. Article 25 of UNDRIP states 
that: “Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain and strengthen their distinctive 
spiritual relationship with their traditionally owned or otherwise occupied and used lands, 
territories, waters and coastal seas and other resources and to uphold their responsibilities 
to future generations in this regard.”  
 
 
 
 3 P.O. Box 35  
Whiting , ME 04691 
 
Whiting, ME  04691 
  
Phone:  (207) 271 -7762  
pthibeault@mitsc.org  
 
 www.mitsc.org  
  
 
Since the 1980 Settlement t he Wabanaki Tribes have proven to be outstanding stewards of 
the natural environment that they share with their non -Indian neighbors. The Wabanaki 
have unique knowledge and perspectives that no other group of people can provide. Their 
special relationship with Katahdin is just one example. In their worldview and culture, the 
Wabanaki are intimately connected to all of Creation, and can provide insights to 
strengthen the conservation and protection of  resources. They have a record of a 
relationship with the  natural world compiled from hundreds of generations of Wabanaki 
Peoples unmatched by Western science. The committee should consider how t he Baxter 
Park Authority and the people of Maine could benefit from an institutionalized seat for the 
Wabanaki to shar e their collective  knowledge.  
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
Paul Thibeault                                            
Paul Thibeault, Managing Director  
Maine Indian Tribal=State Commission  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
