122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Support of:  
LD 294: An Act to Include a Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park Authority  
  
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
Room 214, Cross State Office Building  
Monday, February 1 3, 2023 
 Dear  Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portl and and 
executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The miss ion of MPHA is to improve 
and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public  health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are respo nsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that 
responsibility seriously.  MPHA is in support of LD 294: “An Act to Include a Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park Authority.”  
 Historical and intergenerational  discrimination  and systemic racism
a are intricately intertwined in Maine public 
policies that influence determinants of  tribal members’  health  and wellbeing . These structural inequitiesb are 
pervasive  and cross -cutting , leading to differential health outcomes for trib al communities in Maine, and 
restricting their power and efficacy to influence determinants of  their  health  and ability to practice cultural 
traditions . To further underscore these unjust systems and structures, the American Public Health Association’s 
Tribal Public and Environmental Health Think Tank 2018 report  states: “ …the unique history of forced 
relocation, intolerance of cultural norms and practices , and discriminatory state and federal policies enacted 
over several gen erations has resulted in historical trauma, adverse childhood experiences, distrust, and societal 
alienation. ”1 
 
 
a The “system of structuring opportunity and assigning value based on the social interpretation of how one looks (which is what we 
call ‘race’ ), that unfairly disadvantages some individuals and communities, unfairly advantages other individuals and communities,  
and saps the strength of the whole society through the waste  of human resources.” See Jones CP. 2018. Toward the science and 
practice of anti -racism: Launching a national campaign against racism. Ethnicity & Disease ; 28(Suppl 1): 231– 234.  
b The “personal,  interpersonal, institutional, and systemic drivers —such as, racism, sexism, classism, able -ism, xenophobia, and 
homophobia —that make those identities salient to the fair distribution of health opportunities and outcomes. Policies that foster 
inequities at all levels (from organization to community to county, state, and nation) are critical drivers of structural inequities.” See 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health and Medicine Division; Board on Population Health and Publi c 
Health Practice; Committee on Community -Based Solutions to Promote Health Equity in the United States; Baciu A, Negussie Y, 
Geller A, et al., editors. Communities in a ction: Pathways to h ealth equity. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2017 
Jan 11. 3, The Root Causes of Health Inequity . 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  According to the World Health Organization, “health” is a “ state of complete physical, mental, and social well -
being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.”  The ability to care for and spend time in sacred 
places and practice cultural traditions – like Wabanaki peoples’ spiritual rela tionship to Mount Katahdin – is a 
component of good health. Furthermore, f rom a public health perspective, the inclusion of a tribal member i n 
the Baxter State Park Authority is an example of a contemporary action that can  address historic and systemic 
barriers to whole health –  barriers that have adversely impacted Wabanaki communities’ ability to influence 
decisions that impact the ir health and wellbeing – and change for the better.  
 
Maine Public Health Association recognizes that the tribes in Maine are sovereign nations with inherent rights . 
We support education and policy efforts that  strengthen the recognition of sovereignty of Wabanaki nations . We 
believe LD 294 is one such policy action; as such, w e respectfully request you  to vote LD 294 “Ought to Pass.” 
Thank you for your consideration.  
   
 
1Tribal Public and Environmental Health Think Tan k. Priorities in Tribal Public and Environmental Health . American Public Health 
Association. 2018.  
