 
 
 
Testimony before  the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
By R obin Kerber , American Farmland Trust, New England Policy Associate  
March 1 7, 2023  
 
Re: Support for LD 29 4: An Act to Include a Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park Authority     
 
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture , 
Conservation, and Forestry:     
 
I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 294, An Act to Include a Tribal Member in the 
Baxter State Park Authority.  My name is Robin Kerber, and I am the New England Policy Associate for 
American Farmland  Trust.     
 
American Farmland Trust is the nation’s leading conservation organization dedicated to protecting 
farmland, promoting sound farming practices, and keeping farmers on the land. Since its founding in 1980 by 
farmers and citizens concerned about th e rapid loss of farmland to development, AFT has helped protect over 6.5 
million acres of farmland and led the way for the adoption of conservation practices on millions more. 
Established in 1985, AFT’s New England office works to save the land that sustai ns us across the region.     
 
Baxter State Park is one of Maine’s largest protected natural spaces and  represent s one of Maine’s first 
land conservation efforts. Initially  purchase d by Governor Baxter, the Park was donated to the State in 1931 
under set term s. These terms outline that unlike other state parks supported by state tax dollars in the general 
fund, Baxter State Park is funded by an immense trust. The Park’s operations are solely governed by three 
individuals appointed in statute who  comp rise the Baxter State Park Authority . These individuals include t he 
Director of the Maine Forest Service, the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, and the Maine 
Attorney General. As a vital step towards Tribal sovereignty in the State, we support the proposed legislation of 
adding a fourth individual to the Authority  representin g Maine’s Tribal community.    
 
The area that is now Baxter State Park has been an area of cultural importance to Indigenous people for 
millennia. If  you’v e hiked up Mount Katahdin (a name that means “the Greatest Mountain” to the Penobscot), 
you might see a trail sign for  Pamol a Caves, a landmark named after the evil spirit  Pamol a that is believed to 
guard this sacred mountain. Indigenous communities have been part of the region far longer than the boundaries 
of the  Park have been  establishe d. Baxter State Park is approaching a century o f welcoming visitors to explore 
and see first -hand the value of large -scale conservation in Maine. This legislation will ensure that Indigenous 
communities have a seat at the table and are a part of the important decisions that will  impac t the future of 
Baxter State Par k.    
 
We support the intent of this legislation to lift the voices and knowledge of Maine’s Indigenous people. 
In 1980, The Maine Indian Claims Act blocked many federal resources and support for Maine Tribes  establishe d 
in 1934 as part of the  Indian Reorganization Act. The State has been slow to recognize how this has restricted 
Indigenous communities' growth, health, and resilience. A 2022  Harvard stud y showed that while Tribes in other 
states saw 61% growth in per capita income since 1989, Maine Tribes are systematically underperforming and 
have only grown by 9%. While the last thirty years have shown an economic boom in much of Indian Country 
because of their self -governance and fiscal independence, this is not happening in Maine due to the negative and 
restrictive impacts of the Maine Indian Claims Act. The proposed legislation is a step toward acknowledging that 
Maine Tribal communities must be strengthened and uplifted. We support the opportunity to bring Indigenous 
people into a leadership position in a place with profound and significant cultural importanc e.    
 
Thank you for the opportunity t o submi t testimony on this vital legislation. Please feel free to contact me 
at rkerber@farmland.or g or my colleagues at American Farmland Trust if you have any questions about this 
testimony on LD 29 4.    
    
Sincerely,     
   
Robin Kerber     
New England Policy Associate     
American Farmland Trus t  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
American Farmland Trust is an agricultural non -profit organization with a mission to save the land that sustains us by 
protecting farmland, promoting sound farming practices, and keeping farmers on the land. AFT is the only national 
agricultural organizati on that approaches its work in this comprehensive, holistic manner. We recognize the connection 
between the land, forward -looking farming practices, and the farmers who do the work . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Short Street    •   Northampton, MA 01060   •  (413) 586 -9330  •  www.farmland.org  
