 
 
  97 Main Street, Belfast, ME 04915          207.338.6575                   mainefarmlandtrust.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  from  Shelley Megquier , Policy & Research Director, Maine Farmland Trust , to the 
131st Legislature’s  Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
April 4, 2023  
 
Greetings Senator Ingwersen , Representative  Pluecker , and members of the Joint Standing  
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. My name is Shelley Megquier and I am 
the Policy & Research Director at Maine Farmland Trust. I’m writing to offer testimony in 
support of LD 294 – An Act to Include a Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park Authority.  
 
MFT is a member -powered statewide org anization that works to protect farmland, support 
farmers, and advance the future of farming. Since our founding in 1999, MFT has helped to 
permanently protect more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. 
In 2022 alone, MFT supp orted 48 farm businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and 
grants – delivering over 680 hours of technical assistance and $309,000 in business and seed 
grants to help businesses grow their profitability.  Our main program areas are Farmland 
Protecti on, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm Business Planning, PFAS Support, Climate 
Resilience, and Policy and Research.  
 
Baxter State Park is one of Maine’s most precious resources. Purchased by Governor Baxter and 
donated to the State in 1931 under specific terms, Baxter State Park represents one of Maine’s 
first conservation efforts. Yet, the laudable effort also completely neglected to include 
Katahdin’s original caretakers, Maine’ s Tribal communities, in the Park’s governance structure.  
Katahdin and its surrounding lands form an area of important cultural significance to the 
Wabanaki peoples. Indigenous communities were custodians  of this sacred land long before 
park boundaries wer e established. LD 294 ensures that decisions made about the park have 
formal input from Maine’s Tribal communit y through the inclusion of a fo urth individual to the 
Baxter State Park Authority that represents Maine’s Tribal community.  MFT fully supports th is 
effort based on the recognition that  native people must have a seat at the table in natural 
resource management decisions.  
  
This legislation recognizes and uplifts  the voices and knowledge of Maine’s Indigenous people. 
We support the opportunity to br ing Indigenous people into a leadership position in a place 
with profound and significant cultural importance . 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our support of LD 294 . I’m happy to answer any 
questions you may have.  
