Vicki Doudera
18 Trim Street 
Camden, ME 04843 
(207) 542-1990 
Victoria.Doudera@legislature.maine.gov
H
OUSE OF
R
EPRESENT ATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
February 13, 2023
Testimony of Repr esentative V icki Doudera in support of 
LD 294, An Act to Include a Tribal Member in the Baxter State Park 
Authority 
Befor e the Joint Standing Committee on  Agricultur e, Conservation and For estry
Good afternoon Senator Ingwerson, Representative Pluecker and honorable members of the Joint
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry . My name is Vicki Doudera and 
I represent House District 41, which includes Camden and Rockport. I am here before you today
to speak in support of
LD 67, An Act to Include a
Tribal Member  in the Baxter  State Park 
Authority .
From the windswept peak of Mount Katahdin, to the quiet crevices of the Pomola caves, to the
volcanic peaks and rugged trails of the Traveler Mountain Loop — my hikes in Baxter State Park
have left me with a profound sense of awe, a feeling defined as being “in the presence of
something vast that transcends your understanding of the world.” According to a new book,
“Awe: The New Science of Everyday Wonder and How It Can Transform Your Life,” awe is
critical to our well-being — just like joy , contentment  and love. The research of the book’ s
author , Dr. Dacher Keltner , suggests that this emotion has tremendous health benefits that
include calming down our nervous system and triggering the release of oxytocin, the “love”
hormone that promotes trust and bonding.
1
But we all see from a dif ferent lens, and we all experience things dif ferently .  While Baxter
leaves me awestruck, others will feel a profound sense of history; hearkening back to the work of
Governor Percival P . Baxter and members of the Maine legislature beginning in 1931. Others
will come upon the streams and waterfalls and be struck by the Park’ s fragile beauty .  Many will
marvel at the biodiversity of Baxter State Park; the variety of wildlife and plants within its
200,000 acres. Finally , there are those who will visit Baxter State Park and experience a deep
sense of spirituality , a cultural connection that perhaps combines all of the emotions I’ve
described.
1
New York Times, January 3, 2023,
How a Bit of Awe
Can Improve Your Health.
District 41: Camden and Rockport

It is easy for us to see that our perspective on a place is the only one — the right one.  But we all
view the world from our unique vantage point on this planet. If we see only with our own eyes,
our own background, our own history , our focus is very narrow . We have walked only in our own
shoes.
Every governing board that I have ever served on has benefited tremendously from diversity and
inclusion. From dif ferent viewpoints. At Baxter State Park, it’ s time to draw the circle of
governance wider . It is time — and many would say long overdue — to include a tribal member
as part of the Baxter State Park Authority .
Why? The reasons are myriad, but one is that we face great challenges in our state — the greatest
of our day being climate change — and meeting it means we have to expand and diversify the
kinds of evidence and knowledge we rely upon to make critical decisions. This is essential
because when more forms of evidence are considered, better decision-making results, and we
don’t have a second to waste.
I leave you with the insight of Cheryl Andrews-Maltais, Chairwoman of the Wampanoag Tribe
of Gay Head Aquinnah, who spoke in December on the topic of Indigenous Knowledge in
Federal policy making. She said, “Had our traditional cultural practices and ceremony not been
outlawed and had our information keepers been listened to over the centuries, we probably
would not find ourselves in the position we are today – with the losses and extinction and
contamination we face as our global community . This is a valuable component of being able to
face not only climate change but the preservation and protection of all of our resources.”
2
I ask you to help preserve and protect the incredible, awe-inspiring resource that is Baxter State
Park by voting today to include one member of a federally recognized Indian nation, tribe or
band from this state to the Baxter State Park Authority . Thank you.
Respectfully ,
Rep. Vicki Doudera
2
The White House, December 2, 2022.
What is Ancestral
Knowledge, and Why Does it Matter?
District 41: Camden and Rockport
