Testimony Regarding 
LD 840: An Act to Support Individuals with Personality Disorder or  
Emotional Dysregulation by Requiring Reimbursement Under the  
MaineCare Program 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
before the 
Health and Human Services Committee 
131st Maine State Legislature 
April 5, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented by 
Brooklin R. Jones-Banahan, MSW, LCSW  
(918) 344 – 7844 
brooklin.jones@maine.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
LD 840                                                                                                                         2 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the 
health and human services committee, thank you for my time to testify. I am writing to 
state my support for LD 840: An Act to Support Individuals with Personality Disorder or 
Emotional Dysregulation by Requiring Reimbursement Under the MaineCare Program. 
My name is Brooklin Jones. I am a licensed clinical social worker and resident of 
Hermon. I have a B.A. in International Studies. In my practice, I work with individuals 
with various types of trauma, personality disorders, and mood disorders, amongst other 
disorders. I have taken over 250 hours of continuing education in my 3 years as a 
licensed practitioner, over 60 of those were in DBT. I am required by law to take 24 
every two years.  
This bill removes barrier of non-reimbursable intervention time to practitioners 
who follow the Linehan Model for Dialectical Behavioral Therapy (DBT). The Linehan 
model is the original research and most effective implementation method which include 
phone coaching. At my agency, we do offer phone coaching as part of the intervention 
with individuals who are in DBT group therapy and individual therapy. Before I describe 
phone coaching, I want to describe DBT in accordance with the Linehan Model.  
 DBT is a 48-week intervention program that goes through topics on mindfulness, 
emotional regulation, distress tolerance, and interpersonal effectiveness. They go through 
each module twice (at a minimum) to gain mastery.  These are skills that are used by 
neurotypical individuals that may not have been modeled or implemented effectively in 
the past by the participant. Phone coaching helps people generalize those skills they learn 
in group to their life by giving participants a phone number to call their DBT facilitator at 
to remind them and describe to them the skills they learned in group. When in group 
LD 840                                                                                                                         3 
people are typically calm and able to process what they are being taught. When someone 
is creating a new habit, it is difficult to recall in the heightened state which is where 
phone coaching comes in. In that heightened state, they are reminded and able to make a 
more effective choice. Other parts of the Linehan Model include case consultation. Case 
consultation is when the DBT practitioner team meets to discuss our clients that are 
enrolled in DBT and ensure we are following the model and various intervention methods 
in individual therapy. This is time that is not reimbursed by MaineCare (or any insurance) 
and is crucial to ensure our team is on the same page for phone coaching, group therapy, 
and individual therapy.  
 Phone coaching is currently a five-minute phone call with our clients when they 
call due to the limitations of asking practitioners to be on call during a non-reimbursable 
period of time. This is time that is interrupting life outside of work. The biggest feedback 
we have received on our surveys about client satisfaction is to increase the length of 
phone coaching calls. This is a big ask to practitioners and understandable because 
normally we take up to 90 minutes to review a skill in group and to condense that into 5 
minutes is hard. We are doing the best we can in that moment. Phone coaching is not 
something every agency that does DBT offers as part of the intervention.  
 Individuals with personality disorders and emotional dysregulation are difficult to 
engage at times. It is a diagnostic category that has high utilization of mental health 
intervention needs and high stigmatization. This bill would encourage practitioners to 
seek more training with and engage more effectively with them.  
 If you were to pass this bill and create a new billing code for phone coaching, it 
would make a significant difference in the lives of practitioners. I know this would just be 
LD 840                                                                                                                         4 
for MaineCare clients and they comprise a majority of individuals engaging in DBT 
services. Additionally, this billing code would cover the services offered to some 
individuals referred to services due to their children being involved with DHHS. This 
billing code would help with practitioner burnout and the mental health crisis that is 
ongoing in our state since the pandemic started.   
 Thank you, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the 
committee, for your consideration and I hope you will support this bill so the needed 
assistance to practitioners and recipients of MaineCare will be instated. I welcome any 
questions that you may have on this legislation.  
 
