Maine 
PRISON CACY l 
Coalition 
April 5, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and honorable members of the 
health and human services committee, 
My name is Jan Collins, l am assistant director of Maine Prisoner 
Advocacy Coalition. I am here to support LD 389 An Act to Improve Rural 
Transportation and Access to Mental Health Care and Physical Health, LD 
472 An Act to Support Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinic 
Projects, LD 540 An Act to Establish Per Respite Centers for Adults with 
Mental Health Challenges in Maine, LD 840 An Act to Support Individual 
with Personality Disorder or Emotional Dysregulation by Requiring 
Reimbursement Under the MaineCare Program. LD 908 Resolve to 
Establish a comprehensive integrated Co-occurring Behavioral Health 
Home Model within the MaineCare Program. 
What do these bills have in common? 
These bills seek to serve people in their home or local area with 
community resources. Evidence consistently shows that strong community 
resources prevent the progression of disease, diminishes the number of 
emergency room visits, and forestalls the need for residential services. 
More importantly community services allow for individuals to stay in their 
homes surrounded by their natural support systems. 
Although I have close family members who have been diagnosed with and 
suffer from mental illness. l am in no way an expert in the finer points of 
each of these pieces of legislation. The people behind me are the experts. 
They will tell you the benefits of this legislation. 
I can tell you what the alternatives are.
Estimates of the percentage of jail and prison inmates who have severe 
mental illness vary. Legislative testimony from County Commissioners in 
Cumberland state that 83% of their county jail residents are on 
psychotropic medications. National studies estimate approximately 1 in5 
individuals in jails and prisons have severe mental health 
diagnoses(schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder, major 
depression or brief psychotic disorder) with higher numbers in jails than in 
pnsonsﬁ 
It costs close to $80,000/year to house someone at Maine State Prison. 
The mental health services available are minimal, the conditions are less 
than therapeutic, and for many, trauma inducing. If one person who 
receives community mental health services avoids going to prison fora 
twelve year term it will save the state a million dollars, enough to pay for2 
respite care centers for one year. 
We can invest in prevention, or we can invest in punishment. With national 
jail and prison recidivism rates estimated between 60 and 70% over a5 
year period following release, prevention is a much better investment for 
our tax dollars. 
Please support the bills before you today. 
Sincerely, 
Jan M. Collins 
Assistant Director 
Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition 
PO Box 360, E. Wilton, ME 04234 
207.578.8419 
janmariecollins57@gmail.com 
‘Serious Mental Illness Prevalence in Jails and Prisons. Sept 2016 
https://www.treatmentadvocacycenter.org/evidence-and-researchilearn-more-about!369 
2Reducing Recidivism: Creating a Path to Successful Re-entry 
https:iivinr¢w.firststepai ﬁance.orgipostireducing-recidivism ’? 
gclid=C_lGKCQ_iwul.ShBhC_ARlsAFod4flGcCl42u0BLKeBFSY7xOkoc5AUUPi_~ 
lkiyNsU45WvYQTiDil ‘vdjgJcaArRlEAL.w ___wcBhttbs:; ‘iw"ww.f%rststeoaliiance.orgipostfreducinr;-recidivism? 
gciid==C§OKCQjwuLShBhC_ARlsAFod4flOc042uGBLKeSFSY'Z><Okoc5AUUPL- 
iKlfv’NSU45WVYQTiDifydjQJC3A!RlE!5\LW_WCE
