" Officers "' 
Dave McCluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1*‘ Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"" Vice- 
President 
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Aroostook Mental Health Center 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
. "' 
Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, lnc. 
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
l Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health & Counseling 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
- NF! North, Inc. 
T 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
TriCounty Mental Health Services 
l 
Wellspring, Inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The uniﬁed voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 840 
" An Act to Support individuals with Personality Disorder or 
Emotional Dysregulation by Requiring Reimbursement Under the 
MaineCare Program" 
Sponsored by Representative Madigan' 
April 5, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members 
of the Health and Human Services Committees. My name is Malory Shaughnessy 
and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community based mental health and substance use treatment providers, 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance 
advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, l am here today to speak in support of LD 840, ”An Act 
to Support individuals with Personality Disorder or Emotional Dysregulation by 
Requiring Reimbursement Under the MaineCare Program." 
This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services, to reimburse 
under the MaineCare program for the treatment of personality disorder and 
emotional dysregulation. The bill also requires the department to establish a 
bundled reimbursement rate for the treatment of MaineCare members diagnosed 
with personality disorder or emotional dysregulation. The bundled 
reimbursement rate must include participation in a dialectical behavior therapy 
intensive outpatient program, psychiatry services, nursing services, case 
management, residential services, after-hours skills coaching and supported’ 
employment services. 
Maine expanded its intensive Outpatient (or IOP) Services in the past few years to 
include a category for Dialectical Behavior Therapy which is therapeutic 
intervention for those with personality disorders, or other emotional 
dysregulation disorders. However, it does not include the bundled services that 
this proposed service contains. 
individuals with Borderline Personality Disorder, or BPD, are difficult to engage in 
therapy. It is a diagnostic category that has a high utilization of mental health 
intervention needs and high stigmatization, even within the ﬁeld of mental health 
services. People with BPD, especially, experience significant stigma, particularly at 
the interface of care deliveryl .1
1 
1 Daniel Ring & Sharon Lawn (2019) Stigma perpetuation at the interface of mental health care: a review to compare patient and 
clinician perspectives of stigma and borderline personality disorder, Journal of Mental Health 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 "' theAllianceMaine.org
ll

