l.\/Ia.ineHea1th 
Testimony of Maria Hadjiyane, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 840, “An Act to Support Individuals with Personality 
Disorder or Emotional Dysregulation by Requiring Reimbursement Under 
the MaineCare Program” 
Wednesday, April 5, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Maria Hadjiyane, Chief Operating Ofﬁcer at 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare, and I am here to testify strong support of LD 840, “An Act to 
Support Individuals with Personality Disorder or Emotional Dysregulation by Requiring 
Reimbursement Under the MaineCare Program. ” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-proﬁt health care system that provides a continuum of health 
care services to communities throughout Maine and New Hampshire. As part of our vision of 
“Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest in America, ” MaineHealth provides a 
range of behavioral health services throughout our footprint. These range from community based 
outpatient therapy, medication management, substance use treatment and care management to 
inpatient treatment in four community hospitals and Spring Harbor Hospital. And until just a few 
years ago, it included the highly successful ACTION Program. 
The ACTION Program was an intensive treatment program for individuals with a diagnosed 
personality disorder or emotional dysregulation. Our team worked with each member to learn 
emotion regulation skills as deﬁned in the Dialectical Behavioral Treatment (DBT) model to 
avoid hospitalization. It’s important to note that these patients are some of the most acutely ill 
and difficult to treat patients our teams encounter, and they are often the patients who cycle in 
and out of Emergency Departments and in-patient hospitals. 
I’d like to share one patient’s story with you. In June 2018, a woman had been hospitalized at 
Spring Harbor Hospital for over a month, and this was just one of over 60 admissions. She was 
combative and engaging in self-haiming behaviors and our staff were petitioning for her to be 
placed at Riverview Psychiatric Hospital. The Department asked us to try emolling her in the 
ACTION program and she soon moved into residential treatment. Once in residential care, her 
problem behaviors continued, including attacking staff, running into the road, and swallowing 
objects. But, the behavioral approach taken by the ACTION program gave her the needed skills 
so that she eventually stopped using dangerous behaviors, improved her relationships with 
others, and reduced her medications. She has since moved out of the group home and lives in her 
own home. Her use of hospitalization and crisis services have decreased dramatically. 
In 2019, the Department ended Maine Behavioral Healthcare ’s contract for its ACTION Program 
because it did not meet the deﬁnition of an ACT team. And, unfortunately, the data shows the 
impact the program’s closure has had on these patients. In FY 2019, Maine Medical Center saw 
614 patients with personality disorders in its Emergency Department. In FY 2021, after the
program closed, the Emergency Department saw a 41% increase in visits from patients 
presenting with personality disorders. That number has held steady and the Emergency 
Department is on track to see almost 900 patients this year. 
The legislation before you today creates a bundled rate to recreate a similar model of care as the 
ACTION program so that providers across the state can support intensive treatment for 
individuals with a diagnosed personality disorder or emotional dysregulation. The rate would 
include psychiatry, nursing, individual and group therapy, DBT skills group, case management, 
and vocational support services. With a bundled rate, we can create the needed services so that 
these clients can live productive lives and avoid unnecessary and ineffective hospitalization. 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
