  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 5, 202 3 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michel e Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 840 – An Act to Support Individuals with Personality Disorder or Emotional 
Dysregulation by Requiring Reimbursement Under the MaineCare Program  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide input on LD 840, An Act to Support Individuals with 
Personality Disorder or Emotional Dysregulation by Requiring Reimbursement Under the 
MaineCare Program . This bill requires the Department, beginning January 1,  2024, to reimburse 
under the MaineCare program for the treatment of personality disorder  and emotional 
dysregulation. The bill also requires the Department to establish a bundled  reimbursement rate 
for the treatment of MaineCare member s diagnosed with personality  disorder or emotional 
dysregulation.  
 
The Department agrees there is need for enhanced treatment options for individuals with 
personality disorder and emotional dysregulation , but opposes the bill as written.  
 
MaineCare has allowed for the delivery of services utili zing a Dialectical Behavior Therapy 
(DBT ) treatment model through Outpatient Services and  Specialized Group Services  under  
Section 65 of the M aineCare Benefits Manual, Behavioral Health Services . Additionally, 
MaineCare  began reimbursing providers for delivering Dialectical Behavior Therapy – Intensive 
Outpatient Programs (DBT -IOP) services  under  Section 65 of the M aineCare Benefits Manual, 
Behavioral Health Services , on 11/9/2022.   
 
There are seve ral types of personality disorder diagnoses, with specific treatment approaches 
required for each. Emotional dysregulation is not a diagnosis in and of itself but rather a set of 
symptoms, so the presence of emotional dysregulation does not necessarily determine cours e of 
treatment.  This service needs to be facilitated by appropriately trained providers, and it is 
challenging to attract and retain qualified staff to ensure the program is completed to fidelity of 
the service model.  
 
If passed  as written , the January 1, 2024 effective date proposed is not feasible. The Department 
would need significantly more time to develop such a bundled rate as work is ongoing with rate 
studies of other services in compliance with P.L. 2021, Ch 639 . Additionally, to determine which 
MaineCare Section of rule covers th is service, the Department requests further clari fication  
regarding scope of service, including  eligibility criteria and the  intended population(s)  to be 
 
 served . Depending on which MaineCare section of rule covers the service, major substantive 
rulemaking and/or a rate determination process may be necessary, which needs to follow the 
process as set forth in Ch 639. Considering required policy work, state plan ame ndments, rate 
determination, and CMS approval, OMS projects an effective date of July 1, 2025 at the earliest.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free  to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

