. 219 Capitol Street, Suite7 
€onsur‘ner Couneil Sysiern of rﬁﬁine Augusta’ ME 04330 
;_».~ ; A Voice for Consumers of Mental Health Services 
Phone: 207.430.8300 
”t”" Fax:207.430.8301 
Toll-Free: 877.207.5073 
www.maineccsm.org 
Apnl5,2023 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee, 
My name is Simonne Maline. l am the Executive Director for the Consumer Council System of Maine 
(CCSM). l am here today on behalf of the CCSM to testify in support of LD 840 "An Act To Support 
Individuals with Personality Disorder or Emotional Dysregulation by Requiring 
Reimbursement Under the MaineCare Program" 
The Consumer Council System of Maine is a public instrumentality written into State Statute bythe Maine 
Legislature to serve in an advisory capacity and to provide legislators with guidance and advice regarding 
the delivery of effective and appropriate adult mental health services from those served by them. 
We are aware of a previous program called ACTION that existed a number of years ago in Portland. This 
program featured a specialized team approach for people with personality challenges and worked well fora 
number of individuals. Because of this we support specialized teams for people with personality 
challenges. Without the availability of these types of programs, people with higher needs tend to gravitate 
towards ACT teams. The reason that ACT teams do not work well for these individuals is because they do 
not have therapists as part of their team-oriented model. Evidence-based treatment for personality 
challenges is really focused on a therapeutic model, often using Dialectical Behavioral Therapy (DBT). 
DBT offers skills to manage distressing emotions and move towards recovery. 
We ask you to support LD 840 by voting “ought to pass.” Thank you for your hard work and thoughtful 
consideration of all of the bills that keep coming your way during this very busy legislative session. 
Executive Director
