Maine De artment of Health and Human Services
. 
_P 
T,;.V-. _ _ % Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
V VV V V V V V1V1 State HouseVStati0n 
. 1 V L286 Water Street 
L‘.:]n1brew,Ph.D. Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 
V VV 
Tel; (207) 287-3016; Fax'(207) —287=9058 
TTY: Dial 71 1 (Maine Relay) Janet T. Mills 
Governor 
Testimony of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD ll, An Act to Strengthen Temporary Protections for Children 
Living in Dwellings with Identiﬁed Lead Hazards 
Hearing Date: April 12, 20234 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Karyn Butts and I am the manager of the Childhood 
Lead Poisoning Prevention Program within the Department of Health and Human Services- 
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention. I am here today to provide testimony on 
behalf of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention and will be speaking in support of 
LD ll - An Act to Strengthen Temporary Protections for Children Living in Dwellings with 
Identiﬁed Lead Hazards. Our thanks to Representative Cloutier for sponsoring this Department 
bill. 
LD 11 would address gaps in the Lead Poisoning Control Act (22 M.R.S. Chapter 252) by 
establishing temporary protections against lead exposure for children living in dwelling units 
where there are identiﬁed lead hazards, until the lead hazards are more permanently addressed 
through mandated abatement or children are relocated to lead-safe housing. . 
The Maine CDC Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program (the ‘Pr0gram’) identiﬁes lead 
hazards during lead inspections, which are mandated by the Lead Poisoning Control Act for 
rental units when a child is identiﬁed with lead poisoning in any unit in the dwelling (22 M.R.S. 
§ 1320-A). The Program may also conduct inspections in owner-occupied single-family homes 
where lead-poisoned children live or receive care (22 M.R.S. § 1320-A), or in any dwelling unit 
with reasonable grounds to suspect there are lead-based substances or at the request of the owner 
or a resident with children (22 M.R.S. § 1320). If lead hazards are identiﬁed by the Program 
during an inspection of a rental dwelling unit, the property owner must abate all the lead hazards 
within 30 days (22 M.R.S. § 1321(3)). 
Given the complex nature of many lead abatement projects combined with today’s challenges 
associated with staffing and material supply, lead abatement takes an average of six months to 
complete and, in some cases, may take longer than a year. The Lead Poisoning Control Act 
mandates that the dwelling owner relocate tenants to a lead-safe substitute dwelling unit, at the 
owner’s expense, until the abatement is complete (22 M.R.S. § 1322). Temporarily relocating 
families is challenging and expensive for dwelling owners, disruptive for families, and staff-time 
intensive for the Department, due to a critical shortage of affordable housing throughout the 
State. In most cases, all parties would prefer to keep children in their homes if that can be done
safely. When the*Program does order relocation, the protocol is to give property owners 
_ __._, Ffreasonable notice” of 30 days to relocate families, though it often takes longer. . 
Once the Program identiﬁes lead hazards, it almost always recommends that families and owners 
conduct temporary exposure reduction actions and interim controls (i.e., actions designed to 
temporarily reduce human exposure to lead-based paint hazards; 22 M.R.S. § 1315.3-D) to 
protect child occupants from ongoing lead exposure. The Lead Poisoning Control Act gives the 
Department authority to waive the relocation requirement when interim controls provide 
sufﬁcient protection (22 M.R.S. § 1322). However, unlike the assignment of responsibility for 
abatement to the dwelling owner, the statute does not specify who is responsible for 
implementing interim controls. 
LD 11, if enacted, will address these gaps in the statute by: a) assigning responsibility for 
conducting exposure reduction actions and interim controls to the dwelling owner; and b) giving 
the Department authority to order, monitor, and enforce those actions. Both provisions are 
consistent with how the statute treats the owner’s responsibility for abatement and the 
Department ’s authority related to abatement of lead hazards and would be further deﬁned 
through routine technical rulemaking. The Maine CDC anticipates being able to implement these 
provisions with existing resources and through cost savings realized from reductions in 
department-paid hotel stays for families with children who must be immediately relocated due to 
the severity of the child’s lead poisoning and/or the lead hazards in the child’s home. 
Beyond the impact on children, this bill will also impact property owners where the Program has 
ordered lead hazard abatement by requiring them to implement and pay for exposure reduction 
actions or interim controls. Conducting interim controls in rental properties requires beinga 
licensed lead abatement contractor or certiﬁcation in lead-safe work practices under federal 
regulations. Property owners may elect to hire properly credentialed contractors, or they may get 
the proper training and credentials to conduct interim controls at their own properties. This bill 
may also result in cost savings for some owners if relocation is not required, as they must pay for 
their tenants’ moving expenses to and from relocation units, as well as any increase in rent for 
the substitute dwelling unit._ 
Finally, this bill is in alignment with federal regulations administered by the U.S. Department of 
Housing and Urban Development that require an owner of multi—fami1y properties that receives 
rental subsidies of more than $5,000 in annual proj ect-based assistance per unit to implement 
interim controls and demonstrate effectiveness of those measures within 90 days of identifying a 
lead hazard in a unit (24 CFR 35.715). 
In summary, the Maine CDC supports LD 11 as an additional safeguard that will better ensure 
children who live in housing with identiﬁed lead hazards are protected from lead exposure once 
those hazards are identiﬁed and more permanently addressed through mandated lead abatement. 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from the Committee, and I will be available to participate in the 
work session.
