HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Kristen Cloutier TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
Assistant Majority Leader 
33 Charles St. 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
Phone: (207) 807-1637 
Kristen.Cloutier@legislatureinainegov 
, April 12, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Kristen Cloutier introducing 
LD 11, An Act to Strengthen Temporary Protections for Children Living in 
Dwellings with Identified Lead Hazards 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed colleagues of the Health and 
Human Services Committee. My name is Kristen Cloutier, and I represent House District 94, which 
includes a portion of my hometown of Lewiston. I am here today to introduce LD 11, An Act to 
Strengthen Temporary Protections for Children Living in Dwellings with Identiﬁed Lead 
Hazards. 
Lewiston and our sister city of Auburn have the highest rates of childhood lead poisoning in the state. 
As you likely know, lead poisoning can damage a growing child’s brain and nervous system, slow 
growth and development and create learning, behavior, hearing and speech challenges. In the past 
several years, we’ve taken signiﬁcant action to prevent and respond to childhood lead poisoning in 
Maine, starting with enacting universal testing in 2019. Just a few months ago, Maine Public reported 
that, following these efforts, childhood lead poisoning numbers have dropped from nearly 500a 
decade ago to 265 last year. This is great work that will have a lasting impact on Maine’s future adults, 
but there is still more to do. 
This is why, when the Department asked, I was happy to sponsor LD ll. As you’ll hear from the 
Maine CDC following me, this bill would establish temporary protections against lead exposure for 
children living in units where there are identiﬁed lead hazards. This is a current gap in the state’s 
authority to protect children. I will let the Department provide you with additional details and request 
that you save your questions for them as they are much better equipped to answer them. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
District 94: Part of Lewiston
