/1,, » rt;/,,>~ . ,1.» -/;<.,:,::;,; 
/_ /'
é 
Solutions foro 
Toxic-Free Tomorrow 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocayc, Defend Our Health 
ln SUPPORT of LD 11, “An Act to Strengthen Temporary Protections for Children Living in 
Dwellings with identiﬁed Lead Hazards" . 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services. My name is Sarah Woodbury, and l am the director of advocacy 
for Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health is a Maine-based non-profit that works to make sure 
that everyone has equal access to safe food, safe drinking water, healthy homes, and toxic-free, 
climate-friendly products. Please accept this testimony on behalf of Defend Our Health in 
support of LD 11, “An Act to Strengthen Temporary Protections for Children Living in Dwellings 
with identified Lead Hazards" . LD 11 would allow the Department of Health and Human 
Services to temporarily protect children and families living in any residential dwelling unit from 
identified lead hazards until they are relocated to lead-safe housing or lead hazards are abated. 
lt is well documented that exposure to lead can seriously harm a child’s health and cause health 
effects including damage to the brain and nervous system, slowed growth and development, 
learning and behavior problems, and hearing and speech problems. Children under the age of6 
are at greatest risk for health problems caused by lead exposure. The health effects of lead 
exposure are more harmful to younger children than older children and adults because their 
bodies are still developing, and they are growing so rapidly. Young children also tend to put their 
hands or other objects, which may be contaminated with lead dust, into their mouths. 
Lead based paint, asthma triggers, and carbon monoxide risks are all more prevalent in older 
rental homes that generally represent our affordable housing options for families. Maine has 
some of the oldest housing stock in the nation. Living in an older rental is a significant risk factor 
for several health conditions. The relationship between tenancy, age of housing, and childhood 
lead poisoning has been extremely well documented, and Maine is no exception with 87% of 
Maine children with elevated blood lead levels residing in a home built before 1950 and 69% 
living in a rental‘ . A potent neurotoxin, childhood lead exposure is strongly linked to lower IQ 
scores and worse educational outcomes. ln communities with similar housing stock as 
Cumberland and York counties, studies have shown blood lead levels actually increase in many 
1 
Update on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention in Maine, Childhood Lead Poisoning - EOHP - Maine CDC - DHHS. (2019, January). 
Retrieved April ll, 2023, ﬁom https://ww\v.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/cnvironmenta1-health/eohp/lead/indexshtml 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland. ME D4101 l (207) 699-5795 l info@defendourhealthorg l defenclourlrealth.oI'g
immigrant children in the months following their settlement in the US due to increased exposure 
to lead in old rental homesz. 
We must do all that we can to protect children from childhood exposure to lead. Allowing the 
Department to enforce actions to temporarily protect children from exposure when they are ina 
potentially dangerous situation will help to protect children from exposure. We urge the 
committee to vote unamimously “ought to pass” on LD 11. 
Thank you. 
2 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022, July 26). Reﬁlgees and other newcomer persons resertied to the US. Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. Retrieved April l 1, 2023, from https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/refugeeslltm 
565 Congress Street,Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 I (207) 6995795 I inf0@defendourhealtlrorg l defendourhealthorg
