r C STATE or MAINE 
OFFICE or THE Govrnnon 1 
1 STATE House STATION -'§j.»' __:~$ _'»5 A_.i 
Aucusra, MAINE 
Janet T. Mills 
eovennoe. 
February 8, 2023 
Hon. Anne Carney, Chair 
Hon. Matt Moonen, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Room 438, State House 
Augusta, Maine 04330 
Re: L.D. 243, An Act To Eliminate Residency Requirements for District Court Judicial Appointments 
Dear Sen. Carney and Rep. Moonen: 
Please accept this testimony on behalf of the Office of the Governor in support of L.D. 243, An Act 
to Eliminate Residency Requirements for District Court Judicial Appoirztments. 
Maine law currently contains prescriptive residency requirements governing the appointment of 
District Court judges. See 4 M.R.S. section l57(l)(A) (requiring at least one judge from each of 13 deﬁned 
judicial districts to be a resident of the county in which the district lies, and for certain districts, more than 
one judge). These requirements were intended to ensure that judges are familiar with the communities in 
which they would preside, and come from a time when small-town general practitioners were broadly 
distributed throughout the State. The demographics of Maine are different today, and regrettahly,'many 
areas are experiencing a serious shortage of attorneys to meet the local need for legal services. That same 
shortage has made it impracticable for the Governor to nominate only candidates for the District Court who 
satisfy the statutory residency requirements. There are simply too few lawyers residing in rural Maine, even 
before considering qualiﬁcations and a willingness to serve. 
When vacancies arise, the Judicial Branch is careful to ensure the Govemor’s Office is infonned 
about those regions in which court coverage is most challenging. The Governor then makes every effort to 
identify District Court nominees who live and work near the location where they are likely to preside. Good 
communication and cooperation between the Executive and the Judiciary is now serving the purposes of 
the statutory residency requirements, which are no longer practical or necessary. 
The Office of the Govemor urges your support for L.D. 243. Thank you for your consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Gerald D. Reid 
Chief Legal Counsel 
_,\,~\
I 
1 al , . 
r M?Ls 
l .-W" ;..+:- 
lf 
PmH1'En UN l’<F.C\'Cl.l7.D l"1§PE? 
l’"0Nl~ (2117) ‘I-$4?-5531 ivmcr) TTY ussrcs cart vs: FAX. (’)(}’7) qt;M \\=\vw.us aiue.gcv
