Jeffrey Lovit
PO Box 95
Addison, ME 04606
207-619-2367                                                                                                                          JLOVIT@ALUM.WUSTL.EDU
February 14, 2023
Sen. Anne Carney, Chair
Rep. Matt Moonen, Chair
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
Maine State Legislature
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: Opposition to  LD 243 “An Act to Eliminate Residency Requirements for District Court 
Judicial
Appointments”
Dear Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee:
I oppose the passage of LD 243.  I practiced law in Washington County for 41 years prior to my 
retirement.
It is incorrect to say that LD 243 is necessary because the present law limits the pool of judicial 
candidates to those lawyers presently residing in the county.  During my practice there have been 
three judges who when nominated lived out of the county, but who then moved here upon their 
appointment.  
Justice is not a simple process.  It is a two-way street.  It requires a judge to be fair and 
compassionate.  However, for justice to truly be done it also requires that those who appear 
before her accept her judgement.    Justice is not done if the litigants feel that they were not 
really understood.  Having a resident judge who shops in local stores, who goes to a local church 
and whose kids go to local schools helps the community understand the judge.  Even more 
important, it helps the judge know the community.  
Some of the letters of support for LD 243 stated that with modern transportation time and 
distances do not matter and “that judges can easily move between courthouses and sit as judges 
nearly throughout the entire state without much difficulty.”  Apparently, they have not ridden on 
Washington County roads during the winter and spring.  The closest Hancock County town, 
Gouldsboro, is 89 miles and 1 hour and 42 minutes driving time from Calais, one of the two 
Washington County courts.    As travel becomes difficult or just wearisome, the result will be to 
favor the convenience of the judge and not that of the litigants or the public to which he is sworn 
to serve.
   
Time and distances do matter.  How rulings are perceived and accepted by the public are as 
important as the rulings themselves.   Rural Counties have been well served by local judges.   For 
all of these reasons, I oppose the passage of LD 243.
Sincerely,
Jeffrey Lovit 
