‘Z022-2023 
OFFICERS 
President ‘ 
Amber L. Tucker 
President-Elect 
J eremytPratt 
i 
Vice Presidenl 
Matthew D. Morgan 
Treasurer 
Walter F. McKee 
Secretary 
Sarah E. Branch 
qzozp z-2023* 
DIRECTORS 
Dylan R. Boyd 
Andrew Edwards 
Devens Hamlen 
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason 
Harris Mattson 
J oscph Mekonis 
Stacey D. Ncurnann 
Neil Prendergast 
Luke S. Rioux’I 
Adaml’ . Sherman- 
/\dam’Swanson 
Robert "ryvm Horn 
EXECUTIVE - 
DIRECTOR 
Tina Heather Nadeau MAINE ASSOCIATION or CRIMINALDEFENSE LAWYERS 
C 
P.O. Box 17642t 
Portland, ME 04112-8642 
V (207) 523-9869 
t 
mainemac_dl@gmai|.com 
February 6, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney 
Representativelvlatt»Moonen 
Committee on JudiciaryV
» 
100 State _H_ou_se Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333~ 
RE:'
' 
_LD 243 — An Act to Eliminate Residency Requirements for District Court 
Judicial Appointments-
Z 
Dear Senator Camey, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,A 
MACDL supports LD 243. 
Itisidif ﬁcult to understand how it was that a residency requirement was enacted in 
law such that at least “one judge must be appointed from each district who is,a 
resident _ 
__of .a county in which the district lies.” This is in addition to the current 
requirement that in three other judicial districts there must be two judges appointed 
who‘ _are-residents of the county. 
lt_-.m"ai y_.be' that therewas aitime where proximity to a courthouse was important 
because‘ there were horses and buggies, and it was difﬁcultth to have judges travel pa 
great ‘am we are now in the age of the automobile, highways, and travel 
such that judges carreasily move between courthouses and sit as judges nearly 
throu'ghout§the' entire-state without much difficulty. A speciﬁc requirement thata 
judge has to live in any individual county does not really promote any ' 
justice at all.A 
judge who lives in.Kennebec County can act as a judge in Augusta and really 
anywhere around the stateand apply the same laws because they do not changefrom 
judicial district to j' 
_udicial_'district.' -i 
I _und _er_stand thatvthis requirement has caused some difﬁcultyi with the judicial 
appointmemjprocess because there has to be a speciﬁc judge from a speciﬁc area. 
Instead of making sure that we have the best possible candidates for judicial positions, 
the Goi ver-norhas to undergo the irrelevant consideration of where at judge lives. 
Additionally, as apractical matter, once a judge has been appointed, the judicial 
branch sees _ﬁt~_ _to have that judge go wherever thatjudge is needed. It may well be 
thata judge who lives in Lewiston will be, for the needs of the judicial branch, sit in 
West Bath,"-Portland, or Bangor. The needs of-the judicialbranch aresuch that they 
need -to have this ﬂexibility, and they exercise this approach as they see ﬁt. A law
that requireé that a judge must be appointed from a speciﬁc district who is aresident 
of a county in whichrthe district lies does not change the judicial branch~’s approach, 
and rlimitsthe Govemor in--tenns of who the Governor can appoint at one given time. 
This antiquated lawneeds to change. Striking the language in the statute that has this 
requirement makes sense. . 
Sincerely; it 
Matthew D. Morgan
