REBEC CA A. IRVING99 Frenning Pt. Rd.
Northfield , ME 04654
TELEP HONE: (207) 255-0018 dirving@m aineline.net
February  14, 2023
Sen. Anne Carney , Chair
Rep. Matt Moonen, Chair
Joint S tanding Com mittee on Judiciary
Maine S tate L egislature
100 S tate House S tation
Augusta, ME  04333
Re: Opposition to  L D 243 “ An Act to E liminate Residency  Requirem ents for District Court
Judicial Appointm ents”
Dear Sen. Carney , Rep. Moonen, and Mem bers of the Judiciary  Com mittee:
I oppose the passage of L D 243.  I practiced law in W ashington County  for over 40 y ears prior to
my retirem ent.
I recall we had no resident District Court judge in Washington County  for a significant period of
time in the 1980's or thereabouts and were subject to visiting judges for a num ber of m onths.  
These traveling judges were often reluctant to travel to Calais District Court given road
conditions, distance and tim e constraints. As a result,  litigants, often indigent, were ordered sua
sponte  to appear in Machias from  towns as far away  as Danforth-- a one way  distance of 82.9
miles. (L itigants from  Danforth travel over an hour just to get to Calais). T hose indigent litigants
were often forced to hitchhike. Frequently  bench warrants were issued for their non-appearance,
especially  in the winter. If these folks m ade it to Machias, oftentim es their case was placed on a
trailing weekly  docket forcing them  to find accom modations in the area as their particular m atter
might get called som etime during that week. T hey had no ability  to com mute daily  from  the
courthouse to their hom es.  If they  found no accom modations in Machias they  hitchhiked hom e.
Bench warrants were again oftentim es issued for their arrest for not appearing.  In civil m atters,
like child protective cases, a failure to appear in Machias resulted in orders based on a “ default”
having a lasting im pact on parents’ and children’s lives. T hese were not isolated events during that
time period.
 A non resident judge in Washington County  is sy nony mous with a visiting judge in Washington
County . “How soon can I get back hom e?” is a very  hum an question and the answer to that
question is as im portant to judges as it is to litigants. T he problem  is it shouldn’t becom e an issue
when dispensing justice. But it will if this bill is passed.  “ Hom e” should be Washington County . 
We here in Washington County  are fortunate to have a com petent, dedicated resident Judge.  I am
confident that status can continue.
For all of these reasons, I oppose the passage of L D 243.
Sincerely ,
Rebecca A. Irving
