1 . iv -.»» F J» 
=1?‘ . . 
Richard A. Bennett it 1; ,; 3 State House Station 
Senator, District l8 , Augusta, Maine 04333 “‘ 
THE MAINE SENATE 
13 1 st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
In Opposition of LD 243, “An Act to Eliminate Residency Requirements for District Court 
Judicial Appointments ” 
9 February 2023 
Good Afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary. I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of 
serving l4 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate. I am here to speak in opposition 
to LD 243, “An Act to Eliminate Residency Requirements for District Court Judicial 
Appointments. ” 
My ﬁrst reason for opposition is concern over separation of powers. Constitutionally, the 
Executive Branch is tasked with the nomination of justices, and, therefore, any changes to that 
process should come from that branch of government. Over the years I have been witness to the 
disturbing trend of the slow erosion of the separation of powers; with the Judicial Branch 
infringing on the legislative powers, and now through this measure on the Executive Branch. 
The balance of power established in our Constitution is critical to the future success of our 
govermnent. This matter is appropriate to be offered by the Executive Branch, not the Judicial. 
My second reason for opposition is the policy proposed itself. Members of the committee could 
probably guess that Maine’s four most populous counties include Cumberland, Penobscot, York 
and Kennebec. Together they hold 58% of our population. Yet, did you know, of the 37 District 
Court Justices, 26 reside in those same counties, accounting for 70% of the District Court 
Justices? In fact, four counties don’t have a single District Court Justice, those are Sagadahoc, 
Hancock, Piscataquis and strikingly — Androscoggin. And I fear, if this bill should pass, there 
will never be another District Court Judge from Oxford County. I think those representing 
Washington, Aroostook and Franklin Counties might have similar concerns. 
If there are issues regarding ﬁnding qualiﬁed candidates for the bench, I urge this committee to 
ﬁnd another solution. I strongly believe this proposal should be rejected with vigor. I would be 
happy to answer any questions. 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 * TTY (207) 287-1583 * Message Service I -800-423-6900 * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
