 
 
 
 
 
          
February 9, 2023  
 
Sen. Anne Carney , Chair  
Rep. M att Moonen , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary   
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Support for LD 243 “An Act to Eliminate Residency Requirements for District Court Judicial 
Appointment s” 
 
Dear Sen. Carney , Rep. Moonen , and Members of the Judiciary Committee:  
 
On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Maine State Bar Association, we write in support  of LD 
243 “An Act to Eliminate the Residency Requirements for District Court Judicial Appointments .” 
Briefly, we think this bill provides needed flexibility to Maine’s Judicial Branch to ensure placement 
of qualified judges in every county.   
 
About us. The Maine State Bar Association is a statewide trade association chartered in 1891 by the 
Maine Legislature. The Association currently represents approximately 3 ,000 attorneys in the State in 
both public service and private practice. The Association maintai ns 28  separate sections covering nearly 
every field of law practiced in Maine, from Administrat ive Law to Workers’ Compensation Law. 
Ensuring a ccess to justice for all individuals  across Maine is a key element of our mission, hence our 
stron g interes t in ensuring  that each judicial district , specifically rural districts,  has a larger number  of 
attorney s that may  be considered for appointment  to the District Court.  
 
Proposed change to District Court appointments  is practical . The Associatio n support s the proposed 
change in LD 243 to remove the residency requirements for District Court judge appointments , which 
proposal comes forward from Maine’s Judicial Branch . Currently, state law requires judges at least one 
judge in a Maine District Court district must be a  resident of a county in which the district lies. LD 243 
would eliminate this residency requirement. The Association believes that this proposed change is 
practical and necessary, particularly regarding judicial districts in Maine’s most  rural counties . In some 
cases, there are only a handful of attorneys resident in such counties, which limits the pool of attorneys 
from which District Court judges are selected. Moreover, if one of these attorneys is selected to become a 
judge, such county would have one fe wer attorney available to represent people in the county. By 
allowing District Court judges to be drawn from a wider pool, both of these concerns can be addressed.   
 
Additionally, removing the residency requirement for District Court jud icial appoint ments  does not  mean 
that a District Court district will not have a judge  resident in the respective county . Rather, the bill  simply 
removes from statute that requirement  that each district must have at least one resident judge.   
 
  
 
 
MSBA Letter re: Support for LD 243  
February 9, 202 3 
Page 2 
 
 
 Conclusion.  Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments  on LD 243. If you have questions 
or need additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know.  
Sincerely,  
 
 
Stacy O. Stitham  
President, Board of Governors  
 
cc: Angela Armstrong, Executive Director  
 Rachel Okun, Chair, MSBA Legislative Committee  
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP  
 Clara McConnell , Maine Street Solutions  
 

