Bar én"' 
s=* ts. fo' 1' 
.0 ,1‘-J 
timrlemi .12t;i‘l‘ 
February 9, 2023 
Sen. Anne Carney, Chair 
Rep. Matt Moonen, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Support for LD 243 “An Act to Eliminate Residency Requirements for District Court Judicial 
Appointments ” 
Dear Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee: 
On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Maine State Bar Association, we write in support of LD 
243 “An Act to Eliminate the Residency Requirements for District Court Judicial Appointments. ” 
Brieﬂy, we think this bill provides needed ﬂexibility to Maine’s Judicial Branch to ensure placement 
of qualiﬁed judgesin every county. 
About us. The Maine State Bar Association is a statewide trade association chartered in 1891 by the 
Maine Legislature. The Association currently represents approximately 3,000 attorneys in the State in 
both public service and private practice. The Association maintains 28 separate sections covering nearly 
every ﬁeld of law practiced in Maine, from Administrative Law to Workers’ Compensation Law. 
Ensuring access to justice for all individuals across Maine is a key element of our mission, hence our 
strong interest in ensuring that each judicial district, speciﬁcally rural districts, has a larger number of 
attorneys that may be considered for appointment to the District Court. 
Proposed change to District Court appointments is practical. The Association supports the proposed 
change in LD 243 to remove the residency requirements for District Court judge appointments, which 
proposal comes forward from Maine’s Judicial Branch. Currently, state law requires judges at least one 
judge in a Maine District Court district must be a resident of a county in which the district lies. LD 243 
would eliminate this residency requirement. The Association believes that this proposed change is 
practical and necessary, particularly regarding judicial districts in Maine’s most rural counties. In some 
cases, there are only a handful of attorneys resident in such counties, which limits the pool of attorneys 
from which District Court judges are selected. Moreover, if one of these attorneys is selected to becomea 
judge, such county would have one fewer attorney available to represent people in the county. By 
allowing District Court judges to be drawn from a wider pool, both of these concerns can be addressed. 
Additionally, removing the residency requirement for District Court judicial appointments does not mean 
that a District Court district will not have a judge resident in the respective county. Rather, the bill simply 
removes ﬁoni statute that requirement that each district must have at least one resident judge.
MSBA Letter re: Support for LD 243 
February 9, 2023 
Page2 
Conclusion. Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments on LD 243. If you have questions 
or need additional infonnation, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Sincerely, 
Stacy O. Stitham 
President, Board of Governors 
cc: Angela Armstrong, Executive Director 
Rachel Okun, Chair, MSBA Legislative Committee 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP 
Clara McConnell, Maine Street Solutions
