LAW OFFICES  
HOWARD LEE SCHIFF, P.C. 
CONNECTICUT ● MAINE ● MASSACHUSETTS ● NEW HAMPSHIRE ● RHODE ISLAND ● VERMONT                                HOWARD LEE SCHIFF 1933 - 2007 
 
111 Founders Plaza, P.O. Box 280245   East Hartford, Connecticut 06108 
Telephone: (860) 528-9991                    Toll Free: (866)-234-7606                    Facsimile:  (860) 528-7602 
 
 
Office Hours: 8:30 AM – 6:00 PM 
PMPMPM        April 5, 2023 
 
The Honorable Anne Carney, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Matt Moonen, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
 
Re: Opposition to LD 1259 (An Act to Recover Legal Fees for Low-Income Individuals in Actions or Proceedings) 
 
Dear Senator Carney and Representative Moonen: 
 
My name is Aaron Cox. I’m an attorney with the Law Office Howard Lee Schiff, PC. We are a creditors 
rights firm with an office in Ogunquit.  I am the director of compliance and have been an attorney in the state of 
Maine since 2014. We appreciate the opportunity to comment on this legislation.    
 
As attorneys we strive to represent the highest level of ethics and professionalism in consumer finance. 
Aside from our ethical responsibilities as attorneys, Debt Collection is among the most regulated and scrutinized 
parts of the financial industry.  
 
In every case our members seek to facilitate a fair and transparent legal process to enable consumers to 
resolve a debt. We work very hard to find common ground and have the consumer or the consumers’ counsel be 
part of the resolution. We believe this consumer participation saves the judicial system considerable resources.  
 
It has been my experience that our role in the industry and our process is terribly misunderstood. The 
most common experience for consumers differs significantly from how it is often portrayed. In most cases, an 
attorney representing a creditor is the first person that a consumer speaks to in person about a debt. We see 
people at their most vulnerable, and we listen to them and work to find a reasonable solution.  
 
Our firm and our clients have a detailed and robust procedure when it comes to indigent consumers. Our 
clients routinely authorize us to dismiss cases against consumers when they are found to be indigent. We 
regularly work and communicate with both pro se consumers and consumers represented by legal aid services, 
such as Pine Tree and Legal Services for the Elderly to dispose of cases where the consumer is unable to pay.  
 
The American rule has always been that parties are responsible for their own costs and attorney fees. 
Exceptions to this rule has traditionally involved misconduct by a party during a hearing, or statutes that have a 
broader public concern. Debt Collection regulations employ fee-shifting to encourage attorneys to take on cases 
where consumers have been harmed. 
 
I would encourage the committee to refer this bill to a working group. I believe that the bill, as written, 
will have unintended consequences that will harm both consumers and small business owners.  
 
First, I would call attention to the fact that the fee-shifting that this bill would make law applies to any 
cases that are pending as of the effective date. Cases that have already been filed would be subject to this law. 
The decision to file suit was made under an assumed set of facts, including risks and rewards. Basic due process 
requires advance notice of a government decision with respect to a law of this kind. 
 
As a practicing attorney, it has been my experience that legal claims are rarely open and shut. This is as it 
should be. Access to the Courts to resolve disputed claims is important. Defendants’ can raise counterclaims and 
affirmative defenses; records and memories are imperfect; or simply a judge or jury may simply weigh the 
evidence and rule against you. Claims where the Plaintiff or Defendant have perfect records, or undeniable 
evidence rarely if ever see the inside of the courtroom.   
 
Secondly, I would argue that the act does not address only indigent consumers. The Act defines a 
“covered individual” as “An individual with a gross household income that does not exceed 400% of the federal 
poverty level.” As written, a covered individual with a family of 3 would be anyone with a gross income up to 
approximately $100,000 a year. The owner of a small business who makes $100,000 would become liable for the 
fees of a family with approximately the same income. Small business owners, like plumbers, landscapers, & 
electricians will be harmed because of this bill. They may suddenly be subject to awards of attorney fees that 
were never contemplated when they filed the suit, and they may be afraid to access a court in the future. 
 
Third, the language of the statute would leave exposure to claims for fees when a claim is settled and 
voluntarily dismissed.  Even accepting a settlement for a lower amount could, without a separate settlement 
agreement, lead to claims for fees.  In this respect, it is similar to a fee-shifting statute currently in force in 
Florida.  That statute, Florida 57.105 “increases litigation costs and causes all kinds of absurd outcomes.”  As a 
result of that statute, “voluntary dismissals are often met with demands for fees, and attorneys have sought fees 
in separate actions after reaching settlements to pay debts.  Some Florida consumer attorneys have even refused 
to sign settlement agreements that do not include fee payments1 ”   
 
The potential for a claim for fees would force plaintiffs, such as creditors, to seek judgments in cases that 
they now would dismiss for hardship. The fact that the judgment would be uncollectible would likely become a 
secondary consideration to avoiding a request for fees from consumers and their attorneys.  
 
Fourth, the bill will expose consumer information and slow the legal process inside the courtroom. 
Parties must file financial statements, but there is no indication whether the financial information is sealed, is 
redacted, or is publicly available. Courts would be required to make judgments about who is or isn’t covered. This 
is not the courts purview. The Courts are already working to catch up on cases after the pandemic. Slowing the 
Courts further delays access to justice for Maine consumers. 
 
The Act to Recover Legal Fees for Low Income Individuals fails to accomplish its stated purpose and will in 
fact harm both individuals and businesses in the state of Maine. For these reasons and others, I believe that the 
bill should be sent to a working committee for further study and input from all interested parties.   
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
1 https://www.insidearm.com/news/00049011-fee-shifting-bill-introduced-maine/  retrieved 4/4/23  
LAW OFFICES  
HOWARD LEE SCHIFF, P.C. 
CONNECTICUT ● MAINE ● MASSACHUSETTS ● NEW HAMPSHIRE ● RHODE ISLAND ● VERMONT                                HOWARD LEE SCHIFF 1933 - 2007 
 
111 Founders Plaza, P.O. Box 280245   East Hartford, Connecticut 06108 
Telephone: (860) 528-9991                    Toll Free: (866)-234-7606                    Facsimile:  (860) 528-7602 
 
 
Office Hours: 8:30 AM – 6:00 PM 
PMPMPMVery Truly Yours, 
 
  
 
 
       ____________________ 
       Aaron M. Cox, Esq. 
       Director of Compliance 
       Law Offices Howard Lee Schiff, P.C. 
       716 Main St. 
       Ogunquit, ME 03907 
       Toll Free: 866-234-7606  
Email: Acox@hlschiffpc.com 
