 
150 West  62nd  Street,  Suite  7-165, New  York,  NY 10023   
 
David Udell  
Executive Director  
dudell@fordham.edu
 
 
Written Testimony of David Udell  
on behalf of  
the National Center for Access to Justice  
Maine State Legislature  
Committee on Judiciary  
LD 1259  
1 PM, April 6, 2023  
  
 
Chairpersons Carney and Moonen, and Members of the Committee,   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  I would like also to thank Representative Charles Skold  
for inviting  our testi mony today.  
 
Introduction  
 
My name is David Udell, and I am testifying in support of LD 1259.  I am the Founder and 
Executive Director of the National Center for Access to Justice  based at Fordham Law School . 
The NCAJ is a n independent  nonprofit nonpartisan national organization that is working to bring 
rigorous, principled research and analysis to  the task of advancing progress toward a fairer 
justice system, and in so doing, to achieve a better society.1 
 
At the NCAJ, we  understand that a ccess to justice is a necessary part of making the rule of law 
fair for everyone. Access to justice means that  when people encounter life challenges they are 
able to understand their rights under the law, protect those rights, obtain a fair outcome, and 
know that the result will be enforced under the law.  It is high stakes.  It routinely determines 
whether people’s  basic human needs for food, clothing and shelter will be met, and it can mean 
everything for a person in crisis.  More broadly, i t is a cornerstone of  stability in  our civil society 
and essential to  our democracy.  
 
Importance of Counsel  
 
The civil legal system was  built by lawyers, and designed largely for lawyers.  Yet nationally the 
vast majority of people  in American court s do not have a lawyer , in part because lawyers are 
expensive.  According to the Legal Services Corporation  (LSC) , a non -profit established by 
Congress to provide grants to civil legal aid organizations and promote equal access to justice, 
nearly one -half (46%) of low -income individuals who did not seek legal help for one or more 
problems cite concerns about cost as a reason why.2 For people of modest means, paid counsel is 
 
1 Our Mission , National Center for Access to Justice, https://ncaj.org/our -mission .  
2 https://justicegap.lsc.gov/resource/section -1-introduction/ . 

 
2 
 out of reach for matters as important as evictions, mortgage foreclosures, child custody and child 
support proceedings, and debt collection cases. A 2020 study commissioned by the Institute for 
the Advancement o f the American Legal System (IAALS) surveyed  over 10,000 Americans  
nationally , finding that Americans  experience  over 250 million civil justice problems annually, 
of which fully 120 million go unresolved.3 LSC reports that in 2022 “[l]ow -income Americans 
did not receive any legal help or enough legal help for 92% of the problems that substantially 
impacted their li ves in the past year.4  
 
To respond to this national crisis, NCAJ established the Justice Index – an online, data -intensive, 
legal access ranking system, which promotes policies that enable people who need the help of 
state courts to gain access and get f air treatment, even if they cannot afford a lawyer.5 The 
Justice Index covers five categories of laws, rules, and practices that are essential to assuring 
access to justice in state justice systems, with attorney access being a critical component of the 
Index.  According to our research, and consistent with the national overview, Mainers currently 
face significant barriers in accessing our civil justice system.6 Maine’s low -income residents in 
particular have limited access to civil legal attorneys, including in comparison to its state 
counterparts in the Northeast Region.7 In our most recent Civil Legal Aid Attorney C ount, 
completed  in 2021, we found roughly 61  legal aid attorneys in the state, or only 1.61 per 10,000 
low-income individuals.8 
 
Importance of the Bill in Maine  
 
Moreover, t he access to counsel gap also tends to be highest in rural areas.  Indeed, as you are 
aware, Maine is considered the most rural  state in the nation and forty percent (40%) of the 
state’s population lives in one of Maine’s 11 rural counties.9 Because lawyers tend to gravitate to 
counties with more economic capital and density, low -income individuals in rural areas face 
even greate r challenges with obtaining legal services. Equally important, for those attorneys that 
are available in rural counties, they are often stretched thin as it is and face economic realities 
that make it harder to take on pro bono or discounted legal work.  Here is where LD 1259 fits in.  
 
LD 1259  offers an innovative approach that can help to fill this  justice  gap that otherwise 
persists . We need more innovation given how little the needle is being moved on the access to 
justice . The bill would  create the possibility for people to obtain greater access to justice  by 
shifting the obligation to pay legal costs and reasonable attorney’s fees from low -income 
Mainers who prevail in civil proceedings to non -prevailing corporate entities with greater 
resources . This is particularly true in rural areas where there are fewer lawyers but still a 
significant demand for legal services.  
 
 
3 https://iaals.du.edu/sites/default/files/documents/publications/justice -needs -and-satisfaction -us.pdf . 
4 Id. 
5 https://ncaj.org/state -rankings/justice -index .  
6 https://ncaj.org/state -rankings/just ice-index/attorney -access .  
7 https://ncaj.org/state -rankings/justice -index .  
8 https://ncaj.org/state -rankings/justice -index/attorney -access .  
9 https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/public -health -systems/rhpc/rural -health.shtml - :~:text=Geography 
and Demographics&text=40%25 of the population lives,of Maine's 11 rural counties . 
 
3 
 The one -way fee shifting rule offers  a means of equalizing justice in civil litigation and assisting 
people of modest means in fin ancing litigation against wealthy institutional adversaries  by taking 
into account resource disparities between the litigating parties. Accordingly, in litigation between 
unbalanced parties, LD 1259 would direct courts to award attorney fees to the winner  when the 
poor litigants prevail against their moneyed opponents (private corporations), whereas each party 
would pay its own fees whenever the party with more resources prevails.   
 
This approach not only offers the potential for a more egalitarian society as it would restore the 
balance of power between the parties and greater access to justice, but LD 1259 would also offer 
the prospect of drawing more attorneys into work that would enable more low income residents 
of Maine to protect their rights and interests , including in less populated areas of the state . Of 
course, n o one has a crystal ball, and  although the legislation is thoughtfully constructed and 
well-considered in all respe cts, it is not possible  to know in advance that the law will achieve its   
aim. But, it is important to proceed in a spirit of experimentation because the justice gap that is 
our status quo is unacceptable. If the experiment does not fulfill its promise, the law can be left 
inactive or repealed. But, if the approach succeeds – and we believe it will – its impact is likely 
to be consequential and other states may follow .
 
Conclusion  
 
The ability to shift resource s without state expenditures, including those earmarked for critical 
legal aid funding, is what makes LD 1259 a unique and potentially critical tool for Maine to 
address the access to justice crisis. We commend the Committee for its consideration of a 
critically important increase in  the state’s funding for civil legal services.10 In combination with 
LD 1259, more low -income Mainers will access justice in the legal system and the rule of law 
will more likely prevail.   
 
Thank you for inviting this testimony today . I am happy to answer any questions.  
 
 
 
 
10 LD 564: https://legiscan.com/ME/text/LD564/id/2688723/Maine -2023 -LD564 -Introduced.pdf . 
