  
 
  
TESTIMONY OF DONALD MAURICE   
IN OPPOSITION T O 
LD 1259, HP0807  
An Act to Recover Legal Fees for Low -income Individuals in 
Actions or Proceedings   
April 6, 2023  
 MAI NE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE  
 
Chair perso ns Carney and Moonen and distinguished members of the Committee, 
my name is Donald Maurice , I am outside counsel to the Receivables 
Management Association International , a trade association  of over 620 members  
composed of banks, non- bank lenders, debt buyers and the companies that 
support them.  It is an honor to address you this afternoon .  
RMAI opposes LD 1259, HP0807.  
 
The Exchange of Financial Statemen ts Before a Legal Action is Initiated  Inva des 
Perso nal Privacy and is a Gross Data Security Risk . 
 
Our initial  concern li es with proposed sectio n 1625 which provides  that each 
party shall exc hange a fin ancial statement . And they will be required to do thi s 
“at the same time  or before the filing of the first party ’s pleading. ” The first 
pleading in any c ivil action is a complaint and the bill would require  the plaintiff 
to provide the defendant  with their financial information before a court even has 
jurisdiction .  
 First , this requirement applies to all civil lawsuits in Maine involving what the bill 
calls an “ institutional entity ” and a “ consumer. ” Since the bill covers  all litigation, 
let’s consider a situation  where a consumer wants to sue  a person  who scammed 

 
 
 
 
 
OPPOSE LD 1259, HP0807  
April 6 , 2023  
Page 2  
 
them  by means of identity theft and  in doing so cleaned -out their life savings . If 
this bill were to become law, it would require the consumer to send the bad actor 
their financial statement  before they sue t o recover their losses. As incredible as 
it sou nds, this bill requires victim s of identity theft to provi de alleged scammer s 
with their financial information!  
 
Worse, the financial information is not provided under the protection  of the 
judicial system. No, the victim must provide  their financial information to the  
alleged scam artist “ before the filing of the first party’s pleading.”  
 
Aside from the clear invasion of one ’s personal  financial privacy, this pro cess is a 
textboo k example of a data privacy debacle.  Very few lawsuits  ever  require  the 
parties to exchange  private  financial information. And when it is necessary to do 
so, the courts will enter confidentiality orders res tricting the use and 
dissemination of the financial information. The bill strips litigants of these 
necessary prot ections for no good reason.  
 RMAI categorically oppose s any bill that exposes cons umers  to financial fraud 
and so opposes LD 1259, HP0807.  
 We are willing to work with the sponsors and stakeholders to achieve a solution 
that avoids these harms and other s occasioned by the bill.  
 
Thank you for your attention . 
 
### 
ABOUT DONALD MAURICE  
Donald Maurice is a partner at Maurice Wutscher L LP, a law firm with offices 
throughout the United States. Don has practiced in consumer financial services 
 
 
 
 
 
OPPOSE LD 1259, HP0807  
April 6 , 2023  
Page 3  
 
law for over four decades. He is a fellow of the American College of Consumer 
Financial Services Lawyers, a fellow of the American Bar Foundation and serves 
on the Consumer  Committee of the New York City Bar Associaiton . He formerly 
chaired the Debt Collection Practices and Bankruptcy Subcommittee of the American Bar Association and serves as outside counsel to Receivables 
Management Association International, the trade association for debt 
purchasers. He is admitted to the Bars of Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey 
and the District of Columbia. He is editor of the Consumer Financial Services Blog 
(cfsblog.com). Don can be reached at dmaurice@mauricewutscher.com or 908-
237- 4570.  
