 
1 
                             Written Testimony of Donald F. Fontaine  
   Maine State Legislature  
  Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary  
         LD 1259  
           1 PM, April 6, 2023  
 
Chairpersons Carney and Moonen  and Members of the Committee , 
 
Thank you for providing this opportunity to speak to you.  
 
1. What LD 1259 Provides  
 
 There is wide consensus today that  poor and  even  moderate -income 
litigants are shut out of our court system because they cannot access a lawyer .  
Anyone who has participated in the legal system knows well that you need a 
lawyer in  court  to achieve justice .  And lawyers have to be paid.  Because so few 
low to moderate income litigants have access to a lawyer, we need not just one 
but diverse solut ions to the access to justice crisis that affects so many individuals 
in Maine.  LD 1259 is such a solution . LD 1259 will not cost the State of Maine (or 
its municipalities ) anything.  The only cost will be borne by organizations that 
commit a wrong agains t a low to moderate -income litigant.  And that is only fair: 
a corporate entity that commits a wrong should bear the cost of its conduct.  And 
the proposed law provides a small business exception  for those entities that 
cannot afford to pay legal fees in t he event they are adjudged to have committed 
a wrong . 
 
2. Under what conditions will a corporation have to pay the legal fees of 
its adversary ? 
 
 Only when the corporation fails to win a lawsuit against its adversary is the 
answer. I do not refer to an adversary who is another corporation or is a well -to-
do person. I refer only to an adversary who is a low -income person. And only a 
corporation who h as broken the law or breached its own contract will be held 
liable . And only after the presiding judge has objectively ruled that the amount of 
the fees requested is reasonable.  
 
2 
 3. How will this work out “on the ground? ” 
 
The process begin s when a corporatio n serves a low -income person with a 
court Complaint. The individual takes the papers to a local attorney and asks for 
an appointment. They are told to come back for the appointment with certain 
papers and information, particularly about the transaction wit h the corporation 
and about their income.  At the appointment , the attorney will ascertain the facts, 
request other papers, obtain the  contact information of the witnesses. The 
attorney may call the opposing attorney and ask the company’s position on the 
issues.  The attorney will review the law that applies to the case. A second 
appointment will be scheduled to evaluate the position of the corporation. If after 
that appointment, the attorney is not then confident of prevailing in the case, 
they wi ll likely decline representing the low -income person.  If they are , however,  
confident, they will file an answer and  the documents required by the statute 
concerning income. Finally, they will include in the answer  a demand for 
attorneys’ fees  under this statute  and the Court will award fees only where it 
determines the corporation is in the wrong . 
 
4. Why do we need more access to justice than the funded legal services 
programs provide?  
 
 We need more access to justice funding because present funding does not 
come close to providing counsel to even half of the poor and moderate -income 
people who enter the legal system. This is supported by very objective and easily  
available statistics . The Justice Action Group in Maine (and LD 564) states that  
356,000 Mainers meet the eligibility criteria for most of the  state’s legal aid  
programs  – having income no more than 200% greater than  the federal poverty 
level.  It is estimated by the federal Legal Services Commission that seventy -four 
percent ( 74%) of low-income individuals experience at least one civil legal 
problem per year . The Justice Gap, The Unmet Civil  Legal Needs of Low-Income  
Americans , at page 32 (2022), attached. Based on the foregoing numbers , we 
know that at least 263,44 0 low  and moderate -income Mainers require civil legal 
assistance.  According to previous reports by the legal aid programs made to  a 
previous report by the Maine Civil Legal Services Fund Commission, there were 
20,526 individuals with whom these seven providers  had contact, 8.1% of what 
we conservatively estimated need legal assistance.  The national study is 
 
3 
 remarkably close to this figure. In The Justice Gap ,  The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of 
Low-Income Americans , above mentioned, low -income individuals did not r eceive 
any legal help for ninety -two percent of the legal problems that substantially 
impacted them in the past year , at page 48.  The fortunate eight percent in bot h 
calculations seem confirmed by  the “small fraction” that the seven legal aid 
providers in Maine  cite in their Preamble to LD 564 . These cases primarily  concern  
fielding basic legal questions, provid ing written self -help information, or 
connecting the individuals to attorneys who may be able to take on a matter.  
 
 The 8.1% figure that comprises  not only  all manner of services as above 
described, but equally important, includes also all the cases where the lawyer 
provide d “full representation .”  Sadly, only 1.9% of the total of the estimated low -
income individuals with civil legal services needs received “full representation”, or 
a total of 4,688  individuals .  That is out of the total of more than 2 63,440 0 
Mainers who need legal aid every year.  A nd given the state of the economy, it is 
very possible that this number will only rise.  And, it should also go without saying 
that virtually every client facing a legal problem in court needs full scope 
representation.  Without full scope representation, rights are lost. This is the 
tremendous gap that  LD 1259  addresses . 
 
 Traditional legal aid uses the eligibility criteria of Income no greater than 
200% above the federal poverty level .  However, that low figure  excludes low -
income individuals with a little more income who also lack access to justice  and 
cannot afford an attorney .  Fee-shifting will permit individuals with income up to 
400% of the federal poverty level to shift their fees to a corporate entity ag ainst 
whom they  prevail.  Some examples, in addition, that can be expected to be 
provided are personal injury claims where the claim itself is not large enough to 
attract an attorney whose fee usually is one -third of more of the recovery prevail .  
LD 1259 will also increase access to justice in rural Main e where  most  attorneys w 
have heavier caseloads tha n they can reasonably handle . They have limited to no 
bandwidth to take pro bono cases but  are almost certainly going to be more likely 
to accept fee -shift ing cases.  
 
 There are also cases in which the low -income individual is the defendant in 
a damage s action, commercial sales or personal injury.  A victory in such a case 
often provides only not having to pay the other party damages. These are often 
 
4 
 called “ non-monetizable” cases.  Fee-shifting will allow low-to-moderate income 
clients have a lawyer  to defend the claim and possibl y prevail.  
 
 In sum, LD 1259 is not a panacea for the access to justice crisis that affects 
Maine, like all states.  But it is an innovative tool that can help mitigate the access 
to justice gap and make equal justice more likely for more low -to-moderate 
income Mainers .    
 
Thank you for this opportunity to speak to you. I will take any questions 
that you care to pose.  
  
1
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
The Justice Gap:  
The Unmet Civil Legal 
Needs of Low-income 
Americans
 APRIL 2022
About the Legal Services Corporation
The Legal Services Corporation (LSC) was established by Congress in 1974 to 
promote equal access to justice. LSC operates as an independent 501(c)(3) non-
profit corporation and currently serves as the nation ’s single largest funder of civil 
legal aid for low-income individuals. More than 90% of LSC’s total funding is currently 
distributed to 132 independent non-profit legal aid programs with 877 offices across 
the country. LSC’s mission is to help provide high-quality civil legal aid to low-income 
people. T o learn more about LSC, please visit www.lsc.gov .
 
Board of Directors
John G. Levi  
Chairman
Fr. Pius Pietrzyk, O.P  
Vice Chair
Robert J. Grey Jr. 
Matthew Keenan
Abigail Lawlis Kuzma
Victor B. Maddox 
John G. Malcolm
Laurie Mikva 
Frank X. Neuner Jr. 
Julie A. Reiskin 
Gloria Valencia-WeberOfficers
Ronald S. Flagg  
President
Carol A. Bergman  
Vice President for Government Relations  
and Public Affairs
Rebecca Fertig Cohen  
Chief of Staff and Corporate Secretary 
Will A. Gunn  
Vice President for Legal Affairs and General 
Counsel 
Lynn A. Jennings  
Vice President for Grants Management 
Deborah Moore  
Chief Financial Officer and Comptroller
James J. Sandman  
President Emeritus
Project Team
Sarah John , SJ Democracy Research  
Project manager and data analyst
Mary C. Slosar , Slosar Research  
Writer and research consultant
Legal Services Corporation  
Daniel Bernstein  
Bristow Hardin  
Ronké Hughes  
Lynn Jennings  
Jordan Layton  
James Scruggs  
Holly Stevens  
 Report Design
Dino Stoneking , Stoneking Studios
Acknowledgments
LSC acknowledges the generous support of the William and Flora Hewlett 
Foundation, the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, the Andrew W. 
Mellon Foundation, and the Reynolds Family Foundation for funding for this study. 
Funders do not determine the research findings of LSC research projects. 
LSC would also like to acknowledge NORC at the University of Chicago for 
conducting the 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey using its probability-based 
AmeriSpeak® Panel. 
Suggested Citation
Legal Services Corporation. 2022. The Justice Gap: The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of  
Low-income Americans . Prepared by Mary C. Slosar, Slosar Research, LLC. 
Unless specifically noted, all information contained herein is in the public domain and 
may be used and reprinted without special permission. Citation of this source is required.
 

5
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans	12		Section	1:	 Introduction
	2 0		Section	2:	 T oday’s Low-income America
30	 	 Section	3:	 The Prevalence of Civil Legal  
   Problems
	42		Section	4:	 Seeking and Receiving  
  Legal Help
	56		Section	5:  Comparing Income Groups
	6 8		Section	6:  Reports from the Field
	8 0	 	EndnotesContents
	7	Executive	Summary
6
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansVisit justicegap.lsc.gov
On LSC’s justice gap study website, visitors can download and print the report,  
see videos about the justice gap and the impact of civil legal aid, learn more about 
the study’s methodology, and access additional summaries of study findings related 
to the pandemic, U.S. regions, subpopulations of interest, and other topics.

7 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans Executive Summary
Low-income Americans do not 
get any or enough legal help for 
92%	of	their	substantial	civil 		
legal	problems .  
Low-income America  
About	50	million	 Americans	
have	household	incomes	below	
125%	of	the	poverty	threshold	
–	including	more	than	15	
million	children	and	nearly	8	
million	seniors.*	Civil legal needs  
Civil	legal	needs	typically	
involve	securing	and	protecting	
basic	needs, 	such	as	housing, 	
education, 	health	care, 		
income, 	and	safety. 		The justice gap  
The	justice	 gap	is	the	difference	
between	the	civil	legal	needs	of	
low-income	 Americans	and	 	
the	resources	available	to	 	
meet	those	needs.
The 2022 Justice Gap Study
The Legal Services Corporation (LSC) is pleased to share findings from its 2022 Justice Gap Study. This study 
provides a fresh assessment of low-income Americans’ civil legal needs and the extent to which their legal 
needs are met. Additionally, its timing allows an examination of the justice gap in the context of the COVID-19 
pandemic, which has had disproportionate effects on this population. The study leverages LSC’s “intake 
census” conducted among LSC-funded legal aid organizations as well as a nationally representative survey of 
more than 5,000 adults conducted by NORC at the University of Chicago using its AmeriSpeak® Panel. 
*Data source: U.S. Census Bureau’s Current Population Survey, 2021 Annual Social and Economic (ASEC) Supplement.
8 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
3 in 4 (74%)  low-income 
households experienced 1+ 
civil legal problems in the  
past year.2 in 5 (39%) experienced 
5+ problems, and 1 in 5 (20%) 
experienced 10+ problems.Most common types of 
problems: 	consumer  
issues, health care, housing, 
income maintenance. 
1 in 4 problems: They  
seek legal help for only 1 out 
of every 4 (25%) civil legal 
problems that impact them 
substantially.1 in 2 (46%) of those who 
did not seek legal help for 
one or more problems cite 
concerns about cost as a 
reason why.1 in 2 (53%) 	does not know 
if they could find and afford a 
lawyer if they needed one. 1 in 2 (55%)  low-income Americans who personally experienced a problem say these problems 
substantially impacted their lives – with the consequences affecting their finances, mental health, 
physical health and safety, and relationships. 
92% = survey-based justice gap: They do not get any or enough legal help for 92%  
of the problems that have had a substantial impact on them. Executive Summary
The Prevalence of Civil Legal Problems
Most	low-income	households	have	dealt	with	at	least	one	civil	
legal	problem 	in	the	past	year	–	and	many	of	these	problems	
have	had	substantial	impacts	on	people ’s	lives. 	
Seeking and Receiving Legal Help
Most	low-income	 Americans	do	not	get	any	or	enough	 	
legal	help	for	their	civil	legal	problems	–	and	the	cost	of	 	
legal	help	stands	out	as	an	important	barrier. 		
Data	source:	2021	 Justice	Gap	Measurement	Survey.
	
Data	source:	2021	 Justice	Gap	Measurement	Survey.
9 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
1.9 million requests for 
help : Low-income individuals 
approach LSC-funded 
organizations for help with  
an estimated 1.9 million civil  
legal problems in a year .1 in 2 requests turned 
away:  These organizations 
must turn away 1 out of every 
2 (49%) requests they receive 
due to limited resources. 
 They seek help more 
often: 	People with higher 
incomes are more likely to  
seek legal help for problems 
with substantial impact (32% 
vs. 25% of problems).Their justice gap is 
smaller: They are less likely 
to go without any or enough 
legal help for problems with 
substantial impact (78% vs. 
92% of problems).
 They have better access:  
They are more likely to be 
confident that they could find 
and afford a lawyer if they 
needed one (73% vs. 45%).
1.4 million problems = intake-based justice gap.  All in all, LSC-funded organizations are 
unable to provide any or enough legal help for an estimated 1.4 million civil legal problems (or 71% 
of problems) that are brought to their doors in a year. They believe in the system:  They are more likely to believe that they can use the civil legal 
system to protect and enforce their rights (59% vs. 39%).Executive Summary
Reports from the Field
LSC-funded	organizations	do	not	have	enough	resources	 	
to	meet	the	current	demand	for	civil	legal	aid	in	the	 	
communities	they	serve.*		Comparing Income Groups
Compared	to	low-income	 Americans, 	those	with	higher	 	
incomes	have	fewer	barriers	to	 getting	legal	help.*	
*These	statements	compare	people	at	or	above	400%	of	FPL 	with	people	at	or	below	125%	of	FPL. 	
Data	source:	2021	 Justice	Gap	Measurement	Survey.
*These	statements	are	only	about	problems	that	are	eligible	for	legal	assistance	from	LSC-funded	organizations. 	
Data	source:	LSC’s	2021	Intake	Census.1 in 2 problems fully  
resolved: Even when they  
can provide some assistance,  
these organizations have the  
resources to fully resolve only 1  
out of every 2 (56%) problems.
Geographic Focus 
10 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansExecutive Summary
 West
11.1 million people  
below 125% of poverty.
72% of households  
had 1+ civil legal  
problems in the  
past year.  Midwest 
9.2 million people  
below 125% of poverty.
75% of households  
had 1+ civil legal  
problems  in the  
past year. Northeast
7.4 million people 
below 125% of poverty.
74% of households  
had 1+ civil legal  
problems in the  
past year. South
22.2 million people  
below 125% of poverty.
75% of households 
had 1+ civil legal  
problems in the  
past year.
Special Focus
65+
7.6 million seniors  below 125% of poverty.
70% of senior households  had 1+ problems  
in the past year.8 million people  below 125% of poverty in 
rural areas.
77% of rural households  had 1+ problems in 
the past year.
1.6 million veterans  below 125% of poverty.
76% of veteran households  had 1+ problems  
in the past year.15 million households with high housing costs 
have annual incomes below $25,000.
84% of households  with high housing costs 
had 1+ problems in the past year.
15.2 million children  below 125% of poverty.
83% of households  with children had  
1+ problems in the past year.98% of households  with recent domestic 
violence had 1+ problems in the past year  
(in addition to their problems involving 
domestic violence).Seniors People in Rural Areas
Veterans People with High Housing Costs
Children (<18 yrs) Survivors of Domestic ViolenceData	sources:	2021	 Justice	Gap	Measurement	
Survey	and	the	U.S. 	Census	Bureau’s	Current	
Population	Survey, 	2021	 Annual	Social	and	
Economic	(ASEC)	Supplement.
Data	sources:	2021	 Justice	Gap	Measurement	Survey	and	various	other	sources	(see	Section	 Two	in	full	report). 	

11Executive Summary
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansImpact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
33% 	of	low-income	 Americans 	
experienced at least one civil legal 
problem linked to the COVID-19 
pandemic in the past year.
The	types	of	civil	legal	problems	most	likely	to	be	attributed	to	the	COVID-19	
pandemic	are	those	involving	income	maintenance, 	education, 	and	housing. 	
Income maintenance 
32%  of income maintenance problems are pandemic-related.
Examples:	difficulty	accessing	unemployment	insurance	or	receiving	COVID 	
stimulus	payments. 	
Education 
31% of education problems are pandemic-related. 	
Examples:	difficulty	attending	school	or	accessing	technology	to	participate 	
in	virtual	learning.
Housing
27% of housing problems are pandemic-related.
Examples:	problems	involving	foreclosure, 	eviction, 	and	safe	living 	
environments.
Additionally, 	the	data	suggest	that	income	disparities	in	the	justice	gap	between	
low-	and	higher-income	 Americans	are	exacerbated	for	pandemic-related	civil	
legal	problems. 	See	Section	Five	for	a	fuller	discussion	of	this	noteworthy	finding.
	Data	source:	2021	 Justice	Gap	Measurement	Survey.
12
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
Introduction
13
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
IntroductionSection 1
Every day, millions of low-income Americans grapple 
with civil legal problems, which often involve basic 
needs like safe housing, access to health care, child 
custody, and protection from abuse. Most “go it 
alone” when dealing with these problems – without 
legal information, advice, or representation to help 
them resolve their problems in the civil legal system. 
The 2022 Justice Gap Study from the Legal Services 
Corporation (LSC) provides a fresh assessment of  
low-income Americans’ civil legal needs and the  
extent to which they are met. 
14
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansIntroduction
Introduction	
The phrase “with liberty and justice for all” in the Pledge of Allegiance represents a 
fundamental ideal of this country. Y et, the reality of America’s justice system does 
not live up to this ideal. The United States is facing an access-to-justice crisis that 
disproportionately impacts our society’s most vulnerable. Despite our pledge of 
“with liberty and justice for all, ” it is still the case that one’s access to justice in our 
nation too often depends on how much money one has.  
In criminal cases, legal assistance is a right. Americans accused of a crime are given legal 
counsel if they cannot afford it. In contrast, one generally has no right to counsel in civil 
matters where people might risk losing their homes, livelihoods, health care, or children.1 
Indeed, most low-income Americans must “go it alone” when grappling with civil legal 
matters – without access to legal information, advice, or representation to help them 
resolve the matter in our legal system. The result is an expansive “justice gap” – defined 
by the Legal Services Corporation (LSC) as the difference between the civil legal needs 
of low-income Americans and the resources available to meet those needs.
This report shares findings from LSC’s 2022 Justice Gap Study. The 2022 study 
provides a fresh assessment of low-income Americans’ civil legal needs and the extent 
to which their legal needs are met. Its timing is particularly important because it allows 
us to consider the justice gap in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has had 
disproportionate effects on this population. Additionally, this study sheds light on how 
low-income Americans’ experiences seeking legal help compare with the experiences of 
Americans with higher incomes.  
Background
Legal Services Corporation
Established by Congress in 1974, LSC is the single largest funder of civil legal aid 
for low-income individuals in the nation. Its mission is to promote equal access to 
justice in the United States and provide high-quality civil legal assistance to low-
income individuals. LSC distributes more than 90 percent of its total funding to 132 
independent nonprofit legal aid organizations with 877 offices across the United The	justice	gap	is  the difference between the civil legal 
needs of low-income Americans and the resources  
available to meet those needs.
15
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansIntroduction
States and its territories. These organizations provide legal assistance to low-
income individuals grappling with civil legal problems related to basic needs, such as 
housing, health, employment, family, and safety.
LSC’s Justice Gap Research
The 2022 Justice Gap Study is LSC’s fourth justice gap study since 2005. LSC’s first 
two studies (from 2005 and 2009) showed how limited resources make it impossible 
for LSC-funded legal aid organizations to meet all of the legal needs that low-income 
individuals bring to them. LSC’s 2017 study explored the justice gap through a similar 
lens but did not stop there. That study also included a nationally representative 
survey of low-income American households to better understand people’s 
experiences dealing with civil legal problems more generally – regardless of whether 
they seek legal help. LSC largely modeled the 2022 study after the 2017 study, but 
also expanded the design to include higher-income groups and additional topics. 
Study	Methodology	
The 2022 study leverages two primary data sources: the 2021 Justice Gap 
Measurement Survey and LSC’s 2021 Intake Census. We provide an overview of the 
methodologies used to produce the data below. Readers can find additional details 
about the study’s methodology on the study website: justicegap.lsc.gov .
2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey 
LSC contracted with NORC at the University of Chicago (NORC) to conduct a survey 
of more than 5,000 U.S. adults using its nationally representative, probability-
based AmeriSpeak® Panel. The survey included a sample of n=2,003 adults from 
households at or below 125% of the federal poverty level (FPL) and a sample of 
n=3,305 adults from households above 125% of FPL. T o maximize representation, 
NORC administered the survey using two modes (telephone and web) and in two 
languages (English and Spanish). NORC fielded the survey for seven weeks from 
October 15 to December 4, 2021.
LSC’s central objectives for the 2021 survey were twofold: 
• Measure the prevalence of civil legal problems among low-income Americans, and 
• Assess the extent to which low-income Americans receive the legal help 
necessary to resolve their civil legal problems. 
Additionally, LSC designed the 2021 survey to also explore the impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic on civil legal needs; identify potential barriers to seeking and 
receiving legal help; and evaluate differences in experiences across income groups.
The survey design included a flexible survey logic that allowed us to gather detailed 
16
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansIntroduction
information about people’s civil legal needs at three different levels: at the individual 
level, at the household level, and at the level of specific civil legal problems. 
Additionally, NORC’s approach to sampling and statistical weighting ensures that 
estimates are representative at all three levels. 
LSC’s 2021 Intake Census
Consistent with its previous justice gap studies, LSC conducted an intake census 
among all LSC-funded legal aid organizations as part of this study. For the 2021 
Intake Census, each organization tracked the requests for assistance that it received 
over a four-week period starting October 4, 2021. For each request meeting LSC 
eligibility requirements, organizations documented whether they were able to 
provide any legal help and, if so, whether it would be enough to resolve the problem. 
If they were unable to provide any legal help, they documented the reason why. 
These data allow us to estimate the total number of eligible civil legal problems that 
low-income Americans bring to LSC-funded organizations over the course of a year. 
They also allow us to estimate the proportion of these problems that organizations 
are unable to serve fully or at all due to limited resources. 
Additional Data Sources
The 2022 study also leverages three other (preexisting) data sources. Section Two 
of this report uses recent data from the U.S. Census Bureau to describe the low-
income population in the United States. Wherever possible, we use estimates from 
the 2021 Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the Current Population 
Survey (CPS). In other cases, we use estimates from the 2019 American Community 
Survey (ACS). Finally, Section Six of this report uses information from recent LSC 
Grantee Activity Reports to describe some aspects of LSC-funded organizations’ 
case activity.
This	Report
Report Overview
The study’s findings are organized into the following five sections: 
Section 2: Today’s Low-income America –  Using recent data from the U.S. Census 
Bureau, this section describes the current low-income population in the United 
States. More specifically, it explores the size of this population, who is most likely to 
have household incomes at this level, and how this population compares with the 
general U.S. population.
17
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americansintroduction
Section 3: The Prevalence of Civil Legal Problems – Using data from the 2021 
Justice Gap Measurement Survey, this section presents findings on the prevalence 
of civil legal problems among low-income households, the types of problems they 
face, and how civil legal problems impact their lives.
Section 4: Seeking and Receiving Legal Help –  Using data from the 2021 Justice 
Gap Measurement Survey, this section presents findings on how often low-income 
Americans sought and received civil legal help in the past year, the types of legal help 
they sought, and potential barriers to seeking and receiving legal help.
Section 5: Comparing Income Groups –  Leveraging the 2021 Justice Gap 
Measurement Survey’s sample of households above 125% of FPL, this section 
compares the experiences of low- and higher-income Americans in seeking and 
receiving civil legal help. More specifically, it compares their likelihood to seek legal help, 
their likelihood to receive the help they need, and their potential barriers to getting help.
Section 6: Reports from the Field – This section looks at the justice gap through 
the lens of LSC-funded organizations’ efforts to help address the civil legal needs 
of low-income individuals. Using data from LSC’s 2021 Intake Census, this section 
estimates the number of problems that low-income individuals bring to LSC-funded 
legal aid organizations in a given year and the extent to which these organizations are 
able to help resolve these problems with the limited resources at their disposal.
Special	Reporting	Features
Each of the above-mentioned sections also includes the following special  
reporting features: 
“Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic” spotlights – These pages present findings 
that consider the relevant data and topics with respect to the circumstances 
surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic.  
“Geographic Focus” snapshots – These pages present key findings by U.S. region. 
We follow the U.S. Census Bureau’s conventions in grouping states into the following 
four regions: West, South, Midwest, and Northeast.2 
“Special Focus” snapshots – These pages present key findings for six 
subpopulations of interest: seniors aged 65 years or older, veterans, people from 
rural areas, minor children aged 18 years or younger, survivors of domestic violence, 
and people facing high housing costs.3 
Client stories –  The report presents client stories throughout to help readers put the 
data in perspective of the very real challenges impacting people’s livelihoods, families, 
safety, and general well-being.4 T o protect the identity of clients, we do not use their 
actual names or photos.5
18
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americansintroduction
Important Notes
Terminology: In this report, “Americans” generally refers to adults living in the United 
States; in Section Two, it also includes children. We use “low-income” to describe 
anyone with a household income at or below 125% of FPL or below 125% of the poverty 
threshold. At times, we use “substantial problems” to refer to civil legal problems that 
survey respondents say impacted them substantially (i.e., “very much” or “severely”).
Base sizes: Base sizes are noted in all charts and tables. Bases with fewer than 200 
observations are marked with an asterisk (*). 
Units of analysis: The units of analysis and sets of observations used for the 
estimates vary throughout the report. For example, some survey results are based 
on respondents (or their households), some are based on their civil legal problems, 
and others are based on subsets of respondents, households, or problems. Readers 
are encouraged to pay close attention to information describing the units of analysis 
and relevant sets of observations. 
Comparisons with the 2017 study:  Given differences in the design of the two studies, 
we caution against direct comparisons of precise estimates.6 Comparisons of general 
magnitude are fine. Additionally, it is important to note that much of the analysis in 
this report focuses on the subset of civil legal problems that impacted people’s lives 
substantially  whereas the 2017 report focused on problems that had any degree of impact. 
Study	Findings	in	Brief
The findings of this study are consistent with LSC’s 2017 study regarding the 
prevalence of civil legal problems among low-income Americans, their likelihood to 
seek legal help, and indicators of the justice gap based on survey and intake census 
data. With its expanded and improved design, this study goes beyond the 2017 study 
to also provide new insights regarding potential barriers to getting legal help, the role 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, and key differences between low-income Americans and 
those with higher incomes. Study findings are briefly summarized below. 
Prevalence of Civil Legal Problems and Seeking Legal Help
This study finds that nearly three-quarters (74%) of low-income households have 
experienced at least one civil legal problem in the past year. Additionally, 38% 
of low-income Americans have personally experienced a civil legal problem that 
substantially impacted their lives in some way. Even for these “substantial” problems, 
they only sought legal help 25% of the time. 
Concerns about the cost of legal help stand out as an important barrier to seeking 
legal help. Nearly one-half (46%) of those who did not seek legal help for one or more 
problems cite concerns about cost as a reason why. Additionally, more than one-half 
(53%) of low-income Americans doubt their ability to find a lawyer they could afford 
if they needed one. 
19
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americansintroduction
Over the course of a year, low-income individuals will approach LSC-funded legal aid 
organizations for help with an estimated 1.9 million civil legal problems that are eligible 
for assistance. They will receive some legal help for 51% of these problems, but even 
then, they will only receive enough legal help to resolve their problem about one-half 
(56%) of the time. 
 The following key findings from this study speak to the magnitude of the justice  
gap in 2022: 
• Low-income Americans did not receive any legal help or enough legal help for 
92% of the problems that substantially impacted their lives in the past year.
• LSC-funded organizations are unable to provide any or enough legal help for 
71% of the civil legal problems brought to them; this translates to an estimated 
1.4 million problems over the course of a year. 
Income Group Comparisons 
This study has uncovered at least two interesting sets of insights related to differences 
in experiences by income. The first set relates to findings about differences in potential 
barriers to getting one’s legal needs met. Compared to low-income Americans, we find 
that those at or above 400% of FPL tend to have more positive views of the civil legal 
system and how it can help people like them. Additionally, we find that people at or 
above 400% of FPL are much more confident in their ability to find and afford a lawyer 
if they needed one. 
The second set relates to income disparities evident in the survey-based measure 
of the justice gap. When it comes to problems that do not have much impact, this 
measure of the justice gap is similar across income groups, with people not receiving 
any or enough legal help for 93% to 94% of these problems. An income disparity 
emerges, however, when we look at problems with substantial impact. For those at or 
above 400% of FPL, the estimated justice gap shrinks significantly (93% versus 78%) 
while it essentially stays the same for low-income Americans (94% versus 92%). 
Civil Legal Problems Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic
This study finds that one-third (33%) of low-income Americans experienced at 
least one civil legal problem related to the COVID-19 pandemic in the past year. 
Among those most likely to experience a pandemic-related problem are those from 
households with children, single parents, renters, and/or someone struggling with a 
substance use disorder. Additionally, low-income Americans report that most of their 
collective problems involving unemployment benefits and eviction are related to the 
pandemic in some way. Finally, we find that income disparities in the justice gap are 
exacerbated for civil legal problems related to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
20
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
T oday’s 
Low-income 
America
21
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
T oday’s 
Low-income 
AmericaSection 2
Typically, legal aid organizations can use LSC funds 
only to serve the legal needs of people with household 
incomes at or below 125% of the federal poverty 
level. These people make up the set of “low-income 
Americans” of central focus in this report. To provide 
a fuller picture of this population, this section offers 
a glimpse of who today’s low-income Americans are. 
Using recent data collected by the U.S. Census Bureau, 
it explores how many Americans have low household 
incomes, where they live, and how they compare  
with the general U.S. population. 
22
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  Today’s	Low-income	 America
Percent of state populations  
with household incomes  
<125% of poverty  <12%
  12%- 16%
  >16%ABOUT THE DATA:  This section leverages two U.S. Census Bureau data sources. Whenever possible, we 
use the 2021 Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the Current Population Survey (CPS) 
because it is the most current data available – providing poverty estimates based on 2020 income and 
household information. We use the 2019 American Community Survey (ACS) 1-year Estimates where 2021 
CPS ASEC data are not available.
The income categories in these two data sources are based on the U.S. Census Bureau’s poverty thresholds. 
Note that poverty thresholds are different from the poverty guidelines published by the U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services, which are used to determine one’s percent of federal poverty level (FPL) 
and eligibility for LSC-funded legal assistance. Please also note that the U.S. Census Bureau reports on 
household incomes below 125% of the poverty threshold rather than household incomes at or below 125% 
of FPL (which is how income eligibility for LSC-funded services is defined).
Some additional data sources are used for the “Special Focus” populations at the end of this section; we 
note these accordingly. The unit of analysis in this section is individuals.
About 50 million Americans have household incomes below 125% of  
the poverty threshold, including more than 15 million children.
In 2022, household incomes below 125% of the poverty threshold ("of poverty" 
hereafter) correspond to annual incomes below $34,500 for a family of four or 
$17 ,500 for an individual.7 Fifteen percent of Americans live in households with 
annual incomes below these levels. This translates to approximately 50 million low-
income Americans, including approximately 15.2 million children (<18 years old).
Figure 2A.  Low-income Americans’ share of state populations in 20218i

23
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income AmericaAs Figure 2A depicts, low-income Americans make up larger shares of some states’ 
populations than others. The states with the highest proportions of low-income 
residents include Mississippi (24%), New Mexico (23%), Louisiana (21%), and 
Oklahoma (20%). If we look at population counts (instead of proportions), the states 
with the largest populations naturally stand out as having the highest numbers 
of low-income residents. For example, California alone has about 5.9 million low-
income residents, T exas has about 5.4 million, Florida has about 3.9 million, and New 
Y ork has about 3 million.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
People living in rural areas are more likely to have low household 
incomes than people in other areas.
Most Americans live in suburban or urban areas,9 and those with low incomes  
are no exception. Combined, suburban and urban areas are home to 
approximately 42 million low-income people whereas only about 8 million low-
income people live in rural areas. Note, however, that this low population count 
for rural low-income Americans is driven by the fact that not many Americans live 
in rural areas more generally. As a matter of fact, people living in rural areas are 
actually more likely than others to have low incomes: 19% of the rural population 
has a household income below 125% of poverty compared to 15% of the 
combined suburban/urban population.10
Compared to non-Hispanic Whites, Blacks and Hispanics are  
more than twice as likely to have household incomes below 125%  
of poverty. 
As Figure 2B shows, Blacks and Hispanics are much more likely to have low incomes 
compared with non-Hispanic Whites and Asian Americans. Indeed, more than 
one-quarter (26%) of all Blacks and nearly one-quarter (23%) of Hispanics live in 
households with incomes below 125% of poverty.  About	50	million  Americans have household incomes  
below 125% of the poverty threshold. 
24
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income AmericaThat said, given the relative sizes of the racial and ethnic groups in the United States, 
the low-income, non-Hispanic White population (~21.4 million) far outnumbers 
the size of the low-income populations among Hispanics (~14 million), Blacks (~11 
million), and Asian Americans (~2.3 million). 
Figure 2B.  Proportion of racial/ethnic groups with household incomes below 
125% of poverty 11
 
 
One in five American children lives in a low-income household. 
More than one-fifth (21%) of all American children live in households with 
incomes below 125% of poverty. This translates to about 15.2 million children in 
total. Additionally, children are disproportionately represented in the low-income 
population compared to the general population. See Figure 2C which presents the 
distribution of children under 18 years old, adults between 18 and 64 years old, and 
seniors (65 years or older) for the low-income and general populations in the United 
States. As the figure shows, children make up a nearly one-third (31%) of the low-
income population but less than one-quarter (22%) of the general population. 
Figure 2C. Distribution of age: low-income versus general U.S. population12
 Black (any ethnicity)
Hispanic (any race)
Non-Hispanic White
Asian (any ethnicity)
Children 17 years old  
or younger
Adults 18-64 years old
Seniors 65 years  
or olderPercent	of	U.S. 	racial/ethnic	populations
	Low-income	population					 	General	populationPercent	of	individuals31%26%
23%
11%
11%
15%54%
61%22%
17%
25
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
Section 2:  Today’s	Low-income	 America
Low-income women and girls outnumber low-income men and boys in 
the United States. 
There are approximately 5.7 million more women and girls with low incomes than 
men and boys. There are roughly 27 .8 million women and girls, and roughly 22.1 
million men and boys who live in low-income households. These numbers reflect 
the fact that women and girls are disproportionately represented in the low-income 
population (which is 56% female) compared to the general population (which is 51% 
female). See Figure 2D. Additionally, it is worth noting that a majority (58%) of all the 
low-income households with children are headed by single women.13 
Figure 2D.  Distribution of males and females: low-income versus general U.S. 
population14  
  21%  of children in the U.S. live in households with  
incomes below 125% of the poverty threshold.
Cathy • Georgia • Eviction.  Cathy’s financial troubles began when work reduced 
her hours at the beginning of the pandemic. She was already behind on bills when she 
was involved in a car accident that left her injured so badly that she could no longer work. 
She eventually got so far behind that she faced a monthly threat of eviction. The Atlanta 
Legal Aid Society connected Cathy to a local rental assistance program that helped her 
pay back rent and also helped her secure Social Security Disability Insurance benefits to 
pay for food and other necessities. Client  
StoryGeneral population
Low-income  
populationFemale Male
Percent	of	individuals51%49%
56%44%
26
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income AmericaCompared to the general adult population, low-income adults are 
disproportionately less likely to have a college degree and more likely 
to have never graduated high school. 
Figure 2E presents the distribution of educational attainment for the general and 
low-income adult (18 years or older) populations in the United States. As the figure 
shows, one in five (20%) low-income adults has less than a high school education 
(or equivalent), which is more than twice the rate for the general adult population 
(9%). In the same vein, only 13% of low-income adults have a college education 
compared with 31% of the general adult population.
Figure 2E.  Distribution of education: low-income population versus general 
U.S. population15
Less than high school
High school or GED
Some college
College degree or more
Percent	of	adults20%
23%
13%44%
36%9%
24%
31%
	Low-income	population					 	General	population
27 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  Today’s	Low-income	 America
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has had devastating and disproportionate 
effects on low-income Americans. 
In	addition	to	the	direct	health	impacts	of	the	COVID-19	virus	on	low-income	
families	and	communities,16		the	pandemic	has	also	had	unprecedented	
consequences	for	their	economic	situations, 	housing	security, 	mental	health, 	
physical	safety, 	food	security, 	access	to	education, 	and	many	other	aspects	of	
their	lives.17	
To	provide	a	sense	of	some	of	the	challenges	low-income	 Americans	still	face	a	full 	
two	years	into	the	pandemic, 	we	share	some	results	from	the	U.S. 	Census	Bureau 	
Household	Pulse	Survey’s	most	recent	week	of	data	collection	at	the	time	of	writing	this 	
report	(Week	43:	March	2	–	14, 	2022).18		The	statistics	below	correspond	to	people	with 	
annual	household	incomes	less	than	$25,000.
Finances
23%	of	low-income  	
households	lost 		
employment	income	in	the 	
previous	four	weeks. 	
Housing
18%	of	low-income 		
renter	households	were 		
behind	on	rent	payments. 	Food Security
26%	of	low-income 		
households	did	not	always 	
have	enough	food	to	eat	in 		
the	previous	week.
Mental Health
36%	of	low-income 		
adults	experienced	anxiety 		
symptoms	on	seven	or	more 	
of	the	previous	14	days. 	$
28 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  Today’s	Low-income	 America
GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS   
This snapshot presents estimates for the proportion of populations with household incomes below 125% 
of poverty for each of the four Census regions in the United States. All estimates come from the Current 
Population Survey (CPS) 2021 Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC).19 The unit of analysis is 
individuals. 
14%	of the population in the  
Northeast is below 125% of poverty.
7.4	million   
children and adults.14%	of the population in the  
Midwest is below 125% of poverty.
9.2	million   
children and adults.
West South
14%	of the population in the West 
is below 125% of poverty.
11.1	million   
children and adults.18%	 of the population in the  
South is below 125% of poverty.
22.2	 million   
children and adults.Northeast Midwest

29 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans  Section 2:  Today’s	Low-income	 America
SPECIAL FOCUS   
This snapshot presents estimates for the proportion of populations with household incomes below 125% 
of poverty for each of the six subpopulations of special interest in this report. With the exception of the 
estimate for survivors of domestic violence, all estimates come from recent U.S. Census Bureau data 
sources.20 The unit of analysis is individuals. 
65+
Veterans
Children (<18 yrs)Seniors
People with High Housing Costs
Survivors of Domestic ViolencePeople in Rural Areas
1.6	million  
veterans  have household incomes  
below 125% of poverty.
15.2	million  
children live in households with incomes 
below 125% of poverty.7.6	million  
seniors have household incomes  
below 125% of poverty.
15	million  
households with high housing costs  
have annual household incomes of less    
than $25,000.
The rate of intimate partner  
violence for women is nearly  
3 times higher among those  
in the lowest income quartile  
versus those in the highest.8	million  
people living in rural areas have household 
incomes below 125% of poverty.
30
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
The Prevalence  
of Civil Legal  
Problems
31
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
The Prevalence  
of Civil Legal  
ProblemsSection 3
A significant majority of low-income American 
households have faced at least one civil legal problem in 
the past year, and most have had to deal with multiple 
problems. These problems typically relate to essential 
needs like housing, health care, and providing for 
their families. Using data from the 2021 Justice Gap 
Measurement Survey, this section presents findings 
on the prevalence of civil legal problems among low-
income households, the most common types of 
problems they face, and the impact these problems 
have on their lives.  
32 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansiSection 3:  The	Prevalence	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
ABOUT THE DATA:  The findings presented in this section come from the Justice Gap Measurement 
Survey conducted at the end of 2021 and are based on that survey’s nationally representative sample of 
low-income households. The survey presented respondents with an extensive list of problems that typically 
raise justiciable civil legal issues (“civil legal problems” henceforth) and asked them to indicate whether they 
and/or anyone else in their household had experienced each problem in the past 12 months. The survey 
explored a total of 81 distinct problems, which are grouped into 10 categories for the purposes of this report. 
Respondents’ answers about their and other household members’ experiences make it possible to estimate 
how common various civil legal problems are at the household level. The primary unit of analysis in this 
section is households. 
Prevalence	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
Most low-income American households faced one or more civil legal 
problems in the past year.
The 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey assessed the prevalence of 81 distinct 
civil legal problems among low-income households. The results indicate that an 
estimated 74% of low-income households experienced at least one civil legal problem 
in the past year – with many households dealing with multiple problems. As Figure 
3A shows, about three in five (62%) households experienced two or more problems, 
about two in five (39%) experienced five or more, and a shocking one in five (20%) of 
all low-income households experienced 10 or more problems in the past year.
  
 
Figure 3A. Number of civil legal problems experienced by low-income 
households in the past year2174%  of low-income households experienced at least 
one civil legal problem in the past year. 
1 or more problems
2 or more problems
5 or more problems
10 or more problems
Percent	of	low-income	households		|		n=2,00374%
62%
39%
20%
33
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
Section 3:  The	Prevalence	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
Types	of	Civil	Legal	Problems	
Figure 3B presents the prevalence rates for the six most common types of civil legal 
problems among low-income households. The dark blue bars correspond to the 
proportion of all low-income households that experienced a given type of problem. 
The occasional red bars correspond to subpopulations of particular interest for a 
given type of problem. For example, the chart shows the percent of all low-income 
households that experienced a housing-related problem (33%) as well as the 
percent of renter households that experienced this type of problem (43%). 
Figure 3B. Percent of low-income households experiencing common types of 
civil legal problems22
 
Barbara • Pennsylvania • Domestic Violence.  Barbara’s ex-husband was 
abusing their two children. She had a protection order against him for herself, but she 
could not get the authorities to believe her about the child abuse. She spent all of her 
savings and her parents’ savings to pay for a private attorney to help her case, but she 
eventually ran out of money. Meanwhile, the abuse continued. Eventually, a women’s 
crisis shelter connected Barbara to Neighborhood Legal Services Association, who 
helped her successfully build a case to demonstrate the abuse and protect her children.Client  
StoryConsumer issues
Health care
Income maintenance
Housing
Renter	households	(n=1,194)
Family & safety
Households	with	children	<12	yrs	(n=699)
Education
Households	with	students	(n=925)
Percent	of	households		|		n=2,003	50%
39%
33%34%
26%
19%44%43%
42%
34
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 3:  The	Prevalence	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
The two most common types of civil legal problems among all low-income 
households relate to consumer issues and health care. 
Consumer issues. One-half (50%) of low-income households experienced a 
problem related to consumer issues. Common problems in this area include 
difficulties with medical debt (affecting 26% of all low-income households), having 
utilities disconnected (18%), dealing with harassment from creditors (16%), and 
falling victim to a scam (15%). 
Health care. Nearly two in five (39%) low-income households experienced a 
problem related to health care in the past year. Common problems in this area 
include difficulty getting insurance to cover needed health care (affecting 20% of 
all low-income households), being billed incorrectly for medical services (16%), and 
difficulty accessing necessary health care from providers (12%). 
Other common types of civil legal problems relate to essential needs, such as 
income maintenance, housing, education, and family and safety. 
Income maintenance. More than one-third (34%) of all low-income households 
experienced a problem related to income maintenance in the past year. These 
problems center on people’s difficulty accessing benefits to supplement their income 
and meet their household’s basic needs. Common problems in this area include 
difficulty accessing food stamps and T emporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) 
(affecting 17% of all households), difficulty with their COVID stimulus payment (16%), 
and difficulty claiming or keeping unemployment benefits (13%). 
 
 
Housing.  One-third (33%) of all low-income households experienced a civil legal 
problem related to housing in the past year. As Figure 3B on the previous page 
shows, renter households are disproportionately likely to experience these types of 
problems. Indeed, 43% of renter households experienced a housing problem in the 
past year (compared to 23% of homeowner households;23 result not shown in chart). 
Common problems among renter households include a landlord failing to keep the 
property in good repair (affecting 26% of renter households), falling behind on rent or 
being threatened with eviction (18%), and disputing the terms of a lease (18%). 43%  of low-income, renter households experienced  
at least one civil legal problem related to housing in the 
past year. 
35
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 3:  The	Prevalence	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
Family and safety. About one-quarter (26%) of all low-income households have 
experienced at least one problem related to family matters or personal safety. The 
prevalence is significantly higher among households with children under 12 years 
old (44%). The most common problems across all households in this area include 
experience with domestic violence (affecting 10% of all households), problems 
collecting or paying child support (9%), and separation or divorce (9%). 
Education. Nearly one in five (19%) low-income households has experienced a 
civil legal problem related to education in the past year. When we look solely at 
households with a student in school, this incidence rate more than doubles to 
42%. Common problems among households with a student in school include 
difficulty attending remote classes due to lack of technology (affecting 21% of these 
households), inadequate supplies or equipment for school (17%), and inadequate 
protection from threats or harassment from other students (17%).
Table 3A. Additional types of civil legal problems experienced by low-income 
households24
Type Prevalence Example problems
Employment23%	 Unsafe working conditions, unfair 
or discriminatory treatment in the 
workplace, and difficulty getting paid 
for work
Official records16% Difficulty obtaining government-
issued documents and expunging 
something from a criminal record
Wills & estates14% Setting up an advance medical 
directive, will, or power of attorney
Disability10% Difficulty accessing services and 
experience with abuse
n=2,003
36
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 3:  The	Prevalence	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
Vicious	Cycle	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
Households that experienced issues with eviction or domestic 
violence are disproportionately more likely to face multiple problems.
Consistent with other research about the dynamics of poverty and civil legal issues, 
the 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey finds that households that have to 
deal with certain types of issues tend to encounter even more problems.25 This 
pattern can feed a vicious cycle of civil legal problems that is difficult to interrupt 
without legal help. The survey data point to two poignant examples of this dynamic: 
households that have dealt with issues related to eviction and/or domestic violence 
are disproportionately more likely to have experienced multiple problems in the past 
year. See Figure 3C below.26
Figure 3C. Prevalence of civil legal problems for low-income households 
facing eviction and domestic violence27
39%
81%
58%
87%
62%20%
38%All households
(n=2,003)
Eviction households
(n=228)
Domestic violence households
(n=225)
Percent	of	low-income	households
	5	or	more	problems					 	10	or	more	problems
37
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 3:  The	Prevalence	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
The	Impact	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
In the past year, more than one-third of low-income Americans 
experienced a civil legal problem that substantially impacted their lives.
We consider a problem’s impact to be “substantial” if the respondent says the 
problem affected them “very much” or “severely” (as opposed to “moderately, ” 
“slightly, ” or “not at all”). The survey finds that more than one-third (38%) of low-
income Americans personally experienced at least one civil legal problem that has 
had a substantial, negative impact on their household overall. 
Figure 3D presents the percent of low-income Americans who experienced civil legal 
problems with a substantial negative impact in various aspects of their lives. As the 
figure shows, the most common impacts were on finances and mental health. Indeed, 
35% report substantial impacts on their household’s financial situation, and 31% 
report the same for their or other household members’ mental and emotional health. 
Figure 3D.  Percent of low-income Americans experiencing civil legal 
problems with substantial impacts in various aspects of their lives28 35%  of all low-income Americans experienced a  
problem that has substantially impacted their household’s 
financial situation in the past year.  
Percent	of	individuals		 |		n=2,003 	Overall
Financial situation
Mental & emotional health
Physical health & safety
Relationships38%
35%
31%
25%
21%
38
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 3:  The	Prevalence	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
Problems relating to housing, employment, income maintenance, and 
family and safety stand out as the most impactful types of problems 
overall.
Narrowing our focus to only those low-income Americans who personally experienced 
problems in the past year (as opposed to all low-income), we see that more than one-half 
(55%) say at least one of their problems substantially impacted their lives overall. Some 
types of problems tend to impact people more than others. Figure 3E shows the percent 
reporting a substantial negative impact among those who personally experienced various 
types of problems. At least one-half of those personally affected by the following types of 
problems reported a substantial impact on their lives: housing (54%), family and safety 
(52%), employment (51%), and income maintenance (50%). 
 
Figure 3E.  Percent of low-income Americans experiencing substantial 
impacts from civil legal problems, by problem type29 Civil legal problems had a substantial negative effect on 
55%  of those who personally experienced a problem in 
the past year. 
Percent	of	low-income	individuals	who	personally	experienced	at	least	one	problem	in	a	given	category
*Small	base	size 55%
All problems  
(n=1,466) 54%
Housing  
(n=622)52%
Family & safety  
(n=463)51%
Employment  
(n=361)
50%
Income maintenance  
(n=585)42%
Consumer issues  
(n=975)40%
Education  
(n=316)35%
Disability
(n=165)*
35%
Official records
(n=246)30%
Health care  
(n=690)20%
Wills & estates  
(n=180) *
39 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericaImpact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
One-third (33%) of all low-income Americans personally experienced 
at least one civil legal problem related to the COVID-19 pandemic in the 
past year. 
This	translates	to	nearly	one-half	(47%)	of	all	the	low-income	 Americans	who	experienced 	
one	or	more	problems	overall. 	Those	most	likely	to	experience	a	COVID-related	problem 	
track	with	our	common	understanding	of	who	has	been	most	affected	by	the	pandemic. 	
Among	those	that	experienced	at	least	one	problem	in	the	past	year, 	those	most	likely	to 	
attribute	their	problems	to	the	pandemic	come	from	the	following	types	of	households: 	
household	in	which	someone	struggles	with	substance	use	disorder	(SUD)	(64% 	
attribute	at	least	one	of	their	problems	to	the	pandemic), 	single-parent	households	(57%), 	
households	with	children	<12	years	old	(57%), 	and	renter	households	(51%). 	See	Figure	3F.
Figure 3F. Percent of low-income Americans attributing recent civil legal 
problems to the pandemic, by household characteristics30
The	types	of	problems	people	are	most	likely	to	blame	on	the	pandemic	also	track	with 	
our	common	understanding	of	how	the	pandemic	has	affected	people. 	For	example,	
respondents	attribute	nearly	one-third	(32%)	of	all	their	income	maintenance	problems 	
to	the	pandemic, 	31%	of	their	education	problems, 	and	27%	of	their	housing	problems.	
Looking	at	specific	problems, 	more	than	one-half	of	low-income	 Americans	attribute	their 	
problems	related	to	unemployment	benefits	(52%)	and	eviction	(56%)	to	the	pandemic.	Percent	of	low-income	individuals	who	experienced	at	least	one	problem
47%
All individuals  
(n=1,466) 64%
From households  
with SUD
(n=187)*  57%
From single-parent  
households
(n=416)
 57%
From households with  
children <12 yrs  
(n=552)51%
From renter  
households
(n=919)Section 3:  The	Prevalence	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
40  The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 3:  The	Prevalence	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS   
This snapshot presents the percent of low-income households in each region that experienced 1 or more, 
5 or more, and 10 or more problems in the past year. All estimates come from LSC’s 2021 Justice Gap 
Measurement Survey.31 The unit of analysis is households. 
74%  had 1+ problems.  
34%  had 5+ problems.  
15%  had 10+ problems.75%  had 1+ problems.  
45%  had 5+ problems.  
23%  had 10+ problems.
West (n=402 households)  South (n=810 households)
72%  had 1+ problems.  
38%  had 5+ problems.  
18%  had 10+ problems.75%  had 1+ problems.  
39%  had 5+ problems.  
21%  had 10+ problems.Northeast (n=257 households) Midwest (n=534 households)

41 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 3:  The	Prevalence	of	Civil	Legal	Problems
65+
Veteran Households   (n=242)
Households with Children (<18 yrs)
(n=889)Senior Households  (n=593)
Households with High  
Housing Costs   (n=826)
Households with Recent  
Domestic Violence+ (n=225)Rural Households   (n=419)
76%  had 1+ problems.  
44%  had 5+ problems.  
27%  had 10+ problems.
83%  had 1+ problems.  
52%  had 5+ problems.  
30%  had 10+ problems.70%  had 1+ problems.  
31%  had 5+ problems.  
14%  had 10+ problems.
84%  had 1+ problems.  
49%  had 5+ problems.  
26%  had 10+ problems.
98%  had 1+ problems.  
87%  had 5+ problems.  
62%  had 10+ problems.77%  had 1+ problems.  
40%  had 5+ problems.  
23%  had 10+ problems.SPECIAL FOCUS   
This snapshot presents the percent of low-income households for each subpopulation of interest that 
experienced 1 or more, 5 or more, and 10 or more problems in the past year. All estimates come from 
LSC’s 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey.32 The unit of analysis is households. 
+These	estimates	exclude	problems	related	to	domestic	violence
42
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
Seeking and 
Receiving Legal 
Help
Seeking and 
Receiving Legal 
HelpSection 4
While a significant majority of low-income Americans 
faced at least one civil legal problem in the past year, 
they rarely sought legal help. And even when they 
sought legal help, they typically did not get as much 
help as they needed. Using data from the 2021 Justice 
Gap Measurement Survey, this section presents 
findings on how often low-income Americans sought 
and received legal help in the past year, the types of 
legal help they sought, and potential barriers to  
seeking and receiving legal help. 
44
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansiSection 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
ABOUT THE DATA: The 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey asked respondents to provide details about 
their experiences seeking and receiving legal help for problems they had personally experienced in the past 
year. The survey only asked for detail on problems that had a negative impact on respondents’ lives overall 
(i.e., negatively affected them “slightly, ” “moderately, ” “very much, ” or “severely” overall); the survey did not 
ask for detail on problems that affected respondents “not at all. ” 
The vast majority of respondents (92%) personally experienced 10 or fewer problems that impacted their 
lives to some extent, and these respondents were asked to provide details for all of these problems. In the 
case that respondents experienced more than 10 problems that impacted their lives, the survey selected 
a subset of 10 of their problems about which to ask details. T o maximize the potential for learning about 
problems relating to veterans, disabilities, housing, and family issues, these types of problems were given 
priority for inclusion if they met the other criteria.
The primary unit of analysis in this section is problems.33 The focus is exclusively on problems that 
respondents personally experienced (i.e., excluding problems experienced by other household members) 
and problems that negatively impacted respondents overall to some extent (i.e., excluding problems that 
impacted them “not at all”). Note that the primary unit of analysis changes to the individual in the discussion 
about barriers at the end of the section.
Seeking	Legal	Help
Low-income Americans rarely seek legal help for their civil legal 
problems. 
Low-income Americans sought legal help for 19% of their collective civil legal 
problems in the past year. As Figure 4A shows, they were slightly more likely to 
seek legal help for problems that impacted them substantially (25% of problems 
impacting them “very much” or “severely”) compared to less impactful problems 
(14% of problems affecting them “slightly” or “moderately”).
Figure 4A. Percent of problems for which low-income Americans sought legal 
help in the past year34
Percent	of	problemsAll problems
(n=5,784)
Problems with substantial impact
(n=2,674)
Problems with less impact
(n=3,110)  Did not seek legal help Sought legal help
81%19%
25%
14%75%
86%
45
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansPercent	of	problemsSection 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
People are more likely to seek legal help for problems that are more obviously 
“legal” like those involving legal documents and court proceedings. 
Figure 4B presents the percent of civil legal problems for which low-income Americans sought 
legal help in the past year by problem type. As the figure shows, people were most likely 
to seek legal help for problems relating to family and safety (33%) and to wills and estates 
(41%).35 Compared to the other problems explored in the survey, these types of problems 
might be considered more obviously “legal” in nature. For example, many family and safety 
problems involve the courts, such as those related to child custody, divorce, and protection 
from violence. Similarly, the problems in the wills and estates category involve official legal 
documents and often involve court proceedings as well.
Figure 4B. Percent of problems for which low-income Americans sought legal 
help, by problem type36 Low-income Americans sought legal help for 25%  of  
the civil legal problems that substantially impacted them 
in the past year. 
Percent	of	problems	experienced	in	each	category
*Small	base	size41%
Wills & estates
(n=64)*33%
Family & safety  
(n=690)29%
Disability  
(n=171)*22%
Housing
(n=1,107)
20%
Employment  
(n=466)19%
All problems  
(n=5,784)18%
Official records  
(n=165)*14%
Consumer issues
(n=1,472)
14%
Income maintenance
(n=626)13%
Health care  
(n=675)13%
Education  
(n=348)
46
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
The types of legal help that low-income Americans seek from lawyers 
reflect the wide variety of ways legal professionals can help people 
with these types of problems.
Figure 4C presents the various types of help low-income Americans wanted when 
they talked to a lawyer about their civil legal problems in the past year. The most 
common type of legal help sought was legal advice about specific situations (59% 
of the times they sought legal help). Other common types of help sought include 
representation in court (39%) and help filling out legal forms and documents (35%). 
Figure 4C. Percent of problems for which low-income Americans sought 
various types of legal help from lawyers37
Even when they seek legal help, low-income Americans often do not 
get all of the help they need. 
Looking at all of the problems for which low-income Americans sought legal help, they 
say that they did not receive all of the help needed for nearly two-thirds (64%).38 If we 
narrow our focus to only those problems that affected them substantially, we find a 
similar result: low-income Americans did not receive all of the help they needed for 
66% of these substantial problems.39  Percent	of	problems	about	which	individuals	talked	to	a	lawyer
n=822Legal advice
Representation
Filling out paperwork/forms
Negotiating with another party
Handling communication with  
another party
Finding online resources
Other/none of the above59%
39%
35%
30%
28%
24%
10%
47
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
Section 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
Survey-based	Measure	of	the	 Justice	Gap
The survey results allow us to estimate a survey-based measure of the justice gap 
among low-income Americans.40 T o do so, we first identify the full set of problems  
low-income Americans experienced in the past year and then identify the set of  
these problems for which they did not receive any legal help or did not receive  
enough legal help.
 
We	define	each	part	of	this	measure	below:
•	 All	problems	experienced:  All personally experienced problems that impacted 
respondents to some extent in the past year.41  
•	 Problems	not	receiving	any	legal	help:  The subset of problems for which they 
did not seek any legal help.42
•	 Problems	not	receiving	enough	legal	help:	 The subset of problems for which 
they sought legal help but did not receive as much as they needed.43
Nancy • New Jersey • Disability. Nancy, an elderly disabled woman, lived in public 
housing for seniors, a placement that she risked losing. When she lost her identification 
documents, she fell behind on rent because she did not know how to access her bank 
account without them. She asked Essex-Newark Legal Services (ENLS) for help, but 
they lost contact with Nancy when the pandemic hit. An ENLS staff member eventually 
tracked her down and found that she had been isolated for several months – surviving on 
food donations and still housed only because evictions were not allowed. ENLS helped 
her get a new I.D. card, and she is now up-to-date on rent and safe. Justice	Gap	=(problems	not	receiving	any	legal	help)	+ 	
(problems	not	receiving	enough	legal	help)
all	problems	experienced
48
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
Low-income Americans either do not receive any legal help or do 
not receive enough legal help for the vast majority of their civil legal 
problems.    
Figure 4D presents the survey-based justice gap measure for low-income Americans 
among three sets of problems: all of the civil legal problems they experienced, 
problems with substantial impact, and problems with less impact. As the figure 
shows, low-income Americans did not receive any or enough legal help for 93% of all 
of their problems. Interestingly, this estimate is essentially the same whether we look 
at problems with substantial impact (92%) or problems with less impact (94%). 
Figure 4D. Percent of problems for which low-income Americans did not 
receive any or enough legal help in the past year (i.e., survey-based justice 
gap measure)44
Percent	of	problems	experienced
 Low-income Americans did not receive any legal help or 
enough legal help for 92%  of the problems that  
substantially impacted them in the past year.All problems
(n=5,784)
Problems with substantial impact
(n=2,674)
Problems with less impact
(n=3,110)93%
92%
94%
49
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansPercent	of	problems	experiencedSection 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
Barriers	to	Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
The survey data allow us to explore three types of potential barriers to seeking and 
receiving legal help:
•	 Knowledge	barriers:	 We look at the extent to which people know that legal 
professionals can help resolve the types of civil legal problems explored in this 
survey.
•	 Attitudinal	barriers:	 We explore people’s beliefs about the civil legal system 
and how it relates to people like them. 
•	 Cost	barriers:	 We consider the extent to which the (real or perceived) cost of 
receiving legal help might pose a barrier to getting it.
There is a low level of awareness around the fact that lawyers can help 
resolve many of the everyday civil legal problems people face. 
For each civil legal problem that they personally experienced, respondents 
indicated whether they thought it was a type of problem that a lawyer or other legal 
professional could help resolve. The results point to a low level of awareness about 
how legal professionals can help. As Figure 4E shows, low-income Americans did 
not know if a lawyer could help resolve 74% of their problems. Indeed, they did not 
think a lawyer could help with 44% of their problems and were not sure for another 
30%. Among low-income Americans with at least one reported problem, only 5% 
knew that a legal professional could help resolve all of the types of problems they 
experienced; the vast majority (95%) either did not think a legal professional could 
help or were not sure for at least one problem. 
Figure 4E. Low-income Americans’ beliefs about whether a lawyer could help 
resolve their civil legal problems45 
Percent	of	problems	experienced		|		n=9,30624%30%
74%44%Believe
lawyers could help Not sureDo not believe lawyers  
could help
50
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
Section 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
Most low-income Americans hold uncertain or negative perceptions of 
the civil legal system and how it relates to them. 
The survey asked respondents to indicate the extent to which they agreed or 
disagreed with the following three statements about the U.S. civil legal system:46 
•	 The	civil	legal	system	can	help	people	like	me	solve	important	problems	like	
those	discussed	in	this	survey. 		
•	 People	like	me	are	treated	fairly	in	the	civil	legal	system.
•	 People	like	me	are	able	to	use	the	civil	legal	system	to	protect	and	enforce	
their	rights. 		
Figure 4F presents the percent of low-income Americans who agree, disagree, or 
are indifferent/unsure when it comes to these statements. As the figure shows, a 
minority (ranging from 28% to 40%) agrees with the statements, but most people 
either disagree or are indifferent/unsure. For example, only 28% of low-income 
Americans agree with the statement, “People like me are treated fairly in the civil legal 
system. ” Forty-six percent are either indifferent or unsure, and another 24% disagree. 
  
George • Virginia • Elder abuse. George is an elderly veteran with serious health 
issues. He had a caregiver who was neglecting and abusing him – in addition to stealing 
from him. Once Adult Protective Services became involved, they referred George to 
Blue Ridge Legal Services (BRLS). BRLS attorneys helped him revoke the abuser’s 
previous power of attorney and get new powers of attorney in place with trusted family 
members. BRLS also helped George file a civil case against his abuser, which resulted in 
a settlement of $40,000. Additionally, BRLS helped George and the police document the 
stolen money and property, resulting in a parallel criminal case against George’s abuser.Client  
Story
51
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
Figure 4F. Low-income Americans’ attitudes about the U.S. civil legal system47
More than one-half of low-income Americans doubt they could find 
and afford a lawyer if they needed one. 
The survey asked respondents how confident they are that they would be able  
find a lawyer or other legal professional that they could afford if they needed help on 
a serious civil legal problem, such as preventing an eviction, foreclosure, or the loss 
of custody of a child. Figure 4G presents the corresponding results. As the figure 
shows, less than one-half (45%) of low-income Americans express confidence that 
they could find a lawyer that they could afford while 53% either have low confidence 
or are not sure. 
  Only 28%	 of low-income Americans believe that people 
like them are treated fairly in the U.S. civil legal system. 
Percent	of	individuals		|		n=2,003System can help people  
like me solve important  
problems
People like me are treated 
fairly in the system
People like me can use  
the system to protect &  
enforce rightsAgree Disagree Not sure or indifferent
40%
28%
39%45%
46%
42%14%
24%
18%
52
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
 Section 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
Figure 4G. Low-income Americans’ confidence in their ability to find a lawyer 
that they could afford48
    Many low-income Americans cite cost as a reason for not seeking legal 
help in the past year. 
Among those who did not seek legal help for at least one of their recent civil legal 
problems, nearly one-half (46%)49 cited concerns about cost as a reason why. There 
is also evidence to suggest that concerns about cost stood in the way of others’ ability 
to get all of the help they needed. Indeed, among those who sought legal help but did 
not get all that they needed for one or more problems, 61% say one of the reasons 
was that it was too expensive to get more help.50  
 Percent	of	individuals		|		n=2,00353%	 of low-income Americans do not know if they 
would be able to find a lawyer that they could afford if they 
needed help with a serious civil legal problem. 
45%53%Extremely/  
very confident
24%Somewhat  
confident
21%Not very/  
not at all confident
32%Not sure
21%
53
 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans 53Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Low-income Americans did not receive any or enough legal help for 
91% of the pandemic-related civil legal problems that substantially 
impacted their lives. 
Low-income	 Americans	sought	legal	help	for	22%	of	the	substantial	problems	that 	
they	attribute	to	the	COVID-19	pandemic	in	the	past	year.51	Consistent	with	broader 	
findings, 	two	common	reasons	cited	for	not	seeking	legal	help	for	these	problems 	
were	concerns	about	cost	and	the	belief	that	lawyers	could	not	help	with	these 	
problems.52
All	in	all, 	low-income	 Americans	did	not	receive	any	legal	help	or	enough	legal	help 	
for	91%	of	the	pandemic-related	problems	that	impacted	them	substantially. 	Figure 	
4H	below	presents	estimates	for	the	survey-based	justice	gap	measure	for	the 	
three	types	of	problems	most	frequently	attributed	to	the	pandemic	(i.e., 	income 	
maintenance, 	education, 	and	housing). 	
Figure 4H. Percent of substantial, pandemic-related problems for which  
low-income Americans did not receive any or enough legal help in the past 
year (i.e., survey-based justice gap measure)53
Percent	of	pandemic-related	problems	experienced	with	 	
substantial	impact	
*Small	base	size
All pandemic-related problems 
with substantial impact
(n=946)
Income maintenance
(n=141)*
Education
(n=66)*
Housing
(n=231)91%
97%
96%
94%Section 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
54 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS   
This snapshot presents key statistics about the likelihood of low-income Americans seeking and 
receiv ing legal help for each of the four Census regions in the United States. All estimates are based 
exclusively on civil legal problems with substantial impacts and come from LSC’s 2021 Justice Gap 
Measurement Survey.54 The unit of analysis is problems. 
Sought legal help for  
29% of substantial problems.
Did not receive any or enough legal 
help for 88%  of	substantial 	
problems.Sought legal help for  
25% of substantial problems. 
Did not receive any or enough legal 
help for  93%  of	substantial 	
problems. 	
West (n=558) South (n=1,103)
Sought legal help for  
29% of substantial problems.
Did not receive any or enough legal 
help for  92%  of	substantial 	
problems.Sought legal help for  
21% of substantial problems. 
Did not receive any or enough legal 
help for  92%  of	substantial 	
problems.Northeast (n=261) Midwest (n=752)

55 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 4:  Seeking	and	Receiving	Legal	Help
65+
Individuals from Veteran  
Households (n=366)  
Individuals from Households with  
Children (<18 yrs)  (n=1,500)Seniors  (n=222)
Individuals with High  
Housing Costs  (n=1,507)
Recent Survivors of Domestic  
Violence (n=666)Individuals from Rural Areas (n=593)   
Sought legal help for  
34% of substantial problems.  
Did not receive any or enough legal 
help for 	84%  of	substantial 	
problems.
Sought legal help for  
24% of substantial problems.
Did not receive any or enough legal 
help for 	90%  of	substantial 	
problems.Sought legal help for  
26% of substantial problems.  
Did not receive any or enough legal  
help for 	91%  of	substantial 	
problems.
Sought legal help for  
21% of substantial problems.
Did not receive any or enough legal 
help for 	95%  of	substantial 	
problems.
Sought legal help for  
29% of substantial problems.
Did not receive any or enough legal 
help for 	88%  of	substantial 	
problems.Sought legal help for  
21% of substantial problems.  
Did not receive any or enough legal 
help for 	94%  of	substantial 	
problems.SPECIAL FOCUS   
This snapshot presents key statistics about the likelihood of low-income Americans seeking and 
receiv ing legal help for the six subpopulations of interest throughout this report. All estimates are based 
exclusively on civil legal problems with substantial impacts and come from LSC’s 2021 Justice Gap 
Measurement Survey.55 The unit of analysis is problems.
56
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
Comparing  
Income Groups
57
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
Comparing  
Income GroupsSection 5
Leveraging the 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey’s 
sample of households above 125% of the federal 
poverty level, this section compares the experiences 
of low- and higher-income Americans in seeking and 
receiving legal help for recent civil legal problems. More 
specifically, it compares their likelihood to seek legal 
help, their likelihood to receive the help they need, and 
their potential barriers to getting help. 
58
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansiSection 5:  Comparing	Income	Groups
ABOUT THE DATA:  The data in this section come from the 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey and its 
nationally representative samples of low- and higher-income Americans. The section focuses on comparing 
the results for different income groups across some of the same survey items explored in Section Four – 
including items used to estimate the survey-based justice gap measure and items that tap into potential 
knowledge, attitudinal, and cost barriers to getting legal help. This section uses two primary units of analysis: 
problems and individuals.
Comparing	Income	Groups	
While the main focus of this study is to better understand low-income Americans’ 
civil legal needs, the 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey also included a nationally 
representative sample of individuals with household incomes above 125% of FPL. The 
primary purpose of this higher-income sample was to explore how experiences with civil 
legal problems might differ by income. For the purposes of this report, we group individuals 
into the following three categories based on their household income and household size: 
• At or below 125% of FPL 
• Between 125% of FPL and 400% of FPL
•   At or above 400% of FPL
Table 5A presents the approximate annual incomes that correspond to each of these 
income groups for a typical family of four and a typical individual.56
Table 5A. 2022 annual household income levels for income groups of 
interest57
 
 This section focuses primarily on comparisons between people at or below 125% of 
FPL (“low-income Americans”) and people at or above 400% of FPL (“higher-income 
Americans”). This offers the sharpest comparison given that household income  
often fluctuates, and people who are in the middle income group today could very  
well be in the lower or higher income group tomorrow.	 Family of four Individual
125% of FPL or below $34,688	or	less $16,988	or	less
Between 125% and 400%  
of FPL$34,689	to	$111,000 $16,989	to	$54,360
400% of FPL or above $111,001	or	more $54,361	or	more
59
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansComparing	Likelihood	to	Seek	and	Receive	Legal	Help 	
In general, the likelihood to seek legal help is higher for problems with 
substantial impact, and this pattern is more pronounced among people 
with higher incomes. 
Table 5B summarizes each income group’s likelihood of seeking legal help in the past year 
for three groups of problems: all problems, problems with substantial impact, and problems 
with less impact. As the table shows, people are more likely to seek legal help for problems 
with substantial impact. We see this “impact differential” across all three income groups.
Table 5B.  Percent of problems for which people sought legal help, by income58 
	
All problems Problems  
with substantial 
impactProblems with  
less impact 
125% of FPL or below19%
(n=5,784)25%
(n=2,674)14%
(n=3,110)
Between 125% and  
400% of FPL20%
(n=5,666)30%
(n=2,177)14%
(n=3,489)
400% of FPL or above18%
(n=1,231)32%
(n=320)13%
(n=911)Section 5:  Comparing	Income	Groups
Percentage	points	(pp)<=125% of FPL 
>125% and <400% of FPL
>=400% of FPL 11pp
16pp
19pp19 ppFigure 5A charts the impact differential for each income group’s likelihood to seek help; this 
is the difference between their likelihood to seek legal help for problems with substantial 
impact and those with less impact. As the figure shows, the impact differential is larger 
for people with higher incomes. For low-income Americans, the impact differential is 11 
percentage points; they seek help for 25% of their problems with substantial impact and 
14% of those with less impact. The impact differential for those at or above 400% of FPL 
is 19 percentage points; this group seeks legal help for nearly one-third (32%) of their 
problems with substantial impact and for 13% of those with less impact.
Figure 5A.  Impact differential in likelihood to seek legal help, by income59
This impact differential is the difference (in percentage points) between the percent 
seeking help for problems with substantial impact versus problems with less impact. 
60
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 5:  Comparing	Income	Groups
Among higher-income Americans, the survey-based justice gap 
measure is significantly smaller for substantial problems.
Table 5C presents the survey-based justice gap measure for the three income 
groups. As a reminder, this measure reflects the percent of problems that do not 
receive any legal help or enough legal help. As the table shows, the survey-based 
justice gap measure for low-income Americans stays relatively flat regardless of 
impact level (94% versus 92%). Meanwhile, for those at or above 400% of FPL, it is 
significantly lower for problems with more impact (93% versus 78%). This translates 
to an "impact differential" of 15 percentage points for higher-income Americans 
compared to a differential of only three percentage points for low-income Americans. 
Figure 5B shows these impact differentials in chart form. 
Table 5C.  Percent of problems for which people did not receive any or 
enough legal help in the past year (i.e., survey-based justice gap measure), 
by income60
Figure 5B.  Impact differential in survey-based measure of the justice gap, by  
income61
Percentage	points	(pp)<=125% of FPL 
>125% and <400% of FPL
>=400% of FPL 3pp
7pp
15 pp	
All problems Problems  
with substantial 
impactProblems with  
less impact 
125% of FPL or below93%
(n=5,784)92%
(n=2,674)94%
(n=3,110)
Between 125% and  
400% of FPL90%
(n=5,666)86%
(n=2,177)93%
(n=3,489)
400% of FPL or above90%
(n=1,231)78%
(n=320)93%
(n=911)
This impact differential is the difference (in percentage points) between the 
survey-based justice gap measure for problems with substantial impact versus 
problems with less impact.
61
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
Among higher-income Americans, the survey-based 
justice gap measure is smaller for problems with 
substantial impact;  among	low-income	 Americans, 	it	
stays	the	same	no	matter	how	impactful	the	problem 	
might	be. 	
Judy • Montana  • Family. When her daughter died unexpectedly, Judy became the 
legal guardian for her two grandchildren, including a grandson with autism. Soon after 
her daughter’s death, her grandson’s Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) was 
suddenly terminated, and Judy did not know how to get him the services he needed 
without it. She was desperate to find a solution for her family, but knew she could not 
afford an attorney. A friend referred her to Montana Legal Services Association and their 
attorneys were able to collect the documentation necessary to appeal the SSDI decision. 
Judy’s grandson’s benefits were reinstated. Client  
StorySection 5:  Comparing	Income	Groups
Comparing	Potential	Barriers
Section Four of this report examined results for low-income Americans on survey 
measures that tap into three types of potential barriers: knowledge, attitudinal, 
and cost. Below, we compare the results on the same measures for low-income 
Americans versus higher-income Americans. Overall, we find that higher-income 
Americans tend to have more positive attitudes toward the civil legal system and are 
more confident that they could find and afford legal help if they needed it. 
The three income groups are similar when it comes to their 
likelihood to believe that a lawyer could help resolve their civil  
legal problems.
Figure 5C presents the survey results for all three income groups regarding whether 
they think a lawyer (or other legal professional) could help resolve their civil legal 
problems. Respondents answered this question for each of the problems they 
personally experienced in the past year. As the figure shows, there are only slight 
62
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 5:  Comparing	Income	Groups
differences by income. Regardless of income, most Americans either did not think 
that lawyers could help them with these sorts of problems (44% to 47%) or they were 
not sure about it (19% to 30%). 
Figure 5C.  Beliefs about whether a lawyer could help resolve their civil legal 
problems, by income62 
People with higher incomes tend to have more positive views of the 
civil legal system and how it relates to people like them. 
Figure 5D presents the percent of individuals who agree with three statements about 
the U.S. civil legal system and how it might support “people like [them]. ” Overall, these 
results point to significant differences in attitudes about the civil legal system across 
income groups. Indeed, compared to low-income Americans, those at or above 400% 
of FPL are much more likely to agree with all three statements. We see the biggest 
differences with regard to the statement, “People like me are able to use the civil legal 
system to protect and enforce their rights” – with 59% of those at or above 400% of 
FPL agreeing versus 39% of low-income Americans.Percent	of	problems	experienced<=125% of FPL 
(n=9,306)
>125% and <400% of FPL
(n=8,935)
>=400% of FPL  
(n=2,055)Believe  
lawyers
could help 
Not sureDo not believe  
lawyers could help
19%31%28%24%30%
47%47%44%
19%23%
63
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansGloria • Washington, D.C. • Veteran. Gloria is a veteran with post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD). Her veteran benefits were not enough to make ends meet, and 
she was repeatedly denied the Social Security Disability Insurance and other benefits 
that she was entitled to due to her PTSD. She was appealing the denials of benefits 
on her own – without any legal help. Attorneys from Neighborhood Legal Services 
Program of the District of Columbia took her case and were able to secure the benefits 
she needed to pay rent and take care of her other needs.Client  
StorySection 5:  Comparing	Income	Groups
Figure 5D. Percent agreeing with various statements about the U.S. civil legal 
system, by income63
Compared to low-income Americans, those with higher incomes are 
generally more co nfident in their ability to find a lawyer that they 
could afford.
One of the most striking findings from Section Four of this report is the fact that fewer 
than one-half (45%) of low-income Americans expressed confidence in their ability 
to find a lawyer that they could afford if faced with a serious civil legal problem. Figure 
5E presents the percent of individuals from all three income groups who express the 
same level of confidence (i.e., they are “somewhat, ” “very, ” or “extremely confident”). 
As the figure shows, nearly three-quarters (73%) of those at or above 400% of FPL 
say they are at least somewhat confident. This is a striking figure compared to that 
of the low-income group; indeed, higher-income Americans are a full 28 percentage 
points more likely than low-income Americans to express this confidence (73%  
versus 45%).
 Percent	of	individualsSystem can help people like  
me solve important problems
 
People like me are treated  
fairly in the system  
People like me can use the system 
to protect & enforce rights 
59%45%54%
49%32%47%
39%28%40%
	<=125%	of	FPL 	(n=2,003)	 					>125%	and	<400%	of	FPL 	(n=2,318) 					>=400%	of	FPL 	(n=987)

64
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
Section 5:  Comparing	Income	Groups
Figure 5E. Percent confident in ability to find a lawyer they could afford, by 
income64
 73%	 of higher-income Americans are confident in 
their ability to find a lawyer they could afford while only 
45% of low-income Americans say the same. 
Percent	of	individuals<=125% of FPL 
(n=2,003)
>125% and <400% of FPL  
(n=2,318)
>=400% of FPL  
(n=987)45%
59%
73%
65 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 5:  Comparing	Income	Groups
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Income disparities in the justice gap are exacerbated for civil legal 
problems related to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Compared	to	low-income	 Americans, 	those	with	higher	incomes	are	less	likely	to 	
have	experienced	a	civil	legal	problem	related	to	the	COVID-19	pandemic. 	While	one-
third	(33%)	of	low-income	 Americans	experienced	at	least	one	problem	related	to 	
the	pandemic, 	this	is	true	for	only	18%	of	those	at	or	above	400%	of	FPL.65
Table	5C	presents	the	survey-based	measures	of	the	justice	gap	for	all	problems 	
with	substantial	impact	–	breaking	them	out	by	whether	they	were	related	to 		
the	pandemic.
Table 5C. Survey-based justice gap measure for pandemic-related and other 
problems with substantial impact, by income66 
Looking	at	the	column	for	pandemic-related	problems, 	we	see	that	this	measure	of 	
the	justice	gap	is	much	lower	among	those	at	or	above	400%	of	FPL 	compared	to 	
low-income	 Americans. 	Low-income	 Americans	do	not	receive	any	or	enough	legal 	
help	for	91%	of	the	pandemic-related	problems	that	substantially	impacted	them. 	
Meanwhile, 	those	at	or	above	400%	of	FPL 	do	not	receive	any	or	enough	legal	help 	
for	68%	of	these	problems. 	This	translates	to	an	income	disparity	of	23	percentage 	
points	(91%	versus	68%). 	Table	5C	also	makes	clear	that	this	income	disparity	is 	
significantly	greater	for	pandemic-related	problems	compared	to	other	problems 	
(23	versus	8	percentage	points). 		
Percent	of	individuals	 All problems  
with substantial 
impactPandemic-related 
problems with  
substantial impactOther problems 
with substantial 
impact
125% of FPL or below92%
(n=2,674)91%
(n=946)92%
(n=1,728)
Between 125% and  
400% of FPL86%
(n=2,177)81%
(n=723)88%
(n=1,454)
400% of FPL or above78%
(n=320)68%
(n=103)*84%
(n=217)
"Income disparity” in  
percentage points (pp) 14ppp 23pp8pp
Income disparity represents the difference (in percentage points) between the survey-based justice 
gap measure for those at or below 125% of FPL versus those at or above 400% of FPL.
*Small	 base	 size
66 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 5:  Comparing	Income	Groups
GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS   
This snapshot presents the percent of people in each of the four U.S. Census regions who express 
confidence in their ability to find and afford a lawyer  if they need help resolving a serious civil legal 
problem. All estimates come from LSC’s 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey.67 The unit of analysis  
is individuals. 
At or below 125% of FPL (n=257):  
52% are confident.
Between 125% and 400% of FPL (n=284):  
60%  are confident.
At or above 400% of FPL (n=177):*  
71% are confident.At or below 125% of FPL (n=534):  
43% are confident.
Between 125% and 400% of FPL (n=558):  
59%  are confident.
At or above 400% of FPL (n=258):  
76%  are confident.
West South
At or below 125% of FPL (n=402):  
40% are confident.
Between 125% and 400% of FPL (n=529):  
59%  are confident.
At or above 400% of FPL (n=253):  
70%  are confident.At or below 125% of FPL (n=810):  
47% are confident.
Between 125% and 400% of FPL (n=947):  
58%  are confident.
At or above 400% of FPL (n=299):  
74% are confident.Northeast Midwest

67 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans Section 5:  Comparing	Income	Groups
65+
Individuals from
Veteran Households
Individuals from Households with  
Children (<18 yrs)Seniors
Individuals with High  
Housing Costs
Recent Survivors of Domestic  
Violence Individuals from Rural Areas
At or below 125% of FPL (n=242):  
51% are confident.
Between 125% and 400% of FPL (n=416):  
69%  are confident.
At or above 400% of FPL (n=174):*  
76%  are confident.
At or below 125% of FPL (n=889):  
40% are confident.
Between 125% and 400% of FPL (n=918):  
53%  are confident.
At or above 400% of FPL (n=252):  
70%  are confident.At or below 125% of FPL (n=369):  
60% are confident.
Between 125% and 400% of FPL (n=481):  
72% are confident.
At or above 400% of FPL (n=128):*  
87%  are confident.
At or below 125% of FPL (n=826):  
40% are confident.
Between 125% and 400% of FPL (n=617):  
51% are confident.
At or above 400% of FPL (n=82):*  
53%  are confident.
At or below 125% of FPL (n=177):*  
45% are confident.
Between 125% and 400% of FPL (n=112):*  
48%  are confident.
At or above 400% of FPL  
(not enough data to produce estimate)At or below 125% of FPL (n=419):  
45% are confident.
Between 125% and 400% of FPL (n=412):  
56%  are confident.
At or above 400% of FPL (n=93):*  
77% are confident.SPECIAL FOCUS   
This snapshot presents the percent of the subpopulations of interest who express confidence in their 
ability to find and afford a lawyer  if they need help resolving a serious civil legal problem. All estimates 
come from LSC’s 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey.68 The unit of analysis is individuals. 
*Small	base	size
68
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
Reports from  
the Field
Reports from  
the FieldSection 6
Sections Four and Five examined the justice gap 
through the lens of people’s personal experiences 
dealing with specific civil legal problems. This section 
looks at the justice gap through a different lens: legal 
aid organizations’ experiences trying to help low-
income individuals with their civil legal problems. Using 
data from LSC’s 2021 Intake Census, this section 
estimates the number of problems that low-income 
individuals bring to LSC-funded legal aid organizations 
over the course of a year and the extent to which these 
organizations are able to help resolve these problems 
with the limited resources at their disposal. 
70
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 6:  Reports	from	the	Field
iABOUT THE DATA:  The findings in this section come from LSC’s 2021 Intake Census. As part of this four-
week-long intake census conducted in October 2021, LSC-funded organizations tracked all of the times 
individuals requested legal help from their organizations. They tracked which problems they were able to 
serve fully, to some extent, and not at all. The resulting data permit an estimate of the intake-based measure 
of the justice gap. This measure focuses on the extent to which LSC-funded organizations are able to provide 
any or enough legal help for the civil legal problems low-income individuals bring to their doors. The unit of 
analysis in this section is problems.
Requests	for	Legal	Help
Over the course of a year, low-income individuals approach LSC-
funded legal aid organizations for help with an estimated 1.9 million 
civil legal problems.
As a general rule, to be eligible for LSC-funded legal help, an individual must have a 
household income at or below 125% of FPL,69 and their civil legal problem cannot be 
related to an issue prohibited by LSC regulations, such as abortion, euthanasia, and 
class-action litigation.70 For the purposes of this report, we call civil legal problems 
that meet these criteria “eligible” problems.71
During LSC’s four-week 2021 Intake Census, low-income individuals approached 
LSC-funded organizations with approximately 147 ,000 unique eligible problems.72 
Assuming these four weeks represent intake activity for a typical four-week period in 
the year, this translates to an estimated 1.9 million eligible problems over the course 
of a year. 
 
In reality, the number of civil legal problems requiring legal help 
among low-income individuals in the United States is much greater. 
Impactful as it is, we also know that the estimate of 1.9 million for the number of civil 
legal problems low-income individuals bring to LSC-funded organizations grossly 
underestimates the amount of need. It is impossible to know how much this number 
underestimates the broader need, but we know there are several reasons to expect it 
to be a gross underestimation. The most important reasons include the following:  Low-income individuals approach LSC-funded legal aid  
organizations for help with an estimated 	1.9	million	civil 	
legal	problems  annually.
71
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 6:  Reports	from	the	Field
Completing the intake process: LSC’s 2021 Intake Census counts only problems 
that went through the full intake process to determine eligibility; this does not include 
situations in which people approach legal aid organizations in contexts without formal 
intake processes (e.g., help desks through community partnerships) or situations in 
which people do not make it through the intake process due to time constraints or 
other issues that arise. 
Help-seeking behavior:  Section Four of this report showed that low-income 
Americans seek legal help from any legal professional (not just legal aid) for an 
estimated 19% of their problems (25% of their problems with substantial impact), 
which would suggest that the 1.9 million estimate represents a very small slice of the 
actual civil legal need.
Limited universe: The 1.9 million figure corresponds only to the number of problems 
presented to legal aid organizations funded by LSC; while LSC is the largest funder of 
civil legal aid in the country, there are also many other legal aid organizations serving 
low-income communities that operate outside of LSC’s network. 
Providing	Legal	Help
LSC-funded organizations are able to provide some degree of legal 
help for about one-half of the eligible civil legal problems brought  
to them. 
LSC’s 2021 Intake Census data indicate that LSC-funded organizations are able to 
provide legal help for one-half (51%) of the eligible problems low-income individuals 
bring to them. See Figure 6A. This translates to nearly 1 million distinct civil legal 
problems over the course of a year. 
Figure 6A.  Percent of eligible problems receiving legal help from LSC-funded 
organizations73 
49%51%Did not receive any legal help
An estimated 938,000  
problems annuallyAn estimated 975,000  
problems annuallyReceived some degree of legal help
Percent	of	problems		|		n=146,724
72
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 6:  Reports	from	the	Field
Legal help is generally provided through one of three forms: information 
and resources, brief services and advice, or extended services.
Table 6A provides an overview of the level and types of legal help legal aid organizations 
provide. The figures in the table represent the percent of eligible civil legal problems served that 
receive each type of legal help, according to LSC’s 2021 Intake Census. The table shows that 
LSC-funded organizations provide extended services for about one in five (21%) of the eligible 
civil legal problems they are able to serve. They provide brief services and advice to about one-
half (51%) of the problems they serve and general information and self-help resources to 28%. 
Table 6A.  Legal help provided by LSC-funded organizations74 With the resources currently available, LSC-funded  
organizations are able to provide legal help for one-half	of 	
the	legal	problems	brought	to	their	doors . 
General  
information and  
self-help resources
28% 
of problems  Providing general legal information and self-help materials 
related to an individual’s type of civil legal problem.
Examples:    
• Giving guidance on how to complete legal forms/documents. 
• Explaining the requirements on how to file for custody or 
apply for benefits.
Brief services  
and advice
51% 
of problems 	Providing brief services and/or advice that are specific to an 
individual’s civil legal problem and situation.
Examples:    
• Providing advice about how to handle a custody hearing.
• Writing a demand letter to a landlord to repair a rented home.
Extended services
21% 
of problems  This includes a wide variety of legal assistance specific to 
an individual’s civil legal problem that requires extensive 
attention. 
Examples:   
• Preparing complex legal documents (e.g., advance directives, 
appeals for benefits, real estate documents).
• Representing a client in court, in administrative proceedings, 
or in interactions with third parties.
73
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansThe level of legal help an organization dedicates to a given problem depends on 
at least two factors: the type of help needed in order to resolve a problem and the 
resources available to meet that need. 
Problems related to housing and to family and safety make up nearly 
two-thirds of all the problems receiving legal help from LSC-funded 
organizations.
Figure 6B shows the distribution of problems receiving legal help across problem 
categories. This distribution is based on the LSC’s 2021 Intake Census data, but it 
is worth noting that it tracks very closely with LSC’s recent Grantee Activity Reports 
data and the pattern of the total case services provided by LSC-funded organizations 
in recent years.75
Nearly two-thirds (64%) of all the problems receiving legal help from LSC-funded 
organizations are either related to housing (36%) or related to family and safety 
(28%). Readers might recall from Section Three of this report that while these are not 
the most common types of problems experienced by low-income Americans (see 
Figure 3B), they are the types of problems most likely to have a substantial impact 
(see Figure 3D). Additionally, LSC-funded organizations often prioritize these types 
of problems in the case acceptance guidelines they develop in order to maximize the 
potential impact of the limited resources at their disposal.76 
Figure 6B.  Distribution of the types of problems receiving legal help from 
LSC-funded organizations77Section 6:  Reports	from	the	Field
Housing
Family & safety
Income maintenance
Consumer issues
Employment
Health care
Education36%
28%
8%
6%
6%
10%2%
2%
1%
Other  
(includes	disability	and	official	records)
Miscellaneous
(includes	wills	&	estates)
Percent	of	problems	served		|		n=65,757
74
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
Section 6:  Reports	from	the	Field
Even when they are able to provide legal help, LSC-funded 
organizations often lack the resources to help people fully resolve their 
civil legal problems. 
Given the resources available, LSC-funded organizations are often unable to provide 
enough legal help to fully resolve people’s civil legal problems. Indeed, they are not 
able to provide all the legal help needed for an estimated 44% of the problems they 
serve. This estimate is based on organizations’ reports of whether they have already 
provided enough help to fully resolve a problem or whether they expect to be able to 
do so given the resources they can devote to it. See Figure 6C.
Figure 6C.  Percent of problems served that will receive enough legal help to 
resolve the issue78 Problems related to 	housing	and	family/safety	 make 
up the majority of problems receiving legal help from 
LSC-funded organizations. 
44%56%NOT ENOUGH
Not expected to receive enough  
legal help to resolve problem  ENOUGH
Expected to receive enough legal  
help to resolve problem  
An estimated 428,000  
problems annuallyAn estimated 547,000  
problems annually
Percent	of	problems	served		|		n=74,795
Eleanor • Ohio • Employment.  The pandemic upended Eleanor’s work providing 
entertainment for weddings and other local events. At first, she did not panic – trusting 
that unemployment insurance (UI) would help her stay afloat until things went back to 
normal. When her application for UI was repeatedly denied, she did not know how she 
would make ends meet. She did not seek legal help at first because she did not think she 
could afford it. A friend referred her to the Legal Aid Society of Cleveland (LASC), where 
attorneys helped her successfully appeal for UI and helped her get back on her feet. Client  
Story
75
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 6:  Reports	from	the	Field
Intake-based	Measurement	of	the	 Justice	Gap
Due to limited resources, LSC-funded legal aid organizations are 
unable to provide any legal help for about one-half of the eligible civil 
legal problems brought to their doors. 
Figure 6A showed that LSC-funded organizations are not able to provide any legal 
help to 49% of the eligible problems brought to them. This translates to an estimated 
938,000 problems turned away over the course of a year. More than one-half (52%) 
of these problems are turned away because they fall outside of the priority guidelines 
organizations develop to maximize use of limited resources. Another 18% fall within 
the priority guidelines but are turned away due to insufficient funds to provide service. 
The remaining 30% are turned away for reasons that are best described as ways 
that people can often “fall through the cracks. ” These are civil legal problems that 
organizations hope to be able to serve but are unable to due to difficulty maintaining 
contact with the potential client (or some other similar challenge). Securing legal help 
and following through with the many tasks required is a cumbersome process; this 
is true for anyone, and even more so for individuals and families who are also dealing 
with the challenges of poverty. With sufficient resources to dedicate to intake, follow-
up, and additional hands-on support for people expressing a need for legal help, legal 
aid organizations could avoid – or at least minimize – losing these opportunities to 
serve people’s legal needs. 
LSC-funded organizations are unable to provide any or enough legal 
help for an estimated 1.4 million eligible problems brought to their 
doors over the course of a year.  
In Section Four, we used the 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey data to generate 
a survey-based measure of the justice gap. That measure focused on the extent to 
which low-income Americans received any or enough legal help for all of their civil 
legal problems. Here, we use LSC’s 2021 Intake Census data to generate another 
measure of the justice gap. This measure focuses on the extent to which LSC-funded 
organizations are able to provide any or enough legal help for the civil legal problems 
low-income individuals bring to their doors. 
As already established, LSC’s 2021 Intake Census indicates that low-income 
individuals likely seek legal help from LSC-funded organizations for more than 1.9 
million problems annually. Seven out of every 10 (71%) of these problems will either 
not receive any legal help or not receive enough legal help to be fully resolved. Over the 
course of a year, this translates to an estimated 1.4 million problems that will not get 
any or enough legal help. Table 6B summarizes the various data points that inform this 
intake-based measure of the justice gap. 
76
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
Section 6:  Reports	from	the	Field
 LSC-funded organizations are unable to provide any or 
enough legal help to resolve an estimated 1.4	million 		
eligible	problems  brought to their doors in a year.
Table 6B.  Components of the intake-based measure of the justice gap79
	 Count from 
LSC’s 2021  
Intake Census Proportion  
of eligible  
problemsAnnual  
estimate
Total eligible problems 147,000 100%1,913,000
Problems receiving some 
but not enough help33,000 22%428,000
Problems not receiving  
any legal help72,000 49%938,000
Problems not receiving  
any or enough legal help 
(i.e., the intake-based  
justice gap measure) 105,000 71%1,366,000
Pippa • Alabama • Employment.  When the pandemic hit, Pippa could no longer 
start her new job as a census collector for the U.S. Census Bureau; her job offer was 
suspended indefinitely. Unable to find any other work during the pandemic, she was 
struggling financially. Her application for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance (PUA) 
was denied under the assumption that her inability to work was not caused by the 
pandemic. Legal Services Alabama helped her collect the documentation and make the 
case that the suspension of her job offer was indeed caused by the pandemic. Pippa  
was approved for PUA, which helped her make ends meet until her census collector job  
eventually started. Client  
Story
Section 2:  T oday’s Low-income America
77 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansImpact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The pandemic presented new challenges for the ways LSC-funded 
organizations reach and serve low-income individuals and families.
Like	most	other	office-based	organizations, 	most	LSC-funded	organizations	went 	
remote	starting	in	the	spring	of	2020. 	The	shift	to	remote	work	had	important 	
implications	for	many	areas	of	their	work, 	including	the	following: 	
 Resources.  Many	organizations	had	to	invest	substantial	resources	in 	
“teching	up” 	for	remote	work	–	acquiring	new	technology	and	equipment, 	
training	staff	on	how	to	use	it, 	and	establishing	new	protocols	to	manage 	
communication	and	data	systems. 	Fortunately, 	the	financial	cost	of	most 	
of	these	technological	upgrades	was	largely	covered	by	the	funding	LSC 	
received	under	the	CARES	 Act.	However, 	the	transition	to	remote	work 	
used	other	resources	(e.g., 	staff’s	time)	that	would	have	otherwise	been 	
dedicated	to	providing	legal	services.
 
Courts. Throughout	the	country, 	many	courts	closed	or	moved	to	virtual
formats	for	a	period	of	time	during	the	pandemic. 	This	had	wide-reaching
consequences	for	legal	aid	organizations. 	For	example, 	this	led	to	backlogs
in	the	courts	that	are	still	affecting	how	quickly	civil	legal	cases	are
processed	to	this	day. 	Additionally, 	both	legal	aid	attorneys	and	their	clients
had	to	figure	out	how	to	effectively	navigate	court	proceedings	held	online. 	
This	was	particularly	challenging	for	clients, 	many	of	whom	have	limited 	
access	to	the	internet.
 
 Outreach and education. Organizations	had	to	figure	out	new	ways	to 	
conduct	outreach	and	education	in	their	communities. 	This	work	focuses 	
on	raising	awareness	about	individuals’ 	rights, 	how	to	find	legal	help, 	and	
general	information	about	common	civil	legal	issues	–	and	had	traditionally 	
been	done	mostly	in	person. 	During	the	pandemic, 	many	organizations	recast 	
parts	of	their	outreach	efforts	into	virtual	events	and	social	media	activity. 	The	
pandemic	also	led	some	organizations	to	create	new	community	partnerships 	
or	to	strengthen	existing	ones	as	a	way	to	reach	more	people. 	
Likely	owing	in	large	part	to	the	above	challenges, 	LSC-funded	organizations 	
ended	up	closing	fewer	cases	in	2020	compared	to	the	prior	year. 	It	is	important 	
to	note, 	however, 	that	this	decrease	in	cases	does	not	generalize	across	all	types 	
of	problems. 	Indeed, 	compared	to	2019, 	LSC-funded	organizations	actually	closed 	
more	cases	related	to	income	maintenance, 	employment, 	and	domestic	violence 	
during	the	first	year	of	the	pandemic.80$
78 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 6:  Reports	from	the	Field
GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS   
This snapshot shares results from LSC’s 2021 Intake Census for each of the four U.S. Census regions. All 
estimates are based on the information provided by LSC-funded organizations in each region during the 
four-week intake census conducted in October of 2021. The unit of analysis is problems. 
Approximately  387,000  eligible  
problems brought to LSC-funded 
organizations annually.
They are unable to provide any or enough 
legal help for 72%  of these problems.Approximately  417,000  eligible  
problems brought to LSC-funded 
organizations annually.
They are unable to provide any or enough 
legal help for 73%  of these problems.
West South
Approximately  407,000  eligible  
problems brought to LSC-funded 
organizations annually.
They are unable to provide any or enough 
legal help for 78%  of these problems.Approximately  655,000  eligible  
problems brought to LSC-funded 
organizations annually.
They are unable to provide any or enough 
legal help for 69%  of these problems.Northeast Midwest

79 The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansSection 6:  Reports	from	the	Field
65+
In 2021, LSC-funded  
organizations provided legal  
help to 36,000  veteran  
households.
In 2021, LSC-funded  
organizations served  
households that included more 
than 730,000  children  
combined. In 2021, LSC-funded  
organizations provided legal  
help to 138,000  seniors.
In 2021, LSC-funded  
organizations handled more than  
300,000  cases related to  
housing.
In 2021, LSC-funded  
organizations closed more  
than 148,000  cases involving  
domestic violence. In partnership with Equal Justice 
Works, LSC has placed 190 law 
student fellows in 64 legal aid 
organizations serving rural clients 
through the Rural Summer Legal 
Corps (RSLC) program since 2016. 
Veterans  
Children (<18 yrs) Seniors
People with High Housing Costs
Domestic ViolenceRural Areas   SPECIAL FOCUS   
This snapshot shares information about the types of cases and people served by LSC-funded legal aid 
organizations as they relate to the six subpopulations of interest in this report. With the exception of the 
information shared about rural areas, these snapshot figures come from a preliminary analysis of LSC’s 
2021 Grantee Activity Reports data. The unit of analysis varies.81
80
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans 1 While not common, the right to counsel for civil legal matters exists in some places and for some types 
of legal matters. For example, the right to counsel exists for eviction cases in the states of Connecticut, 
Maryland, and Washington and in several cities. For the most up-to-date information on the civil right to 
counsel, see: 	http://civilrighttocounsel.org/ .
 2 The regional categorization used by the U.S. Census Bureau can be found here: https://www2.census.
gov/geo/pdfs/maps-data/maps/reference/us_regdiv.pdf.
 3 We define these groups in the following ways for the purposes of this report: “seniors” typically refers 
to people who are 65 years or older, though information based on LSC’s Grantee Activity Reports 
treats anyone 60 years old or older as a “senior;” “veterans” refers to anyone who has served in the 
military, military reserves, or national guard; for survey data, “rural” refers to nonmetro counties as 
coded in the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Economic Research Service’s 2013 Rural-Urban 
Continuum Codes (see: https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/rural-urban-continuum-codes/
documentation/ ); for U.S. Census data, “rural” refers to nonmetro areas; “children” refers to individuals 
under 18 years old; for survey data, “recent survivors of domestic violence” refers to individuals who 
report having experienced domestic violence in the past 12 months; someone is considered to have 
“high housing costs” if they spend more than 50% of their household income on housing expenses 
(consistent with the definition used by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). 
 4 The client stories are based on information that LSC-funded organizations have shared with LSC to 
provide examples of how the provision of legal assistance impacted clients. 
 5 Note that some of the client stories featured in this report are also featured in study-related videos 
hosted on the study website: 	justicegap.lsc.gov . The clients featured in the videos authorized the use of 
their images and names for the purposes of the videos. 
 6 See NORC’s 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey technical report for details about the differences 
between the 2017 and 2021 surveys; this report can be found on the study website: 	justicegap.lsc.gov .
 7 Source: U.S. Census Bureau, T able: Poverty Thresholds for 2021 by Size of Family and Number of Related 
Children Under 18 Years  (accessed in April 2022); the household income for a family of four assumes the 
family consists of two adults under 65 years old with two dependent children, and the household income 
for an individual assumes the individual is under 65 years old.
 8 Source: U.S.  Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2021 Annual Social and Economic Supplement 
(CPS ASEC). T able POV46: Poverty Status by State: 2020  (accessed in March 2022).
 9 An estimated 87% of the general U.S. population lives in a metropolitan area; source: U.S. Census 
Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2021 Annual Social and Economic Supplement (CPS ASEC). T able 
POV40 (by region): Age, Sex, and Household Relationship of People by Region and Residence – Ratio of 
Income to Poverty Level: 2020  (accessed in March 2022).
10  Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2021 Annual Social and Economic Supplement 
(CPS ASEC). T able POV40: Age, Sex, and Household Relationship of People by Region and Residence – 
Ratio of Income to Poverty Level: 2020  (accessed in March 2022).
11  Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2021 Annual Social and Economic Supplement 
(CPS ASEC). T able POV01: Age and Sex of All People, Family Members and Unrelated Individuals: 2020 
(accessed in March 2022).
12  Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2021 Annual Social and Economic Supplement 
(CPS ASEC). T able POV01: Age and Sex of All People, Family Members and Unrelated Individuals: 2020 
(accessed in March 2022).
13  Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2021 Annual Social and Economic Supplement 
(CPS ASEC). T able POV04: Primary Families by Age of Householder, Number of Children, and Family 
Structure: 2020  (accessed in March 2022).Endnotes
81
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansEndnotes
14  Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2021 Annual Social and Economic Supplement 
(CPS ASEC). T able POV01: Age and Sex of All People, Family Members and Unrelated Individuals: 2020 
(accessed in March 2022).
15  Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2019 American Community Survey (ACS); estimates were produced 
through IPUMS USA database (accessed March 2022): Ruggles, S., Flood, S., Foster, S., Goeken, R., 
Pacas, J., Schouweiler, M., Sobek, M. 2021. IPUMS USA: Version 11.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS.
16  See, for example: Chen, J. T., & Krieger, N. 2021. Revealing the Unequal Burden of COVID-19 by Income, 
Race/Ethnicity, and Household Crowding: US County Versus Zip Code Analyses. Journal of Public 
Health Management and Practice: JPHMP , 27 Suppl 1, COVID-19 and Public Health: Looking Back, Moving 
Forward , S43–S56; Quan, D., Luna Wong, L., Shallal, A., Madan, R., Hamdan, A., Ahdi, H., Daneshvar, 
A., Mahajan, M., Nasereldin, M., Van Harn, M., Opara, I. N., & Zervos, M. 2021. Impact of Race and 
Socioeconomic Status on Outcomes in Patients Hospitalized with COVID-19. Journal of General Internal 
Medicine, 36 (5), 1302–1309; Finch, W. H., & Hernández Finch, M. E. 2020. Poverty and Covid-19: Rates 
of Incidence and Deaths in the United States During the First 10 Weeks of the Pandemic. Frontiers in 
Sociology , 5, 47. 
17  With the help of the Institute for Research on Poverty at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, the 
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning & Evaluation (ASPE) in the U.S. Department of Health & 
Human Services (HHS) produced a brief summarizing the impact of the first year of the pandemic on 
low-income families: “The Impact of the First Year of the COVID-19 Pandemic and Recession on Families 
with Low Incomes” (September 2021) ( https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/2021-09/low-income-
covid-19-impacts.pdf ). 
18  Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Household Pulse Survey, Week 43 (March 2 – 14). Tables: Employment 
T able 1, Food Sufficiency and Food Security T able 1, Health T able 2a, and Housing T able 1b  (accessed in 
March 2022). 
19  Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2021 Annual Social and Economic Supplement 
(CPS ASEC). T able POV40: Age, Sex, and Household Relationship of People by Region and Residence – 
Ratio of Income to Poverty Level: 2020  (accessed in March 2022).
20 The information on this page that pertains to seniors, households with children, and people in rural 
areas come from: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2021 Annual Social and Economic 
Supplement (CPS ASEC), various tables (accessed in March 2022); the information pertaining to 
veterans comes from: U.S. Census Bureau, 2019 American Community Survey (ACS) and the estimates 
were produced through IPUMS USA database (accessed March 2022): Ruggles, S., Flood, S., Foster, S., 
Goeken, R., Pacas, J., Schouweiler, M., Sobek, M. 2021. IPUMS USA: Version 11.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, 
MN: IPUMS; the information that pertains to people with high housing costs comes from: U.S. Census 
Bureau, 2019 American Housing Survey (AHS) using the AHS T able Creator  in March 2022 (national 
2019 housing costs by household income, no filters); the information that pertains to survivors of 
domestic violence comes from: Bonomi, A. E., Trabert, B., Anderson, M. L., Kernic, M. A., & Holt, V. L. 
2014. Intimate partner violence and neighborhood income: a longitudinal analysis. Violence against 
women , 20(1), 42–58. 
21  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; results based on count of respondents’ reports of 
problems personally experienced and experienced by others in household in the past year from among 
81 distinct problems. Note that a given problem can only be counted once per household. For a full list of 
the 81 problems, see the questionnaire on the study website: justicegap.lsc.gov .
22  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; for information about how specific problems were 
categorized into problem types, see NORC’s 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey technical report on 
the study website: 	justicegap.lsc.gov . 
23  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; n = 1,194 homeowner households.
24  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; note that the prevalence rate of experiencing a problem 
related to disability is 16% for households with someone who either has a disability or cares for a loved 
one who does (n=1,152 households).
82
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans25  For example, see: Pleasence, P ., Balmer, N.J., Buck, A., O’Grady, A., and Glenn, H. 2004. Multiple justiciable 
problems: common clusters, problem order and social and demographic indicators. Journal of Empirical 
Legal Studies , 1(2): 201-329; Desmond, Matthew. 2017. Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City. 
Penguin Books; Tobin Tyler, E., Lawton, E., Conroy, K., Sandel, M. and Zuckerman, B. 2011. P overty, Health 
and Law: Readings and Cases for Medical-legal Partnerships . Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press.
26  Note that, here, “eviction households” refers to households for which a respondent reported that they 
or another household member had experienced a civil legal problem related to eviction in the past year 
(e.g., falling behind on rent or receiving an eviction notice); likewise, “domestic violence households” 
refers to households for which a respondent reported that they or another household member had 
experienced domestic violence of some sort in the past year.
27  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; note that the estimates for eviction households reflect 
problems in addition to  eviction-related ones (problems related to eviction are not included in the count); 
the same is true for estimates for domestic violence households – they are in addition to  problems 
involving domestic violence. 
28  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q4A – Q4E; Q4A: Overall, how much would you say 
this problem has negatively affected you or others in your household?  Q4B – Q4E: How much has this 
problem negatively affected the [impact area] of/for you or any other person in your household? Impact 
areas: physical health or safety, mental or emotional health, financial situation, relationships with family 
members and others) ; response options for Q4A – Q4E: severely, very much, moderately, slightly, not 
at all. Note that survey items Q4B – Q4E were not presented to respondents who answered “not at all” 
to Q4A; to produce the proportions in this figure for the entire low-income sample of individuals, we 
assume these respondents would have answered “not at all” to Q4B – Q4E and code them accordingly 
(this increases the denominator used in estimates and potentially leads to an underestimation of the 
proportion of people who were substantially impacted in those specific areas). 
29  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; the results in this figure are based on Q4A (see previous 
endnote for question wording and response options). For a given category, the percentage reported 
reflects the proportion of individuals — among all who personally experienced at least one problem in 
that category — who indicated that at least one problem in the category had negatively affected them 
“very much” or “severely” overall.
30 Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q3: Do you think this problem was related to the 
COVID-19 pandemic or circumstances surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic?  Response options: yes, 
no, not sure.  For each set of individuals (differentiated by characteristics of their households), the 
percentage reported reflects the proportion of individuals — among all those in the set who personally 
experienced at least one problem — who indicated that at least one of their personally experienced 
problems was related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Note that “households with children < 12 yrs” are 
actually households with parents of children < 12 years old; it is possible that the children do not actually 
live in the same household. 
31  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey. 
32  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; note that we consider a respondent’s household 
to have “recent domestic violence” if the respondent indicated that they or someone else in the 
household had experienced a problem involving domestic violence in the past 12 months; note also that 
“households with children (<18 yrs)” are actually households with parents of children < 18 years old; it is 
possible that the children do not actually live in the same household.
33  Note that several estimates related to seeking legal help in this section differ from those presented in 
NORC’s technical survey report because our analysis includes some observations that were not included 
in the analysis informing that report; more specifically, we include cases where the respondent initially 
said they did not speak with a legal professional in Q5, but later indicated that they had unsuccessfully 
tried to speak a legal professional in Q6.
34  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; we count a respondent as having sought legal help 
for any problem for which they answered “yes” to Q5 or “I tried, but I wasn’t able to talk to a legal 
professional” to Q6. Q5: At any time while you were dealing with this problem, did you do any of the 
following? T alk to a lawyer or legal professional about the problem. Response options: yes, no. Q6: Why 
haven’t you talked to a lawyer or other legal professional about this problem? I tried, but I wasn’t able to 
talk to a legal professional .Endnotes
83
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans35  This finding is consistent with 2017 results – but note that the 2017 Justice Gap report discussed 
problems related to children and custody as separate from other family matters. 
36  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q5 and Q6 (see endnote 34). 
37  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q8: What kind of legal help did you want when you 
decided to talk to a lawyer or other legal professional?  Response options:  learning where to look for legal 
information online; help filling out a legal document or form; handling communication with the other 
people involved in the issue (including demand letters); legal advice about your specific situation and 
what actions you should take; help negotiating with the other people involved in the issue; representation 
by a lawyer or other legal professional in court, including filing court documents; other; none of the above. 
Note: these estimates correspond only to the set of respondents who said that they spoke to a legal 
professional for a given problem in Q5; it does not include people who indicated that they tried to speak 
to someone but were not able to do so in Q6.
38  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q10: As of today, have you been able to get as much 
legal help with this issue as you wanted?  Response options: yes, no; base n=1,059 problems. 
39  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q10 (see previous endnote); base n=635 problems.
40 For more information about this survey-based measure of the justice gap – including how it might 
underestimate or overestimate the justice gap – please see the additional information provided on the 
study website: justicegap.lsc.gov . 
41  Reminder: As discussed in the “about the data” information for this section, the number of problems 
considered was capped at 10 problems per respondent; readers can find additional information on the 
study website: justicegap.lsc.gov .
42  This is based on items Q5 and Q6 in the 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey.
43  This is based on item Q10 in the 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey.
44  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; additional details on how the survey-based estimates of 
the justice gap were produced can be found on the study website: justicegap.lsc.gov . 
45  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q2 (see previous endnote). 
46  See NORC’s 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey technical report for a discussion of the 
measurement strategy for these survey items, including a consideration of the utility of agreement 
scales in this case. 
47  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q16 – Q18: T o what extent do you agree or disagree 
with the statement below? People like me are able to use the civil legal system to protect and enforce 
their rights; people like me are treated fairly in the civil legal system; the civil legal system can help people 
like me solve important problems like those discussed in this survey . Response options: strongly agree, 
somewhat agree, neither agree nor disagree; somewhat disagree; strongly disagree. Numbers do not total 
to 100% due to rounding and a small percent of respondents who did not provide a response.
48  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q15: How confident are you that you would be able find 
a lawyer or other professional that you could afford if you needed help on a serious civil legal problem, 
such as preventing an eviction, foreclosure, or the loss of custody of a child?  Response options: extremely 
confident, very confident, somewhat confident, not too confident, not at all confident. Numbers do not 
total to 100% due to rounding and a small percent of respondents who did not provide a response. 
49  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; n=1264; Q6: Why haven’t you talked to a lawyer or other 
legal professional about this problem? I was worried about the cost. 
50 Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; n=110* (*small base); Q11: Why haven’t you gotten all 
the legal help you wanted? T oo expensive to get more help .
51  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; n=946; Q5: At any time while you were dealing with 
this problem, did you do any of the following? T alk to a lawyer or legal professional about the problem. 
Response options: yes, no.
52  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q6, n=621 respondents; 38% and 33% of low-income 
Americans offered these reasons, respectively, to explain why they did not seek help for one or more of 
their COVID-attributed problems.Endnotes
84
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansEndnotes
53  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey.
54  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; results regarding seeking legal help come from items Q5 
and Q6; results regarding receiving any or enough help are based on the survey-based justice gap measure. 
55  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; results regarding seeking legal help come from items 
Q5 and Q6; results regarding receiving any or enough help are based on the survey-based justice gap 
measure; note that “households with children (<18 yrs)” are actually households with parents of children 
< 18 years old; it is possible that the children do not actually live in the same household.
56  Note that these figures are based on the poverty guidelines for the 48 contiguous states and the District 
of Columbia; they are separate guidelines for Hawaii and Alaska.
57  Source: 2022 Poverty Guidelines from the Department of Health and Human Services as published in 
the Federal Register (January 21, 2022), Vol. 87, No. 14 ( https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-
2022-01-21/pdf/2022-01166.pdf ).
58  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q5: At any time while you were dealing with this 
problem, did you do any of the following? T alk to a lawyer or legal professional about the problem.  
Response options: yes, no.
5 9  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; this impact differential was calculated by subtracting 
the percent seeking help for problems with less impact from the percent seeking help for problems with 
substantial impact for each income group. See Table 5B for the numbers used in the calculation.  
60 Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; additional details on how the survey-based estimates of 
the justice gap were produced can be found on the study website: 	justicegap.lsc.gov . 
61  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; this impact differential was calculated by subtracting 
the survey-based justice gap measure for problems with less impact from the survey-based justice gap 
measure for problems with substantial impact for each income group. See Table 5C for the numbers 
used in the calculation. 
62  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q2: In your opinion, is this a type of problem that a 
lawyer or other legal professional could help resolve?  Response options: y es, no, not sure.   
63  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q16 – Q18: T o what extent do you agree or disagree 
with the statement below? People like me are able to use the civil legal system to protect and enforce 
their rights; people like me are treated fairly in the civil legal system; the civil legal system can help people 
like me solve important problems like those discussed in this survey. Response options: strongly agree, 
somewhat agree, neither agree nor disagree; somewhat disagree; strongly disagree. See NORC’s 2021 
Justice Gap Measurement Survey technical report for a discussion of the measurement strategy for 
these survey items. Figure reports percent saying they strongly agree or somewhat agree. 
64  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q15: How confident are you that you would be able find 
a lawyer or other professional that you could afford if you needed help on a serious civil legal problem, 
such as preventing an eviction, foreclosure, or the loss of custody of a child? Response options: extremely 
confident, very confident, somewhat confident, not too confident, not at all confident. Figure reports 
percent saying they are at least somewhat confident. 
65  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q3: Do you think this problem was related to the 
COVID-19 pandemic or circumstances surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic?  Response options: yes, no, 
not sure.  n=1,466 for <=125% of FPL, n=549 for >=400% of FPL. 
66 Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; additional details on how the survey-based estimates of 
the justice gap were produced can be found on the study website: 	justicegap.lsc.gov .
67  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; Q15: How confident are you that you would be able find 
a lawyer or other professional that you could afford if you needed help on a serious civil legal problem, 
such as preventing an eviction, foreclosure, or the loss of custody of a child? Response options: extremely 
confident, very confident, somewhat confident, not too confident, not at all confident.  Figures in this 
snapshot reflect the percent saying they are at least somewhat confident.
68  Source: 2021 Justice Gap Measurement Survey; see previous endnote. Also note that “households with 
children (<18 yrs)” are actually households with parents of children < 18 years old; it is possible that the 
children do not actually live in the same household.
85
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income AmericansEndnotes
6 9  Note that while the overwhelming majority of individuals served by LSC-funded organizations have 
household incomes at or below 125% of FPL, LSC regulations allow funds to be used to serve individuals 
with incomes up to 200% of FPL; see 45 CFR § 1611.5(a) (3) and (4). 
70  For information about current statutory and regulatory restrictions on the use of LSC funds, please see 
the overview on LSC’s website: https://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/laws-regulations-and-guidance/lsc-
restrictions-and-other-funding-sources .
71  It is important to note that, for the purposes of this analysis and report, we exclude requests for 
assistance that were not accepted due to conflicts of interest. These cases are technically “eligible” 
based on the criteria presented in this report, but LSC-funded organizations are nonetheless unable 
to serve them due to conflicts of interest. These cases constitute a very small portion of the overall 
requests for assistance. Note that other LSC publications include these cases in their analysis and 
estimates and therefore might have slightly different estimates. 
72  Throughout this section, all counts and estimates include “pending” cases; organizations have 
determined that these cases were eligible for assistance, but had not yet determined whether or how 
much service the cases would receive. There were 17,730 pending cases (out of a total of 146,724 eligible 
cases). For the purpose of this analysis, these cases were distributed proportionately across service 
categories. 
73  Source: LSC’s 2021 Intake Census. 
74  Source: LSC’s 2021 Intake Census.
75  For example, see Figure 4.2A in LSC’s 2020 “By the Numbers” publication; Lim, L., Layton, J., Abdelhadi, 
S., Bernstein, D., Ahmed, R. 2021. LSC By the Numbers: The Data Underlying Legal Aid Programs (2020). 
Legal Services Corporation, Washington, D.C.
76  LSC-funded organizations conduct comprehensive legal needs assessments in their communities on a 
regular basis to inform these guidelines.  
77  Source: LSC’s 2021 Intake Census. These figures reflect only the cases for which the level of service was 
determined (i.e., pending cases are not included).
78  Source: LSC’s 2021 Intake Census.
79  Source: LSC’s 2021 Intake Census; the counts and estimates are rounded to the nearest thousand. 
Annual estimates are projected counts for the entire year, assuming that the intake census four-week 
period represents a typical four-week period for intake activity. The annual estimates were produced this 
way: (count) x (52.14/4) = annual estimate. 
80 Source: Lim, L., Layton, J., Abdelhadi, S., Bernstein, D., Ahmed, R. 2021. LSC By the Numbers: The Data 
Underlying Legal Aid Programs  (2020). Legal Services Corporation, Washington, D.C.
81  The information corresponding to the cases, households, and individuals served by LSC-funded 
organizations in 2021 comes from LSC’s preliminary analysis of 2021 Grantee Activity Report (GAR) 
data. GAR is the largest and longest-running data collection effort on civil legal aid in the United 
States. Since 1976, LSC has recorded and reported data from grantees in a variety of ways. Topics 
include grantee staffing, finances, case services, and more. Data collection occurs in the first quarter 
of each year. LSC reports GAR data in its annual “By the Numbers” publication; the 2021 publication 
is forthcoming. The information about the Rural Summer Legal Corps program comes from: Lim, L., 
Layton, J., Abdelhadi, S., Bernstein, D., Ahmed, R. 2021.  LSC By the Numbers: The Data Underlying Legal 
Aid Programs  (2020). Legal Services Corporation, Washington, D.C.
 
86
The Justice Gap : The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low-income Americans
For more information: 
justicegap.lsc.gov
Carl	Rauscher , Director of 
Communications and Media Relations 
Legal Services Corporation 
3333 K Street NW, Washington, DC 20007 
202.295.1615 
www.lsc.gov
Follow LSC @
Like us on Facebook at
facebook.com/LegalServicesCorporation
Follow us on Twitter at
twitter.com/LSCtweets
View us on Y ouT ube at
youtube.com/user/LegalServicesCorp
 
