 1 Testimony on LD 1408 
An Act to Reduce Maine’s Dependence on Fossil Fuels and Carbon Footprint 
Production Using Waste Wood Fuel 
 
The Honorable Senator Lawrence 
The Honorable Representative Ziegler 
And Distinguished Members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee 
 
My name is Don Tardie and I represent the Ashland Area Economic 
Development Corporation and wish to provide testimony in support of LD 1408. 
 
Passage of LD 1408 is very important for our corporation’s goals to revitalize the 
industrial and commercial sectors of our Region in Aroostook County.  In 2021, 
our corporation was successful in acquiring a former lumber mill site with the 
expressed objective to revitalize Economic Development in Ashland by 
establishing a Renewable Energy Park.   Our corporation currently has an 
investor interested in developing a Combined Heat and Power Platform with the 
goal of selling generation and capacity to the Northern Maine Grid plus provide 
opportunities for bolt on businesses to purchase process steam and electricity 
behind the meter. I call your attention to the Final Report of the Commission to 
Study the Economic, Environmental, and Energy Benefits of the Maine Biomass 
industry submitted to the Legislature in 2016.  My questions to you are whether 
or not this report was accepted by the Legislature and what policies have been 
implemented in support of the report since it being submitted?  A copy of the 
Report is attached to my testimony.  Although not an all-inclusive list, I submit 
Specific Recommendations from the Report to assist and encourage further 
investment in the Biomass Industry: 
• Amend the Renewable Portfolio Standards by creating a thermal class to 
incentivize increased efficient biomass use for thermal. 
• Amend existing laws to explicitly allow microgrids statewide. 
• Create an addition under the Renewable Portfolio Standards that 
provides incentives for facilities that create in-state jobs and economic 
benefits. 
• Through statutory changes, categorize biomass-derived carbon dioxide 
emissions as carbon neutral and exempt from regulation under certain air 
pollution laws and 
 2 • Encourage the Governor’s Energy Office to make biomass a more focused, 
greater priority in Maine’s Comprehensive Energy Plan. 
 
Notwithstanding the status of these Recommendations, it is important to note 
their significance as to the opportunities they represent for diversifying and 
making Maine Energy supply more reliable while amplifying the Economic, 
Environmental and Energy Benefits to Maine that CHP Biomass Represents.  It is 
also important to note that the Biomass to Energy Plants built with 1970’s and 
1990’s technology is totally different compared to the Biomass to Energies 
plants built under the best of class technologies of today. The old technology 
was strictly stand-alone electrical generators with one source of revenue. Unless 
built as a Combined Heat and Power Platform for co-generation in Pulp and 
Paper Mill and Sawmill settings, stand-alone biomass plants have and will 
continue to have a difficult time in securing a long-term future.  In 2018, 
Northern Maine lost its two Biomass Generators owned by ReEnergy having a 
net generating capacity of over 40 MW combined.  Due to a combination of 
inverted economic factors from the costs to transmit in the Northern Maine 
Grid to ISO-NE and the reduction of revenues from Renewable Energy Credits in 
New England,  ReEnergy’s two plants were shuttered and demolished.  The two 
plants represented over $20,000,000 to the GDP of Northern Maine. Since 2018, 
there has been no investment that has replaced the GDP value of the ReEnergy 
plants to our Region.  
 
Therefore, with this appreciation for our regional history and the opportunities 
that CHP Platforms represent to our region and the State of Maine, I present 
this fact sheet with references on the Advantages of Modern CHP Systems.  
 
EFFICIENCY — ENVIRONMENT — ECONOMICS 
FACT SHEET 
Efficiency 
 
1. Up to 85% efficiency utilizing both heat (BTUs) and power (electricity). 1 
2. Base load renewable and synchronous power with no need for expensive 
battery storage. 
 
1 U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy: Combined Heat and Power 
Technology – Fact Sheet Series. DOE/EE-1692, 2017, 4p 
 
 3 3. Europe decades ahead with proven and efficiently functional deployment 
of CHP. 2 
4. The overall efficiency of a larger 20 MW CHP project increases 5-10% from 
a 10 MW project. 
5. The installed $/kw is substantially less for a 20 MW project than a 10 MW 
project. Economies of scale are significant for a larger CHP project thereby 
providing more competitive and fixed contracted rates to the grid in the 
future. 
6. A larger 20 MW project more efficiently supports ancillary services as well 
as capacity requirements within a grid.  
7. CHP maximizes local utilization of in woods slash and tops, low grade mill 
and other residues, while reducing the carbon footprint to get residues to 
market. 
8. In the case for Northern Maine, the supply generated by the CHP 
platforms will provide a competitive edge to the Standard Offer 
presented to the Northern Maine Grid. This is assuming that the contract 
price and term for twenty years will be the same criteria for 20 MW 
projects as is for the current 10 MW projects. 
9. Other opportunities and efficiencies in district heating exists using the 
European model. 
 
Environment  
 
1. Emissions of Carbon Dioxide and other greenhouse gases from 
combustion of forest biomass to produce energy are considered 
“carbon neutral”.3 
2. Maine could replace up to 42% of its current dependence on liquid 
fossil fuels used in the commercial/industrial heating sector through 
forest-based biomass heat and power. 4 
3. The 20 MW projects provides for a more competitive platform that 
allows additional future industries such as activated carbon, Biochar, 
Switchcoal, Stack CO Dioxide emissions capture for green houses on a 
 
2 CoGen Europe: Europe’s Future Energy System, 6p. https://www.cogeneurope.eu/images/Final-brochure-
COGEN-Europe.pdf 
3 World Nuclear Association: Comparison of Life Cycle Green House Gas Emissions in various electricity generation 
sources. 12p. https://www.world-
nuclear.org/uploadedfiles/org/wna/publications/working_group_reports/comparison_of_lifecycle.pdf 
4 Buchholz et al, 2011. Forest Biomass and Bioenergy: Opportunities and Constraints in the Northeastern United 
States.  76p. http://www.maforests.org/Cary%20Institute_report_biomass_2011.pdf 
 4 24/7 basis, plus other commercial and industrial forest products 
related businesses requiring electrical and thermal capacities to 
collocate and benefit from reliable based loaded electrical and thermal 
power.  
 
ECONOMICS 
 
1. Local forest-based renewable energy supports real jobs in rural 
communities (facility operations, harvesting crews and truckers). 
2. Eric Kingsley report estimates for a 30 MW plant the following: 
a. Direct Jobs at the facility- 25 
b. Indirect Jobs in Woodlands- 101 loggers and 24 truckers 
c. Induced Jobs- 109 
d. Total jobs created – 259. 
3. $40M/year GDP added to the rural economy by former ReEnergy Facilities 
in Northern Maine.  
4. In 2022, two forest-based CHP biomass energy facilities (Georges River & 
Athens Energy) have saved rate payers in Maine over $1.8M in electricity 
costs.5 
 
In summary, this Committee must take a serious look at the opportunities lost 
for Maine by not seeking actions and promoting the Recommendations of the 
2016 Report. It should also support LD 1408 and position Maine towards the 
path for future energy independence by developing the platform for greater 
diversity of generation with more reliability utilizing the available natural 
resources while supporting our rural economies. 
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Don Tardie  
President:  Ashland Area Economic Development Corporation and  
tardied@yahoo.com  
207-551-6100 
 
5 MPUC Report to Current Legislature, 2023. 
