 
                                                                                                                                                              www. aroostookpartnership.org  
11 West Presque Isle Rd. , PO Box 779, Caribou, ME  04736  
Voice: (207) 551-6601 , Toll Free in ME: 1 -800-427-8736, Fax: (207) 493-3108, TTY: (207) 498 -6377  
 
 
April 13 , 2023  
 
The Honorable Senator Lawrence, Chair  
The Honorable Representative Zeigler, Chair  
And esteemed members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: LD 1408, An Act to Reduce M aine's Dependence on Fossil Fuels and Carbon Footprint for 
Energy Production Using Waste Wood Fuel  
 
Dear Members of the Committee on Energy Utilities and Technology , 
 
I represent the Aroostook Partnership (AP), a unique private/public partnership of over 80  businesses, 
the Northern Maine Development Commission and the three  colleges in Aroostook County.  The mission 
of the Partnership is to speak with one voice to engag e the private sector leadership, talents and 
resources to ensure the economic survival and growth of Aroostook County  
 
In alignment with our mission and  representing an area of Maine where logging and forest products 
drive our economy, I am writing to you in full support of  LD 1408 . 
 
AP’s primary mission is to d rive economic development in Aroostook County and a great deal of our 
focus is centered around using our abundant natural resources.  Forest ry and agriculture  are the 
back bone of our econom y and from those industries , nearly all our other b usinesses are sustained  and 
thrive if those industries are healt hy.  We also have opportu nities to p lay a ver y big role in the 
Governor ’s renewable energy and GHG reduction goals not just through  wind and solar, but also with  
proven renewable  combined heat and  power (CHP)  generation using our abundant woody feedstock 
available as a byproduct of our extensive forest i ndustry.  
 
The most significant difference between generation and wind/solar is  that CHP is an economic jobs 
multiplier .  Supporting a CHP facility  creates far more well-paying  jobs per unit of gen eration and can 
support our economically challenged rural commun ities that have been dependent on forest industry 
jobs for generations.  Rural Maine is mu ch different than our thriving and economically divers e urban 
communities in that we are very limited in  local work opportunities.  As the forest  industry experiences 
ebbs  and flows , so do our entire  regional  communities  and microeconomies .  Increasing the 
environmentally responsible use of our abundant loc al natural resources to supply  and support  modern 
CHP energy  generation promotes more robust rural econom ies. 
 
CHP systems are not the old inefficient biomass generators  which were  built deca des ago  and have been 
completely shuttered and dismantled in Aroostook County.  They are highly e ngineered and effic ient 
syste ms which make the maximum use of the low value wood waste feedstocks they burn, upwards of 
85% efficient  heat and electricity utilization , so they are an excellent addition to the portfolio of modern 
renewable systems Maine is supporting today to meet its cl imate goals.   It should also be noted  that the 
                                                                      www. aroostookpartnership .org 
11 West Presque Isle Rd. , PO Box 779, Caribou, ME  04736  
Voice: (207) 551 -6601, Toll Free in ME: 1 -800-427-8736, Fax: (207) 493 -3108, TTY: (207) 498 -6377  PUC is  currently  contracting  with CHP generators at  rates approximately  60% l ower  than the standard 
offer rate  so this is more of a windfall  for, than a subs idy from , Maine ratepayers.  
 
The issue with the current PUC procurement ceiling of 10MW of generation is it is more costly  per unit 
of generation  to build smaller systems  which makes it  more difficult to  attract investment and  compete 
in the open  generation mark et.  We also have  an abund ance of available feedstock that  can further  
bolster  the entire  forest industr y by creating more markets for low grade slash and sawmill  residues .  
For these reasons, it wo uld make more sense to increase the net generating capac ity allowed under the 
long term PPA ’s to 20MW per facility and 40MW for all program participants combined.  
 
Additionally, our Governor has set aggressive goals for generating clean energy in the coming years and, 
with little hope of hydro development in Maine, wind, solar and biomass remain our best options to 
achieve these goals.  The challenge is locating the projects in regions where the residents need and 
welcome the economic benefit s and have the local natural resource s (feedstock) available to reduce 
transportation emissions .  Wind and solar are already off to a great start contributing to the 
achievement of these renewable goals, now it ’s time to further support  those goals by increas ing output 
limits and attracting more investment in this proven  and efficient  technology . 
 
Finally, I ’ll point out that , just because burning is required to create the inert ia-based generation of CHP, 
it does not mean  net carbon emissions are worse than  for wind and solar.  Several  studi es have proven  
full lifecycle GHG emission s are very similar to those of wind and solar.  However, t he bonus achieved 
from CHP is the base load  and inertia -genera ted power  produce d is much higher quality  electricity to 
support the forest products industry  mills  because of the always on reliab ility.  This committee  has 
hear d recent  testimony from Versant engineers on why this is important to the electric g rid, especially 
where mills and plants operate . 
 
Expanding the net generating capacity of CHP systems and getting more long -term  PUC PPA’s in place is 
a win for Aroostook County , rural Maine, our important fores t industry, the environment  and, therefore, 
a significant  win for the State of Maine.  The Aroostook  Partnership  fully  supports  this bill and sincerely 
hopes  your committee  will consider the breadth of  advantages of expand ing CHP in Maine  and vote s 
ought to pass . 
 
Respectfully,  
 
Paul Towle  
President & CEO  
ptowle@aroostookpartnership.org  
Direct:  207 -551-6601  

