Daryne Rockett
Orono
LD 100
207-881-3134
harprockett@gmail.com
February 26, 2023
Daryne Rockett
14 Fernwood St
Orono, ME 0447
Dear Maine Lawmakers,
I am writing to you in reference to LD 100 “An Act to Require an Annual Financial Audit of a 
Private School Approved for Tuition Purposes” as a taxpayer and concerned citizen.
Maine is fortunate to have educational options for students which include attendance at a 
number of academies with roots that go back to the early years of the republic. These 
institutions provide academic rigor and a sense of connection to a legacy of learning and 
leadership. Unfortunately, they also harbor other legacies of socioeconomic, racial, religious, 
sexual, disability and gender discrimination and inequality which are anathema to the 
well-being of our students and our society. It has taken the courageous action of students, 
faculty and community members over the past three years to call out inequity and abuses at 
these schools, resulting in legislation to address some of these issues. But as much as 
requirements for teacher credentialing and equity audits help to improve the situation for 
marginalized students, there is still a lack of transparency that can only lead to continuing 
problems in the culture of these institutions.
In 2020, the top 11 private schools in Maine received approximately $56 million dollars in 
public funding. But despite this hefty price tag, there is no requirement for public oversight of 
how these taxpayer funds are being spent. Public schools are overseen by local school 
boards which are elected to be representative of the communities providing those funds. But 
these private academies do not have elected community representation and are notably 
opaque. There is no way of knowing if these schools are spending their public funding in a 
manner that is commensurate with the laws and education policies of our State and 
community. 
If these private institutions are to continue to benefit from the tax dollars that I am contributing
to their operating budgets then it is only appropriate for me to expect regular audits of this 
spending to ensure that it conforms with laws meant to ensure equality, fairness and health 
for our students and members of the community.
Sincerely Yours,
Daryne Rockett
