 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF  
 
L.D. 100 
 
AN ACT TO REQUIRE AN ANNUAL FINANCIAL AUDIT OF A PRIVATE  
SCHOOL APPROVED FOR TUITION PURPOSES  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee.  I 
am Eilee n King , deputy executive director  of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association , in support of  L.D. 100. 
 
Private schools that accept t uition money fo r public school students should be held to the same financial 
accountability and transparency a s public schools. We support that our 60/40 schools should be required to 
have an audit, but they should also be required to follow other financia l requirements of public schools. The 
funds raised for tuition purposes are raised and approve d by taxpayers  at budget meetings every year. 
Taxpayers  should have access to the same financial data from the private schools they tuition their students to , 
as the public scho ols, as it is their money the private school s are spending.  
 
• 60/40 schools should have the same reporting and audit requirements as all public SAU ’s. 
• Audit reports should be submitted to all SAU ’s that tuition  students to private schools.  
• Audit reports shou ld reflect the 11 -cost center spending categories that all SAU ’s report to local 
towns, municipa lities, and voters.  
• All private schools should use the same reporting, account s, and systems  in place for public  
schools.  
• Local SAU ’s provide pay ment s for speci al education  that covers the costs for salaries, benefits, 
supplies, and training . Private schoo ls receive tuition payments for special education students. 
Some private schools then charge SAU’s the maximum allowable tuition , in addition to the tuition 
payment they receive d for special education students , regardless of student needs  that costs the 
SAU’s $26,624 . (Tuition:  $12,559 ; IVF: $753; and Special Education costs regardless of needs: 
$13,312).  The sending district is then responsible f or providing additional services such as speech, 
occupational therapy,  and physical therapy.  
• The local SAU cannot see how these funds have been spent for their students and if any funds 
remain at the end of the year. If there are funds remaining in the special education cost center for 
tuition students, those funds should be returned to the SAU.  
 
Every year taxpayers raise millions of dollars to support the education of the students in their towns. It is not 
unrealistic to expect that all schools, public an d private , provide transparency and are held accountable for the 
management  and expenditure  of these funds.  
