TESTIMONY OF MATT DUNLAP, CIA 
MAINE STATE AUDITOR 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 100, An Act to Require an Annual Financial Audit of a Private School Approved for 
Tuition Purposes 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Matt Dunlap, and I live in Old Town, 
and I have the distinct privilege and.honor to serve as Maine’s State Auditor. I am here today to 
present testimony to provide additional information to the Committee as it deliberates the merits 
of LD 100. 
The legislation, if enacted, would require that private schools approved for state tuition purposes 
submit to our ofﬁces an annual audit of their ﬁnances and further compels us to perform such 
audits if necessary. The mission of the State Auditor has changed, although not dramatically, 
since the ofﬁce was created in law in 1907. In 1923, the services of the State Auditor were made 
availableto municipal ofﬁcers for audits of town ﬁnances; following a recommendation included 
in the work of the Joint Select Committee on Administrative Code from 1931, that work was 
made mandatory in 1937. In 1984, Congress passed the Single Audit Act, folding the myriad 
required independent audits of Federal grant and award programs into a single audit report. 
The work of the Ofﬁce of the State Auditor is now almost entirely occupied with the annual 
Single Audit of the State, comprised of the ﬁnancial statement and Federal compliance audit. 
Municipalities and counties are required to submit annual audit reports to OSA; those are 
executed by private accounting ﬁrms on a contract basis.-OSA has the statutory authority to 
conduct such audits, but the work is exceedingly rare and subject to available resources outside 
of the Single Audit function. This would also be true for the proposed legislation. 
The purpose of an audit is to accomplish two things; to give assurance to users of ﬁnancial 
information that within reasonable parameters what they’re looking at is a true representation of 
the activities of an entity, and to help that entity improve and make more efﬁcient their 
operations. It is plausible to assume that most entities as large as a private school or academy 
may well already have audits performed of their ﬁnancial activities. The proposed language 
would direct the audit reports to be ﬁled with the State Auditor. As noted previously, we already 
serve as the repository for county and municipal audits; those are accessible on our website. The 
purpose behind this is to make information more readily available to the public and to have that 
information housed in more than one place. 
I believe that if the committee chooses to move forward with this proposed legislation that some 
agreement with the Department of Education be reached or legislated. 20-A MRSA §6051 
mandates school administrative units submit audit reports to the Commissioner of DOE, and that 
department already has in place a Fiscal Review and Compliance Team responsible for 
developing and coordinating ﬁscal compliance with federal, state, and local regulatory 
requirements through Department guidance and sub-recipient monitoring; T racks and interprets
laws and regulations that might aﬂect the Department and/or sub-recipients and implements 
necessary changes; Reviews Major Capital School Construction Projects ﬁ2r ﬁnal ﬁscal 
compliance and determines ﬁnal expenditures and revenues, state/local share and local share of 
unused bond proceeds and net interest income; and coordinates external state and federal audit 
reviews, ﬁndings, and resolutions. (l1ttps."//wuwv. maine. gov/doe/ ﬁ1nding{ﬁscalreview) In addition, 
our ofﬁce provides additional information regarding Department of Education subrecipient 
monitoring in the course of our audit Work of Federal grant and award expenditures. OSA would 
be amenable to including a link on our Website to theirs; it is not intuitive for a citizen looking 
for such information to ﬁrst tum to the State Auditor to fmd it if they seek it. 
I am happy to answer any questions at the pleasure of the Chair.
