Testimony in Opposition to LD 100,
“An Act to Require
an Annual Financial Audit
of a Private School Approved for Tuition Purposes”
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as
director of policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a
nonpartisan, non-profit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic
freedom in Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 100
“Town-tuitioning,” first adopted in 1873, occurs when a town does not operate a
school, and does not opt to contract with a different public or private school to educate
its resident students at every grade level.
1
Instead,
the town elects to send tuition
payments on behalf of its students to the institution of that student’s choice. Today, this
option is utilized by little more than 2% of Maine’s K-12 students.
2
It is a safety net for
those without access to a local school, to find an educational option that works for them.
After the landmark ruling in
Carson v. Makin
, the
United States Supreme Court
said that the state of Maine may no longer discriminate against schools which are
sectarian within town tuitioning solely because of their religious status.
3
Following that
ruling, Maine Attorney General Aaron Frey issued a warning to sectarian private schools
which may be considering submitting for approval that they would be subject to
additional restrictions in the Maine Human Rights Act regarding receipt of public
funding.
4
Sadly, this threat was successful; only one school—Cheverus High School in
Portland—applied, and was approved to accept town-tuitioning funds.
5
Based on Maine
Policy Institute’s attempt to account for the policies of every municipality, we found that
the nearest students who could be “tuitioned” to Cheverus are in Raymond; beyond that,
they reside in the Midcoast—an hour or longer drive away.
6
LD 100 would require private schools approved to accept town tuition funds to
conduct an audit every year “that demonstrates that the books, accounts, financial
documents and reports of the school are in a satisfactory and accurate condition.” The
6
School Choice Map of Maine
| Mainepolicy.org
5
Cheverus High School gets OK for taxpayer-funded
tuition reimbursement - Portland Press Herald
4
Statement of Maine Attorney General Aaron Frey on
Supreme Court Decision in Carson v. Makin
3
20-1088 Carson v. Makin (06/21/2022)
| Supreme Court
of the United States
2
Maine - Town Tuitioning Program
| EdChoice.org
1
Title 20-A, §5204
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

bill would also allow the Maine Department of Education (DOE) to hand down “routine
technical” rules—which do not require legislative approval—to enforce the requirement.
Today, these private schools are already subject to report any information the
DOE Commissioner may require. The Commissioner may also already adopt rules
governing “tuition charges, accounting, audits, contracts and other aspects of schooling
privileges arranged between a private school and school administrative units.”
7
One would think that, if the DOE saw a problem with the accountability of these
schools, many more audits would have been ordered. Is this bill just a solution in search
of a problem?
Given existing state oversight of private schools approved for town-tuitioning,
this bill appears to be more likely an attempt to limit families from choosing a school
that works for them, even under approval from their municipality. Passing this bill
would be a clear end-around of the US Supreme Court, allowing the state to continue to
discriminate against rural families’ school choice and weaken home rule in the process.
This Legislature should quickly dispense with this bill, and instead remove the
requirement that a private school be approved by the state in order to receive town
tuition funds at all.
8
If a family chooses a school,
and the local community approves the
tuition, the state should not stand in the way.
Please deem LD 100 “Ought Not To Pass” and reject this attempt to wield state
power as a cudgel against rural Maine students seeking a better education. Thank you
for your time and consideration.
8
Title 20-A, §2951
7
Title 20-A, §2952
;
Title 20-A, §2954
