State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Paula Gravelle, Director of School Finance 
In Support of: L.D. 100 
An Act to Require an Annual Financial Audit of a Private School Approved for Tuition Purposes 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Rebecca Millett 
Co-Sponsored by: Representatives Dodge, Kuhn and Salisbury and Senators Daughtry, Hickman 
and Rafferty 
March 2, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Paula Gravelle, and I am here today representing the Department of Education 
speaking in support of L.D. 100, An Act to Require an Annual Financial Audit of a Private 
School Approved for Tuition Purposes. This bill requires a private school approved for public 
tuition purposes to submit an annual audit to the State Auditor that demonstrates that the books, 
accounts, financial documents, and reports of the school are in a satisfactory and accurate 
condition. 
Private schools approved for public tuition purposes provide instruction to publicly funded 
students. In order to ensure accountability of the proper use of public taxpayer funds it is 
necessary for the State to review a private school’s audits annually. This measure will help to 
inspire trust and ensure equitable student and school safety, health, and well-being within all 
schools that serve Maine’s publicly funded student population. This proposed statute honors their 
independence and allows them to continue to use the audit process they always have; it merely 
asks them to share that audit with the State. 
The Department of Education (DOE) sees three elements of this bill that could be strengthened. 
First, we suggest including a more ﬂexible response period, rather than a hard due date of 
September ls‘ of each year. This will accommodate the varying fiscal year end dates as well as 
ease the burdens on the schools given the limited availability of auditors within the State of 
Maine. The Committee could consider using the same audit submission timeframe as used for 
public schools, which is six months after the end of the audit period. Second, we would like to 
see the Committee consider including language relating to consequences of failing to submit an 
audit, or submitting an audit with a finding that warrants a concern. The DOE suggests including 
the loss of approval until the audit is submitted or the concem is addressed through a reasonable 
action. This will ensure that the funds for the publicly funded students at private schools 
approved for public tuition are properly accounted for. With this change, the DOE would be able 
to notify school administrative units that a private school has lost approval and to withhold
1
payments until further notice. Finally, in order to streamline the approval process, the DOE would request a copy of the audit. 
The Department of Education is in support of L.D. 100, An Act to Require an Annual Financial 
Audit of a Private School Approved for Tuition Purposes and believe that our suggestions will 
strengthen the bill. I am happy to answer any questions, and I will be available for work sessions 
on this bill.
2
