i Lakes Environmental Association l 
I Protectmg Mame s lakes SIFFCQ 1970 
April 27, 2023 
Re: Support for LD 1534: "An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Interagency 
Task Force on Invasive Aquatic Plants and Nuisance Species" 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, 
My name is Colin Holme and I am the Director of the Lakes Enviromnental Association. Our 
organization is headquartered in Bridgton and we directly work on waterbodies in the upper Sebago 
and Saco River watersheds. We have the largest milfoil control program in the state and hire, train, 
and oversee around 35 Courtesy Boat Inspectors each year. 
Our organization strongly supports LD 1534. 
The lakes of Maine are gems in the state for our residents and visitors alike. They improve the 
quality of life of people living and visiting our state and are year-round revenue generators for our 
economy. 
We have a lot to lose as these lakes and ponds succumb to invasive species. If you haven’t been toa 
waterbody like Lake Arrowhead, I encourage you to go and see what a lake infested with variable 
leaf milfoil looks like. This is not the future we all want. But this is what it will be unless we start to 
invest in prevention and control programs and look at different strategies to stop these species from 
spreading.i 
This bill provides not just needed funding for this work, but also directs the Interagency Task Force 
on Invasive Aquatic Plants and Nuisance Species to take a fresh look at how the state responds to 
new infestations of invasive aquatic species. 
As stated in our testimony for LD 1342, the majority of on-t _he- ground control and prevention 
programs for invasive aquatic species in the state of Maine is done by small non-proﬁts. This work is 
currently underfunded. The important statewide work to control these species by the Maine 
Department of Environmental Protection and the Maine Department of Inland Fish and Wildlife is 
also vastly underfunded. 
rm» ' "'1 ' " ;: " ' ' 
; _ nr "7"? ruI’"'*W _ "'"'~'~;, 
230 Main Street, Bricigton ME 04009 207-6z,,7~858o www.maineiakes.org
Our organization strongly encourages you to pass this important bill or combine it with LD 1342, 
which includes a provision to increase funding for this work over time to account for inﬂation and 
increased labor costs. 
Please vote “ought to pass” on LD 1534. 
Thank you for taking the time to read this letter. 
Colin Holme 
Executive Director 
Lakes Environmental Association
