Senator LaFountain and Representative Landry 
Members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee 
Re: LD 1534, An Act to implement the Recommendations of the lnteragency Task 
Force on Invasive Aquatic Plants and Nuisance Species 
Good day! And thank you for this opportunity to comment on this important bill. 
My name is Peter Meulendyk and I am a resident of Manchester, Maine. On behalf 
of the Cobbosseecontee Lake Association (CLA), of which I am a member, and 
serve as its Vice President, we are pleased to present these comments in full 
support of LD1534. We especially want to thank, Representative Hasenfus for 
bringing this important legislation forward. 
Lake Cobbosseecontee is a 5,500-acre lake located approximately 5 miles from 
here, is currently threatened by the presence of three different invasive aquatic 
plants (lAPs), namely Eurasian Watermilfoil, Variable-leaf Milfoil, and European 
Frog-bit. lf left unchecked, experience in many states reveals these plants can 
choke the lake, destroy its ecosystem and marine life, and reduce lakeside 
property values resulting in a signiﬁcant negative economic impact. In our opinion, 
increasing the registration fees is one way to increase the funding required for the 
prevention and control of invasive aquatic species. Another proposed bill (LD 
1342) addresses the registration fee rates as well; however, LD 1534, includes the 
opportunity to strengthen and improve the Department of Environmental 
Protection 2006 Rapid Response Plan. 
A rapid response by lake communities, bordering towns, State agencies, and the 
legislature is what is needed today to get ahead of the invasive species problem. 
The CLA has grown its membership, raised private donations and pledges, and 
partnered and contracted with The Friends of Cobbossee Watershed to increase 
courtesy boat inspections and provide for invasive plant control and removal. 
However, it takes more to reduce the impact of the lAPs and the probability of 
their transport to any of the other 27 lakes, ponds, and streams within the 
watershed district, or to other lakes in Maine.
As one example, our lake has an infestation of Eurasian Watermilfoil and European 
Frog-bit in a stream that empties into the Lake. We tried to obtain a surface-use 
restriction to prevent boats and watercraft from entering and leaving the infested 
area until a control and removal plan could be implemented. One property owner 
was not in support of the surface use restriction and as a result under the current 
process, only buoy signage, which has much less effect in keeping watercraft out 
of the infested area, was approved for use. The likelihood of transferring the 
aquatic invasive plant into another area of our lake, or any other lake, was 
increased without the surface use restriction. 
We enthusiastically support the opportunity this bill will provide to further look at 
situations where requiring inspections of boats launched and removed are 
advisable, and a requirement to submit to boat and trailer inspections bya 
certiﬁed inspector when launching or taking a boat out of an infested or at-risk 
lake. 
Keeping lAPs out of lakes and preventing the spread to other lakes in Maine needs 
State agencies and legislative help. Private property owners cannot and should 
not bear the full cost of protecting and preserving lakes from invasive aquatic 
species. Maine lakes are a natural resource that any citizen or visitor can enjoy. 
The time is critical and we thank you for your consideration of our comments. On 
behalf of the CLA, I ask you for full support of LD 1534, not only as an investment 
to protect and preserve Lake Cobbosseecontee but as an investment in the future 
of all lakes and ponds in Maine and in all who use them.
