District 57: Readfield and Winthrop May 1, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Tavis Hasenfus introducing 
LD 1534, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Interagency Task 
Force on Invasive Aquatic Plants and Nuisance Species 
Before the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee 
 
Good morning, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife Committee. My name is Tavis Hasenfus, and I represent House District 57, which is 
the communities of Readfield and Winthrop. I am here before you today in support of LD 1534, 
An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Interagency Task Force on Invasive 
Aquatic Plants and Nuisance Species. 
 
Last year, the legislature passed a resolve tasking the Interagency Task Force on Invasive 
Aquatic Plants and Nuisance Species to regroup and complete its 2022 report (see attached). 
One of the findings of the task force was to increase funding for invasive species prevention and 
control programs as the need for its services is significantly surpassing current funding. 
 
The first section of LD 1534 seeks to increase the lake and river protection fee by ten dollars.  
This fee is part of the registration process when you register a motorboat in the state. This is a 
very important fee as it provides funding to both DEP and IFW so that the agencies can 
implement their programs related to invasive prevention and irradiation.  
 
I believe IFW will be able to provide the approximate number of registrations it receives yearly, 
either this morning or for the work session. Multiply that number by ten and that should give you 
the fiscal note of the revenue this will generate. Of the total lake and river protection fee, 80% 
goes to DEP to fund invasive prevention and removal programs and 20% goes to IFW for its 
preservation programs.   
 
In Section II of the Task Force’s report, one action item discussed reads as follows:  
 
“to increase revenue for invasive, aquatic species prevention, early detection, and control, 
work. A stakeholder group subcommittee will begin working on this in the second half of 
January 2023.”  
Tavis Hasenfus 
50 Nobis Point 
Readfield, ME 04355 
(207) 446-0016 
Tavis.Hasenfus@legislature.maine.gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY:  MAINE RELAY 711 
 

District 57: Readfield and Winthrop  
Appendix 3 further explains, “the lake and river protection sticker fees are not adequately 
covering what is needed and a future increase should be considered. This finding is based on the 
following points: 
- DEP receives request for funds that exceed the funds currently available. Furthermore, 
these requests are only for plants not for invasive organisms. 
- In addition to the state funding request, there are significant funds raised by towns, and 
organizations via private donations, private foundations, etc. 
- The extent of the increase needs to be based on additional data and development of a 
more comprehensive funding and needs plan. 
o (DEP/Subcommittee) Developing a recommended budget for an approximately 
prioritized invasive prevention program is needed. A prioritized allocation of 
funding resources could be based on MDEP’s risk vulnerability index, and should 
include sideboards for consistency and accountability. (e.g., Agreed-upon hours 
of CBI coverage, CBI, wages, infested/most has risk focus for CBI and plant 
survey, etc.) DEP-IFW-Watershed partners will begin developing budget as early 
as mid-January 2023. 
 
With the ever-increasing discovery of new invasive species in our lakes and the threats right on 
our borders, we can no longer ignore this problem or wait and see what happens.  We have a 
dedicated revenue stream that our agencies use to fund prevention and remediation efforts, but 
that source is not keeping up with the real need for these programs. The costs of waiting or not 
being aggressive enough are high. Preventing an infestation is far more cost effective than trying 
to eliminate one already in place. This fee increase is a fair solution, as it is a modest increase 
and boaters benefit from the services provided. Most of my fellow boaters understand the 
importance of keeping milfoil, zebra mussels and swollen bladderwort out of our favorite 
swimming holes and waterways and will gladly pay this small increase.  
 
The second piece to LD 1534 directs the Task Force to continue its work, specifically tasking the 
them with reviewing the DEP 2006 Rapid Response Plan for invasive plants, fish and fauna and 
to further expedite the process for controlling these invasives. Most important however, is giving 
this committee, or the committee on Environment and Natural Resources, the power to report out 
legislation in the second regular session of this Legislature. This is crucial, as the Task Force 
needs to continue it’s work and we anticipate recommendations for legislation to further prevent 
and control invasive species within the state.   
 
I believe it is paramount for this committee, and the Legislature as a whole, to add additional 
funds for an essential program in order to protect our lakes. This is of the upmost importance as 
new invasives, such as zebra mussels, are being found all around us, most recently just across 
our northern border in New Brunswick.  
 
I urge this committee to pass LD 1534. Thank you, and I am happy to answer any questions you 
have for me. 
 
