      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
March 1 6, 2023  
 
Re: LD 449, An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services  to License Home-
based and Community- based Services for Persons  with an Intellectual Disability, Autism Spectrum 
Disorder or a  Related Condition or an Acquired Brain Injury and Define Autism  Spectrum 
Disorder  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee , my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing 
of Maine or CHOM .  I am also the parent of a 2 6-year -old son with Intellectual/Developmental 
Disabilities (ID/DD).  I serve as Chair of the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality 
Services, a coalition of some 4000 people, consisting primarily of parents, that focuses on 
housing and quality services for people with ID/DD.  I also serve as chair the Maine 
Developmental Services Oversight and Advisory Board (MDSOAB) .   
 
I am testifying in support of L D 449, An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human 
Services  to License Home- based and Community- based Services for Persons  with an Intellectual 
Disability, Autism Spectrum Disorder or a Related Condition or an Acquired Brain Injury and 
Define Autism  Spectrum Disorder . 
 
This bill accomplishes two distinct and important things:   
 
1. This bill allows the Department to update the definition of autism spectrum disorder to align 
with the current version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DS M) – an important and 
necessary change that I fully support.  
 
2. This bill also authorizes the Department to modernize ID/DD, brain injury, and other related conditions (ORC) licensing, making licensing more consistent, efficient, relevant to the populations served, and integrated into the Home and Community- Based Services (HCBS) 
Global Rule . 
 
Consistency : 
Currently, the Department licenses group homes of all sizes. Providing the Department 
authority to license homes with three (3) or more beds is clear in statute, but licensing for one-  
and two -bed homes is not. The Department does not currently license other critical areas, such 
as community support services and work supports, where the same need for standards exist.   
 
Efficiency:  
Currently, a sep arate license must be issued for each residential site operated by an agency. 
Instead, the Department proposes to license agencies. An agency would have one license for 
its IDD services, for example, with multiple locations and/or services listed on the li cense.  
 
Relevance to the Populations Supported: 
Currently, these residential services are licensed under the Assisted Housing program. This means that a small group home for individuals with intellectual disability is treated similarly to 
a large memory care center for older adults or a PNMI- C for adults with significant medical 
needs.  Disability services residential services are unique and ought to be treated as such and 
not lumped in with larger assisted housing licensing.  
 
Integration with the HCBS Global Rule:  
Any actual or perceived conflicts will be addressed in new licensing rules to ensure alignment 
of HCBS policy for clarity and effectiveness.  
 
I would like to thank the Department, specifically leadership and staff within the Office of 
Aging and Disability Service (OADS) , and the Legislature, which has b een working diligently 
to improve and streamline the ID/DD service system, seeking stakeholder feedback on how best to do so, and incorporating this feedback into its short - and long-term plannin g efforts.    
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro  
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell  
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick  
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins  
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 
John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan  
Co-President , Evernorth 
 Kimberly Twitchell  
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba  
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon  
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
    
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
This is huge and should be applauded.  However, more work remains.  Passing LD 449 aligns with numerous 
important initiatives underway, all of which work in tandem to improve Maine’s system of care for people with 
ID/DD.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.  
 
