 
 
 
 
 
              
              
 
Waypoint  
5 Dunaway Drive Sanford, ME 04073         P: (207) 324- 7955        F: (207) 324 -6050       info@waypointmaine.org      
www.waypointmaine.org    
 
Testimony In Re: LD 449, An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services to 
License Home -based and Community -based Services for Persons with an Intellectual Disability, 
Autism Spectrum Disorder or a Related Condition or an Acquired Brain Injury and Define Autism Spectrum Disorder.  
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Health and Human Services Committee, I am providing testimony on behalf of Waypoint (formerly Waban)  in favor of LD449.  
As the Executive Director of an organization providing a multitude of services for children and 
adults with intellectual disabilities and autism in southern Maine, I understand the importance of licensure and agency oversight.  
While Waypoint supports the principle of licensing agencies and supports licensure of two bed 
residential facilities - long left out of the division of licensing purview - we have some suggestions 
we would like to see occur prior to and during implementation . 
 
One, we think it is important to ensure align ment  between the Division of Licensing and OADS 
as it pertains to residential care facilities, i.e. group homes. Currently, some of the licensing 
regulations are  not aligned with the Home and Community Based Settings Community Rule. 
This creates unnecessary confusion and is not in the best interest of the members we serve. 
 Two, the current number  of licensing certifications and requirements for various state services 
means we are almost always sending similar or identical information to multiple licensing 
entities. For example, Waypoint currently must participate in: individual residential care an nual 
licensing renewals and visits for all 14 group homes, plus our ‘provider owned’ apartment 
buildings; adult case management triannual certification; childcare licensing for our special 
purpose preschool; mental health licensing for our behavior health home and outpatient 
services; MaineCare ‘revalidation’ as a MaineCare provider; Most of these require substantially 
similar information. We support creating a statewide mechanism for agencies to upload information for licensing agencies to review, thereby creating efficiencies for providers and 
licensing surveyors alike.  
 
Three, working with providers along with other stakeholders on developing licensing standards , 
ensuring there are no redundancies within existing requirements for providers and otherwise 
creating a transparent and efficient process is important  to us as we work together t o create a 
collaborative and mutually beneficial process to ensure  the health and safety of our members. 
 
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
 
 
Jennifer Putnam, Executive Director  
 

