‘ CSP - 
"Maine Association For 
Community Service Providers 
Testimony of Laura Cordes, Executive Director 
Neither for nor Against 
LD 449 An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services to License Home-based and 
Community-based Services for Persons with an Intellectual Disability, Autism Spectrum Disorder ora 
Related Condition or an Acquired Brain Injury and Define Autism Spectrum Disorder 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 16, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee._ 
My name is Laura Cordes. l am the Executive Director of the Maine Association for Community Service Providers 
(MACSP). MACSP is the statewide association of 85 individual, mission driven agencies providing person centered 
and individualized educational, vocational, residential and community supports, as well as specialized services 
and care to several thousand of Maine's children and adults who have either intellectual disabilities, autism 
spectrum disorder, or brain injuries, so that they may live full and meaningful lives in the community. 
Doing this work requires the navigation of an exceptionally complex and ever changing set of federal and state 
rules, regulations, guidelines and requirements. 
While this bill sets forth a framework authorizing the Department to license, conditionally license and 
provisionally license providers of Home and Community Based Services (HCBS), the licensing and relicensing of 
each of the more than 650 separate group homes is a well known current requirement, standard, and process for 
our members. 60% of our members maintain a "Residential Care Facility" license for each of their 3-6 person 
group homes through the Division of Licensing and Certification (DLC). 
The minimum standards for maintaining a ”Residential Care Facility" license are focused on assuring the health 
and safety of the resident. As providers committed to the philosophy of the Home and Community Based 
Settings rule which champions individual rights and choice, we have found that there are times when the 
minimum standards outlined in licensing regulations conflict with the HCBS expectations. 
The prospect of ultimately streamlining the licensure along with aligning requirements with the federal HCBS 
Settings Rule for group homes and untying these small group homes from the requirements that larger long term 
care facilities, like nursing homes have, is very promising 
Not all adults with disabilities living in group homes require the health and safety measures required for those 
with higher medical needs living in long term care facilities. The health and safety of the people we support is of 
great importance and it must be balanced with upholding an individual's needs and right under the Home and 
Community Based Services Settings Rule.
The safety measures required under the pandemic underscored this difference. For example, 3 person homes, 
because they are currently licensed as a "Residential Care Facility ” were expected to follow the same protective 
measures (limiting visitation, community engagement, etc.) as a large, 100 bed+ assisted living facility. 
-
1 
The new licensing plan as imagined would also put to bed the question of whether the state requires licensing of 
1 and 2 bedroom homes in addition to the currently required license for 3-6 person group homes, as an agency 
would maintain one license regardless of the size of their homes. 
We see the potential and promise in the intent of the legislation. l want to extend our appreciation to OADS 
Director Paul Saucier for bringing this effort to our attention before this session and for discussing the intent with 
our members, and other stakeholders over the last several months. 
We are not opposed to moving from multiple individual licenses to one comprehensive license per agency. 
Nor are we opposed in theory to the Department expanding the licensing to HCBS services not currently 
licensed, like Community Support Services. ~ 
As an authorizing vehicle, this bill by its very nature, stops short of defining what would be required of an agency 
for each of the HCBS services that an agency provides to secure and maintain one license. 
Introducing additional oversight, and regulation of all HCBS services that are not currently licensed could 
potentially create duplicative administrative requirements. Such detail would be found in subsequent licensing 
rules, regulations, or possible service certifications that have yet to be written. Without knowledge of this 
additional substantive detail we can be neither for nor against this bill. . 
We stand ready as always to work with OADS and DLC to identify ways to maintain high standards in our service 
sector. We are optimistic that the future single licensing framework will balance the agency level requirements 
with certification at a programmatic level. Our concern is that if each program e.g. community support, work 
support, hourly home supports, etc. is required to have separate certification elements under the agency 
licensing, the work will become duplicative and burdensome to administer.' 
Should the bill pass, we ask for meaningful engagement with the Department to discuss the rules and licensing 
process as they are being defined, and before they are posted, as well as clear direction and ample time to both 
understand and make the changes necessary to meet new licensing requirements so that the thousands of 
Mainers who rely on us each day can maintain access to the support they need, deserve and have a right to in 
their homes and communities across our state. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. Please contact me with any questions you may have. 
Respectfully Submitted,' 
Laura Cordes 
laura.cordes@meacsp.org 
l\/IACSP | P.O. Box 149, Hallowell, ME 04336 I (207) 62345005 | Laura.Cordes@rpgacsp.org
