Janet '1‘ . Mills Maine Department of Health and Human Seruus ~ -*1. ‘- 
Governor Conimissi0ner ’s Oiﬁcc 
ll State House Station " 1'?5=g.r. ‘§(f' ll 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D. 109 Capitol Street 
. . ‘_. Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 C°‘“'“‘“'“““" Ta; (207) 287-3707; rm; (207) 287-sous 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Rel u) 
Testimony of the Ofﬁce of Aging and Disability Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee 011 Health and Human Services 
I11 Support of LD 449 An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services to 
License Home-based and Community-based Services for Persons with an Intellectual Disability, 
Autism Spectrum Disorder or a Related Condition or an Acquired Brain Injury and Define 
Autism Spectrum Disorder 
Sponsored by: Representative Javner 
Hearing Date: March l6, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am Paul Saucier, Director of the Ofﬁce of Aging and Disability 
Services Department of Health and Human Services. I am here today to help introduce and 
speak in support of LD 449, An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services 
to License Home-based and Community-based Services for Persons with an Intellectual 
Disability, Autism Spectrum Disorder or a Related Condition or an Acquired Brain Injury and 
Deﬁne Autism Spectrum Disorder. Our appreciation to Representative J avner for sponsoring this 
Department bill. 
The bill has two components. First, it authorizes the Department to modernize licensing of 
certain disability services for greater efﬁciency and effectiveness. Second, the bill also enables 
the Department to update the deﬁnition of Autism Spectrum Disorder to align with the current 
version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM). QADS has worked closely with the 
Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation (DLC) on this bill, and offers this testimony on behalf of 
both ofﬁces. 
Licensing Provisions of the Bill 
LD 449 authorizes the Department to modernize how services are licensed for intellectual 
disability, brain injury and other special conditions. Licensing for these services has evolved 
over many years, rooted in the Department ’s authority to license assisted housing facilities, with 
additional policy articulated in Home and Community Based Services (HCBS) policy. The need 
to update our approach has been made clear by several developments in recent years, including 
our initiative to license one- and two-beds homes, adoption of the HCBS global rule, our 
development of more robust quality assurance approaches, and the need to adopt temporary 
policy and issue guidance during the COVID-19 pandemic. Modernization of licensing in this 
area will advance the following goals: 
1. Consistency. Currently, the Department licenses group homes of all sizes. Authority to 
license homes with 3 or more beds is clear in statute, but licensing for one- and two-bed
homes is not. The Department does not currently license other critical areas, such as 
community support services and work supports, Where the same need for standards exist. 
2. Relevance to the People Supported. Currently, these residential services are licensed 
under the Assisted Housing program. This means that a small group home for 
individuals with intellectual disability is treated similarly to a large memory care center 
for older adults or a PNMI-C for adults with signiﬁcant nredical needs. We learned how 
constraining this was during the pandemic, when we needed to issue frequent guidance to 
providers and found that policy designed to ensure safety in large facilities often were 
impractical and less relevant to smaller homes for individuals with disabilities. 
3. Integration with the HCBS Global Rule. Last year, Maine adopted the HCBS Global 
Rule as part of the State’s compliance with the federal HCBS settings rule. Providers 
have expressed concerns that the Global Rule may conﬂict with current licensing rules. 
Any actual or perceived conﬂicts will be addressed in new licensing rules to ensure 
alignment of HCBS policy for clarity and effectiveness. 
4. Eﬂicierzcy. Currently, a separate license must be issued for each residential site operated 
by an agency. For providers, this means they may have dozens of licenses that need to be 
tracked and maintained. For the Department, it means tracking more than 1,000 
residential licenses. Instead, the Department proposes to license agencies. An agency 
would have one license for its IDD services, for example, with multiple locations and/or 
services listed on the license. In addition, providers sometimes must submit similar 
information to DLC and OADS to fulﬁll licensing and quality assurance functions 
respectively. DLC and OADS intend to clearly delineate their roles as they collaborate 
on new rules, and will strive to reduce burden on providers by reducing duplicative 
requirements across the two organizations. 
This bill gives the Department clear authority to adopt rules to achieve the goals described 
above. The Department ’s goal is to have new rules in place by July 2024. We held one public 
stakeholder meeting on this topic late last year. We envision holding a few more public input 
sessions before we begin formal rulernaking. Once rulernaking begins, stakeholders will 
continue to have input through the processes of the Administrative Procedures Act. 
Updating the Deﬁnition of Autism Spectrum Disorder 
LD 449 also removes from statute a reference to a speciﬁc edition of the DSM deﬁning Autism. 
The Department wishes to update its rules to reflect the current deﬁnition but is bound by the 
statutory reference. Psychologists, families and others have urged the Department to align its 
deﬁnition with the edition of the DSM that is currently in use in the ﬁeld. This bill will enable 
us to do so now and in the future when the DSM is updated again. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have 
and to make myself and others from the Department available for questions at the work session.
