526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207-480-1478     833-713-2618    www.maineddc.org
March 13, 2023
Testimony supporting LD 449, An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human 
Services to License Home-based and Community-based Services for Persons with an Intellectual 
Disability, Autism Spectrum Disorder or a Related Condition or an Acquired Brain Injury. 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services:
My name is Rachel Dyer, and I am the associate director of the Maine Developmental 
Disabilities Council. Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the 
Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970.  Maine’s DD 
Council has been advocating with and for individuals with developmental disabilities for over 50 
years.  The DD Council is a federally funded, independent organization with members from 
across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and representatives of 
public and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for services for individuals 
with developmental disabilities.  As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, 
capacity building and systemic change activities, with the goal that individuals with 
developmental and other disabilities of all ages are fully included, integrated, and involved in 
their communities and the decisions impacting their lives.  
MDDC is not a service provider and has no meaningful expertise interacting with licensing, so 
we offer input based upon how changes could potentially impact the system rather than upon 
concerns about how the current system functions.  In general, MDDC supports a structure in 
which provider organizations rather than sites are responsible for ensuring compliance with 
relevant responsibilities currently elucidated in licensing regs (are staff qualified? are provider 
controlled physical plants safe? are proper records kept?). This is in keeping with the idea 
central to the HCBS setting rule that individuals receiving services should control their housing, 
and it provides a long-overdue structure that could be used for monitoring and improving 
quality of services, especially congregate service settings that are currently unregulated. Maine  Developmental  Disabilities  Council
526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207-480-1478     833-713-2618    www.maineddc.orgIt’s been said before in this committee that the devil’s in the details and that’s especially true in 
a proposal like this. MCCD suggests that in order to enact this proposal it would be prudent to 
coordinate policy and practice on a pretty granular level. This might include but in no way 
would be limited to addressing 
oThe lack of consistency in the language among OADS rules, licensing rules and the 
vernacular (i.e. residential, assisted living/assisted housing, group home)
oEnsuing that new regulations reflect the experiences and needs of the population that is 
being served (i.e. current rules reflect more medically vulnerability than waiver 
recipients experience as a whole as well as some seriols lack of alignment with the HCBS 
settings rules). 
oWe recognize that there are people who need services who may, through choice or 
necessity, live in unsafe environments that they control (they or a family member owns 
or rents it) . We would not want them to be deprived of needed services because of 
service provider’s concern about liability. 
oWe also would not want lack of coordination or understanding among licensing, OADS 
and community service provider staff to create barriers to accessing services. This may 
very well require some explicit clarification about roles and responsibilities around the 
HCBS setting rules. 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide input. 

