 
 
 
160 Capitol Street,  Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
 
March 16, 2023  
 
Senator Joe Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Committee on Health and Human Services  
Cross Office Building, Room 209  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 Re:  LD 449, An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services to License 
Home -based and Community -based Services for Persons with an Intellectual Disability, Autism 
Spectrum Disorder or a Related Condition or an Acquired Brain Injury and Define Aut ism 
Spectrum Disorder  
 Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Standing Members of the 
Committee On Health and Human Services:  
 
My name is Staci Converse and I am a Managing Attorney at Disability Rights Maine (DRM). DRM is Maine’s designated Prot ection and Advocacy Agency and our 
mission is to advance justice and equality by enforcing rights and expanding opportunities for people with disabilities in Maine. I write in support of LD 449, An 
Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services to License Home -
based and Community -based Services for Persons with an Intellectual Disability, 
Autism Spectrum Disorder or a Related Condition or an Acquired Brain Injury and 
Define Autism Spectrum Disorder.  
 
DRM supports this legislation because it wo uld require the licensure of community-
based services, including work support and community support services, which have 
never been licensed in Maine. Licensing these additional services would increase 
oversight of services provided to persons with developmental disabilities. This in turn 
would help foster a system where people with developmental disabilities receive high -
quality services and support in their communities.  
 
Moreover, this licensing bill would require a single license for an entire agency, ra ther 
than licensing individual residences. This would expedite the process of making services available to people. In a rural state like Maine, a single license also can help ensure that services are available in more locations. It can also improve oversig ht 
because it allows for more comprehensive oversight of the agency as a whole. This consistency in standards can help ensure that all individuals receive high-quality 
services.  
 
I urge you to support this licensing bill, which would improve the lives of individuals with developmental disabilities in Maine by increasing oversight and ensuring consistent, high- quality care.  
 Thank you for your consideration of this important issue.  
 Sincerely,  
   Staci Converse  
Managing Attorney  
  
  
 

