 
 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 1138:  
An Act to Improve Work and Family Mobility by Altering and Removing Certain Requirements for Driver's 
Licenses and Nondriver Identification Cards 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and honorable Members of the Transportation Committee: 
 
I write to urge you to support LD 1138. 
 
Maine’s population is rapidly aging, and our labor force is shrinking.  Maine is competing with the rest of the 
nation to attract people, including immigrants, to the state to live, work, and strengthen our communities.  In 
fact, immigrants are a significant component of Maine’s slight net population growth  in recent years.   
 
To prevent Maine’s economy from shrinking, let alone for it to grow, as outlined in both the State’s 10-year 
strategic economic plan  and the Recommendations to Sustain and Grow Maine’s Economy  made by the 
Governor’s COVID-19 Economic Recovery Committee, Maine must  be forward thinking and have laws and 
policies that are welcoming to immigrants and where immigrants will feel that they and their children, 
Maine’s future generation of workers and community members, can succeed. 
 
With LD 1138, Maine would join 19 other states (including all of New England except for Maine and New 
Hampshire) and the District of Colombia, that have passed laws expanding access to state IDs and driver’s 
licenses to all residents of their states, regardless of immigration status.   
 
Ensuring drivers in Maine are licensed and can get insurance makes our roads safer for all Mainers.  It is also 
the right thing to do to make sure that all Maine residents can keep their families healthy and safe.  Residents 
need IDs and driver’s licenses to cash a check, to get to work, to the grocery store, to Maine’s colleges and 
universities, to the doctor, to their children’s schools and daycare centers, and for every aspect of everyday 
living – especially in the majority of the state where there’s no public transportation.  
 
But most importantly, LD 1138 will also strengthen Maine’s economy, helping Maine compete for and 
attract talent from across the country and around the globe.  Maine’s workforce shortages are acute 
and chronic.  Immigrants are a critical part of the solution to Maine’s labor woes.  For all the reasons 
explained in more detail in the testimony submitted by the Maine Business Immigration Coalition 
(MeBIC), enacting LD 1138 is the right move for Maine’s businesses and Maine’s economy. 
 
Respectfully submitted by: 
Edward McKersie 
President, Pro Search, Inc. 

