May 3, 2023 
 
Senator Ben Chipman, Co-Chair 
Representative Lynne Williams, Co-Chair 
Transportation Committee 
Maine State Legislature 
State House, Room 126 
Augusta, Maine 
Re:   LD 1138, An Act to Improve Work and Family Mobility by Altering and 
Removing Certain Requirements for Driver's Licenses and Nondriver 
Identification Cards 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable Members of the 
Transportation Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 1138.   
My name is Laurent F. Gilbert Sr.  I am a native and resident of Lewiston, Maine, 
though I now live part of the year in Florida.  I am also a former Mayor of the City of 
Lewiston, but I speak with you today through the lens of my decades of experience in 
law enforcement.   I proudly served the Lewiston Police Department for twenty-five 
years, working my way up through the ranks to Chief of Police, a position I was honored 
to hold for five years.   I left that job when I was presidentially appointed as the United 
States Marshal for the District of Maine, a role I held for eight years.  I also served as 
the Associate Director of the Maine Community Policing Institute at the University of 
Maine at Augusta for five years. I was then elected as Mayor of Lewiston for five years. 
I earned a Bachelor of Science Degree in the Administration of Justice and an 
Associate of Science Degree in Criminal Justice, both with Distinction from The 
University of Maine at Augusta, and am also a graduate of the Maine Criminal Justice 
Academy, the New England Law Enforcement Management Training Institute at Babson 
College, and the FBI National Academy.  
LD 1138  is an overdue  and common-sense  update  to Maine’s  driving  laws 
that will improve  public  safety  by ensuring  that all drivers,  regardless  of 
immigration  status , can be licensed,  insured,  and know  the rules  of the road.   
It will also improve  access  to training  before  drivers  get behind  the wheel  of a 
motor  vehicle  and drive  on Maine’s  roads.  
 
In addition  to the road safety  benefits  of the bill, because  under  LD 1138,  
applicants  for standard  Maine  driver’s  licenses  and IDs will still be required  to 
prove  who they are and where  they live in Maine,  it would  help law 
enforcement  do its job by having  confidence  in the verified  identity  of those  
holding  standard  Maine  state  identification  cards  and driver’s  licenses.   
Additionally,  the nation’s  collective  bureau  of motor  vehicles  databases  are 
the country’s  single  largest  law enforcement  database.    Allowing  anyone  
who can establish  their identity  and that they live in Maine  to get a Maine  
state  identification  card or driver’s  license  regardless  of their immigration  
status  actually  improves  public  safety  and security,  rather  than the reverse,  
because  it increases  the number  of people  entered  into the BMV’s  database  
in the event  that law enforcement  officials  need  to access  information  about  
them.    
Regardless  of anyone’s  immigration  status,  immigrants  have  long been  and are part 
of the fabric  of our state.    Maine  residents  need  IDs and driver’s  licenses  for many  
essential  aspects  of life, from opening  a bank  account,  renting  an apartment,  and 
proving  one’s  age, to getting  to the supermarket,  to work,  to religious  services,  to 
the doctor,  to school,  and generally  to stay safe,  healthy  and to provide  for one’s  
family.  
Maine  should  join the 19 other  states  (including  all of New England,  except  for New 
Hampshire)  that have  restored  access  to state  IDs and to driver’s  licenses  to all 
identified  and qualified  state  residents.   This is the right thing  to do to promote  
healthy  communities.   It’s also the right thing  to do to improve  road safety,  and to 
strengthen  public  safety  and security.  
Please  vote to pass  LD 1138.  
 
 
