Marcus Jaynes
Landis Arn & Jaynes, P.A.
LD 1138
May 7, 2023
Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 1138:
An Act to Improve Work and Family Mobility by Altering and Removing Certain 
Requirements for Driver's Licenses and Nondriver Identification Cards
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and honorable members of the 
Transportation Committee:
My name is Marcus Jaynes.  I am an attorney and partner at the law firm of Landis 
Arn & Jaynes, located in Westbrook, Maine. I have specialized in immigration law 
since 2003, representing immigrants, their U.S. citizen family members and their 
employers located throughout the state of Maine.   My personal practice is currently 
focused on business/employment-related immigration, but over the course of my 
career I have handled the full-range of immigration-related legal services, including 
asylum, removal defense, family-based and naturalization cases.   I strongly support 
LD 1138, an Act to Improve Work and Family Mobility.
U.S. immigration laws are incredibly complex.  Even an attorney with 20 years of 
experience may need to parse multiple statutes and genealogical records to determine,
for example, whether someone born in Canada who has lived in the U.S. since infancy
is a U.S. citizen.  Often we discover that individuals like this are actually completely 
undocumented, despite their families believing throughout their lifetimes that they 
were U.S. citizens.  If they’re undocumented, they face complicated processes to 
apply for their green cards, which can take months of evidence gathering before they 
can even apply.  And even when we establish that they are citizens, getting a 
Certificate of Citizenship can take more than a year. In the meantime, under Maine’s 
legal presence law, they can’t legally drive, making activities of everyday living 
nearly impossible, especially when living in rural Maine.
Immigrants who marry U.S. citizens and who have U.S. citizen children also often 
face years-long processes to get their permanent residency.  Even after U.S. 
Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) has approved their eligibility to 
immigrate, during this long process, many of these immigrants are undocumented and
cannot obtain a driver’s license or ID under the current legal presence law.  If they 
live in parts of Maine that are rural or have no public transportation, their inability to 
get a state ID or driver’s license means that they can’t pick up their children when the 
school nurse calls, can’t drive to the grocery store, the doctor or the pharmacy, can’t 
cash a check or do any of the errands or activities required of those simply living or 
having a family to take care of in Maine.
I’ve also had clients married to abusive U.S. citizens. Marrying a U.S. citizen does not
mean you get legal status automatically.  Your U.S. citizen spouse has to file for you 
to get the “green card” process started.  U.S. citizen abusers routinely refuse to start 
that process, and even a noncitizen who was here legally, such as a woman on a 
student visa (in these cases, the victim is almost always a woman) who falls in love 
with and marries her college boyfriend, will become undocumented.  Then, the abuser
can threaten their victim, “If you tell anyone, I’ll get you deported.”  If the noncitizen 
is pregnant or they already have a child, the noncitizen victim is terrified of losing her
child if she were to be deported.  Keeping an abused spouse undocumented is the 
perfect way to control and isolate her.  She can’t get a social security number, she 
can’t legally work, and under Maine’s legal presence law, she can’t even get a 
driver’s license.  Without a driver’s license, she can’t get to church, to a doctor, or to 
any place where she might meet people who might pick up on signals that she’s an 
abuse victim, and let her know there are programs that can help her escape the abuse.  
In addition to the needless harm that the legal presence law causes undocumented 
Mainers who are part of our communities, the law also is discriminatory, causing hard
working immigrants, including those on professional and seasonal work visas, or with
temporary protected status, or asylum seekers, to have to renew and pay for their IDs 
or drivers licenses multiple times during the normal six-year driver’s license or state 
ID term, having to take time away from work, and often needing to make multiple 
trips to the BMV because of confusion over their documents or their immigration 
status.  My clients have often needed me to intervene with the BMV since the legal 
presence law took effect. No one should need to get a lawyer involved just to get a 
state ID or driver’s license.
A state ID or driver’s license should be about identifying who a person is, whether 
they live in Maine, and, in the case of a license, whether they know how to drive.  It’s 
time for Maine to return these documents to those purposes.  Maine should join the 19
states, including most of New England, that have restored access to state credentials 
regardless of immigration status.
Please pass LD 1138 to remove the legal presence requirement for state IDs and 
driver’s licenses.

