   
 
 
 
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony in Support of LD 1732 – “An Act to Expand the General Assistance Program ” 
 
April 25, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services. My name is Deborah Laurie, Bangor City Manager, and I’m providing 
testimony on behalf of the Bangor City Council in support of L D 1732, An Act to Expand the General 
Assistance Program . 
 
As Maine’s third largest city and a service center community, we have a robust General Assistance 
program . In the past five years, our program has served over 2,100 households with total expenditure s of 
$5,659,522.  These numbers are actually a bit deceiving as our caseload decreased significantly during the 
two plus years our clients were eligible for COVID rent relief.  Now that those funds have been depleted, 
our caseload is rising rapidly, and we  have replaced a retiring part -time caseworker with a full time one.  
In addition to our traditional clients, we are beginning to see more immigrant households.  While these 
individuals and families bring welcomed diversity to our community, they tax the G A program not only 
in terms of benefits received but also in administrative costs such as interpreters and the increased 
caseworker time required to process their applications.  
 
General Assistance programs in Maine are as different as the communities they  serve.  Despite the fact 
GA statute and ordinance are in place to guide programs, there is wide variance in how  and when  
municipalities determine eligibility and grant benefits.  This is due in part to a lack of required training 
for GA administrators and also a lack of consistent oversight from the State.  LD 1732 will require that 
all GA administrators complete a training program within 120 days of hire  and accept applications during 
regular business hours . It will also require that DHHS provide technica l assistance to municipal GA 
programs 24 hours per day.  This is critical as GA programs are required by law to accept applications 24 
hours per day, and quick clarification from the state on complex issues during non- business hours is of 
the utmost importance.  It is not only important that municipalities get answers to their questions, but also 
that those answers reference GA statute, thereby making communications with clients easier.  These two 
elements can help ensure all Maine residents have fair and r easonable access to General Assistance 
regardless of their municipality of residence.  
 
LD 1732 makes much needed changes to the rules regarding the municipality of responsibility.  As a 
service center community, we are all too familiar with the practice o f moving, or in many cases 
abandoning , individuals from across Maine in Bangor.  This is unfair not only to the individual or family 
being moved but also to the taxpayers who carry the burden of GA costs .  This problem has become even 
more pronounced as an increasing number of households are being placed in hotels .  It is only fair that a 
municipality that moves an individual or family be responsible for their GA costs for 6 or 12 months  
 
 
GA expenditures for both benefits and program administration are on the rise in Bangor and other service 
center communities.  In FY ’22, the C ity of Bangor awarded $475,852 i n GA benefits and was reimbursed 
$333,096 by the State.  That left Bangor taxpayers responsible for $142,756.  It is unfair to expect the 
residents of  high-need, service center communities to pay such a large share of the regional and statewide 
cost of General Assistance.  Raising the reimbursement rate to 90% and adding a 5% reimbursement for 
the direct cost of program administration will make GA a mor e equitable program for all municipalities.   
 
Finally, GA administrators currently lack the ability to communicate with other GA administrators via a 
database in order to track services provided or other referrals/interventions surrounding the individuals  
and families seen in our offices. This puts us behind other state services such as vehicle registration and 
MaineCare and often leads to a more complicated use of administrator and client time as information 
required to determine eligibility is tracked do wn via phone and email. The creation of a statewide General 
Assistance database that interfaces with other state service providers will enhance our level of care to both 
our clients as well as stewardship of resources.  
 
Bangor has been and continues to be committed to our citizens in need of General Assistance.  We believe, 
however, that the program can be run more equitably and efficiently if the above mentioned changes are 
enacted.  Therefore, with the full support of the Bangor City Council, I urge you t o pass LD 1732.  
 
Thank you for your consideration. Please do not hesitate to reach out with questions.  
 
Deborah Laurie, City Manager, debbie.laurie@bangormaine.gov  
Courtney O’Donnell, Assistant City Man ager/ Director of Human Resources, 
courtney.odonnell@bangormaine.gov   
Richard Fournier, City Council Chair, richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov  
 
