Maine Coast Heritage Trust 
A Statewide Land Conservation Organization 
Testimony on LD 695 
An Act to Exempt Nonprofit Land Trusts from Sales Tax 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee, my name is 
Jeff Romano. I appreciate this opportunity to provide testimony on behalf of Maine Coast 
Heritage Trust (MCHT) in support of LD 695. Joining our testimony are fifteen other land trusts 
from around the state. 
Maine Coast Heritage Trust conserves and stewards Maine's coastal lands and islands for their 
renowned scenic beauty, ecological value, outdoor recreational opportunities, and contribution 
to community well-being. We provide statewide conservation leadership through our work with 
land trusts, coastal communities, and other partners. Over the past four decades, we have 
conserved more than 150,000 acres in Maine. 
MCHT works in partnership with land trusts throughout Maine including the fifteen 
organizations that have joined this testimony. Collectively, our state's land trust community: 
0 Maintains more than 1,250 miles of recreational trails for hiking, snowmobiling, 
mountain biking, and ATV riding; 
0 Provides public access to over 2.3 million acres for traditional uses, including hunting 
and fishing; 
0 Manages over 250 water access sites for recreational boating, swimming, and 
commercial fishing; 
0 Conserves more than 2.1 million acres of working forestlands and over 40,000 acres of 
productive farmlands; and 
I Offers educational programming each year to about 30,000 students of all ages. 
in addition to these highlights, Maine's land trusts partner with local governments to improve 
infrastructure at municipal parks, collaborate with community leaders to enhance water 
quality, and host a variety of events each year welcoming tens of thousands of people to enjoy 
the health benefits realized from time spent outdoors. And, although eligible for property tax 
exemption, most land trust conserved lands (nearly 95%) remain on the local tax rolls to help 
pay for municipal services ‘. 
1 Legislature's Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee compiled land trust property tax 
exemption data for Study on Conserved Lands Owned by Nonprofit Organizations. Under the bipartisan 
leadership of Senator Paul Davis and Representative Michele Dunphy, the committee completed the 
study in 2018 at the request of the LePage Administration.
Despite these clear public benefits, Maine's land trusts fall outside the current list of nonprofits 
whose activities qualify for the state's sales tax exemption. While we support LD 695, we 
recommend the committee focus its attention on LD 68, a bill that would extend sales tax 
exemption to all nonprofits. 
The change proposed in LD 68 could not be timelier as nonprofits assume a growing list of 
responsibilities once delivered by state, federal, and local governments. For example, amid the 
recent pandemic, even as some state parks and public lands shut down, land trust preserves 
continued to welcome Maine families. We continue to see record numbers of people exploring 
these wild places near their homes and across the state. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective on LD 695. 
0 Kennebunkport Conservation Trust 0 Greater Lovell Land Trust 
0 Blue Hill Heritage Trust 0 Appalachian Trail Land Trust 
0 Rangeley Lakes Heritage Trust 0 Crabtree Neck Land Trust 
0 Midcoast Conservancy 0 Western Foothills Land Trust 
0 7 Lakes Alliance 0 Maine Farmland Trust 
0 Boothbay Region Land Trust Q Freeport Conservation Trust 
0 Friends of Wilson Pond 0 Loon Echo Land Trust 
0 Brunswick-Topsham Land Trust
