1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Thursday, April 13, 2023, 1:00 PM 
  
L.D. 695 – “An Act to Exempt Nonprofit Land Trusts from Sales Tax” 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
here today at the request of the Administration to testify Neither For Nor Against 
L.D. 695, “An Act to Exempt Nonprofit Land Trusts from Sales Tax.” 
This bill would create an exemption from the sales and use tax for 
incorporated nonprofit land trusts if the property or services sold are to be used 
primarily for the purposes for which the land trust was organized.  The term “land 
trust” should be defined within the proposed exemption, as there is not currently a 
definition of “land trust” to refer to in Title 36 or elsewhere in the Maine Revised 
Statutes.  Many states have enacted definitions of the term “land trust” in their 
laws, and these could be used as reference points for drafting the definition for the 
proposed exemption here if this bill were to move forward.   
Additionally, the Committee should consider requiring that incorporated 
nonprofit land trusts obtain 501(c)(3) status to qualify for the exemption.  L.D. 68, 
“An Act to Exempt Certain Nonprofit Organizations from the Sales and Use Tax 
and the Service Provider Tax,” which was heard in this Committee on Tuesday, 
February 14, would provide a so-called “blanket” exemption from the sales, use, 
2 
 and service provider taxes to organizations that have been determined by the IRS 
to be exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.   
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.   
