LD 695, An Act to Exempt Nonprofit Land Trusts from Sales Tax 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members ofthe Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation: 
My name is Mila Plavsic. l am the Executive Director of the Falmouth Land Trust, a nonprofit 
that was started in 1981 for the purposes of conserving land in Falmouth for the public benefit. 
l am here today to support LD 695, An Act to Exempt Nonprofit Land Trusts from Sales Tax and 
l thank Representative Kuhn for sponsoring this bill. While l believe that Maine should join its 
New England neighbors by granting a sales tax exemption to all registered 501<:(3) nonprofit 
organizations in the state, l am honored to speak today about what such an exemption would 
mean to a small land trust in Maine. 
Like most of the land trusts in Maine, the Falmouth Land Trust was founded by a dedicated 
group of residents who decided to volunteer their time to preserve some of their town's 
forests, wetlands, farms, and other lands for all to enjoy in perpetuity. As the acreage under our 
care grew and as land trusts around the country professionalized, our land trust addeda 
handful of staffto help keep up with the demands of land management, trail maintenance, and 
the provision of educational programming and events for children and adults. We are an 
extremely lean organization, with no endowment, and we receive no operational support from 
either the federal or state government. Most land trusts in Maine are land-rich and cash-poor, 
as almost all of the funds that come in the door soon go out to acquire land from willing sellers. 
The Falmouth Land Trust now cares for 2,700 acres, which includes properties that we own, 
properties where we hold conservation easements, as well as some municipal properties. 
Saving up to $1,500 a year with a sales tax exemption would be meaningful to our organization 
with its small operations budget. With those funds, we could lead more class field trips for 
children in the greater Portland area, repair an eroded section of trail, or make a trail more 
accessible to visitors with mobility challenges. The beneï¬ts of extending the sales tax 
exemption to nonprofit land trusts would immediately be felt by communities across Maine. 
When considering whether land trusts should be exempt from paying sales tax, I think it's 
important to consider that Maine's land trusts collectively protect twice as much land for the 
public benefit as our well-loved State Park system. For example, Falmouth's Blackstrap Hill 
Preserve and Community Forest is a 600-acre oasis that is only 10 minutes away from our 
state's largest city. in a past era, this area might have been designated a State Park. Instead, it 
was protected in the late 1990's with help from the Land for Maine's Future Program. The 
Falmouth Land Trust and the Town of Falmouth bear the full burden, in perpetuity, of 
maintaining an extensive trail system that attracts mountain bikers, trail runners, hunters, 
hikers, summer day camp participants, and others from all over the region. Exempting 
nonprofit land trusts from sales tax would signal that the State of Maine values the vital role 
that land trusts play in our state's recreation economy. For these reasons, l urge you to vote 
Ought to Pass on LD 695.
