Anne Gass
Gray
LD 794
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the State and 
Local Government Committee.
I am writing in strong support of LD 794. I was appointed to the Permanent Commission on 
the Status of Women (PCSW) in 2019 by then House Speaker Sara Gideon. I was thrilled to 
be asked, and excited to serve with this group of women who brought such skill, talent, and 
dedication to this important work. 
I  understood the position was unpaid and was willing to volunteer my time. It soon became 
clear to me that, while we appreciated the limited logistical support provided by the Secretary 
of State’s office, we were completely hobbled by not having any budget at all with which to do
our work. And then, several months after my first meeting of the PCSW, the Covid-19 
epidemic shut the state down. 
The havoc caused by the pandemic has been labeled the “she-cession” because it 
disproportionately affected women, who struggled to balance their demands of family
and the vital work they were doing in front-line jobs such as childcare, education, and 
health care. As women, many PCSW members experienced this ourselves. Together, 
we grieved the hardships caused by the pandemic for our members, for all women, for
everyone, and struggled to understand the breadth and depth of the impact, both short-
and long-term. 
In the midst of all this we had a report to write and deliver to the legislature and the 
Governor, and we managed to do this despite the pandemic. It was really hard. It was 
especially difficult because we had no staff, and no budget to help us with this critical 
work. We even had to borrow Zoom technology from partners in order to hold 
webinars, much needed in order to hear testimony from people around the state about 
the needs of women and girls, because the license the Secretary of State’s office did 
not permit this. We had no budget for printing or postage. Our webpage is decades out
of date and until recently we didn’t even have our own email address where people 
could reach us. Frankly, I found it embarrassing to have to beg for and borrow even 
the most basic tools we needed in order to do our work effectively. I wonder whether 
a commission made up entirely of men would be asked to do such important work 
with no resources. 
All PCSW members have families and are leaders in a variety of paid and volunteer 
positions; that’s precisely why we were recruited to serve. These responsibilities limit 
our ability to do, for example, original research into the needs of women and girls, 
and to effectively partner with others who are serving this population. Everything we 
do for the PCSW is time taken from our families, our employers, from our evenings 
and weekends, and juggling these many demands takes its toll. The resources 
proposed under LD 794 would allow us to deliver data and recommendations to the 
legislature and the Governor that support the critical policy and budget decisions that 
you must make. 
During my service on the PCSW it’s been clear to me how critical it is to have a 
diversity of voices. It is for this reason that I wholeheartedly support expansion of the 
PCSW’s membership to include members representing LGBTQIA+ Mainers and 
youth under the age of 25. We truly are stronger with a wide range of perspectives. 
Finally, I support the language updates that will make the Governor-appointed seats 
more in line with current language usage. Language evolves over time, and it makes 
sense to use more inclusive language as part of LD 794. 
Thanks very much for your attention.

