1 
  
 
 TESTIMONY OF LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE 
ELDERLY IN SUPPORT OF  LD 794:  AN ACT TO 
EXPAND THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE 
PERMANENT COMMISSION ON THE STATUS 
OF WOMEN   
 
March 31, 2023  Senator Nangle , Representative Stover , and esteemed members of the State 
and Local Government Committee, my name is Jill Randall, and I am the  
Helpline and Medicare Advocacy Services Director  of Legal Services for the 
Elder ly, also known as LSE.  
 I am also a member of the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women 
in the seat that represents the interests of older women.   I submit this 
testimony today in  support of  LD 794. 
 Legal Services for the Elderly ( LSE) is a nonprofit corporation that was 
formed in 1974.  LSE’s mission is to provide free legal help to older people 
in Maine when their basic human needs are at stake.  This includes shelter, 
food, health care, public benefits and safety.   LSE also provides Medicare 
advocacy services to Mainers with Medicare.  
 I support LD 794 because it contains changes that are critical and 
fundamental to the work of the Permanent Commission on the Status of 
Women, also known as the PCSW. I thank Senator Eloise Vitell for 
sponsoring this important bill.   It is critically impor tant that the PCSW have 
members who represent diverse interests and experiences. C urrently the 
PCSW is lacking important perspectives from LGBTQIA+ Mainers and from a Maine youth.  This bill expands the PCSW to include these two 
important seats.  
 
LD 794 al so updates the language in the statute to use terminology to ensure 
that Mainers feel respected and represented, such as by replacing “elderly” 
with “older residents.” Employing precise and proper  language is 
foundational to the work of the PCSW to ensure inclusivity and respect.   
LSE is currently working toward a  name change for these same reasons.    
2 
 LD 794 also creates an Executive Director staff position for the 
Commission. The Commission  has operated for many years without funding 
and very limited administrative support which has limited the Commission’s 
work because it has been carried out by volunteer members, including 
myself.   The Commission  released reports on the status of Maine wom en in 
2020 and 2022. But a s the Commission researched and drafted these reports 
we were hampered by the lack of funding and capacity. Having a staff 
position would provide capacity for us to carry out our  important work of 
researching issues impacting wome n and documenting those in a written 
report.  
 Therefore, not only does this bill allow for critical changes to the Commission, but also would enable us to execute our charge to the Maine Legislature. Thank you and please support LD 794. 
 Submitted by Jill Randall, Helpline and Medicare Advocacy Services 
Director, Legal Services for the Elderly, jrandall@mainelse.org
, 207 -620-
3114 . 
