 
Testimony in Support of 
 
LD 794: An Act to Expand the Membership of the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women 
 
Friday, March 31st, 2023 
 
Senator Nagel, Representative Stover and members of the State and Local Government Committee, my 
name is Jill Barkley Roy and I am a member of the Permanent Commission on the Status of Maine 
Women. I live in South Portland with my wife, Amy, and our foster daughter.  
 
Early in my career in Maine, I worked in the domestic violence movement alongside advocates, 
survivors, and various other stakeholders all trying to address this far too common problem. I remember 
the discussions back in the early 2000s about bringing back the Permanent Commission on the Status of 
Maine Women. Never could I imagine back then being on this commission now. It is truly an honor to 
serve alongside my fellow commissioners, representing the interests of Maine women and girls.  
 
I am a proud member of Maine’s LGBTQI+ community and strive to amplify the experiences of my 
community within my service on this commission. Commissioners are appointed based on their 
knowledge of challenges facing Maine women, which means it is critical that the Commission reflects 
the diversity of lived experiences of Maine women and girls across the state. The Commission reviewed 
the current statute language and felt the perspective of LGBTQI+ Mainers is essential to the success of 
the Commission, and must be required, and intentional, representation. This bill would update the 
Gubernational appointments to reflect this goal of inclusivity.  
 
Though I am still relatively new to the Commission, I see how hard my fellow commissioners work to 
achieve our goals of providing our bi-annual report and weighing in on policy that could impact Maine 
women and girls. I have long believed that if you want something done right, you should assign it to a 
busy woman – and I am in awe of the many roles my fellow commissioners and I hold in our professional 
and personal lives. However, as unpaid volunteers with competing priorities, we are limited in our ability 
to truly meet our mission and expand on our reach. A full-time position within State Government is 
critical to providing the Commission with the expertise and support to produce a high quality biannual 
report and make consistent policy recommendations each session. This bill would create this position 
and give us the structure and staffing support to have an even greater impact.  
 
Thank you for your consideration. I urge you to support this bill.  
 
Jill Barkley Roy 
31 Bonnybank Terrace  
South Portland, ME 04106 
207-332-1297 
jbarkley@gmail.com   
