i'\/lairie's Qerrnanent Cortirnission on the Status of Women 
an s _' 
March 31, 2023 
Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee of State and Local Government, 
My name is Ruth Kermish-Allen and l'm honored to be here today to speak on behalf of The 
Permanent Commission on the Status of Women in support of LD 794. I'm joined today by 
many of my fellow Commissioners, but to be respectful of the Committee's time, I'm going to 
read a joint statement from the full Commission. Individual Commission members have 
submitted their testimony in writing. 
First, the Commission would like to thank Senator Vitelli, former Chair of the Commission, for 
her leadership in sponsoring this bill and Secretary Bellows for her endless support. 
In 2009, LD 236 was unanimously passed by the 124th Maine Legislature to create the 
Permanent Commission on the Status of Women. The Commission is a nonpartisan group of 
appointed citizens who are dedicated to improving the lives of Maine's women and girls. Our 
mission is to inform policymakers on the status of women throughout the state and help 
promote activities that further opportunities for women. We do this primarily through the 
creation of a biennial report for the Legislature that reflects the current status of women and 
girls in Maine and aims to recommend policy options that will improve the health and well- 
being of women and girls. We currently have 14 members who devote significant time 
volunteering to ensure that policymakers have the tools and knowledge to make important 
decisions. However, our collective volunteer time is not enough. We are mothers, caretakers, 
professionals, community leaders, and advocates. We are here because we care about gender 
inequity in our communities and hope to support the Maine Legislature in creating good laws 
that work for real people. 
When legislation to create Maine's Womens' Commission was first introduced during the 
Second Session of the 124th Legislature, the bill included administrative support, including an 
Executive Director. However, it was amended to reduce the number of members and eliminate 
any financial support. The fiscal note was stripped, and bill voted out of Committee as 
Emergency Legislation late in the session. 
Since then, the Commission has operated without any funding and extremely limited 
administrative support. Without such support, the Commission cannot truly meet our 
important mission. Most of us work full-time jobs in addition to this work and have limited 
capacity to oversee the management of the Commission and to implement large projects well,
it/‘laineis Rerrnanent ﬁommission on the Status of Women 
.1; 
such as research on the status of women, producing our bi-annual report, and advocating on 
policy. 
Despite these challenges, the Commission worked hard to present a report to the 130th Maine 
Legislature. When drafting these reports, it was evident the Commission lacked funding and 
capacity to collect and analyze original anecdotal and empirical data. 
Restoring a full-time Executive Director position within State Government is critical to providing 
the Commission the time and access to collect, analyze, and present the necessary data 
regarding the status of l\/laine women and girls. It will also help us publish our findings in an 
accessible way that supports policy makers. 
ln addition to the funding critical to support the ongoing work of the Commission, this bill also 
creates two additional Governor-appointed seats, representing LGBTQlA+ Mainers and young 
(under the age of 25) Mainers. We believe these two perspectives are fundamental to ensuring 
representation on the Commission reflects the variety of lived experiences of Maine women 
and girls. 
Today, you have the opportunity to strengthen the tools available to make decisions that 
benefit Maine women and girls now, and into the future. l urge you to please support LD 794, 
to finally allow this important Commission to do the work it was intended to do when it was 
first introduced. 
Thank you for your time. 
Signed, 
Kate Elmes, Trekkers, Commission Chair - Damariscotta 
Fatuma Hussein, Immigrant Resource Center of Maine - Auburn 
Jill Randall, Legal Services for the Elderly - Augusta 
Samantha Lott Hale, Girl Scouts of Maine - Orono 
Rebecca Austin, Safe Voices - Farmington 
Maulian Dana, Penobscot Nation Tribal Ambassador - Indian Island 
Jill Barkley Roy, EMERGE America - South Portland 
Moriah Geer, Maine Equal Justice - Old Town 
Jennifer Wilkey, Woodworker at Woodhull of Maine - Brunswick 
Darylen Cote, Retired Educator - Caribou 
Hon. Meredith Strang Burgess, former Maine State Legislator - Cumberland 
Susan Mackey Andrews, Facilitator - Dover-Foxcroft 
Dr. Ruth Kermish-Allen, Maine Math and Science Alliance - Appleton 
Dania Bowie, Maine Women's Lobby, Maine Inside Out - Pittston 
Anne Gass, independent Historian - Gray
