Sue Mackey Andrews  
3 Shore Road North  
Dover -Foxcroft, Maine 04426  
207-408-8040  
Sdmandrews @gmail.com   
 
 
March 28, 2023  
 
RE: LD 794, An Act to Expand the Membership of the Permanent Commission on th e 
Status of Women   
 
Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and esteemed members of the State and 
Local Government Committee,  
 
My name is Sue M ackey Andrews and I serve as a  Commissioner in Maine’s 
Permanent Commission on the Status of Women , now in my second term . Thank you 
for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 794, An Act to Expand the 
Membership of the Permanent Commission on th e Status of Women .  
 
In my at -large representation on the Commission, I am honored to bring the voice and 
advocacy on behalf of women in rural Maine . I hav e lived in Piscataquis County since 
1979, raised my children here and worked in a variety of careers at the local, state and 
national level – all the while , living in Dover -Foxc roft. My most recent volunteer work 
has introduced me to a variety of women living, working, raising children and 
contribut ing to our great state. Through their eyes and voices, I have learned about the 
wide range of issues that a good majority  of women in rural Maine – and very likely, 
throughout all of Maine – experience .  
 
My exposure  to other Commissioners and learning  their stories and passions, has only 
reinforced the importance of the voices of women in every facet  of Maine life – most 
especially in the real m of public policy.  Our non-partisan membership enriches our 
conversations and the work we are assigned to do per Maine statute.  
 
No other group, commission , state division or agency in Ma ine is statutorily assigned 
with this important task  of informing policymakers about the sal ient issues and 
challenges, as well as opportunities the Maine women and girls – of all ages – face,  
every day.  
 
 
Joint Commi ttee on State and Local Government  
LD 794, An Act to Expand the Membership of the Permanent Commission on the Sta tus 
of Women  
March 31, 2023 /Page Two  
 
Passage of LD 794 will increase  the membership of the Permanent Commission on the 
Status of  Women from 17 members to 19 members , requiring that the Governor appoint 
the 2 additional members, with one member representing the interests of lesbian, gay, 
bisexual,  transgender, queer, questioning, intersex or asexual persons and one member 
a person who  has not attained 25 years of age. The bill also updates terminology 
describing other  appointees and provides funding for one Public Service Coordinator I 
position to serve as  executive director of the Commission / 
 
My current  volunteer  work with our cross -sector, county -wide coalition is forged in 
community service, focused on marginalized residents as well as our children, youth 
and youn g adults. Every day, I come into contact with at least with one person most  
typically with a seeking help for a chil d, a parent, a neighbor and sometimes – for 
themselves . The overwhelming  majority of these local residents are women .  
 
As a Commissioner, I helped to re search and craft our report to the L egislatur e last 
year, entitled COUNT US IN: MAINE WOMEN, DATA, AND  THE CARE ECONOMY .i 
This process  was entirely supported by the C ommissioners and included expansive 
research, interviews,  and writing. We learned  many things but the major finding that 
sticks with me is the disproportionate “hit” that rural Maine women, who were already 
behind economically before 2019, took during these pa st three+ years – and continue to 
take as our state and country strives to recover . The end result has been profound for 
too many women – disrupted education and careers  which have been impossible to 
retrieve due to the gender wage  disparity  and lack of child  care and exacerbated by the 
high cost of living.    
 
We do believe that a state ’s success  can and should be judged by how it treats its  
women and girls. Right now, our girls and women are struggling and we at The 
Commission beli eve that our major mission is to provide leadership to ensure that 
Maine leads the nation in striving towards gen der equi ty. 
 
Our impact though i s seriously negative limited by the fact that Maine is NOT the leader 
in ensuring that its Women’s Commission has the funding and the membership 
necessary to be as strong, impactful, and helpful to policy m akers as possible.  Other 
state Commissions  such as Massachusetts  and Vermont benefit from a modest state 
investment which staffing able t o help to publish professional biannual reports to the  
 
Joint Commi ttee on State and Local Government  
LD 794, An Act to Expand the Membership of the Permanent Commission on the Sta tus 
of Women  
March 31, 2023 /Page T hree 
 
legislature that offers  insights into the status of women and girls, and recommendations 
for policy solutions .  
 
It is important to the Maine State Legislature th at we live our stat utory assignment – to 
inform key poli cy makers about policy and social issues affecting women and girls in 
Maine . The inve stment o f state funds will gre atly the Commission to research and 
provide input on a variety of issues su ch as women’s economic security, women in the 
trades, women in STEM , older women, rural women, etc. Part of our work , as with many 
other states, would include hosting convenings to bring women from across Maine   
 
together to discuss ways to increase opportunities and equity for women  regardless of 
their residence, economics, education, age, etc.  
 
With the passage of LD 794, we would have the necessary capacity to execute  this 
statutory assignment . We don’t have funding to do surveys or research, or to print 
copies of our own biennial reports.  
 
We are very appreciative of the support from the Office of the Sec retary of State for her 
support and advocacy , and to this bill ’s sponsor  Senator Vitelli  of Sagadaho c,  
Cosponsor s Representative C loutier  of Lewisto n, Senators Daughtry of Cumberland, 
Pierce of Cumberland, R afferty of York,  and Rot undo of Androscoggi n and  
Representatives  Cluchey of Bowdoinham, Jauch  of Topsham, O’Neil of Saco, and Terry  
of Gorham.  
 
I strongly urge your sup port for this Bill which represents a low cost, low barrier wa y to 
stand with Maine women and girls and help us  to ensure that whatever our future holds, 
current and future generations have what is needed to close the gaps in gender 
disparities and secure full equality.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Joint Commi ttee on State and Local Government  
LD 794, An Act to Expand the Membership of the Permanent Commission on the Sta tus 
of Women  
March 31, 2023 /Page Four 
 
Thank you sincerely for your time and your leaders hip, and for advancing the work of 
the P erman ent Commission on the S tatus of Women in Maine.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Susan D. Mackey Andrews  
Com missioner  
4 Shore Road North  
Dover -Foxcr oft, Maine 04426  
sdmandrews@gmail.com   
207-564-7835  
 
ii https://www.maine.gov/sos/womens -comm/index.html  

