Consumers for P~° B°X249° 
A t ,ME04338 
Afferdable Te'eP“a:§g§%§2:222:;2;2 
wwwmainecahc g 
consumerhealth@mainecahc org 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable 
health care for all Mainers. 
Testimony In Support of: 
LD 1736, An Act to Advance the National HIV/AIDS 
Strategy in Maine by Broadening HIV Testing 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee On Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services, thank you for the opportunity to submit these 
comments in support of LD 1736, An Act to Advance the National HIV/AlDS Strategy in Maine 
by Broadening HIV Testing. 
My name is Ceilidh Shea and l am the Policy Advocate at Consumers for Affordable Health Care, 
a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates the right to quality, affordable health care 
for every person in Maine. As designated by Maine's Attorney General, CAHC serves as Maine's 
Health Insurance Consumer Assistance Program (CAP),which operates a toll-free HelpLine. Our 
HelpLine, fields approximately 6,000 calls and emails every year from people across Maine who 
need help obtaining, keeping, using, or fixing problems with private health insurance or with 
accessing or affording health care services. CAHC also serves as the Ombudsman program for 
Maine's Medicaid program, MaineCare, and helps people apply for and navigate the enrollment 
process for MaineCare. it is with that background that we provide these comments. 
LD 1736 broadens access to HIV testing by including it in the standard, comprehensive set of 
tests provided for patients who may have been exposed to an STD or STI and requires HIV tests 
to be offered to patients receiving non-emergency care in a hospital or urgent care facility, or 
outpatient primary care setting, if the patient is not under the regular care of a primary care 
provider. This bill also requires health plans to cover, without cost-sharing, for annual HlV 
testing for individuals 13 years or older, and testing for people with a possible STD or STI. These 
requirements will ensure more people in Maine are tested regularly and when they are at 
greater risk. increasing HIV testing is an extremely important public health measure; by 
increasing the rate of diagnosis, more people living with HlV will be able to get treatment they 
need and take necessary precautions to help keep themselves and others safe. If left untreated, 
HIV weakens the immune system so much that it can no longer fight infection. This late stage of 
the virus, AIDS, can be fatal if left untreated? Catching HIV earlier, through increased testing, 
can prevent the onset of AIDS, improve health outcomes and quality of life for Mainers living 
with HIV, as well as reduce transmission. 
1 
httpsI//www.hamiltonhealthcenter.com/importance-hiv-testing[
Consumers for P-O “X2490 
L Augusta, ME 04338 
{+1-, Aff°"lab'e “""e"“‘;’;i§lI§2§-2ii'Z3ZS 
Hﬁalth Care z 
consumerhealth@ma|necahc org Advocating the right to quality, affordable 
health care for all Mainers. 
Approximately 1.1 million people in the United States are living with HIV today. However, 1 in7 
of them are not aware they are living with HIV. That means there are approximately 165,000 
people in the U.S. who do not know that they are living with HIV? The Maine CDC reported that 
more than one-third of new HIV cases in Maine are dually diagnosed with AIDS?’ In 2019, the 
Maine Health Data Organization found that 71% of STI screenings in Maine excluded HIV 
testing. ‘ Evidently, Maine is no exception to inadequate HIV screening. A dual HIV/AIDS 
diagnosis is a sign that the virus has been detected much later in its progression — and at a more 
serious stage. The lack of inclusion of HIV testing in standardized sets of tests for STDs and STls 
likely contributes to the number of people falling through the cracks who are living with HIV 
unknowingly, and therefore do not have the opportunity to seek treatment. 
Increasing testing opportunities and coverage will help close these gaps and ensure people are 
able to access the care they need to stay healthy and prevent new infections. These measures 
are also in step with Maine's Integrated HIV Prevention and Care Plan as well as the National 
HIV/AIDS Strategy, which both recommend increasing availability and access to HIV testing in 
order to diagnose all individuals with HIV as early as possible. “ For these reasons, I urge you to 
support LD 1736. Thank you and I am happy to answer any questions. 
2 
https:[/www.hiv.gov/biog/too-many;people~living-hiv-us-don-t-know-IU 
3 
https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/infectious-disease/hiv-std/documents/Maine_lntegrated_Plan_2022.pdf 
4 Frannie Peabody Center. 
5 
https://www.maine.gov/clhhs/mecdc/infectious-disease/hiv-stcl/documents/l\/laine Integrated Plan 2022.pdf 
6 
https:[/www.hiv.gov/federal-response/nationaI-hiv —aids~strategy/national-hiv-aids —strategy-2022-20251e
