Testimony of Cory Morrison,  in Support of LD 1736 : An Act to Advance the National HIV/AIDS Strategy 
by Broadening HIV Testing  
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Senator Bailey,  Representative Perry, and members of the HCIFS Committee, on February 14, 2005 , yes 
Valentines Day of all days,  at 3:17 p.m. MST  the staff at Denver Health Medical Center informed me that 
my annual STD screening tested positive for HIV . As a result of earl y detection and treatment, within 30 
days of starting on four antiviral meds , my viral load was undetectable . During my time as a Voting 
Member of the Maine  HIV Advisory Committee I was a ppalled by the lack of early detection testing in 
the state  and assum ed all states were required to offer HIV testing to patients during medical visits.  I’m 
an “U”ndetectable = “U”ntransmittable  survivor of HIV as a direct result of the State of Colorado’s early 
detection program.  
I support LD 1736 as it will expand HIV testing services to reach more people in Maine  through early 
detection and treatment.  I have personally gone from 4 pills every night down to two inj ections every 
other month  as a direct result of early detection.  Had the virus not been detected early and progressed 
to AIDS , it is very likely my now 27 year old son would have lost his father before he had the chance to 
graduate high school.   
I urge you  to support the passage of LD 1736 so that more people in Maine have knowledge of their HIV 
status and can link to life -saving care  before it is to late. Early detection is vital . 
Thank you for allowing me to testify today. I’m hopefully that by sharing very personal health 
information with you  today we will one day  soon end the HIV/AIDS epidemic . 
If I can be of further assistance please contact me at 207 -233-0800.  
Respectfully,  
Cory Morrison  
A Patient of Dr. Maia Pinsky and the Horizon Program at Maine General . 
Cory Morrison
State of Maine HIV Advisory Committee and Maine General Horizon Program HIV 
Positive Patient
LD 1736
Testimony of Cory Morrison, in Support of LD 1736: An Act to Advance the 
National HIV/AIDS Strategy by Broadening HIV Testing
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the HCIFS Committee, on 
February 14, 2005, yes Valentines Day of all days, at 3:17 p.m. MST the staff at 
Denver Health Medical Center informed me that my annual STD screening tested 
positive for HIV. As a result of early detection and treatment, within 30 days of 
starting on four antiviral meds, my viral load was undetectable. During my time as a 
Voting Member of the Maine HIV Advisory Committee I was appalled by the lack of 
early detection testing in the state and assumed all states were required to offer HIV 
testing to patients during medical visits. I’m an “U”ndetectable = “U”ntransmittable 
survivor of HIV as a direct result of the State of Colorado’s early detection program. 
I support LD 1736 as it will expand HIV testing services to reach more people in 
Maine through early detection and treatment. I have personally gone from 4 pills 
every night down to two injections every other month as a direct result of early 
detection. Had the virus not been detected early and progressed to AIDS, it is very 
likely my now 27 year old son would have lost his father before he had the chance to 
graduate high school. 
I urge you to support the passage of LD 1736 so that more people in Maine have 
knowledge of their HIV status and can link to life-saving care before it is to late. 
Early detection is vital.
Thank you for allowing me to testify today. I’m hopefully that by sharing very 
personal health information with you today we will one day soon end the HIV/AIDS 
epidemic.
If I can be of further assistance please contact me at 207-233-0800.
Respectfully,
Cory Morrison
A Patient of Dr. Maia Pinsky and the Horizon Program at Maine General.

