 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health of all Maine 
people 
 
TO:   Committee on Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
FROM: Dan Morin, Director, Communications and Government Affairs  
 
DATE:  May 10, 2023 – WORK SESSION 
 
RE:  OPPOSED – LD 1736 , An Act to Advance the National HIV/AIDS Strategy in 
Maine by Broadening HIV Testing 
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest and oldest professional physician association 
representing over 4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings.  
 
The MMA opposes bills such as LD 1736, in which legislators insert themselves into exam rooms 
by dictating medical decision-making and/or the nature and content of patients’ interactions with 
their physicians.  
 
Very few elected officials are physicians, experts in providing clinical care, or have a professional 
background or training in parsing the evidence about what makes an effective therapy or what 
constitutes appropriate medical care. 
 
Requiring physicians to discuss specific practices, or to require certain testing, may not be 
necessary or appropriate at the time of a specific patient appointment. Such overreaching 
mandates may also contradict the physician’s best clinical judgment and established, evidence-
based guidelines and consensus standards for medical care. 
 
Laws are blunt instruments. The practice of medicine, like health care in general, changes at 
unprecedented speed. Legislative actions imposing requirements for a 1:1 health care encounter 
do not allow for the infinite array of exceptions — cases in which the mandate may be 
unnecessary, inappropriate, or even harmful to an individual patient.  
 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 Thank you for your attention to our comments. We urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass. 
