Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services: 
I am writing to you in reference to LD 1736, a proposal to increase HIV testing in the State of 
Maine. 
Because of the stigma still associated with being H|V+, I write to you anonymously. Born and 
raised in Maine, after a 30-year professional career, I returned to retire in I\/laine in 2009. Upon 
my return to Maine, I began dating a man I trusted and loved. In early 2010, I developed flu-like 
symptoms with high fever and was eventually admitted to the local hospital, suspected of 
having swine ﬂu. Doctor after doctor performed test after test as one diagnosis after another 
was dismissed. In this time, no member of the medical community inquired if I were sexually 
active with other men. During day three, a doctor suggested testing me for HIV. My fever 
abated and I was discharged with the understanding my PCP would provide me the results of 
the HIV test the following week. As he entered the exam room that following week, it was clear 
the doctor had the news that I had dreaded. I was, indeed, HIV+. 
I am fortunate that it was 2010 and not the 1980's. There are antiretrovirals which ensure thatI 
will live a relatively normal life. One pill per day for the rest of my life. $5,100 per month 
without insurance. Each pill costs $170. Imagine ifl live another 25 years. That would cost 
over $1.5 Million. 
Had HIV testing been a part of my then partner's routine STI screening, then an awareness of 
his HIV status and subsequent linkage to care would have prevented transmission to me. 
How many other residents of the State of IVIaine are unknowingly HIV+ positive and placing 
hundreds of sexual partners at risk for infection? You as State representatives have the 
opportunity to make a difference in including HIV testing as a component of every STI screening. 
Such an easy decision to make. Personally, I would take it one step further and require that HIV 
testing be a mandatory component of a yearly physical for all residents 13 years of age or older. 
What would be the harm of increased testing? The potential costs of increased testing would 
be offset by saving lives and signiﬁcant savings to insurance companies in decreased coverage of 
antiretroviral drugs. 
Please expand HIV testing in the State of Maine.
