Testimony of Stephen A. Rawlings MD, PhD in Support of  
LD 1736: An Act to Advance the National HIV/AIDS Strategy by Broadening HIV Testing 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee, my name is Dr. Stephen 
Rawlings (he/him) and I am the medical director of an HIV clinic in Portland. Today I am here to 
testify in support of LD 1736. 
Not only am I a medical doctor with nearly a decade of experience caring for people with HIV, my 
credentials also include 15 years of research on the virus with a PhD in HIV and a postdoctoral 
fellowship at the San Diego Center for AIDS Research.  
I don’t normally support the state legislating how medicine should be practiced, but we are 
currently in a situation where decades of stigma have influenced how medical professionals and 
policy-makers alike approach the handling of HIV. As a result, there is an under-appreciation of 
HIV risk and a lack of understanding of HIV prevalence in our communities. Presently, I believe, we 
need to use the power of legislation to improve access to HIV testing and overall decrease HIV 
spread, which will help achieve our very much local, as well as the global goal of ending the HIV 
epidemic.  
The US CDC estimates that there are 1.2 million people with HIV living in the US, but 13% or 
156,000 of them do not know they have HIV. Since 2006, the CDC has recommended all persons 
aged 13 and above receive an HIV test at least once in a healthcare setting. But this 
recommendation is not always being followed and the proportion of people who know of their HIV 
diagnosis has barely budged in nearly two decades1. The current approach is not working and I 
believe we need to change tactics. 
I started practicing in Maine 18 months ago and, in that time, I have cared for nearly a dozen 
patients who discovered late that they had HIV/AIDS. Their medical course was prolonged (and 
very costly) because of complications from late-stage HIV infection. The HIV clinic where I am 
medical director treats some of the sickest, most complicated patients with HIV in Maine. All too 
often we meet patients with a new HIV diagnosis who had frequent interactions with medical care 
when it would have been appropriate for them to have an HIV test performed, but it was not. I know 
they would have benefitted from an earlier HIV diagnosis and I know that this bill would increase 
the chance someone in identical circumstances would be offered an HIV test. 
I consider LD 1736 a bill not to require or force HIV testing upon our citizens, but a bill to improve 
the medical infrastructure that provides care to Mainers. Like a muscle that atrophies because it 
is not being used, if we do not ensure HIV tests are available and readily performed at the 
places where Mainers are accessing their care, that testing is unlikely to happen. LD 1736 
requires the offer of an HIV test; it does not require the test be performed for care. Many health 
care providers are poor estimators of individual HIV risk and, with our successes in treating and 
preventing HIV, we are reducing the overall number of new cases every year in Maine. As HIV is 
less and less on the minds of providers, it becomes too easy to forget to test patients who meet 
criteria. Normalizing the testing of HIV during routine medical encounters helps decrease stigma 
and removes the need to “judge” whether someone needs an HIV test.  
I urge you to support LD 1736 to advance HIV testing in Maine. I would be happy to answer any 
questions now or in the future. 
 
1 https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/library/reports/hiv-surveillance.html 
