BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director
55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.org
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to homelessness and 
hunger
Good morning Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, 
My name is Taylor Cray and I am the Team Leader for the Food Justice Coalition, and a 
member of Preble Street’s Advocacy Team. I am writing to you today to ask that you 
please support LD959: An Act to Prohibit Food Waste by Grocery Stores.
The Food Justice Coalition is a group of folks with lived experience of food insecurity who 
work to both inform Preble Street’s own food programs, and advocate for larger change 
to ensure that everyone has access to healthy food. With the recent end of SNAP 
emergency allotments, the importance of food banks, soup kitchens, and other such 
programs cannot be overstated. The end of emergency allotments means that individuals 
and families have seen a dramatic decrease in their SNAP benefits, with some benefits 
going from more than two hundred dollars each month to less than thirty. These SNAP 
cuts have been a devastating blow to the grocery budget of many families, forcing some 
households to decide between buying food or paying rent for the month. No one should 
ever have to choose between food and housing. 
 
Preble Street currently receives food donations from many local retail and wholesale 
distributors, which help us produce up to 2,000 hot and nutritious meals at our Food 
Security Hub daily, as well as fill roughly 500 grocery boxes monthly for food insecure 
individuals and families. The Food Security Hub was specifically designed to work with 
food at the end of the supply chain. Processing and preserving food to prevent waste 
while increasing nutrition for our communities. We recognize that many retailers are 
already working to ensure that any potential food waste is avoided and believe that this 
legislation will help grocery stores to bring any food waste in Maine to zero.
LD959 will help to keep food banks and soup kitchens well-stocked and ready to meet this 
growing need. By ensuring that excess food from grocery stores goes to these resources, 
we can prioritize limiting food waste while also helping to feed our neighbors and 
communities. With this in mind, I urge you to vote in support of LD959. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Taylor Cray
Team Leader, Food Justice Coalition
Preble Street 

