Caryl McIntire Edwards
Harrison
LD 1068
In Maine the animals usually used in canned hunts are nonnative species such as red deer, 
fallow deer, bison, and boars. These animals are domestically raised and have lost most of 
their fear of the humans who would be hunting them. Guides often assist “hunters” to make 
sure they make their kill.
Most hunters are totally against canned hunts because they don’t observe fair chase 
traditions and are a threat to Maine hunting principles. Most hunters feel it is morally and 
ethically wrong to enclose tame animals in a confined area and charge fees to kill them, 
sometimes in the most inhumane ways. These canned hunts and hunters and not subject to 
Maine hunting laws, in fact, a person does not even have to know how to handle a gun or be 
licensed to shoot in the state to participate in these canned hunts.
This is not something that individuals rely on as a primary income, because the people who 
offer it have other sources of income such as offering a guide service, bird photography, 
snowmobiling and canoeing. Canned hunting is a minor, diminishing source of income, 
therefore, labeling it as something else is not factual.
It is a small and dying industry that never caught on in Maine. Proposed legislation calls for a 
two-year phase out period to mitigate any loss.
We have laws for people who do not adhere to our core values and the same laws can be 
used to determine if these laws are morally and ethically acceptable.
Maine Inland Fisheries and Wildlife contends that these animals should be considered 
domestic and treated as cows but it is certainly not part of their mission to inspect cows.
Twenty states have taken action against canned hunting and it has been condemned by 
many prominent hunters in Maine. Eighteen states who still allow it have seen chronic 
wasting disease in many of its animals, something which can be deadly to our native deer 
species.
This is not a bill to end hunting. It is simply a bill that takes a moral stand on a particular type 
of hunting which Maine citizens and a vast number of Maine hunters oppose. 

