Committee on Agriculture, Forestry, and Conservation
Re: In Support of LD #1068 "An Act To Ban the Killing of Animals in Enclosed Areas"
March 24th, 2023
Good morning, Sen. Ingwersen, Rep. Pluecker and members of the Committee on Agriculture 
Conservation and Forestry;
My name is Gina Garey, and I am a professional animal behaviorist at Animal Behavior and 
Healing in Portland and the Maine State Director for Animal Wellness Action and Center for a 
Humane Economy. 
I appreciate the opportunity to offer my testimony in support of LD 1068, An Act to Ban the 
Killing of Animals in Enclosed Areas.
Canned “killing” in enclosed areas violates the premise of fair chase that is encoded into Maine 
hunting tradition and practices. It eliminates any vestige of the promise of escape by captured 
wildlife, indeed the “hunt” itself, and in doing so, renders the animal a victim of killing sprees 
for a fee.
The majority of hunters, as well as respected national hunting groups, are against these 
operations and consider them unethical, void of fair chase traditions, and a threat to the image 
of Maine hunting. It is morally and ethically wrong to enclose animals and charge fees to 
kill them.
The killing of animals in this venue can be unnecessarily inhumane. True hunters take pride in 
the chase and the skill to manage one clean shot. Hunters at enclosed ranch operations are 
often inexperienced, unlicensed and are not subject to our wildlife laws, therefore increasing 
the unlikelihood for a humane end for the animals. This is seen by a broad spectrum of hunters 
and non-hunters as unnecessarily inhumane and a bloodsport that has no place in Maine.
Let’s make certain this dying activity is phased out and ends in Maine, as this form of killing of 
wildlife is inherently inhumane, and an unwelcome message to those who come to Maine for 
its hunting traditions, and to our children and their families.
I know the committee takes this measure seriously and I ask that you all vote “ought to pass” 
with the vigor such a proposal deserves.
Thank you for your time and attention;
Gina E. Garey, MS CABAC
Maine State Director-Animal Wellness Action
Center for a Humane Economy
