Jared Bornstein 
Opposition to LD 1068 
Good morning, Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and esteemed members of 
the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry committee. Today, we are here to discuss banning 
licensed, regulated and economically important "large game shooting area's" here in this state. 
These businesses are more commonly referred to as Hunt Parks or Hunting Preserves. Why 
should we ban them? Do they pose a risk to the native wildlife? Are they cruel places for 
animals to live? Are they an affront to the morality or ethics of hunters? The answer to all of 
these is a resounding no. These hunt parks are extremely regulated farms. They are subject to 
stringent testing requirements for any pathogens that could affect the native deer herds.A 
large burden is placed on the owners of these parks to ensure that Maine's wildlife is 
maintained through longstanding cooperation with the Department. The animals in these areas 
are treated far better than beef cows in large industrial farms. They have acres of grasslands 
and forest to roam, are fed daily a diet that closely matches the food they would seek out in 
nature, they are afforded the opportunity to breed, socially interact and live a deer life while in 
captivity. 
The harvesting of these animals within an enclosed space is just as moral and ethical as 
hunting an animal in the wild or eating a frozen hamburger you buy at Hannaford. There is no 
difference. In each case an animal is raised, harvested and consumed. The manner of harvesting 
is what we are discussing here, and I charge that there is no moral or ethical issue with the 
person consuming the meat harvesting the meat from the farm. ln fact, the person willing and 
desiring to harvest the meat themselves- either in the wild or from a hunt park is more ethical 
than the person who only buys meat from a store. You see, our society has separated the true 
cost of consuming meat from the actual consumption. ln order for you to enjoy you bacon, 
steak or sausage someone must kill an animal. Those are the facts of life, and the reality of 
nature that many want to discount. Some people wish to close that gap, see the animal they 
will consume alive, harvest the animal and bring it home. Hunt parks offer these folks an 
economical, efficient and respectful process for them to fill their freezers. In Maine, only about 
10% of hunters are successful in the Deer woods. Does that mean that they should go without? 
Should they be forced buy meat from the store? Or should they be allowed to harvest their own 
meat, on their own accord, in the manner that they deem fit for themselves? 
Grand Lake Hunt, who I represent, offers animals at every price range from a Red Deer 
Hind to fill the freezer to a Majestic Stag or Bison that will ﬁll the freezer and be a memory fora 
life time. Many of Corey‘s clients are working class New Englanders who just do not have the 
time to scout, stalk and prepare to hunt in the wild where the chance of success is minimal. 
They want quality meat and they want to see the process through. Should we take that away? 
So what, they are forced to buy more expensive and less quality meat at the store? No. 
Notwithstanding everything above, this bill is an absolute and direct affront to Maine's Right to 
Food amendment. ‘All individuals have the right to grow, raise, harvest produce and consume 
the food of their own choosing. Please deliver a unanimous ought not to pass on LD 1068.
