Testimony in SUPPORT  
of LD 1068 , “An Act to Ban the Hunting of Animals in Enclosed Areas” 
 
Before the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry  
Presented by  Jayne Winters, South China, ME  
 
March 27, 2023  
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative  Pluecker , distinguished members of the 
Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry  Committee, my name is Jayne Winters. I have 
lived in Maine all my life and currently serve on the Board of Directors of  Maine 
Friends of Animals.  I am submitting com ments in SUPPORT  of LD 1068 , “An Act  to 
Ban the Hunting of Animals in Enclosed Areas.”   
 
While o thers are addressing issues such as Maine’s hunting heritage, ethics, and 
economics, my testimony concerns animal health, specifically Chronic Wasting 
Disease [CWD].  
CWD is a progressive, fatal nervous system disease, similar to mad cow, which 
impacts deer species. It  is not caused by a virus or bacteria, but abnormal proteins 
that damage nerve cells in the brain and nervous tissue. Symptoms slowly devel op 
over months and can include  lethargy, poor coordination, paralysis, drooling, 
isolation from the herd, drooping head , and weight loss ; death typically  occurs in 
less than a year.  It has been found in wild and captive elk, moose, and caribou, as 
well as whitetail, mule, red , and sika deer. There ’s no evidence it can been 
transmitted to species such as horses, cattle, goats,  sheep, or pigs, or that it can 
infect humans, but public heal th officials recommend avoiding exposure to it.  
CWD proteins are shed in urine, feces, saliva, and blood of an infected animal ; it is 
spread by direct animal -to-animal contact or through contaminated soil, leaves, 
bedding, food, or water. When deer are in frequent or close contact with one 
another, the risk of transmission obviously rises. CWD can also be spread through 
contact between wild and fenced animals , in either direction. T he protein is not 
easily destroyed by disinfection, heat or environmental factors, so it can also be 
spread by predators and scavengers after consumption of infected carcasses . 
Research has shown CWD  proteins  can live outside a host for many years.  
The usual testing method is microscopic examination of stained tissue samples from 
an animal’s brain stem or lymph nodes. Most CWD tests are done  on dead animals; 
live animals can be tested, typically for herd management situations, with a biopsy 
sample from the animal's tonsils.  
The good news is that CWD has never be en found in Maine. It has been monitored 
annually since 1999 and i n 2002, the Department of Inland Fisheries & Wildlife 
(IF&W) started sub- sample testing of our deer and moose harvests  as part of its 
species management . Most sample s are processed with a quick , cost -effective 
method in which a color- changing solution can indicate the presence of the protein, 
with follow- up microscopic exam if indicated.  
The Department of Agriculture, Conservation, & Forestry (DACF) monitors our 
licensed deer farms for CWD.  Over the past 20 years,  ~2,000  farm-raised elk and 
deer tested have been negative. In 2010, DACF revised its importation rules, 
requiring animals come from CWD -certified and accredited tuberculosis -free herds.  
CWD has, however, been found in 30 US states and four Canadian provinces , in 
both wild and captive populations. It was not detected east of Illinois until 2005, 
when it was discovered in captive and wild herds in New York and wild herds in 
West Virginia. A $1 million testing and culling program seems  to have stopped the 
outbreak in New York.  
Closer to Maine, CWD was documented  in captive deer in Pennsylvania in October 
2012 and wild whitetails in 2013 . Of particular concern  to Maine  is the CWD found 
in a Quebec deer farm in September 2018.  Since that time , Maine’s  IF&W plac ed 
stricter  restrictions on the transport of deer and moose carcasses from Canada and 
all states except New Hampshire, which has yet to detect the disease.  
I respectfully urge you to pass LD 1068  to further protect our deer and moose  
herds from an easily spread,  horrific and fatal disease.  If CWD is found in Maine, it 
could severely impact our wild deer population. Monitoring and attempts to control 
its spread would be  expensive and time -consuming, s eriously  straining agency 
financial and personnel resources. Perceptions about possible human consumption 
risks – like we’re now seeing with newly discovered PFBs - could not only affect 
herd management , but also our traditional hunting and farmed venison industries . 
Thank you  for your consideration.  
 
 
