Jennifer Skiff
Tremont, Maine
LD 1068
March 27, 2023
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and respected Members of the 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, 
I am submitting written testimony in favor of LD 1068, An Act to Ban the Killing of 
Animals in Enclosed Areas. 
My name is Jennifer Skiff.  I had the absolute privilege of growing up in Maine.  
Weekends were spent on the coast (MDI) or in Monson, at my grandfather's "hunting"
camp.  And while I never saw "Bumpy" shoot anything but a squirrel, I was immersed
in the Maine hunting culture of his friends.  
For the past decade, I have witnessed, as Director of International Programs for 
Animal Wellness Action, the worst of the worst abuses perpetrated against animals.  
"Canned Hunting" is one of the most sickening. Animals are often bred, taken from 
their mothers and hand-raised (so they trust humans), and then their heads are 
pre-sold over the Internet. Once purchased from a photograph, the person who bought
the animal shows up, walks into a relatively small enclosure (often the size of a 
football field), walks up to the animal (who is not afraid), and kills him/her with a 
bullet, a bow and arrow, or by stabbing.  
My grandfather and his friends, I'm sure, would be appalled to know that this is going 
on in Maine.  
Canned "hunting" is a form of killing that raised its ugly head in our lifetime and is 
being shuttered throughout the world.  In May, 2021 the Minister of Forestry, 
Fisheries and the Environment of the country of South Africa, Barbara Creecy, 
announced "South Africa will no longer breed captive lions, keep lions in captivity, or
use captive lions or their derivatives commercially."  Creecy also instructed her 
Department to begin the process to end canned hunting. 
In December 2022, just months ago, Congress acted and the President of the United 
States signed into law the Big Cat Public Safety Act, ending the legal breeding of big 
cats (lions, tigers, leopards, and more) that were being used to this end.  The gates are 
closing on canned hunts, for good reasons.
It is my opinion that Maine should be known as a state that is respectful to the animals
in our care.  Canned "hunting" is grossly unacceptable - on every level. 
Thank you for considering the testimony I have provided based on my experience.  
Jennifer   

