Josey Towle 
Opposition to LD 1068 
Good morning, Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker and esteemed members of 
the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee. This is my first time ever testifying and 
to be honest, I am a little surprised that I am here testifying in opposition to LD 1068 “An Act To 
Ban The Hunting of Animals in Enclosed Areas." I am surprised that I am here because I ama 
vegan. I detest the manner in which the majority of animals are treated in order for meat to be 
a staple of the American Diet. Cows fed a diet they were never meant to eat, chickens that live 
on top of each other, fish scooped up in nets regardless of bycatch. It's all awful. There are 
many examples of animal cruelty, unsustainable practices and immoral behavior in our meat 
industrial complex. Hunting preserves, however, are none of these. I visited a hunt preserve a 
few weeks ago, in fact, my partner and I are thinking about raising Red Deer. What I saw at 
Grand Lake Hunt were animals that were fed a natural diet of grass and grass-based grain; not 
given any hormones or antibiotics, had plenty of room to roam, were able to breed, socialize 
and act like normal animals. They are the heart of Grand Lake Hunt's business and they are 
treated accordingly. In the extremely large breeding pens, filled with animals who will never go 
onto the preserve and who will die of old age, I was able to hand feed an extremely large Bison 
who's called "hair-do" because his mane closely resembles a bowl cut. I fed the farms prized 
breeding elk, who lives like a king surrounded by 70 or so cows. I sat in the blind that hunters sit 
in and watched Bison, Fallow Deer, Red Deer and Elk come through the field and feast on their 
choice of about a dozen round bales of alfalfa. Corey's 10-year-old son sat with us and told us 
all he knew about the animals, stories of times he had helped his dad in the park, talked about 
what it's like to raise deer. This is not a business for them, it is a way of life. Today, the Lord 
family's way of life is threatened by folks who's only concern about food is which delivery 
service to call. 
I grew up in rural Maine. I know what it means to work, I have been on my own working 
full time since I was 16. I was always fed, but I have friends who weren't. It's a big deal when 
someone gets a deer, nothing goes to waste and it feeds a family for months. I remember when 
I was in young, kids coming to school with a big smile on their face that their dad got a deer, 
and they would have venison to eat. Grand Lake Hunt keeps many options available for folks 
who work for a living to come get the most ethical and nutritious meat that Maine farms have 
to offer. Someone wants to take that away, why? Folks are going to always eat meat, I accept 
that. This is the more sustainable, respectful and less expensive way to get that meat. Taking 
this option away is just going to force people to eat meat that is less ethically sourced. If 
Mainers are going to eat meat, I support them having Grand Lake Hunt as an option to provide 
that meat. I believe in my right to be vegan, and I believe in my partners right to eat meat. I do 
not believe it is my right to dictate what others eat. I appreciate what PETA and other groups do 
to raise awareness about cruelty in the meat supply chain, but from a strict vegan- they're 
looking in the wrong place. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, I would welcome any questions!
