 
 
 
M E M O R A N D U M  
 
Date:   March 24, 2023  
 
To:   Senator , Henry Ingwer sen, Chair  
Representative , Bill Plue cker, Chair  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry  
  
From: Judith Camuso,  Commissioner of In land Fishe ries and Wildlife    
 
Subject:  Letter in lieu o f testimony  regarding  L.D. 1068  “An Act to Ban the Hunting o f 
Animals in Enclosed Areas ” - Neither For Nor Against  
 
Dear Committee Members,  
 
I am subm itting this let ter to express MDIFW ’s thoughts on this bill. We do support any 
action that would reduce risk to Ch ronic Wasting Disease transmission  into Maine. 
However , we have  some significant concerns  with th e bill as written , only  as it impacts a 
section of IFW law specifically . Although the primary intent of th e bill seems to be 
prohibiting Licensed Commercial Large Game Shooting Areas, (CLGSA) which are areas 
where domesticated  large game spe cies are contained for shooting , we believe that 
Section 9 of the b ill, which prohibits hunting in an enclosed area,  may  appl y to any 
situation where a restrained animal is dispatched.   This would  include  prohibit ing the 
dispatch of legally trapped animals, including those that are captured and dispatched to 
prevent human -wildlife conflicts or manage zoonotic diseases.   Proh ibiting the humane 
dispatch of legally trapped animals would lead to a  dramatic increase in human -wildlife 
conflicts and significant economic consequences for homeowners, landowners, and 
municipalities.    
 
We would suggest that if the Committee does move f orwar d with this bill, you consider 
an amendment  that remove s Section 9 .  The shoo ting of domesticated  large game  in 
CLGSA is not consi dered hunting, so we do not believe that any revisions to Title 12 are 
necessary if the Committee wishes to prohibit  this activity.  
 
We are happ y to have  staff from MDIFW attend the work session on  this bill if you 
would l ike more in formation on these issues.  
 
Sincerely,   
Judith Camuso  Commissioner, MDIFW   
