 
WWW.BACKCOUNTRYHUNTERS.ORG/NEW_ENGLAND_BHA  
NEWENGLAND@BACKCOUNTRYHUNTERS.ORG   
 
March 26, 2023  
 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: LD 1068  - An Act to Ban the Hunting of Animals in Enclosed Areas  
 
Dear Senator Ing werson, Representative Pluecker, and Members of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry : 
 
Backcountry Hunters & Anglers (BHA) seeks to ensure North America's outdoor heritage of 
hunting and fishing in a natural setting. Our members support the North American Model of 
Wildlife Conservation, which asserts that wildlife is held in p ublic trust as a scientifically 
managed resource for the benefit of all Americans.  
 
BHA supports the intent of LD 1068  to ban hunting of animals in enclosed areas, but we cannot 
support the bill without the clarifying amendment  described below.  
 
BHA support s the intent of the bill because h unting animals in enclosed areas  increases the risk 
of disease s such as Chronic Wasting Disease being transmitted from captive cervids to wild deer  
and moose  and increases the likelihood that destructive invasive exotic an imals like wild hogs 
will escape. Furthermore, hunting animals in enclosed areas  is a violation of fair chase hunting 
principles , and  enclosing game  privatizes native wildlife that belongs to everyone .  
 
Our concern with the bill is with  “Sec. 9,  §1122 . Hunting in an enclosed area .” This section , 
which would prohibit  "killing or wounding  with a firearm or a deadly weapon of an animal that 
is ....t ied, staked out, caged or otherwise intentionally restrained"   could ban  killing   animals 
that were legally trapped under current Fish and Wildlife  laws.  To ensure that this bill does not 
impact current trapping laws and regulations, t his language should be amended by adding  the 
following: except as otherwise permitted pursuant to and Title 12, Part 13, and excluding 
humane trapping of animals for population control efforts or animal control under Title 7, Part 
9, or similar language that addresses this concern.   
 
While we understand and support  the intent of this bill  to prohibit  hunting of captive game, we 
would like to take a m omen t to highlight the risk of Chronic Wasting Disease  (CWD)  posed by 
importing cervid s into Maine for any purpose . CWD is the #1 threat to deer and deer hunting  in 
North America , and moose are also susceptible to the disease . According to the  Association of 

 
WWW.BACKCOUNTRYHUNTERS.ORG/NEW_ENGLAND_BHA  
NEWENGLAND@BACKCOUNTRYHUNTERS.ORG  Fish and Wildlife  Agencies  (AFWA)  Best Management Practices1, the best option to prevent 
spread of CWD  is an outright proh ibition on  movement of cervids,  and the second best option is 
to prohibit movement from areas  where CWD is endemic.   
 
While Main e’s Chapter 203 rules for CWD surveillance are helpful , they offer much less 
protection  than  the AFWA Best Management Practices . Under Chapter 203 there is a significant  
risk th at CWD could be imported to Maine by anima ls with laten t CWD from a herd that has 
been certified  as CWD -free. Sources of spread to certified farms include  fence -line contact with 
wild animals , CWD prions in the soil , and even from prions in imported feed . For example, i n 
2021  CWD was found at a  deer farm in Wisc onsin  that had been certified CWD -free for over 5 
years , but not before 400 deer had been shipped to 40 different facilities in seven states2. This 
event and a recent major spread of CWD through many  Texas deer farms  highlight the 
shortcomings of herd certification and monitoring  programs. The risk to wild cervids has 
become so great th at the Theodore Roosevel t Conservation  Partnership  has call ed for a 
nationwide moratorium on the interstate transportation of cervids and adoption of other Best 
Management Practices, such as requiring double fencing around domestic and captive herds to 
prevent con tact with wild cervids .  
 
Because LD 1068 will remove one reason to import  cervids into Maine  and hence reduce the 
risk of CWD , we ask y ou to support the bill with the amendment we have proposed  above . 
Beyond LD 1068, we  encourage the Legislature  to consider additional  steps to further reduce 
the risk of bringing CWD to Maine  and its spread to wild popula tions .  
 
Thank you very much for your considerat ion of our comments.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
John Simoneau  
 New England Chapter Secretary and Maine Chair  
Durham, ME  
maine@backcountryhunters.org  Robert R. Bryan  
 New England Chapter Board and Maine Vice -Chair  
Harpswell, ME  
rrbryan.54@gmail.com  
 
                                                 
1 AFWA T echnical Report on Best Management Practices for Prevention, Surveillance, and Management of Chronic 
Wasting Disease. 
https://www.fishwildlife.org/application/files/9615/3729/1513/AFWA_Technical_Report_on_CWD_BMPs_FINAL
.pdf  
2 https://www.outdoorlife.com/conservation/cwd -outbreak -wisconsin -deer-farm/  
