TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  - IN SUPPORT OF   
L.D. 1068  "An Act to Ban the  Killing of Animals in Enclosed Areas. ” 
Committee On Agricultur e, Conservation and Forestry  
March  26, 202 3 
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative  Pluecker , and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony in support  of LD 1068, “An Act to Ban the  Killing of Animals in Enclosed Areas. ” 
 
I suspect many will give testimony today about the cruelty and absence  of fair chase involved in hunting domesticated  
wildlife in an enclosed  area.   I agree with those arguments but  want  to focus my testimony on the  contagious  disease risks 
that these hunting ranches present  to ou r native  wildlife and resident farm animals . 
 
Canned hunting operations host unnatural populations of animals i n a confined area which encourages disease spread that 
threat ens not only  to the captive animals , but to free-ranging wildlife  and farm animals as well . Diseases such as chronic 
wasting disease, tuberculosis and brucellosis (which can also infect farm animals and other species of wildlife) hav e been 
diagnosed in captive wildlife.  
 
Chronic wasting disease (CWD)  is a neurological illness that occurs in cervids, members of the deer family, who are often 
stocked at these ranches.  A 2021 report from the Humane Society Legislative Fund revealed that  CWD has already been 
found in more than half of the U.S. states. "It is always fatal because there is no approved, reliable live test, and 
there’s no vaccine or cure. Worse, this disease has also infiltrated wildlife populations outside the ranches, and 
outbreaks in other states have cost taxpayers millions of dollars in response efforts."   
 
According to the CDC, as of June 2022, Chronic Wasting Disease has been reported in wild deer, elk, and moose in at least 
29 US states and two Canadian provinces. Eight een of those states have active hunting ranches with documented cases of 
chronic wasting disease.  
 
Scientists believe CWD proteins  spread between animals through body fluids like feces, saliva, blood, or urine, either 
through direct contact or indirectly t hrough environmental contamination of soil, food or water . Once introduced into an area 
or farm, the CWD protein is contagious amongst deer and moose populations and can spread quickly. Experts believe CWD 
can remain in the environment for a long time, which  means other animals can contract CWD from the environment even 
after an infected animal has died.  
 
Although there have not yet been any documented cases of CWD in Maine, the number of states impacted by this disease 
has risen steadily over the last decad e, with no sign of decline and no reliable methods of screening or treatment.  If we do 
nothing, i t is just a matter of time before CWD reaches Maine.  The presence of captive hunting ranches in Maine only 
increases the risk of contamination to our free-roaming  wildlife .  Why do we continue to allow this risk in Maine?  
 
We must do everything we can to protect our native wildlife from this disease and others that become prevalent  when 
animals are imported, confined, baited,  and/or congregate in high densities.   
 
I believe with a two-year phase out period in place, the few existing captive hunting ranches that still exist in Maine would be 
able to transition into safer and more profitable alternative busines s models.  Land is in demand in our state, there are many 
uses that could be applied to these existing properties that require  less risk and offer more potential for success such as 
organic vegetable farms, solar farms, eco -tourism businesses, guide services, or wildlife  education centers.  
 
It is time to take action to ban these  canned hunting  facilities.  There are plenty  of fair chase hunting opportunities  in Maine , 
this op tion is unnecess ary and dangerous .  Please vote “ Ought to pass” on L.D. 1068 . 
 
Susanna Richer  - Portland, ME  
  
2 | LD 1068 Testimony ( S. Richer)  Sources  
 
Shooting fish in a barrel: U.S. canned hunting industry offers ‘menus’ of rare animals for a thrill kill  
https://hslf.org/blog/2021/01/shooting -fish-barrel -us-canned -hunting -industry -offers -menus -rare-animals -thrill-kill 
 
Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD)  
https://www.cdc.gov/prions/cwd/occurrence.html  
 
Chronic Wasting Disease Transmission Risk Assessment for Farmed Cervids in Minnesota and Wisconsin  
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8402894/  
