Representative Tracy Quint 
Opposition to LD 1068 
Good morning Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee. I come before you today on behalf ofa 
constituent of mine. He is a retired Army Sargent Major who now owns Grand Lake Hunt in 
Danforth. During his 30 years of service to our nation he deployed to Afghanistan, Haiti, Qatar, 
Bosnia and Iraq three times. Many of these deployments were in hot war zones. These 
deployments took a toll on his mental and physical health, as well as his family's. He spent 
much of his service jumping out of planes. I am told that his knees remember those jumps just 
as well as his mind remembers. Of all the people in this room and building, we all owe Corey 
Lord our deepest gratitude. Thank you, Corey. 
Today the question before us is whether to ban Corey's business. A licensed, regulated 
and responsible Deer and Bison farm that offers hunters from around Maine and New England 
the opportunity to harvest their own meat from Corey's herd. The question is not whether 
farms are bad, or shooting animals is bad. Neither one of those is up for discussion today. The 
question is whether Mainer's have the ability to shoot their own animal at someone else's 
farm. We would consider it absurd to ban killing at farms, it is a necessary part of the life cycle 
of livestock raised for meat. We would also consider it absurd to ban people from shooting 
game in the woods, it is the most historic way that humans have consumed meat. So why then 
are we discussing Mainer's ability to shoot the animal they will consume at someone else's 
farm? Would we ban pick your own strawberries because not growing your own strawberries is 
somehow offensive? N0. The real issue at hand is groups who want an end to eating meat, 
something that we have done as a species since our arrival on earth. They see banning these 
businesses as low hanging fruit for ending Mainer's ability to harvest the meat of their own 
choosing. 
These farms are not cruel. The animals are treated far better than commercial beef 
farms, or even in the wild. These Deer and Bison live in a 400+ acre property and are fed 
through-out the winter. They are able to breed, socialize and act like animals all while not 
worrying where their next meal comes from. They are harvested in a humane and respectful 
manner, no different than how wild animals are harvested. These farms have been an 
important part of rural Maine's economy for decades. They buy local, employ local and in many 
cases support local organizations who need ﬁnancial help. Today, they need your help. Please 
deliver a unanimous ought not to pass report on LD 1068
