Chapman, Cheryl _ 
From: Risler, Hillary 
Sent: Tuesday, March 14, 2023 12:27 PM 
To: Legislature: Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Cc: mfpbrennan; Heidi Sampson; Rebecca Millett 
Subject: FW: Maine Ocean School Update and HP 134. 
Good afternoon, 
Tomorrow, Wednesday, one of our public hearings will be on LD 213, An Act to Maintain the Authority of the Maine 
School for Marine Science, Technology, Transportation and Engineering (more commonly known as the Maine Ocean 
School). In advance of this public hearing, Representative Brennan requested that l forward you the following 
communication/update from the chair of the Maine Ocean School's Board of Trustees. 
Hillary Risler, Esq. - 
Legislative Analyst 
Office of Policy and Legal Analysis 
Maine State Legislature 
Office Tel.: (207) 287-1670 
From: Melissa Landon <melissa@maineoceanschool.org> 
Sent: Tuesday, January 24, 2023 8:32:57 AM 
To: Joseph.Rafferty@legisIature.maine.gov <Joseph.Raffertv@legislature.maine.gov>; Brennan, Michael 
<Michael.Brennan@legislature.maine.gov> 
Cc: Gayle Zydlewski <gayle@maineoceanschool.org> 
Subject: Maine Ocean School Update and HP 134. 
This message originates from outside the Maine Legislature. 
Good morning Senator Rafferty and Representative Brennan, 
l have recently been made aware of H.P 134 sponsored by Representatives Cambell, Paul, and Thorne that would repeal 
PL 2021, c. 565, ยง1 regardarding the school's closing. To my knowledge, none of the MOS leadership was aware of this 
bill until recently, and we had not been contacted or consulted prior to, or following, its submission by the 
Representatives. We did not request this. 
Our last meeting with the Committee yielded a shift away from a diploma-granting school to a program educational 
model accessible to students across Maine who get their primary education from their local district or homeschooling. 
HP 134 is substantively different from what we agreed to provide the Committee for continuation of MOS as a program. 
Since we last met with the Committee, our Executive Director and one of our teachers left for other employment. Our 
volunteer BOT had limited availability to do the work required to create a new, sustainable funding and oversight model 
with the assistance of RSU 20 leadership, as was the plan for the Program Model. We also had limited time and 
resources to find and hire a qualified person who would be able to help us develop the legal, organizational 
development, financial, and educational path forward the Program would need. We agreed that the fiscally responsible 
path forward was to close the school after graduating our last student in December 2022 and focus on packaging the 
innovative and ocean-themed aspects of our curriculum into a format that is useful to teachers at other institutions and 
for homeschooling. We worked with DOE to approve the limited funding for operations in July through December for
1
these tasks. We intend to submit a formal letter to the Committee that reports on these efforts and informs you of our 
intent to not put forth a proposal or bill for the MOS Program to continue after our sunset deadline. 
The MOS community sincerely appreciates the work of the Committee in supporting us and urging us to develop. 
Unfortunately, our founders and supporters and leadership did not fully understand the resources required to start 
something of this magnitude and the momentum required to make it sustainable quickly. We are proud of what we 
created and are glad the students we educated and curriculum we created will go on as valuable maritime community 
members and resources. 
l would be glad to talk with one or both of you more regarding this MOS update. Are you interested in a brief 
phone/zoom call? 
Respectfully, 
Melissa 
Melissa E. Landon, PhD, PE 
Maine Ocean School Board of Trustees Chair 
E: melissa@maineoceanschool.orq 
C: 413.695.7616 
W:maineoceanschool.org 
Confidentiality Notice: The material transmitted herein is intended only for the use of the addressee 
and may contain information that constitutes work product or is confidential and exempt from 
disclosure under applicable law. Distribution or copying of this communication or reliance upon its 
contents by unauthorized participants is strictly prohibited. If you have received this communication in 
error, please notify us immediately by telephone or email.
2
