 
   
  
May 15, 2023  
 
The Honorable Stacy Brenner  
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, Chair  
Maine Senate  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
The Honorable Lori Gramlich  
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, Chair  
Maine House of Representatives  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re:  L.D. 1908  – An Act to Enact the Safe Cosmetics Act  
 
Dear Chair s Brenner and Gramlich,  
 
On behalf of the Consumer Healthcare Products Association (CHPA), the national trade 
association representing the leading manufacturers of over -the-counter (OTC) medications, 
dietary supplements, and consumer medical devices, I’m writing to express opposition to L.D. 
1908 . As currently drafted, this legisla tion seeks to ban specific chemicals found in cosmetics 
but may inadvertently  extend this same chemical ban to products found in Food and Drug 
Administration (FD A) approved drugs. CHPA opposes the legislation as it will ban th e majority 
of sun factor protection ( SPF) sunscreens, and additional drug products Maine families rely on 
for their  everyday healthcare.  
 
L.D. 1908 Impact Drugs, Not Just Cosmetics  
 
L.D. 1908  targets cosmetics, but as currently drafted will also impact FDA regulated drugs. The 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) defines a “drug” as:  
 
1) An Article “intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or 
prevention of disease;”  
2) Articles, other than food, that are “intended to affect the structure or a ny function of 
the body;” and,  
3) Articles “intended for use as a component” of such drugs.  
 
Unlike cosmetics and their ingredients (with the exception of color additives), drugs are 
subject to  (FDA) approval before being introd uced to the marketplace. Drugs  must either:  
 
1) Receive FDA premarket approval of a new drug application (NDA), or  
2) Conform to a set of FDA requirements known as a monograph.  
 
Monographs govern the manufacture and marketing of most over -the-counter (OTC) drugs 
and specify the conditions under which OTC drugs can be legally marketed in a particular 
category.  A cosmetic, on the other hand, is defined as a product that is intended to be applied 
to the human  body for cleansing, b eautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering 
   
 
2 
 appearance. The term covers  a broad range of FDA -regulated products that may be used 
externally, internally, and within  orifices.  
 
Finally, e very OTC medicine available at retail must include a Drug Facts label. This label has 
information  about what condition the medicine treats and how to use it safely. Therefore, any 
product with a  Drug Facts label is first and foremost a drug, even if it ha s cosmetic uses.  
 
Oxybenzone Is a Critically Important  Sunscreen Ingredient  
 
Oxybenzone  is a safe, and effective ingredient approved by the FDA in 1978 and found in 
hundred s of personal care products on the market today including some of the most popular 
sunsc reens, lip balms, and lotions designed to guard against sun damage.  In fact, oxyben zone 
offer s broad spectrum protection against both ultraviolet A (UVA) and ultraviolet B (UVB) rays 
that are the greatest contributors  to skin cancer.  Some popular sunscre en products containing 
oxybenzone include Coppertone, ChapStick, Blistex, Hawaiian T ropic Lotion Sunscreen, Aveeno 
Moisturizing Lotion, SoftLips Cube, Neutrogena lotions and countless other shampoos, 
conditioners, lipsticks, body washes, hairsprays, afters haves, and more.  
 
Importance of Oxyben zone Containing Sunscreen Protection Against Skin Cancer  
 
The most common form  of cancer is skin cancer.  Every year there are more cases of skin cancer 
in the United States than the combined incidents of breast cancer, prostate cancer, lung cancer, 
and colon cancer combined.  In fact, over the last 30 years, more people have experi enced skin 
cancer than all other cancers combined.  One out of five Americans will develop skin cancer in 
their lifetime, and one person dies of melanoma (the deadliest for m of skin cancer) every hour.  
The vast majority of melanomas are caused by the sun,  and a person’s risk of melanoma doubles 
if he or she has had more than five sunburns.  When used as directed, sunscreens containing  
oxybenzone on the market today  have pro ven to be very effective in protecting skin against the 
sun’s harmful rays.  The FDA  has acknowledged research that shows sunscreens aid in 
decreasing the risk of developing skin cancers and early skin aging.  The FDA  recommends use 
of a broad -spectrum  sunscreen with sun protection factor (SPF) values of 15 or higher regularly 
and as directed to protec t against ultraviolet A sun rays  as provided by oxybenzone sunscreen 
products .  In order to get ultra -high SPF, oxybenzone is required to serve as a stabilize r for other 
sunscreen ingredients in sunscreen.  Without it, high SPF may not be achieved.   
 
Unintended Consequences  of L.D. 1908  
 
Over -the-counter sunscreen containing oxybenzone is an affordable, accessible first line of 
defense for individuals seeking protection from the sun’s cancer -causing  UV rays.  Banning the 
use of oxybenzone, an important UV filter ingredient, in Maine  will drastically r educe the 
selection of sunscreen products available to residents and tourists.   The combination of reduced 
choice and less effective products could have the dangerous consequence of Maine  residents 
and tourists  using less protective sunscreens or worse – not using sunscreen at all – thereby, 
causing more skin damage and potentially increasing skin cancer rates.    
 
FDA Approved Drugs Should Be Exempt  
 
Restricting the use of FDA approved  ingredients in OTC drugs that are  also regulated as 
cosmetics can cause unnecessary  confusing  and preventable health risks  to cons umers.  To 
   
 
3 
 address these concerns, CHPA respect fully requests the following amendment to exempt 
FDA regulated drugs from being subjected to the bill ’s ingredient/chemical bans : 
 
Amend page  2, line 13-14 as follows:  
 
“Cosmetic product” does not include soap, dietary supplements, or food and drugs approved 
by the United States Food and Drug Administration . 
 
Conclusion  
 
Thank you for taking the time to consider our concerns and feel free to contact me directly 
with any questions you may have.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
 
Carlos I. Gutiérrez  
Vice President, State & Local Government Affairs  
Consumer Healthcare Products Association  
Washington, D.C.  
cgutierrez@chpa.org | 202 -429-3521  
 
cc:  Members of the Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
 The Honorable Representative Sophia Warre n 

