4/25/23, 8:28 AM Screensh0t_20230407-l70307_Ga!lery.jpg 
5203 @ @ mi E éﬁ lg; ..V €)4U/om
< 
C7 0 <1 EU E 
https://mail .go0gle.c0m/mail/ul I /#inbox/FMfcgzGsmNMjdjsfSzZVVFNKz\vmftGCV?pr0ject0r= I &messagePartld=0.2
Hello , my name is Dennis Hammac, I live in Guilford Maine. I'm sending in my testimony today to let 
you guys have an inside look on what I think about LD1583. Coming from an addict with 17 years 
recovery. I started life in Connecticut a little town called Derby, outside of New Haven. I was born to an 
addict alcoholic father, and at that time an addict and alcoholic mother. By the time that I turned 9 years 
old I had learned how to cook crack cocaine. The lst time I had used narcotics I was 10 years old, The 1st 
time I used heroin and cocaine I was almost 12. That was my 1st time using intravenously. I learned this 
at such a young age from the person that was supposed to be teaching me how to become a man, my 
father. My father Allowed me to become a twelve-year-old junkie because of his need to have someone 
around that he could use to drive him to do illegal activities. I didn't have much of a childhood as you 
can understand. While my father was in and out of prison, he would be introduce me to drugs and 
alcohol. He would abuse my mother and go back to prison. I spent from the time I was 12 years old until 
I was 32 using every drug imaginable. From the time I was 12 to 24 I used heroin, cocaine, and pills daily, 
I went to jail on my 25th birthday, When I was released I decided not to do cocaine or alcohol anymore, 
but I still was OK with my pills, And I would try to justify them because they came from the doctor. 
During that time I switched from cocaine to methamphetamines at 25. Meth had became my drug of 
choice, they all were drugs of choice, it didn't matter. Whatever I could get to silence the trauma of 
being raped as a kid . When bad things happen to you, especially as a young child, it's hard to 
understand. In active addiction ,we don't talk about it so it makes it easier just to drown it with drugs 
and alcohol, But thank God for his grace and mercy. In 2006, in a little county jail in North Carolina God 
reached down and touched me and Allowed me to be sick in that jail while I self detoxed , but I got 
through it. I turned my life around. l didn't have suboxone or methadone or any other substance whileI 
was kicking off ofthe pharmaceutical based opiates that I had been prescribed. That makes February 
14"‘ 2006 my clean date. I've been green and sober ever since. In 2008 after having 2 years sober I met 
Heather, my second wife. We were married and in 2010 she gave birth to my youngest son. While she 
was pregnant I thought things were going well. We had found a nice home in the mountains of North 
Carolina, I opened up my own business. Things were going well. Until the day my son was born. It got 
very interesting sitting there wondering why my son would not stop screaming, why he kept shaking . 
Take into account that before this I've already fathered 5 children, 3 from my previous marriage. Now 
I've got to watch my newborn son withdraw from drugs that I did not know that my wife at the time was 
taking. I don't know if you've ever been in the situation at a doctor's office and had nurses and doctors 
judge you but it happened to me. I got pulled aside by the doctor because I kept asking why my son was 
acting like that, what was wrong with him? The doctor told me that my son was withdrawing , and I lost 
it. I started crying, I was a big mess thinking I failed my son. At that point in time I made a decision to 
fight for custody of my son . I did ,and I won, full custody. I didn't know his mom was struggling with 
addiction when we got married. In this testimony I am also going to be sending you 2 pictures, one is 
my wife, In her early addiction and what she looks like now. It's crazy what drugs will do to a person. But 
I speak from the heart I have a lot of experience. After all this, I then proceeded to move to Brownville 
Junction Maine. If you want to move to Brownville Junction maine, It was because you Offered me to 
grow my own 6 plants of medicine that saved my life, Because a couple weeks after I got full custody I 
was told that I had spots on my liver and they wanted to start radiation and chemo. So in June of 2013I 
loaded up all my belongings that I could fit in my truck, And decided to take my almost three-year-old 
sun and move to Maine were I knew no one ,so I could find a healthier lifestyle and a better way to heal 
. And in that little piece of property in Brownville junction I was amazed by a plant that I had pushed 
over”
aside For drugs, for years. I had amazing results from the cannabis treatments. I used, what some people 
call, Rick Simpson oil (RSO) .The name that I like it to be called is full extract cannabis oil or FECO. They 
say certain types of cancer you should Administer 60 grams amount in 90 days I did the opposite. I grew 
enough that I could do a 90 gin 60 days And while raising my son alone,with God's help, I was able to 
heal myself. Thanks to a plant that He put here. I said all that to say this. I had found an all natural 
holistic medicine that I could grow myself and heal myself of a lot of different stuff. It opened my eyes, 
especially me being a recovering addict, to the possibilities of cannabis oils to being used as a pathway 
to recovery. Within a few months ofthis thought a woman who I had not met, that was on my friend's 
list on Facebook was traveling across country. In search oftrue love. Half way across the country the 
true love stopped answering her phone calls and she had nowhere to go. She was a scared, 21 year old 
kid, pregnant, and strung out on drugs. After seeing my son be born addicted I felt led to help. She is 
now married with some amazing children, and she has over 8 years green and sober. She home schools 
her children she's an amazing mom and she never ceases to amaze me. I watched cannabis give herA 
life. Once I saw how well it worked with her I started reaching out and helping other people. So far 
we've had 23 people get clean @ Genesis farm using cannabis, and 13 ofthem are still Sober. Only5 
still use cannabis. I gave them just a little bit of my life, and my desire to help people is what drives me 
every day. I know for a fact that done correctly ,brought to the jails and figured out a schedule, we 
together as a community can combat this opioid, meth, alcohol, trauma problem . I need some help 
from the criminal Justice committee today. I need you, whoever it is that's reading this, to understand 
that what we've been doing this far is not working. Over the last 2 years Buprenorphine deaths are up 
139%. Buprenorphine is another name for Suboxone, something that Just does not work. The numbers 
don't lie. We are trying to take a plant, that has never killed anyone in the history of man, and use it to 
try to beat pharmaceutical addiction. And have better numbers than any of the other Pharmaceutical 
poisons that are harder to come off ofthan the drugs. Using suboxone or methadone only extends their 
addiction. Only 3 out ofa 100 people ever leave the suboxone or methadone clinics. Not to mention it's 
on our dime as tax paying citizens? We're not doing anything to get these people clean or keep them 
clean we're just prolonging the misery of addiction. Please let's work together to find a way that we can 
make this program a reality. Because the reality is, if we don't do something fast we're not going to have 
many people to help get clean. Nationally right now we're losing almost 300 a day. If a foreign country 
was shooting planes out of the sky with 300 Americans in it each day we would definitely havea 
problem with that. Then why don't we have a problem with that 300 a day dying from drugs? Help get 
some structure behind this LD1583 and let's move forward fixing what's broken. Our state motto is 
Dirigo which means we lead or we direct . How about we show the other states how we help each other 
here in Maine. Let's Work together and find how to get this done so we don't have to lose any more of 
our people. We lost a 14 year old child 2 weeks ago here in Guilford. 14 years old! These drugs don't 
help. It kills people from all ages from all ranges of color, sexual identity, lack of identity. It doesn't 
matter. Addiction is addiction . But we do recover!!! lfa man or woman is in a jail cell and they can take 
something all natural to beat their addictions while there in jail so they can be released, go home, 
without having to chase down methadone or suboxone every time they're sick. They can get real 
freedom from addiction with cannabis oil. I'm living proof Valentine's Day was 17 years for this 
recovering drug addict. I am totally available anytime you need me for work session. And thank you for 
your time for reading this.
4/25/23‘, 826 AM Screensh0t_202303 14-180()56_G00gle.jpg 
63100 iﬁ i Ti‘! Q5 .. T3"/0.2:. 
WHKY    
Blowing Rock Resident Visit 
Arrested for Breaking 
tr*m:a§1;;t:.;::~; rm$,1 be :;u!‘,1;e<:t to t::;c1;:>yt*i§j,;t'tt:. Learn More 
Related content 
2% 
E>i:z<;c>ver Search Cmltecticms           
;;»; ..\ 
4: 
https://mail .g00gle.c0m/mail/u/1/Ifinbox/FMfcgzGsmNMjdjsfSzZVVFNKz\vmftGCV?pr0ject0r: I &messagePartId=O.3 
