Larry Dansinger
Bangor
LD 1583
To members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee of the Maine 
Legislature:
I am writing to partially support and partially oppose LD 1583, “An Act to Provide a 
Pathway to Sobriety for Formerly or Currently Incarcerated Individuals.” This can be 
considered testimony that is neither (or both) for nor against this bill.
I have seen lots of evidence that when individuals make efforts through programs at 
recovery from substance use disorder outside of incarceration, some of them succeed 
and do recover. I have seen no evidence that such programs in locked facilities are 
nearly as effective. 
Therefore, I support programs and funding when individuals are released from prison 
or jail. However, I believe it is ineffective, at best, and a waste of effort and funding at
worst, to support programs for individuals while they are incarcerated. 
Individuals who are arrested because of an incident or situation primarily caused by 
substance use disorder should not be incarcerated but instead referred to a treatment 
facility. Just as a person can be declared “not guilty by reason of insanity/NGRI,” a 
person who acted in a harmful way because they were so caught up in dealing with an
addiction (substance use disorder/SUD) should be helped to deal with an addiction 
first before dealing, if necessary, with the criminal punishment system. 
Here is a definition of NGRI: “A verdict or finding of not guilty by reason of insanity 
(NGRI) means that due to a mental disease or defect the person either didn’t 
understand the wrongfulness of their actions at the time of the crime or was unable to 
conform their behavior to the requirements of the law.” I believe those with SUD, in 
many instances, may commit illegal acts because they also are “unable to conform 
their behavior to the requirements of the law.”
To the extent that funds and programs are provided to those being released from jail 
or prison, or funneled to those who are charged but not jailed and sent directly to 
therapeutic programs, I support this bill. For funds provided to programs for 
individuals who are incarcerated, I am opposed.
Sincerely,
Larry Dansinger
21 Mount Desert Drive
Bangor, ME 04401
(207) 262-3706 or larryd@myfairpoint.net 
