Dennis Hammac from Genesis Farms sent me a message. It wrote something like 
this; 
” I know we don't know each other very well, but I can help you and get you out 
of the situation you are in.” 
He proceeded to tell me about his farm, how he can help me get clean without all 
the pharmaceuticals, like Suboxone. He continued to explain to me how I would 
have room and board, I would help in the kitchen and with the plants. I would 
learn about the medicine plants and find the best way for me to use cannabis to 
reach sobriety. I listened. He paid for my travel the rest of the way from 
Pennsylvania to Maine, Dennis and the Genesis farm changed my life. Saved mine 
and my oldest daughters life. 
I am now 8 + years clean and sober from all drugs and pharmaceuticals. I have 
four beautiful, healthy, young children, who I homeschool. I run a successful 
business from my home and we are happy. I owe this success and my sobriety to 
this man and his mission. He is now family to my children and I and we wouldn't 
change it for a thing. 
I want to be a part of Genesis Farms and their mission because I know, from 
experience, having lived it, that it works! That it can change the lives of these 
inmates. Now and after release. I know that it will give them a chance to truly 
clear their minds without the side affects from pharmaceuticals like Suboxone. 
That takes one addiction and replaces it with another. Cannabis in any form can 
help an addict get through the sickness... without the urge to use and keep using. 
We can't say that about prescribed medicines, can we?
You might be wondering if I used medicinal cannabis while I was pregnant, and 
I did. It helped me to eat when I couldn't, sleep when l couldn't, and distracted 
me from the urge to use. Using any drug from my past addiction could seriously 
hurt the baby. Even more so the cannabis ever could. Please, keep in mind how 
physically, mentally and emotionally brutal withdrawals from drug addiction can 
be. It's excruciatingly painful, makes you feel mentally insane and you become 
deeply depressed. This situation just isn't healthy for a pregnant woman. lt’s 
sickening how many helpless, homeless, or even incarcerated pregnant women 
there are. Whose going to take care of them and their growing child. ls Suboxone 
the best option for addicts who are soon to be mothers. Who will soon be 
responsible for not just their own life but another's . We have to think about the 
future! The future for these children and their mothers, for inmates that have lost 
their way. Give them a chance to grow closer to the earth and themselves, rather 
back out on the streets filled with heroine. Cannabis can give these peoplea 
better chance, a fighting chance. 
Written by: Michaela Gaudlap
