STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 
‘*“ 111 STATE HOUSE STATION 
JANET T. MlLLS AUGUSTA MAINE RANDALL A. LIBERW 
GOVERNOR 04333-0111 COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY OF 
RANDALL A. LIBERTY, COMMISSIONER 
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 
In Opposition to 
LD 1583 An Act to Provide a Pathway to Sobriety for Formerly or Currently Incarcerated Individuals 
Before the 
Criminal Justice Public Safety Committee 
April 25, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and other distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee, I am Randall Liberty, Commissioner of the Maine Department of Corrections 
providing testimony in opposition to LD 1583. 
While there is much about this bill We do not understand, including What problem it attempts to solve, what is 
clear is that this is a dangerous bill aimed at introducing marijuana into MDOC, while attempting to 
micromanage the nationally recognized substance use treatment services already well established. 
We cannot help but wonder who beneﬁts by introducing marijuana into the MDOC‘? Certainly not the residents. 
For decades the MDOC has provided residents with comprehensive substance use disorder treatment, including 
group and individual counseling, peer recovery and peer coaches. In the summer of 2019, in response to the 
opioid epidemic in Maine, and in accordance with Governor Mills’ Executive Order, the MDOC launched a 
pilot program to support those needing medication, the gold standard in treatment, as they work toward 
recovery. 
The pilot that began in July 2019 started with 100 residents. Quickly residents saw success and recovery. As 
staff, we saw a healthier and safer correctional environment. We saw residents sticking with their recovery, 
more engaged with life, and many giving back to others as peer mentors. We took steps to expand services to 
more residents meeting medical eligibility. After the ﬁrst year more than 300 residents had accessed medication 
for their diagnosed substance use disorder in conjunction with counseling. 
Fast forward to 2023. Any given day across all MDOC’s adult facilities more than 750 residents are actively 
engaged in SUD treatment, that includes counseling, medication, peer support, recovery-oriented services. To 
date, more than 1,500 individuals have released back into Maine communities with a continuity of care plan in 
place after having successfully completed treatment services inside. 
Residents report improved heath, improved personal relationships both inside with their peers and with those 
back home. We have more residents involved in education, in job training, in fanning, in facility job 
opportunities, culinary arts, dog training, book groups, than ever before. Staff report improvement too. There 
is less tension inside the units, less anxiety, less contraband. Everyone is safer. The number of assaults inside 
the facilities has fallen to single digits. What We are doing is Working, as many of you have seen ﬁrsthand. lt’s
1
STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 
111 sTATE HOUSE STATION 
JANET T. MILLS AUGUSTA MAINE RANDALL A. LIBERTY 
GOVERNOR 04333-0111 COMM|SSlONER 
why the Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy said our model is an example for other states to follow. It’s 
why we have correctional facilities from across the country coming to Maine to learn what we’re doing, to see 
our model, to meet our staff and to hear ﬁrsthand from residents. 
It took a lot of effort on the part of staff and residents to get MDOC’s substance use treatment services to this 
level, passing this bill will devastate the efforts and send the wrong message. 
We see no beneﬁts; no problems solved and urge you to vote ONTP. 
Thank You, 
Randall A. Liberty, Commissioner 
Maine Department of Corrections
2
