Subject Testimony for state house 
To: ltuffymaine76@yahoo.com <tuffymaine76@yahoo.com>] 
From Stephanie Rinier <tuffymaine76@yahoo.com> 
Date Tue, Apr 25, 2023 at 1:44 AM 
Hello my name is Stephanie Haskell 
I was sentenced by a judge to a second time offender program for a weekend the judge 
sentenced me to the weekend program cuz I had been on 14 pharmaceuticals for 14 years 
and I could go into a medical withdrawal. I had to go meet with the lady at the jail to 
approve me and take my money for the program I got approved. I showed up to the 
program gave them my things within a half hour they stated I was going to jail cuz I was 
nodding. Being on those meds for that long I wouldn't be nodding. They just didn't want to 
deal with it so I went to jail. They even tried to keep my money I had to spend six nights 
they didn't give me my meds at all. On the 6th night I got up and started pressing the 
button on the wall. They said what do you want I thought I was at the post office I needed 
postage stamps to mail a letter they said you get out at 6:00 a.m. go back to bed. I was 
clearly hallucinating. I was so confused I'm at the post office yet they are telling me to go 
to bed that I get out at 6:00 a.m. that I'm in jail. Scared not knowing what's going on I laid 
there till they said you were leaving. My mom picked me up I got my meds and started 
taking them as soon as I got into the car. That night the hallucinating started again. My dad 
came over to my apartment I was seeing people who were not there this was terrifying I 
believed I was seeing things and my dad was lying to me then daytime hit and it seemed to 
go away I kept taking my meds trying to get them into my system again. Then that night 
my son Steven 10 years old said Mom I will stay awake don't worry. Being 10 years old he 
fell asleep this time I believe the neighbor upstairs assaulted my mom I called 911 the 
police came the ambulance ﬁre truck by a chief. They talked to my mom they came back 
said she had been sleeping nothing had happened. I was convinced they were all lying to 
me I was so scared and confused. My mom had told the police officer I had been in jail and 
they did not give me my meds. She asked him please do not take her back to jail he said 
jail's doing this is horrible and saw it more than once he took me to the hospital they then 
put me into a padded suit and put me into a padded room. I didn't know why this was 
happening why are people ying and putting me into the hospital didn't my family love me. 
My dad came and got me the next day ﬁnally I met had taken effect. I was still very 
confused and very tired now i could have not been so lucky to come out of the 
pharmaceutical withdrawa psychosis. I could have stayed that way for the rest of my life. 
As I look back I think of how scared I was during all of this how scared my parents and my 
10-year-old son were. The jail never came and checked on me after they told me to go back 
to bed l could have died in jail they would have said I died from natural causes. Cannabis 
then saved my life 8 years ater from all those pharmaceutical poisons I was able to get off 
them all and live a healthy ife. We need to make changes where changes are most needed 
inmate should have the option to choose cannabis or CBD my son's father died of an 
overdose 2 years after getting out of prison our son was born on his father's birthday he 
died the day before our son's 18th birthday we had to plan a funeral instead of havinga 
birthday for Steven and his father we should help people get off on my circle poisons so 
they can do better for themselves.
