§s@‘i?!EE $55? - Erﬁﬁgh ~ ﬁﬁliﬁgiﬁ 
To: Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
From: Al Cleveland, Our Power Campaign Manager 
Date: May 12 2023 
Re: Testimony in Support of L.D. 1772: An Act to Require Voter Approval of Certain 
Borrowing by Government-controlled Entities and Utilities and to Provide Voters More 
Information Regarding That Borrowing 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on State 
and Local Government, my name is Al Cleveland and I’m the Campaign Manager for the Pine 
Tree Power campaign led by Our Power. We are a coalition of Maine ratepayers, youth leaders, 
small businesses, energy experts, and community leaders dedicated to putting our energy future 
in the hands of Mainers. 
Our Power is leading a statewide movement to democratize Maine’s electric grid by creating a 
non-profit consumer-owned utility. Our coalition knows that in the current model, 
investor-owned utilities use their guaranteed profits to lobby the Maine Legislature, the Public 
Utilities Commission, and Governor ’s office to push undemocratic policies at every turn. We 
believe that Mainers should be decision makers on the direction of our state’s energy future. Asa 
campaign focused on strengthening our democracy and our communities ’ input over the 
institutions that power their lives, we are in support of LD 1772. 
This process to get this legislation in front of you was fully funded by Central Maine Power’s 
owner, Avangrid. For their signature collection effort, they retained an out-of-state, paid 
signature collection ﬁrm, Second Street Associates, based out of Washington D.C. They, in 
tandem with Maine Affordable Energy, another investor-owned utility ballot question committee 
supporting their effort, have paid the firm millions. This bill came before you because it was 
bought by out-of-state corporations who proﬁt and control our electric grid without the 
leadership of Mainers. It was intended to halt the efforts of the Pine Tree Power campaign by 
bringing fear to voters. We know that Maine voters are smarter than this and deserve to have all 
of the information about their utilities. We support any efforts to provide more transparency and 
education to Mainers.
Cur Power asks this committee to pass this bill into law immediately. In addition, we ask this 
committee to show fairness towards the practices of investor-owned utilities. Just as this bill 
requires of consumer-owned utilities, both CMP and Versant should also be required to seek 
voter approval for debt investments of over $1 billion in Maine’s electric grid. We know that debt 
issued by a for~proﬁt utility invariably costs customers more than debt issued by a non-proﬁt 
utility in rates. 
Whether it is the high-interest debt of CMP and Versant or the low-cost debt ofa 
consumer-owned utility, Maine people deserve to have a say. Please vote Ought to Pass as 
Amended and give voters the an alternative measure that applies equally to COUs and IOUs 
alike. 
Thank you, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
