Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1772 (IB 4) 
 
“An Act to Require Voter Approval of Certain Borrowing by  Government -
controlled Entities and  Utilities and to Provide Voters More Information 
Regarding That Borrowing ” 
 
May 12, 2023 
 
Patrick Strauch , Executive  Director  
 
Senator Nangle , Representative Stover  and members of the Committee on State and Local 
Government , I am  Patrick Strauch  of Exeter, and I am submitting testimony today on behalf of 
the Maine Forest Products Council to testify in support of LD 1 772 (IB 4) , “An Act to  Require 
Voter Approval o f Certain Borrowing by Government -controlled Entities and Utilities and to 
Provide Voters More Information Regarding That Borrowing.”  
 
As I am sure you are all aware, there is a nother refe rendum question  called Pine Tree Power that 
will be considered by Maine voters this November. Th e Pine Tree Power referendum seeks to 
utilize eminent domain to forc ibly take over the assets of two privately -owned utility compani es 
– Central Maine Power and Versant. The Council opposes the Pine Tree Power referendum for a 
whole host of reasons ( our testimony can be found here ), but one of our greatest concerns is the 
fact that Maine voters are being asked to take on  considera ble risk without a clear picture of 
what the measure would truly cost. Estimates from proponents and opponents of the  measure 
vary greatly, and the true figure could take upwards of a decade to settle.  
 
If you s earch for the cost online, Our Power ’s website says, “What would Pine Tree Power cost 
ratepayers? Not more in the short term, and far  less than we ’ll otherwise pay in the long 
term…saving $9 billion over 30 years. ” Maine Affordable Energy ’s website says, “ Pine Tree 
Power will start out in massive debt for the total acquisition cost of CMP and Versant – a cost 
energy experts estimate to be $13.5 billion. This would be over two times Maine's entire state 
budget .” 
 
With a $22.5 million disparity  in cost estimates, how are voters supposed to make an informed 
decision? Also concerning is the fact that Pine Tree Power proponents  amended the language of 
their petition at the last minute in an attempt to exempt their measure from being subjected to an 
additional vote once the true cost is on the table. What are they trying to hide from Maine 
voters?  
 
While the Pine Tree Power referendum prompt ed this No Blank Checks referendu m, we feel 
that it is simply a good policy moving forward to protect Maine voters and taxpayers from 
blindly accepting debt that may not be in the best interests of Maine. For these reasons, the 
Maine Forest P roducts Council supports LD 1772 (IB 4). Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
 
