 
Testimony of Seth Berry in Support of L.D. 1772,  
I.B. 4, “An Act to Require Voter Approval of Certain Borrowing ” 
 
May 1 7, 2023  
Submitted a fter delivering verbal testimony  on May 12  
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government: my name is Seth Berry and I live in 
Bowdoinham. I am here today, unpaid and representing only myself, to ask that 
you support  this measure,  and that you also act to apply the same voter approval 
rule to all public utilities.  
 
As written, this bill requires that certain “entities” – in particular, “consumer -
owned  utilities ” as defined in Title 35 -A – seek statewide voter approval before 
borrowing over $1 bill ion in debt. I consider this reasonable, so long as it applies 
to all public utilities  whose customers will be required to pay for over $1 billion in 
debt.  
 
Some have represented this as a countermeasure to the Pine Tree Power 
Company referendum. This may surprise  you, but I disagree. True, L.D. 1772 
has been funded exclusively by CMP’s owner, Avangrid/Iberdrola, and has been 
presented as an effort to sabotage the proposal to replace CMP and Versant with 
a nonprofit, Pine Tree Power Company. But so long as the proposal  can be 
amended to appl y to all public utilities, I fully support it.   
 
On its own, the language of this measure unfairly targets Maine’s nonprofit 
utilities, which in Title 35 -A we call “consumer -owned.” While LD 1772 purports to 
apply to any quasi -governmental entity or nonprofit utility, in truth the long list of 
exemptions at the end of the bill (FAME, the University and Community College 
Systems, etc .) means it will in fact target only nonprofit utiliti es, as well as a 
couple of other entities that could also own poles and wires.  
 
Why does CMP’s holding company, Avangrid/Iberdrola, want to empower voters 
only when it suits them? As a public utility, CMP itself has already borrowed 
roughly a billion doll ars in debt. Who will pay for that debt? CMP customers – 
most of us, and your constituents. In fact, CMP customers will not only pay for 
CMP’s debt in full, plus interest: they will also pay for much higher equity returns 
on investment, plus CMP’s taxes. T his is how rates are made everywhere in the 
U.S., and much of it is shaped by U.S. Supreme Court case law.   
 
Conf used? I was too at first! So just in case, here is a  little background  about 
utility debt, bu siness model and rates :  
 
First, a s you may know , public utilities in Maine and in the U.S. come in two 
flavors: consumer -owned (or nonprofit), and investor -owned (or for -profit). When 
it comes to public water pipes, most Maine custome rs are served by consumer -
owned utilities. When it comes to electricity, the opposite is true: most of Maine’s 
wire networks are owned by two investor -owned utilities or IOUs . The rest  of us 
are for tunate enough to be customers of 10  consumer -owned utilities (COUs) . 
Toge ther, t hese Maine COUs serve 98 towns  at residen tial, mainland rates that 
average less th an half as much , per k Wh delivered . 
 
Second, c ontrary to popular belief  and recen t CMP ad vertisements , no Maine 
utility  (real or propo sed) uses state tax dollars or state bonds. Instead, they are 
financed by borrowing against  their revenue. Since we all pay our bills and don’t 
want to be disconnected, utilities  are able to borrow  at extre mely favorable rates.  
 
Third, d ue to th e ratemaking process, IOUs almost inva riably cost their 
customers more than C OUs. In fact, the more an IOU is wor th, the mo re this is 
true.  The reason for this is simple :  while a COU is financ ed entire ly through low -
cost, tax-exempt deb t (usually 200 basis points below taxable debt), a n IOU is 
financed through a 50 -50 mix of ta xable debt and higher -cost equity . Rates must 
be designed (and vetted at Public Utility C ommission s) to ensure full payment of 
all these costs,  and with no compet ition, both IOUs and C OUs are virtual ly 
guaranteed to be able to pay these  costs . 
 
For a simpl e illust ration of how this works, here is a diagram showing a 
hypot hetical $100 capital inv estment:  
 
 
 
 
Already , CMP ’s customers are paying for o ver $1 bill ion in higher -cost debt, and 
they were never given a chance to appr ove it.  Like wise, they are also pa ying for 
the same amount in even high er-cost equity , which they also were ne ver able to 
approve . 
 
In sum:  Since CMP and Versant ’s custo mers must pay even more for their debt  
than for COU debt, and even more for their equi ty, why would CMP and Versant 
want to make it harder for non profit utilities  to offer savings to their customers?  
Why is CMP ’s owner spending millions on out-of-state signature gatherers , and 
seeking to bypass  the legis lature, to enact this?  
 

Could it be that they feel th ey have a h ighly l ucrative cash cow, and do not want 
to let it go?  
 
A public utility is not an ice cream truck or a grocery store, where competition 
sets prices. Public utilities are, by definition, monopolies. Jus t like government 
entities such as the Maine Turnpike Authority, their rates are set to cover all 
costs, plus the interest required to attract capital.  It may be in Avangrid/ 
Iberdrola’s interest to tilt the playing field to help one kind of utility and t o hurt 
another kind, but as Mainers, we should want to empower all voters to have a 
say in all debt they will be required to pay for.  
 
The remedy is simple: you can act now to level the playing field . Your best 
course of action at this point may depend on the advice the legislature  receive s 
in response to your recent Solemn Occasion  from the State Supreme Judicial 
Court. You may wish to pass this immediately, sending it to the Governor if the 
Law Court advises that you can do so, and then also pass a separate measure 
that applies the same logic to investor -owned utilities (IOUs).  
 
Alternatively, if you wish to send this measure to voters rather than enacting it 
directly, you could add an alternative for voters (a so -called “competing 
question”) that would apply the same voter -approval rule to investor -owned 
utilities.  
 
Maine people believe in a fair democracy. You do as well, or you would not be 
here.  Whether you pass this measure directly into law or send it to vot ers, 
please do be sure to level the playing field so that Maine COUs and IOUs can 
compete on the same terms, and so that these new rules will apply not only to 
locally owned nonprofit utilities, but also to multinational for -profit IOUs.  
 
Thank you.  I am happy to try to answer any questions.  
