   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
 Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Test imony in Opposition to LD 77 8, “An Act Regarding Work Requirements for Able -bodied Adults Without Dependents 
Under the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program ;” LD 784, “An Act to Establish Welfare Work Requirements for 
Able -bodied Adults Without Dependents ;” and LD 1194, “An Act to Implement Work Requirements Under the MaineCare 
Program .” 
April 30, 2023  
James My all, E conomic Policy Analyst  
 
 
Dear Senator Baldac ci, Repre sentative M eyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services. I am writing to you in opposition to several bills proposing additional work require ments for s afety net programs 
in M aine (LDs 778, 78 4, and 1194).  
 
MECEP opposes these b ills because they would  add significant red tape and administrative  burden to the impacted 
programs , for no public benefit.  Past experience in Maine and in other states has  shown that adding such requirements  
makes it harder for people t o get the help they need,  without  increasing  their ability to find employment. In other w ords, 
as a r esult of these bills, thousands of Main ers would still be out of  work  and unable to access any supports for 
themsel ves or their families . 
 
In many ways, these bills are a return to the policies attempted by the administration of Governor LePag e. During that 
perio d, MECEP publis hed several  pieces on  the results of his policies, which I wish  to bring to your attention : 
 
• In 201 7, we highlighted  the findings of the Governor ’s own report, which showed that four y ears after being  
denied access t o the Temporary Assistance f or Needy Families program, one in seven of the families who were 
unenrolle d still had no employment , and no access to MaineCare  or the Supplemental Nutriti on Assistance 
Program. In other words, they were likely left destitute.  The same MECEP analysis  found that under the LeP age 
Administration, the share  of extremely poor families without  any access to MaineCare or SNAP doubled.1 
• In 2018, we re viewed the impacts of the LeP age re strictions on  the SNAP program. After the imposition of work 
requirements statewide (as LD 778 proposes), around 10,000 households los t food assistance in the first three 
months of the new polic y. Again , the LeP age administrati on released a report which actually  confirmed a lot of 
the harm caused by this policy. Nearly ha lf the impacted individuals still lacked work a year  after lo sing their food 
assistance , and many of those who did find work were working intermittently  and had low earnings. Mean while, 
the share of Mainers who were food insecure increased  in the years this policy was in effect, e ven as it decline d 
nationwide.2 
• LD 119 4 is similar to a proposal made by th e LePage Administration in 201 7. At the time, we pointe d to numerous 
problems  with the propo sal, including that many of those impac ted would be older (between 50 and 6 4 years 
old), or c aring for children not covered  by the exemptions . Moreover, the designation of “able-bodied” is 
misleading, because  tens of thousands of Mainers report disabilities w hich make it hard to work , without formally 
qualify ing as “disabled” under work requirement polic ies. Finally, a work requirement  on MaineCare is es pecially 
short -sighted because poor health is a leading cause of underemplo yment among Mainers. Making i t harder for 
them to get health care makes it harder for these individuals to work.3 
 
Additionally , I would like to draw the Committee ’s attention  to the research nationally on work requirements. Like Maine , 
many states have tried to compel indi viduals to  work through additional requirement s. In nearly e very case, the  result has 
been that man y people hav e lost assistance, without any noticeable  impact on the number of p eople working, or the 
number of people  living  in poverty.4 
 
Finally, I think it ’s important to note that a lot of the concern driving these bills – that prime -aged Mainers are not working 
sufficient ly – is misplaced. Maine’s low labor force participation rate is drive n by two factors. One  is the aging of ou r 
popu lation, which means an increasing share of the adult population is at retirement a ge. But another more recent trend 
is that the data underlying this statistic is faulty. As the Maine Department of Labor note s, the labor force par ticipation 
rate is derived from a surve y of relatively few Maine hous eholds  which app ears to be suffering from methodological  
inaccuracies since the COVID pandemic .5 In particular, this household  survey contra dicts the larger and more accurate 
survey of Maine employers, w hich shows employment levels above pre -pandemic l evels.  It seems  likely, ther efore, th at 
the labor for ce par ticipa tion rate among 25 -54 year -olds is not as the statistics suggest , and should not be a b asis for 
making drastic  policy cha nges.  
 
Thank you fo r the opportunity to tes tify. I’m happ y to offer an y additional information or to answer questions as needed. I 
can be reached  at jmyall@mecep.org . 
 
 
 
Notes  
 
1 James Myall, “Governor’s Own Report Reveals the Human Cost of His War on the Poor .” Main e Center for Economic Policy, June 1, 
2017. https://www.mecep.org/blog/governors -own -report -reveals -the-human -cost-of-his-war-on-the-poor/   
2 James Myall, “Despite Poliquin’s praise, Maine is no model for food insecurity .” Maine Center for Economic Policy , April 19, 20218.  
https://www.mecep.org/blog/despite -poliquins -praise -maine -is-no-model -for-food -insecurity/   
3 James Myall, “Testimony in Opposition to Work Requirement for MaineCare (Proposed 1115 Waiver) .” Maine Cen ter for E conomic 
Policy , May 25, 2017. https://www.mecep.org/health -care/testimony -in-opposition -to-proposed -1115 -waiver -on-mainecare -
eligibility/   
4 Ladona Pavetti, “Work Requirements Don’t Cut Poverty, Evidenc e Shows .” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities , June 7, 2016. 
https://www.cbpp.org/research/poverty -and-inequality/work -requirements -dont -cut-poverty -evidence -shows   
5 Mark McInerney , “Presentation to the Consensus Economic Forecasting Commission .” Maine Depa rtment of Labor : Center f or 
Workforce Research and Innovation , March 31, 2023. https://ww w.maine.gov/labor/cwri/publications/pdf/CEFC_March2023.pdf   
