I 
3 _; Senator Harold ‘T rey’Stewart 
. , 
, Senate Republican Leader 
-I 
3 State House Station
. 
, f‘ _. f7 Augusta, ME 04333-0003 , 
- 1 1" 
iii" 
:*=~1,~ : 
}:. 
I, (207) 287-1505 
3‘ “Vl|‘\ _- 
_ .. 
_> .. 
_, ., 
LD 778, “An Act Regarding Work Requirements for Able-bodied Adults ' ' ' ' 
Without Dependents Under the 'I 
Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program” 
Joint-Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
V 
April 7,. 2023 
Senator Baldaeci, Representative Meyer and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Conrunittee on Health and Human Services: 
I am Senator Trey Stewart and I represent District 2, which includes several municipalities in 
Aroostook and Penobscot Counties. I am here today to present LD 778, “An Act Regarding Work 
Requirements for Able-bodied Adults Without Dependents Under the Supplemental Nutritional 
Assistance Program. ” p .- 
LD 778 _is a simple bill with a clear purpose: . it ensures that Maine will do what it has done in the 
pastibut is not doing now - maintaining a statewide work requirement for able-bodied -adults on 
foodstamps. ’I 
.-
. 
As legislators, we have been hearing from businesse' s for_several years now in our communities 
that they are starved for workers. Did you ever think that inMaine, Va state known for hard work, 
that we’d ever run out of workers? But the truth is, this is not a new problem. It’s worth noting 
the current worker shortages are just an acute symptom of a long-term problem in Maine. Today, 
the labor force participation rate in Maine is less than 60 percent, which is the lowest rate of any 
state in New England.. Just 20 years ago, the rate was almost 70 percent. » »
W 
But this isn’t just about workers and dollars , and cents. It’s about people. I was recently given 
"survey results put out by a network of charities that asked about this very issue - work requirements 
in food stamps. Many charity leaders took the time to respond to the survey to encourage 
policymakers to bring back work requirements. Here is What one executive» director ofa 
community services organization in the Northeast wrote in response: 
“The lack of work requirements has made a HUGE difference in the lives of our clients... 
for the worse. It has crushed dignity and has increased depression while encouraging dependence 
on government. We have seen that this keeps people in a destructive cycle of dependency and 
they rarely if ever move out of a life of constant ‘relief and struggle. Work bans completely 
_disincen_tivize the need for employment in the name of ‘inﬂation relief.’ Getting our clients back ' 
Fax: (207)287-1527 * TTY (207)287-1583 * Message Service 1-800-423-6900 * -Web Site: legislature.mainegov/senate
to alneed to work‘ reality would notonly reduce inﬂation because more people wouldbe working, 
which will positively impact society, it will also help with a crisis more dire than inﬂation, which 
is mental health.” 
And let’s.be clear about who this bill actually impacts - folks who can and should be working. This 
work requirement has all the exemptions anyone could reasonably expect. It doesn’t apply if 
»you’re:'
~
V 
a childK 
have any dependents in the home 
are over the age of 50 _' 
have a disability that keeps you from workingA 
are in a drug or alcohol treatment program’
-
. 
and it "even has a catch-all good cause exemption because we just can’t anticipate some of 
the barriers to work that exist for some households through no fault of their own. - - 
This is not radical. It’s common sense. And it’s not new to New England. This very day, even 
Massachusetts and Vermont have no waivers submitted at all. And it’s not even new to Maine. It 
was the policy of this state during the previous governor ’s administration. 
So, what is Maine’s current policy? So far this year, Maine actually has not used these waivers.- 
So this billsimply codiﬁes Governor Mills’ current policy into the future, but the work requirement 
will remain suspended anyway by the federal" govermnent for several moremonths due to the 
federal public health emergency still in place. This bill ensures that something Governor Mills 
and LePage both agree on Will come back into force when that public health emergency ends] If 
we don’t do this, it is likely that the agency, instead of assessing households on an individual case- 
by-case basis to assess good cause exemptions, will just apply a one-size- ﬁts-all blanket waiver to 
all households on food stamps. . V T 
‘ 
i 1' 
We know how to do this; and I think the folks here who promised independent leadership open to 
good ideas regardless of partisan afﬁliation would agree this would be exactly the kind of policy 
used to address Maine’s current worker shortages and long-term decline in labor force 
participation. .e 
I encourage youto support this bill, whichiwill simply make Mainers who can and should be 
working train, work or volunteer part-time - 20 hours per week - if they enroll in food stamps,I 
Thank you very much for your time and consideration. <
