1 
@ M C E |)v_ P.O. Box 5188 
Tn»! Maine Cmslition Augusta, ME Q4332-5188 
YO l5’ 
.T‘ld DOfTHI~F3tlC \/lOl£?l1CG 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
In Support of LD 1438: “An Act to Require Standard Procedures to Protect Stalking Victims 
and Access to Certain Criminal Complaints" 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Thursday, April 27, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, I am writing on behalf of the 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)‘ in support of Representative Warren’s 
amendment to LD1438, “An Act to Require Standard Procedures to Protect Stalking Victims 
and Access to Certain Criminal Complaints. ” 
This amendment would amend Maine law in two ways: 
1. Direct the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to establish a minimum standard that 
would require all law enforcement agencies to have a policy in place to ensure 
that, where a crime victim makes multiple complaints against the same individual 
within a reasonable proximity of each other, those complaints are reviewed 
together to determine if that person has engaged in stalking under Maine’s 
criminal laws; and 
2. Ensure that, when a crime victim obtains a copy of their police report, they are 
not charged an administrative fee for it. 
How we respond to stalking is intrinsically connected to homicide prevention efforts. 
Stalking is a known lethality indicator in cases involving intimate partners. In its 13”“ Biennial 
Report, Maine’s Domestic Abuse Homicide Review Panel made the following important 
reflections about stalking in Maine: 
“Stalking an intimate partner is a dangerous and prevalent tactic of abusers anda 
powerful form of coercive control. In the cases reviewed in the last two years, 30% (6 of 20) 
of the perpetrators stalked the victims prior to committing homicide. In past reports, the 
Panel has observed that at least 50% of the perpetrators stalked their victims prior to 
‘MCEDV represents a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers across Maine as 
well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more than 
12,000 survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children in our state. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of3 
committing homicide. While dangerous and prevalent, the Panel observes that stalking is 
often overlooked or minimized by people surrounding the perpetrator and victim. The 
emergence of extensively available and easy-to-use technology has given people who 
commit abuse heightened ability to control, monitor, and track victims. ” The Panel went on 
to observe that they had reviewed “cases involving extensive and public stalking prior to 
homicides that was not reported, investigated, or prosecuted. ” (emphasis added) 
Stalking exists in the vast majority of non-fatal domestic abuse and violence cases as 
well. However, as a patterned crime, our criminal justice system response is not well poised 
to identify it or respond to it appropriately. Our criminal justice system, by and large, is best 
situated to respond to single incidents of bad conduct, where that single incident of bad 
conduct clearly constitutes a crime. In stalking cases, the conduct is necessarily patterned, 
and frequently consists of individual instances of bad conduct that may not, in and of 
themselves, be obvious, chargeable crimes. The crime is only identifiable when those 
instances of bad conduct are reviewed together, and reviewed together with the impact the 
bad conduct has reasonably had on the victim. Victims who have experienced this type of 
patterned conduct often find themselves turned away, especially when reporting multiple 
incidents over a period of time, and especially when they are not themselves articulating 
what is happening to them as stalking. 
According to data provided by the Maine Prosecutor ’s Association to MCEDV in 2019, 
out of the more than 16,000 criminal cases that were identified as domestic violence cases 
charged in our criminal courts in the years 2014-2018, the primary charge was stalking in just 
over 1% of all cases (1.2% of 16,182 cases). Conversely, attorneys representing victims of 
domestic abuse and violence in protection from abuse proceedings in civil court, who are 
often reviewing the full relationship history with their client in preparation to present the 
protection order case to the court, will identify stalking with prevalence that more closely 
aligns with the prevalence observed in the report of the Domestic Abuse Homicide Review 
Panel. The difference between the frequency this conduct is brought forward in non-fatal 
criminal cases and the frequency it is identified in civil cases and homicides is in how the 
conduct is being screened for. LD1438, in the proposed amendment, which would serve asa 
substitute for the printed bill, would help better equip our criminal justice system to respond 
to stalking in those cases that are not yet fatal. 
importantly, the amendment does not dictate the procedures law enforcement 
agencies must follow to comply with the minimum standard; each agency will have the 
ability to construct an approach that is workable for that particular agency (or will be able to 
adopt whatever model policy would be developed by the Maine Chiefs of Police in response 
to a new minimum standard). The amendment also does not prevent law enforcement 
agencies from declining to provide a copy of the police report if any of the current statutory 
grounds for withholding the report from the crime victim are present in considering the 
individual case circumstances.
@ M35 |)v_ P.O. Box 5188 
Tm: Maine Coalition Augusta, ME Q4332-5188 
to {End Domestic Violence 2O7_43O_8334 
This is sound public policy, and we urge you to support it. Thank you for the 
opportunity to be heard on these important issues. MCEDV and our member programs are 
happy to serve as a resource to the Committee as you continue your work on this bill. 
Contagformatipnz 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 650-4356 
Email: andrea@mcedv.org 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
