207.205.0046 
Flbeau13@gmail.com
March 25, 2023
Committee for Education and Cultural Affairs
Re: LD809 Allow Regional School Units to opt out of School Choice by Referendum
Dear Committee Members,
I live in Arundel and our little Town is well known for school choice.  We have had options 
for high school as far back as I am aware and in the last few years, now our children can pick 
between the Kennebunk Middle School (RSU 21 school) and Thornton Academy Middle 
School.  As a parent, when our children reach school-aged, we strive to have the best 
education possible for our child.  When you have the choice of where you can send your 
child to school, a few things happen:
1. Schools have competition to provide the best education upfront,
2. Schools and Educators become more accountable,
3. Parents become more engaged in the education of their child,
4. And most important, a child receives the education BEST suited for THEM!
Our children are not commodities to fill a seat and tally budget dollars.  We need to look at 
our children as the future and give them every opportunity to have the very best education 
possible.
In my Town, I have seen a family send their 2 children to different schools (one an RSU 
school and one outside of the RSU), and the reason was based on the needs of the child and 
the offerings at each school.  Each child flourished and have become well rounded young 
adults.  
Schools should see Choice as a motivation to use their budgets to provide programs that 
attract students and encourage young minds to push the limits of their minds and dare to 
dream of what is possible.  Competition is healthy- we encourage it in sports, in robotics, 
spelling bees, and even between grades such as Spirit Week.  Competition in students 
207.205.0046 
Flbeau13@gmail.com
encourage a drive to learn, to think outside the box, to push themselves to excel, socialize 
and learn how to make a choice that best helps them succeed, why would this be different 
for schools?
We encourage our high school seniors to visit many schools before choosing the one to 
attend.  Why?  What is the reason you hear from most students on why they chose a 
particular school?  It’s not the scholarships, the financial aid package, or the location, it is 
how the school made them FEEL.  They felt it was the best place for them to grow, learn, 
develop and to succeed not just academically but in life.  This should be the same for our 
younger children!
If this passes, my small Town, the only town in our RSU that has choice, will be outvoted by 
people who never had a choice and feel that no one should have choice.  Why should they 
be given the ability to decide what is best for someone’s child?  What if this was your child?  
With all due respect, would you want a political party to decide what is best for your child or 
would you want the ability to find the best school for your child to one day lead our 
Country?
I leave you with a quote from Confucius, “Education breeds confidence.  Confidence breeds 
hope.  Hope breeds peace.”
Warm regards,
France Beaulieu
