Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Support  
LD 809: An Act t o Allow Regional School Units with School Choice to Opt Out of School Choice  
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee  
March  30, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other esteemed members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee,   
 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly ev ery public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.  
 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in support of LD 809, An Act to Allow Regional School 
Units with School Choice to Opt Out of School Choice.   
 
I want to start with a hypothetical.   
 
A small RSU school district has planned for 44 students in their incoming 2nd grade.  The district will 
likely need to hire two 2nd grade teachers – each classroom will have 22 student s.   
 
But now let’s say one town in the RSU has “school choice” and instead of attending the local public 
school operated by the RSU and the taxpayers of that town, 14 students take their tuition payment and 
attend private  or other schools outside of the R SU.  Now the RSU has 30 students in the 2nd grade class.  
The option at that point is to have one teacher with 30 students – hopefully this is an unlikely scenario.  
Instead, the district will likely continue to hire two 2nd grade teachers.  Only, instead of having the 
revenue from the participating towns in the RSU  reflect 44 students, it will reflect 30.  This means a 
huge loss of revenue to the RSU.  And while the school may be left hiring the same number of teachers, 
only with less revenue to do so, it will likely  mean they must hire the same number of bus drivers, and 
run the same number of bus runs, and they will likely keep the thermostat in the school at the same 
temperature, whether the 2nd grade has 44 students or 30.  
 
The point is to underscore the specific economics that impact schools.  When public school funding is 
diluted and siphoned via choice programs, it contributes to inefficiencies in public education, produces 
more overhead, creates more volatility in public school funding and ultimately jeopardizes the stability 
of programs for students.   
 
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
LD 809 proposes to have a public vote, in RSUs, to determine if they want to continue allowing certain 
choice programs within their RSU or whether they want to maximize efficiencies  and dedicate public 
dollars to public schools .    The towns that comprise RSU s have made agreements and commitments to 
work together to support the best public schools for the students of those towns.  It has been over a 
decade since many dist ricts consolidated into RSUs. It seems only appropriate to give these RSUs a 
chance to review and potentially alter their local choice programs.  For at least a decade, maybe more, 
these towns have had the chance to work together  to support their local pub lic schools.  This bill will 
give them a chance to consider whether they would like to amend their local reorganization plan.   
 
I will also point out that the bill contains a requirement for schools to develop “transition periods” for 
students accessing c hoice programs where they exist.  This is an important component of the bill and 
could be expanded to provide more protections to students enrolled in other schools.  
 
This bill pushes the decisions to local voters in the RSUs.  These RSUs have worked toge ther to craft 
school budgets for ten years or more.  Some have worked on building new schools, or new programs for 
all the students in the RSU.  Overall the RSUs of the state continue to work well together.  This bill will 
simp ly allow them to reconsider one component of their plan.  
 
Thank you for your time and your attention.  I will do my best to answer any questions you may have.  
 
 
 
 
