    
    
    
    
  
 
March 18 , 2023  
 
  
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
5 State House Station  
Augusta ME 04333 -0005  
  
Dear Honorable Legislators  
  
I previously submitted testimony advocating for your support of LD 809 .  Today I only wish to highlight some additional 
points.  
  
•         The bill requires municipal voter approval, allowing the taxpayers to have a voice regarding a local issue.  
•         This municipal mandate is not state -funded or reimbursed, raising qu estions if it is not following provisions of 
the Constitution of Maine.  
•         There have been concerns regarding students that are taking advantage of school choice being left in 
transit.   The discussion with my municipal board is that no student would  be required to change their education 
mid-stream, the intent of the reorganization plan would be to “phase out” school choice.    
•         There have also been concerns regarding sending towns and receiving schools becoming dependent upon 
relationships.   It is the belief of the municipal officers of Bradley that the communities that voted to consolidate in 
the 2008 -20018 time period, should support that RSU.  
•         Maine Municipal Association has presented testimony that states “regional school units wi th a reorganization 
plan have the ability to amend their plans to exclude school choice, subject to the approval by the Commissioner.” 
While this is true, as stated the change is subject to the approval of the Commissioner.   If the Commissioner does 
not ap prove the voting efforts made at the local level the vote is null and void.   The Town of Bradley has sought 
legal opinion which read “Although the Reorganization Plan can be amended, an amendment to reduce or 
eliminate school choice would not likely be app roved by the Commissioner because such an amendment would 
violate the school choice requirement in Section 1479A.   This conclusion is not free from doubt because of the 
ambiguities in the statute and uncertainties about how a court would resolve those ambi guities or interpret the 
statute.   On balance, however I think the 2008 legislative history supports my conclusion.”    
•         Maine Municipal Association also states that the “LPC feels that any decision regarding school choice should be 
left to local d ecision -making authorities to determine if that is something they would like to bring forward to their 
votes.”   I completely agree and that is exactly what this bill is asking for authorization to do.   The voters will make 
the decision at the local level, not the Commissioner.    
  
I will be in attendance today if additional questions or comments are needed.   I thank you in advance for your 
consideration and your continued service to the State of Maine.  
  
Sincerely,  
  
  
Melissa L. Doane  
Town Manager  
Town of Bradley  
 
PO BOX 517  
165B Main Street  
Bradley Maine 04411  
Telephone 207 -827-7725  
Fax 207 -827-7072  
