    
    
    
    
March 30, 2023  
  
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
5 State House Station  
Augusta Me 04333 -0005  
  
Dear Honorable Leg islators 
  
I am writing to adv ocate for your support of LD 809, An Act to Allow Regional School Units with School Choice to 
Opt-Out of School Choice.   I am the Town Manager of the Town of Bradley, a position I have held since 2005.   In 
2009 the voters approved a consolidation plan to c reate RSU 34. Prior to the consolidation, Bradley was a 
member of Union 90 and owned an elementary school that educated children grades K -5.  As Bradley did not 
have a school that educated grades 6 -12 the students had “school choice”.   This choice permitted  Union 90 to 
contract with schools in our region and pay the tuition cost Union -wide.   Transportation to schools outside of the 
Old Town area was the responsibility of the parents and or guardian.    
  
The approved reorganization plan provided that Bradley w ould maintain “school choice”; Maine State Sta tute § 
1479 requires that the “sending municipality in a regional school unit is responsible for an amount equal to the 
difference in tuition in cases when it exceeds the amount of the regional school unit’s tui tion rate…..”.   In short, 
the Town of Bradley municipal budget is directly responsible for the difference between the tuition of our RSU and 
the school of choice.    
  
This budgeted item is something that the Town of Bradley cannot control.   Voters  have no voti ng power in the 
schools of choice and therefore cannot control their tuition rates.   This budget item is an educational expense that 
receives no State reimbursement.   This budget item is an amount that is forever changing and impossible to 
calculate.   I have attached a budget summary highli ghting this line item since 2009.   You can easily note the 
amount has fluctuated from as low as $833.48 to as high as $60,941.64 (it is expected to be over $68,000 this 
fiscal year).    
  
It is the belief of the Bradley To wn Council that the Bradley taxpayers should be supporting the Regional School 
Unit that was approved by the voters in 2009.   The Bradley tax funds should not be supporting schools outside of 
our educational region.   In addition, it is the belief of the Br adley Town Council that the continued increase  
amount s of tuition are not sustainable.  
  
The bill before you today will provide the voters and taxpayers of Bradley an option to opt out of school choice.   It 
would never be the intent of the Bradley Town Council to  change a child’s education.   It would be their intent to 
provide a “cutoff” date if you will.   The warrant article presented to the voters would allow all children that are 
currently living in Bradley the school choice option , the “cutoff date” would be pr esented in the warrant article and 
new residents would not have a municipal paid school choice option.  
  
I regret that I only learned of this bill this morning at 7:30 am.  I would have happily traveled to Augusta to meet 
you in person and be available to answer any questions you may have.   Thank you in advance for your 
consideration.  
  
Sincerely,  
   
Melissa L. Doane  
Town Manager  
Town of Bradley  
 
PO BOX 517  
165B Main Street  
Bradley Maine 04411  
Telephone 207 -827-7725  
Fax 207 -827-7072  
  
