 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 809 
 
AN ACT TO ALLOW REGIONAL SCHOOL UNITS WITH SCHOOL  
CHOICE TO OPT OUT OF SCHOOL CHOICE  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee.  I 
am Victoria Wallack, d irector of communications and government relations for Maine School Management 
Association, testifying on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and 
Maine School Superintendents Association , in opposition to  L.D. 809. 
 
L.D. 809 proposes to allow a reg ional school unit to alter its reorganization agreement.  This would apply in 
districts where some but not all of the students are attending the schools of the regional school unit.  In this bill 
it allows for the towns of the  school unit to hold a referendu m to amend the reorganization plan to remove any 
school choice provisions expressly allowing students to attend a school other than the school or schools 
operated by the regional school unit.  Were the vote successful, schoo l choice would be removed and stu dents, 
with a transition plan in place, would begin to have to attend the school or schools operated by the regional 
school unit.   
 
An initial question is about the language of the bill.  Is it truly about students within an RSU, versus in a 
municipality sc hool district, a CSD, or an  AOS?  If it is, it involved a select portion of the school districts in 
Maine, not all, and the specifics of each of these situations should be carefully studied.  If it will apply to all 
school ad ministrative units, then a much broader situation exists, where there could be untold unintended 
consequences.  Stability of structure and of operating consistency has been a benefit of the reorganized school 
units since consolidation.  
 
In most inst ances ac ross the state, school choice wa s provided as a component of the reorganization plan for 
districts during the 2008 -2010 time period of consolidatio n. Communities jumped at the opportunity to retain 
tradition and provide their children the opportun ity of ch oice that had been established a t the time of the 
creation of the regional school unit.  Sending towns and receiving schools have become dependent upon the 
relationships and the funding involved in providing this choice.  There may be financial i mplications within 
the agreements previously  crafted that should also be considered when weighing this proposed change.  
 
Both associations are opposed to changing this provision in the law and are in support of maintaining this 
opportunity of choice fo r those families  and communities where it has be en established.  
