W?) ' CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
{M g a I n e "' Ur: i31€=i7f.l"l1ii €1 $55. Wyke Brian H. Noyes, Chair‘ 
Richard T. t~;e::i~.(s@:- , I/ice ChairI 
PLIi:3L.iC EMPLOYEES RE'I‘IFH£€M£EM‘i' §,:3Y52'i ‘§E*.?/1 3‘i@_“‘¥g5§f?; éfiiiii "'*~*“*“”'@*~ 1”“ 9"" ’° 
Oﬁn - . LR? VJSGU 
Shirrin L. iéiaiscieil 
iiflark A. ¥?Iruntor2 
March 9' 
TO: Senator Michael Tipping, Chair 
Representative Amy Roeder, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
FROM: Kathy]. Morin, Director, Actuarial and Legislative Affairs 
SUBIECT: Testimony on L.D. 742 - An Act to Divest State Pensions from Companies 
Boycotting Maine Lobster 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Ioint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Kathy Morin, and I am the Director of 
Actuarial and Legislative Affairs for the Maine Public Employees Retirement System. 
MainePERS is testifying neither for nor against L.D. 742. We are here to provide information 
and offer any assistance the Committee might need regarding this bill. 
L.D. 742 would require MainePERS to divest holdings from companies that boycott Maine 
lobster and to limit further investment in those companies. Importantly, these actions are only 
required to the extent they are ”in accordance with sound investment criteria and consistent 
with fiduciary obligations. ” This acknowledges that the Maine Constitution requires the 
MainePERS Board of Trustees to make investment decisions solely in the best financial interest 
of the members as pension recipients. 
During the 13031 Legislature, the Committee considered L.D. 99 and L.D. 319, which limited 
investments in the fossil fuel industry and for-profit prisons. At that time, the Committee 
requested guidance from the Office of the Attorney General regarding the constitutionality of 
the bills as drafted. At least in part based on the response from the Attorney General, the bills 
were amended to include the language that is also included in L.D. 742 as referenced above 
and enacted into law. 
The enactment of L.D. 99 (PL 2021, c. 231) included a requirement that MainePERS review the 
extent to which its holdings included fossil fuels and to submit an annual report to the 
Legislature regarding progress of divestment under that law. The initial review and 
identification of covered holdings was an extensive process that took approximately one year 
to complete. The System submitted the required report on Ianuary 17, 2023, which includes 
information about the process undertaken, including engaging a consultant to determine the 
holdings and potential impact of divestment of those holdings. We recommend that 
Committee members refer to that report for much more in-depth information about the 
System's holdings, investment policies, and general impacts of divestment. The Attorney 
www.mainepers.org LOCATION LOCAL FAX 
‘I159 (lIapIIoI Sheet, August-,1, I\/IE ()4-330 207-612-3'1 O0 207-~5'l2<3 IOI 
MAILING ADDRESS TOLL-FREE MAINE RELAY 
PO. Box 349, /kugusia, I\/IE O4332-O3/i9 'l~800—45'I~98OO 711
LD 742 Testimony ‘V?/Q- 
Ma|nePE RS March9»2@23 ‘Wash 
PU:‘1!.i(§€EMPt0YEES RETIR4?HEHY tram Page2 
General's letter referenced above is included as an appendix in that report as is a separate letter 
from the Attorney General’s Office to MainePERS regarding the divestment laws. 
As with the previously enacted laws, implementing additional divestment laws would require 
MainePERS to expend resources on identifying investments covered by the laws and 
analyzing portfolio and cost impacts. Divestment would result from this process only if doing 
so was in the best financial interest of MainePERS' members as pension recipients. The 
Attorney General’s Office has said regarding the similarly-worded divestment laws: 
The subject statutes do not affect the Board's exercise of its fiduciary duties. 
And they do not require the Board to either cease investing in or divest such 
holdings unless sound investment criteria and fiduciary obligations require 
such actions. Both statutes specifically condition their directives on 
"accordance with sound investment criteria" and "consisten[cy] with 
fiduciary obligations." As such, they reiterate rather than modify the 
Board's fiduciary obligations as a trustee - both constitutional and 
statutory. 
11: ‘k* 
If adherence to sound investment criteria and fiduciary obligations 
prevents achievement of the investment and divestiture objectives of [the 
statutes], failure to achieve those objectives is not a violation of the 
directives in those statutes. In short, the Board's focus should remain on 
adhering to sound investment criteria and fulfilling its fiduciary 
obligations. However, if the Board encounters a situation where the 
application of sound investment criteria and its fiduciary obligations 
neither favors nor disfavors either of two potential investment options, the 
Board shall pursue the option that more closely complies with the 
directives. 
(See Divestment Report dated Ianuary 17, 2023, Appendix D.) 
We have completed some preliminary analysis to estimate current exposures to companies 
that appear to be covered by L.D. 742, and estimate that MainePERS has approximately $70 
million in holdings with such companies. Significantly more analysis would be necessary 
to confirm those potential exposures and the impacts of divesting from those holdings. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. I would be happy to answer your 
questions and will be available at your work session.
