:1- 
” . HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
3 2 STATE HOUSE STATION‘ .- 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 Dan Shagoury 
P.O. Box 202 
Hallowell, ME 04347 
Phone: 207-242-2169 
Dan Shagoury@legislature.maine.gov 
February 9, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Dan Shagourjv introducing 
LD 111, An Act Requiring the State to Pay a Share of a Retired State 
Employee's or Retired Teacher's Premium for Medicare Part B Under 
Medicare Advantage 
Before the Labor and Housing Committee 
Good aftemoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. I am Representative Dan Shagoury, and I- represent House 
District 55 ~ the connnunities of Hallowell, Manchester and West Gardiner. I come before you 
today to introduce LD 111, An Act Requiring the State to Pay a Share of a Retired State 
Employee's or Retired Teacher's Premium for Medicare Part B Under Medicare 
Advantage. 
Retirees have had a rough time over the last few years, especially retired state employees and 
educators. Their beneﬁts have simply not kept up with inﬂation and many are suffering asa 
result. 
One area where the state could really help retired state employees and educators is health care 
costs. When a person becomes a state employee, they are promised that they will receive the 
same beneﬁts a current employee receives, without charge, for life if they retire as an active state 
employee who is receiving health insurance beneﬁts. This is very good insurance and could bea 
great deal for retirees. 
The state falls down on this commitment when it comes to the Medicare Part B premiums, 
however. If a person retires before 65, the state pays everything. Then when they tum 65, 
assuming they qualify for Medicare, they suddenly have to pay the Part B premiums. 
This seems unfair for several reasons. The ﬁrst is that although the retirees ’ insurance costs 
should be lower for the system because much of the coverage is being paid for by Medicare, 
retirees suddenly have to pay a share of their costs in the Part B premium, which is currently 
$164.90 per month. This is almost $2,000 per year. 
The second problem is that the state pays the Medicare Part B Premium for current employees 
who are over 65. I was very surprised when I found this out when I again became a state 
District 55: Hallowell, Manchester and West Gardiner
employee upon being elected to the Legislature. This goes against the idea that retirees would 
receive the same health care beneﬁts as active employees. 
Finally, the state pays the entire health care premium for several hundred retirees who do not 
qualify for Medicare themselves or through their spouse. In this case, it is treating two different 
groups of retirees differently. 
This $2,000 would make a real difference to a lot of state retirees and retired educators, and hits 
those with lower retirement beneﬁt payments the hardest. This bill will rectify the situation by 
requiring the state to pay the Medicare Part B premium for many of these retirees. This bill is 
weighted to provide those with lower retirement income with a larger payment for their PartB 
premium, as they need this help the most. Up to the cutoff for COLA adjustments, currently 
about $24,000, 100% of the Part B premium would be paid. Above that, the percentage paid 
would gradually decrease, ending altogether for those with retirement beneﬁts over $75,000 per 
year. 
It is also my intent that this bill only apply to those retirees who have qualiﬁed for 100% 
coverage of their insurance through the state retirement system. 
Thank you for your consideration. l look forward to working with you on this bill, and I will be 
glad to answer any questions. 
District 55: Hallowell, Manchester and West Gardiner
