Rob Peale Testimony On LD 111 
An Act Requiring the State to Pay a Share of a Retired State Employee's or Retired Teacher's Premium for Medicare Part B Under Medicare Advantage sponsored by Representative Shagoury.
Senator Tipping, Representa0ve Roeder and members of the Commi8ee on Labor and Housing: My name is Rob Peale and I am a Readﬁeld resident. I am also a re0red State of Maine employee.  I am asking for your support to pass and fund LD 111 for the state to share the cost of our Medicare premiums. Although paying a por0on of our Medicare premiums would not come close to paying back re0red state employees and teachers for the ﬁnancial sacriﬁces imposed on them by the pension cuts passed by the republican governor and republican majority legislature 2011, it will provide a small ﬁnancial boost for most of us.   The 2011 cuts included (1) a substan0al cut in the amount (base) to which cost-of-living adjustments (COLA) apply, (2) lowering the COLA cap to a level below the likely long term average inﬂa0on rate, and (3) a 3-year COLA freeze.  These changes took away beneﬁts we were promised when we were hired. These promises were oSen repeated to keep us in our jobs during years when wage and other beneﬁt increases were paltry. Un0l 2011 Maine law speciﬁed that these pension beneﬁts were contractual between the state, and its employees and teachers. This all changed in 2011. 
Since I re0red in 2017 aSer 30 years of service to the state, the value of my pension beneﬁts has con0nued to decrease because (1) a signiﬁcant por0on of my pension is not covered by cost of living adjustments (the COLA) due to the cap on covered pension beneﬁts base, (2) the COLA itself is capped at rate below the likely long term average inﬂa0on rate, and (3) inﬂa0on rates that in the last couple of years have exceeded the COLA cap (and are likely to exceed it in at least some future years).  Our beneﬁt COLAs contrast starkly with the social security payments that private sector workers get. Social security beneﬁts receive annual COLAs on their en0re payment based on actual inﬂa0on rates. On behalf of myself and my fellow re0rees I ask you to please pass and fund this bill, and be open to other changes to help re0rees recover our promised pension beneﬁts. Thank-you Robert Peale 42 Mooer Road Readﬁeld, Maine
