February 09, 202 3 
Public Testimony on Supplemental Budget  LD 111 
 
Sen. Tipping , Rep. Roed er and members of the Committee  on Labor and Housing .  My name is Steven R. 
Keaten and I’m a lifelong resident of Maine.  I grew up in Somerset County and have lived for the past 3 4 
years in China, Maine.  Thank you for letting me testify in favor of LD 111.   
I’m a retired state employee having retired on December 29th, 2011 at the age of 55 ½ years.  I retired 
with a penalty of 42 percent in my MEPERS pension a fter having worked just short of 28 years as a state 
employee.  I retired due to the 2011 changes enacted to state paid health insurance benefits for long 
time teachers and state employees  upon retirement .   
You’ve probably all have heard about the cuts to  our pension s the occurred in 2011  that were a 
reduction in the maximum COLA  and the base reduction in which your C OLA is based on.  What you 
don’t hear about much is  the age requirement you must attain  to qualify to get your health insurance 
paid for by the State  at retirement .  Prior  to those enacted changes in 2011 you were eli gible for State 
paid heath insurance after reaching 25 years of service .  That was changed  to now having to reach your 
normal retirement age before the State picks up the cost of your health insurance .  You’ll  be hear ing 
more about this later from me in testimony I plan to submit  on another proposed LD  coming before this 
committee on a later date.  
State employees  that retire and work until their normal retirement age and are Medicare eligible when 
they turn 65 are placed  into a Medicare Advantage plan that saves the State tons of money .  Currently 
that deduction  for me is $164.90/month  for Medicare Part B.   This cost is deducted from what little I 
receive from Social Security.  
The retiree is forced to pay this $164. 90 per month that is taken out of their Social Security check which  
is already greatly reduced because of the Social Security offset s know n as t he Windfall Elimination 
Provision  (WEP)  and Government Pe nsion Offset (GPO ).  Many state retirees that  receive their reduced 
Social Security  don’t get enough to pay this Medicare Prem ium and the y must  pay any difference out of 
pocket.  
If yo u’re not eligible to draw Social Security than the State picks up 100  % of your insurance costs.  That 
is not the case if your Social  Security eligible.  
Therefor all Retired State employees are not treated equal when it comes to payment of Health 
Insurance  and their out of pockets costs for Health Insurance  Premiums.  
I urge this committee to correct this injustice and pass LD 111 as ought to pass  and sen d to the 
Legislature to be enacted  and funded.  
Once again,  I thank you for allowing me to testify  and I’ll tr y to answer any questions you might hav e. 
 
Steven R. Keaten  
China , Maine  
