Mmwe Assocmnom OF Rermzzs 
El} DATE: February 9, 2023 
TO: Senator Michael Tipping 
Representative Amy Roeder 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
FROM: William H. Laubenstein, III 
President, Maine Association of Retirees 
SUBJECT: LD 111: An Act Requiring the State to Pay a Share of a Retired State Employee ’s 
or Retired Teacher’s Premium for Medicare Part B Under Medicare Advantage 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing. My name is William H. Laubenstein, III. I am President of the Maine 
Association of Retirees (MAR) whose membership includes retired State employees, retired 
teachers and other public service retirees. 
MAR supports LD 111, An Act Requiring the State to Pay a Share of a Retired State 
Employee ’s or Retired Teacher’s Premium for Medicare Part B Under Medicare Advantage. 
MAR is an organization of Maine Public Employees Retirement System (MainePERS) retirees 
who receive a MainePERS retirement beneﬁt. Upon retirement, State retirees are eligible for 
health care insurance under a Medicare Advantage Insurance Plan administered by the Ofﬁce of 
Employee Health and Wellness and by Maine Educational Association Beneﬁt Trust fund for 
teachers. Participation in the Advantage Plans require retirees to pay the Medicare PartB 
Premium. For retirees receiving Social Security, the premium is taken from the monthly beneﬁt. 
However, the majority of MainePERS retirees are not eligible for Social Security and must pay 
the Part B premium from other sources, which for many means the State pension beneﬁt. 
Bearing in mind that approximately thirty percent (30%) of MainePERS retirees fall under two 
hundred percent (200%) of the federal poverty level, and that the average annual MainePERS 
pension beneﬁt in 202lwas only $23,456, older Mainer’s independence and ﬁnancial security are 
already at risk without the obligation to pay the monthly Part B premium, which for 2023 is 
$ 1 64.90. 
LD lll seeks to remedy the hardship imposed on Maine public service retirees by the 
requirement that retirees pay the Part B premium. It does so, not by requiring the State to pay 
the entire premium for all eligible retirees, but by basing the amount to be paid a retiree ona 
retiree’s 21111111211 pension beneﬁt.
Thus, for retirees whose base annual pension beneﬁt on or after January 1 2024 is less than or 
equal to the maximum amount of the beneﬁt subject to the cost-of-living adjustment (COLA), 
the State would pay 100% of the Part B premium. The amount the State must pay then 
decreases as a retiree’s beneﬁt increases, reducing at the other end of the scale to a payment of 
only 10% for retirees whose annual pension beneﬁt is greater than $64,000 and less than 
$75,000. Additionally, retirees who are eligible for federally approved Medicare services, and 
State retirees who are eligible for payment of 100% of the Medicare Part B premium due to 
their eligibility through an agreement with the United States Department of Health and Human 
Services, Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the State would not pay any share of the 
Part B premium. 
Each year, MAR holds Regional Meetings in each of the ﬁve MAR regions. At these meetings, 
a major topic of discussion and concern, along with concerns with current law regarding the 
annual Maine COLA, is the requirement to pay the Medicare Part B premium. As noted above, 
this payment, $164.90 monthly or $1,978.80 annually, imposes a signiﬁcant ﬁnancial burden on 
State public service retirees. MAR asks that as you turn your attention to LD 111, you keep in 
mind this often repeated concern. 
Thank you for consideration of this testimony. I would be happy to answer your questions and 
MAR will be available for your work session. 
Leading the Way for Maine Retirees 
280 Maine Avenue, Farmingdale, ME 04344 William H. Laubenstein Ill — President 
Telephone Number: (207) 582-1960 Diane M. Bailey — Executive Director 
1-800-535-6555 email: MAR@lVlaineRetirees.0rg 
(207) 707-1722 FAX www.maineretirees.org
