      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 21, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1609, An Act to Prevent Student Homelessness   
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my 
name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine or CHOM .  
CHOM’s small staff  works collaboratively with  service provider s all a cross Maine to house 
hundreds of people experiencing homelessness.  I am a member of the Statewide Homeless Council 
and also chair the Maine Homeless Policy Committee, the Maine Continuum of Care Board of 
Directors, and the ESAC Long Term Stayers Committee.   Prior to moving to Maine, 10 years of 
my career was spent working  with homeless youth in Vermont and Minnesota.   
 
I am testifying in support of LD 1609, An Act to Prevent Student Homelessness .  The bill would 
enact provisions of law to prevent student homelessness.  I reviewed the concept draft and have 
learned that Re presentative Brennan’s bill LD 1422 will be pulled.  That leads me to be even more 
supportive of this legislation.   We can’t prevent everything.  But in this case, with some limited funds, we can surgically target 
some resources to keep families housed so  students can be successful.  That seems like a wise 
investment in both homeless prevention and positive outcomes for our youth.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro  
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins  
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan  
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell  
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba  
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea 
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon  
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill 
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
Cullen Ryan
Portland
LD 1609
April 21, 2023
Re: LD 1609, An Act to Prevent Student Homelessness 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on 
Housing, my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community 
Housing of Maine or CHOM.  CHOM’s small staff works collaboratively with service
providers all across Maine to house hundreds of people experiencing homelessness.  I 
am a member of the Statewide Homeless Council and also chair the Maine Homeless 
Policy Committee, the Maine Continuum of Care Board of Directors, and the ESAC 
Long Term Stayers Committee.  Prior to moving to Maine, 10 years of my career was 
spent working with homeless youth in Vermont and Minnesota.  
I am testifying in support of LD 1609, An Act to Prevent Student Homelessness.  The 
bill would enact provisions of law to prevent student homelessness.  I reviewed the 
concept draft and have learned that Representative Brennan’s bill LD 1422 will be 
pulled.  That leads me to be even more supportive of this legislation. 
We can’t prevent everything.  But in this case, with some limited funds, we can 
surgically target some resources to keep families housed so students can be 
successful.  That seems like a wise investment in both homeless prevention and 
positive outcomes for our youth.  
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.

