 
 
 
April 20, 2023  
 
Dear members of the Standing Committee on Housing : 
 
I am writing to offer testimony in support of LD 1609, An Act to Prevent Student Homelessness.   
 
As Superintendent of the Biddeford School Department, my staff and I have seen firsthand the 
devastating effects of homelessness on students and their familie s. Especially since the pandemic, 
schools have become front line social service agencies, and our daily tasks have expanded beyond 
traditional education to include providing essential social services to students and families.  
 
The pandemic, rising inflatio n, and an affordable housing crisis that is acutely  felt in York County has 
caused many families to experience financial hardship, job loss, and eviction, which have resulted in a 
significant increase in homelessness. The Biddeford School Department has se rved more than 100 
homeless families this year, and we are currently addressing  more than 60 active  cases.    Families are 
doubled up, living in tents, and staying in the back of U -Hauls. We have provided these families with 
emergency housing, case manageme nt, gasoline, and utilities, among other essential services 
with CARES Act and ARP funds. However, our school department's budget allocation is insufficient to 
cover the costs of serving homeless families, and we often lack the allowable expenditures to pr ovide 
families in crisis what they need.  
 
Homelessness has a devastating effect on students' academic achievement, emotional well -being, and 
overall health. Homeless students often face myriad challenges, including hunger, inadequate shelter, 
lack of trans portation, and limited access to medical care. These challenges make it difficult for students 
to focus on their education and succeed in school, perpetuating the cycle of poverty and homelessness.  
 
LD 1609 would provide critical support for homeless stude nts and their families, including rental 
assistance, case management, and transportation assistance. By preventing student homelessness, this 
legislation would help students stay in school, receive the support they need to succeed academically, 
and break t he cycle of poverty and homelessness.  
 
The Biddeford School Committee, our 500 employees and I urge you to support LD 1609 and take action 
to prevent student homelessness in Maine. The Biddeford School Department believes that all students 
deserve the oppo rtunity to succeed, regardless of their housing status, and this legislation is a critical 
step in ensuring that every student has the support they need to thrive.   
 
Thank you for considering this testimony.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Jeremy Ray  
Superintendent of Schools  
 
 
cc:  Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 

