 TESTIMONY     OF     THE     WESTBROOK     COMMUNITY     HOUSING     COALITION 
 SUPPORTING     LD     1609:     An     Act     to     Prevent     Student     Homelessness 
 Public     Hearing:  Friday,     April     21     at     9:00am 
 Dear     Members     of     the     Joint     Select     Committee     on     Housing, 
 I     am     Liz     Eisele     McLellan,     one     of     the     co-chairs     of     the     Westbrook     Community     Housing     Coalition. 
 We     are     a  group     of     community     members,     faith     leaders,  school     and     city     representatives,     and 
 nonprofit     organizations  that  have     been     working     together  to     address     the     housing     crisis     within 
 Westbrook. 
 We     work     closely     with     the     McKinney-Vento     Liaison     for     the     Westbrook     School     Dept.     At     last     count 
 Westbrook     had     more     than     100     students     that     were     considered     unhoused.     This     is     the     highest     the 
 number     has     been     all     year. 
 Last     month,     a     father     and     his     young     daughter     spent     the     night     on     the     streets     before     coming     to     the 
 attention     of     her     school.     We     were     able     to     fundraise     from     the     community     enough     money     to     cover 
 a     week     in     a     hotel     for     them,     before     our     network     was     able     to     get     them     placed     in     an     apartment. 
 While     this     was     a     success     for     our     community,     it     also     shows     the     need     for     additional 
 McKinney-Vento     funding. 
 We     have     collected     Hannaford     and     Market     Basket     gift     cards     to     be     delivered     to     unhoused     high 
 school     students.     Our     members     have     collected     sleeping     bags     and     backpacks     that     are     delivered 
 to     the     school.     Again,     this     shows     the     need     for     additional     McKinney-Vento     funding. 
 A     program     that     is     still     being     funded     at     a     level     approved     in     the     1980’s,     is     far     behind     being     able     to 
 adequately     support     the     needs     of     unhoused     students     during     an     epic     housing     crisis.     Our     students 
 need     the     safety     and     stability     of     a     home     in     order     to     thrive.     Anything     we     can     do     to     get     them     closer 
 to     that     existence     is     well     worth     it.     After     all,     they     are     the     future. 
 Thank     you. 
 Liz     Eisele     McLellan, 
 on     behalf     of     the     Westbrook     Community     Housing     Coalition 
