April 20, 2023
T o the Hon. Chair and M em bers of the Standing Com m ittee on Housing,
I am M eg Parkhurst, Assistant Superintendent of the Saco School Departm ent. I am subm itting
this testim ony in favor of LD 1609, An Act to Prevent Student Hom elessness.
O ver the past five years, we have seen an 800% increase in the num ber of
M cKinney-V ento-eligible students in our district. T hese students lack a fixed, regular , and
adequate nighttim e residence. Hom elessness is a growing problem that has a direct im pact on
the education and well-being of our students. M uch of this hom elessness is owing to
skyrocketing rents and a red-hot housing m arket. Still, another contributor to this startling figure
is a population of New M ainers currently resting their head in substandard housing.
Indeed, the Saco Schools serve nearly 100 asylees and asylum -seekers who have com e to us
from neighboring com m unities like South Portland and F reeport. W e welcom e these new
neighbors and thank Catholic Charities of M aine for helping us serve them . However , this
sudden influx of students has put a strain on our resources and we lack critical resources to fully
m eet the needs of our hom eless fam ilies and youth.
T he funding and approved uses proposed in LD 1609 would have a m easurable im pact on the
quality of life and education of the students we are so honored to serve. T his act would provide
additional resources to support the educational needs of hom eless students, including
transportation, tutoring, and other wrap-around services that are critical for academ ic success.
T his act would also create a Hom eless Y outh F und to support housing stability and prevent
hom elessness am ong youth. T his is a critical step forward in addressing the growing problem of
student hom elessness in M aine. It would enable us to provide m ore support to our m ost
vulnerable students and ensure they have the resources they need to succeed.
W e urge you to support LD 1609 and help us provide a better future for our students. T hank you
for your tim e and consideration.
Sincerely ,
M eg Parkhurst
Assistant Superintendent Saco Schools90 Beach Street, Saco, ME 04072 ● 207.284.4505 ● sacoschools.org ● Jeremy Ray, Superintendent

