 
1 
 
 
SchoolHouse Connection Support for LD 1609  
 
TO: The Honorable  Chair s Sen. Teresa Pierce  and Rep. Traci Gere , and the distinguished  
members of the Maine Committee on Housing  
 
My name is Rodd Monts,  and I am the director of state policy for SchoolHouse Connection. We 
are a national nonpartisan, nonprofit that works to address youth homelessness through 
education. Our or ganization has helped pass legislation in Maine and more than 20 o ther states 
aimed at  improv ing education  outcomes PreK  through higher education , along with access to 
housing , shelter, and other  supportive resources for you ng people  experiencing homelessness.  
 
We support  the concept  proposed in LD 1609  and look forward to reviewing the legislation.   
 
The Maine Student Homelessness Prevention fund  has the potential to  greatly  improve the 
abilit y of the professionals closest to the issue of youth homele ssness to help get more students 
the housing and support they need.  Schools are a  natural entry point  for both the early 
intervention and prevention of homelessness . 
 
For the past three decades, p ublic school  system s have been  uniquely equipped to  identify and 
assist families at risk of becoming unhou sed or experiencing homelessness . Under the federal 
McKinney -Vento Act  Homeless Assistance Act , every U.S. school district has a designated 
homeless liaison who identifies and supports families experiencing homelessness  in their area .  
 
The work that they do with the homeless children a nd families  they serv e put  school district 
homeless liaisons on the front lines of the housing crisis. But they can face multiple barriers 
when attempting to help families access emergency renta l assistance, or to meet emergency 
needs so they can  end thei r homelessness  sustainably . In some cases, families may not meet 
stringent eligibility criteria for emergency help . In other cases, applying for  assistance  or 
navigating supportive systems can be too difficult for them to  manage .  
 
LD 1609 would remove these barriers by making emergency funds available directly to homeless 
liaisons to meet critical  needs . Liaisons could quickly help  stabilize families without them having 
to endure  a leng thy process that can , at times, be traumatizing  when they must  repeatedly 
share the details of the ir homelessness  with agency staff they don ’t know . Liaisons build  
relationships with the students  and families they serve so schools  are a more com fortable 
environment  for them . By leveraging the  existing infrastructure public schools provide  we can 
both  stabilize  more vulnerable  families and children and prevent further educational disruptio n 
  
Other states are ad opting  similar approaches  by equipping schools with flexible funding to 
address homelessness. For example, the  Homeless Student Stability Progra m in Washington 
 
2 
 
state supplements the federal M-V Act funds to p rovide rental assistance, help with housing  
searches and related supports with the liaison network distribut ing aid. The  Homework Starts 
with Home prog ram in Minnesota also pairs housing and social services to families experiencing 
homelessness identified through public schools. Both efforts have reported positive outcomes 
and continue to grow . 
 
Finally, we want to point out that s chool  district s have been successful in using the flexibility of 
the American Rescue Plan Homeless Children and Youth  (ARP -HCY) funds, which can be spent on  
a broader range of activities than the typical M -V Education for Homeless Children and Youth  
(EHCY)  grants .  
 
EHCY monies  are limited  to activit ies related to the identification, enrollment, attendance, and 
success of children and youth experiencing homelessness. These funds cannot be used for 
utilities, or other kinds of emergency assistance such as rent. The ARP -HCY funds, on the other 
hand, are broader, and can be used for a few nights in a hotel, car repairs, and other emergency 
needs.   This flexibility has allowed schools to do more to stabilize the entire family, and 
therefore ha s greater  impact on school attendance and success. However, ARP -HCY fund ing will 
run out in September 2024. Moreover, both EHCY and ARP -HCY must be used for children and 
youth who are unhoused and experiencing homelessness.  
 
LD 1609 could help more families avoid  homelessness in the first place by allowing schools to 
meet  immedi ate need and improv e prevention . It also could continue the flexibility of ARP -HCY, 
which has reached significantly more school districts in Maine than annual EHCY funds. This 
legislation should improve  academic outcomes  in the near term and reduce  adult homelessness , 
longer term. Beca use the single greatest risk factor for young adult homelessness is lack of a 
high school degree or GED . 
 
Rodd Mont s 
Director of State P olicy  
rodd@schoo lhouseconnection.org  
(313) 288 -9133  
