» As $5‘ "'0: 
Q‘ -r?’ 
,- ¢ »v 
VGM Group is a membership service company that provides business services to all types of 
Home Medical Equipment companies nationally. We have over 3,000 member companies with 
8,000 US locations. 
Durable medical equipment suppliers of Maine are writing to respectfully ask Maine legislators 
to support L.D.1184, which will exempt certain prescribed (DMEPOS) home medical 
equipment and supplies from sales tax. 
Passage of this bill will provide better access to products and services to patients who rely on 
medical equipment to live their daily lives. Access to quality durable medical equipment allows 
patients to heal in the comforts of their own home. DMEPOS frees up hospital beds and 
significantly reduces expenses incurred during a hospital stay or skilled nursing facility. 
DMEPOS includes, but is not limited to, home oxygen, ventilators, wheelchairs, cpap devices, 
hospital beds, custom wheelchairs, breast pumps, orthotics and prosthetics. 
Current law exempts the following items: crutches and wheelchairs for the use of sick, injured 
or disabled persons and not for rental; 0 diabetic supplies used in the diagnosis or treatment 
of human diabetes; Q positive airway pressure and oxygen delivery equipment and supplies 
sold or leased for personal use; prosthetic or orthotic devices sold by means of an order issued 
by a licensed health care practitioner. 
There are several medically necessary and prescribed items not on the covered list including 
hospital beds, breast pumps, catheters and ostomy devices and supplies, wound care 
mattresses and dressings, and patient handling equipment. 
Why would the state exempt some prescribed items and not others? ln many cases Medicare 
is paying for these items, and they never pay sales tax so the provider is left to either chargea 
Maine citizens for tax on some of their prescribed products and not on others or have the 
sales tax taken out of their already very low reimbursement rates. The extra effort it would
I 
take a provider to collect the tax under these circumstances would cost more than the sales 
tax payment itself. It is a very untenable situation. 
Individual payers do not typically reimburse medical equipment suppliers for sales tax. 
Suppliers are either absorbing sales tax for DMEPOS or passing that expense onto the patients 
The following states generally exempt medical devices from tax when they are sold ona 
written order (prescription) provided by an individual who is required to hold, and actively 
holds, a state license (physician, therapist, etc.): Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, 
District of Columbia, Florida, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, 
Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota, 
Texas, Utah, West Virginia. 
Common sense would say to make all prescribed medical products would be tax exempt for 
both the consumer, many of which are also Mainecare eligible, and for the providers who are 
challenged to collect the tax on only some items. 
We ask for your support for L.D. 1184 so those who rely on this necessary equipment can 
continue to live and heal in the comfort of their homes. 
We greatly appreciate your support. 
Emily Harken 
VGM Government Relations 
319-830p-1578
