 
 Written testimony of Jason Canzano,  Board Member of HOMES  and Managing 
Director of Acelleron Medical Products , Relative to LD 1184 - An Act to Exempt 
Certain Prescribed Home Medical Supplies from Sales Tax  
April 26, 2023  
 
Dear Taxation Com mittee Members,  
My name is Jason Canzano, Board Member of the Home Medical Equipment and Services 
Association of New England (“HOMES”) and Managing Director of Acelleron  Medical Pro ducts 
(“Acelleron ”). HOMES is the New England trade association representing providers of 
durable/home medical equipment  (“HME”) . HOMES represents HME providers in Maine and all 
the other  New England  states.   
Acelleron  is a MaineCare and commer cial health insurance provider that provides breastfeeding 
equipment and supplies as well as other maternal health products such as blood pressu re 
monitors, pregnancy back braces, and compression socks, along with pediatric nebulizers to 
familie s throughout Maine . We are one of the leading experts in our space because we combine 
experience, technology, clinical expertise, product knowledge, and patient data to improve 
maternal health and pediatric respiratory  outcomes.  Last year we served over 5,000 families 
throughout the great state of Maine. We expect to serve  close to 6,000 f amilies this year. We are 
a key provider to both Maine Health and Northern Li ght health systems.  
Thank you for the opp ortunity to comment on LD 1184 , an act to exempt certain prescribed 
home medical supplies from sales tax. This bill should provide sales and use tax exemption for 
medical equipment and supplies prescribed by a health care provider for medical purposes 
when payment is made by an insurance company or specified government program such as 
Medicare or Medicaid.   
Prescribed medical equipment is essential for individuals who require it for managing their 
health conditions. Just as Maine does not tax the medication for medical conditions , Maine 
should  not tax the equipment  needed to manage those conditions.  
Maine Sal es Tax Law  
Under current  law, sales of prescribed breast feeding equipment, nebulizers, blood pressure 
monitors, compression socks, and many more  types of  medical equipment and suppl ies are 
subject to the sales and use tax  when billed to a health insurance company , Medicare,  and 
MaineCare . This means HME providers are paying a consumer sales tax on prescribed 
medical equipment and supplies . In essence, this is a tax on HME providers  who are cri tical 
to improving patient outcomes, reducing hospitalization  stays , and lowering  health care co sts.  
 
 In addition, t here is a significant administrative burden on HME providers to calculate and remit 
sales tax . We are not traditional retail businesses that charge  and collect sales tax f rom a 
consumer when they come in  to purchase  a product . We are a health  care provider that supplies  
medical equipment to patients  in need . We submit  an insurance claim to the  patient ’s insurance 
company , Medicare or Medicaid for the equipment .  Therefore,  we need to manually pull out all 
the claims out of our billin g system  each month , then remove  claims that are not subject to sales 
tax, then calculate the sales tax based on the insurance allowable amounts. This is very tedious 
and time consuming process.  
Lastly, t here are similar exemptions in the state of Maine that supports why this change should 
be made.  In the Maine Revenue Services Sal es, Fuel, & Special Tax Division Instructional Bulletin 
NO. 41 (See Appendix A ), prescription medicines , prosthetic or orthotic device s, crutches  and 
wheelchairs , diabetic supplies , positive airway pressure  and oxygen delivery equipment 
and supplies , and certain adaptive equipment  are exempt from sales and use tax.  
All this being said,  we urge you to exempt sales and use tax on prescribed medical equipment 
billed to health insurance plans and MaineCare. It is  the right thing to do. It can help ensure that 
Maine resi dents  have access to the healthcare they need, improve outcomes , and demonstrate 
Maine's commitment to the well -being of its residents.  
Thank you so very much for your tim e. 
 
 
 
 
Jason A. Canzano  
Managing Director  
Acelleron  
jcanzano@acelleron.com  
603-918-1631  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Appendix A  
 
 

 
  
 
 
 

 
  
 

 
  

