TESTIMONY OF 
JOHN SAGASER, TAX POLICY COUNSEL 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Wednesday, April 26, 9:30 AM 
LD l 184 — “An Act to Exempt Certain Prescribed Home Medical Supplies from 
Sales T ax” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good morning, my name is John Sagaser, Tax Policy Counsel in the 
Office of Tax Policy at Maine Revenue Services. I am testifying at the request of 
the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD l 184, “An Act to Exempt Certain 
Prescribed Home Medical Supplies ﬁrom Sales Tax.” 
This bill would exempt sales of medical equipment and supplies prescribed 
by a healthcare provider when payment is made by an insurance company, 
municipal or state agency or specified federally funded program. 
Current law provides a sales tax exemption for “sales of medicines for 
human beings sold on a doctor’s prescription, ” with an exclusion for “the sale of 
marijuana pursuant to Title 22, chapter 558-C.” There is not a similar blanket 
exemption for sales of medical equipment and supplies, although there are several 
narrower exemptions. Furthermore, third-party payment for a purchase does not in 
itself change the nature of the sale from being a sale to the consumer to beinga 
sale to a third-party payor, such as insurance company or government‘ 
agency. MRS Sales Tax Division Instruction Bulletin No. 41 addresses the topic in 
more detail.
1
For the new exemption proposed by this bill to be administrable, we 
recommend the proposal clarify both which products and which types of 
transactions would be eligible for the sales tax exemption. The terms “Medical 
equipment and supplies ” and “prescription ” are not statutorily defined and could be 
construed broadly to include essentially any product ordered by a “health care 
provider. ” While Maine Revenue Services ’ Sales Tax Informational Bulletin No. 
41 discusses the prescriptions and certain medical equipment and supplies relative 
to existing narrower exemptions, we recommend that both terms used in this bill— 
“prescription ” and “medical equipment and supplies ” — be deﬁned in statute. 
In addition, it is unclear whether the exemption would apply to partial 
payments made by an insurer. It is also unclear whether an individual would be 
entitled to a credit if they paid the cost of the goods (including sales tax) and were 
later reimbursed by the insurer. 
The phrase “federally funded program[s] such as Medicare or Medicaid ” 
may also broaden the exemption beyond its intended scope, potentially including 
other federally funded programs that occasionally pay for prescribed medical 
equipment and supplies on a beneﬁcia1y’s behalf. The Committee should consider 
amending the proposal to expressly name the federally funded programs intended 
to benefit from this exemption. 
The Committee should also consider expressly limiting the exemption to 
sales of medical equipment and supplies for humans; as drafted, this exemption 
may extend to purchases of medical equipment and supplies sold pursuant toa 
veterinarian ’s prescription, paid for by a pet insurance company.
2
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
