Written testimony of Steven R. Royer, R.Ph., FASCP, Vice-President of Pharmacy 
Services for Kennebec Pharmacy and Home Care, Relative to LD 1184 - An Act to 
Exempt Certain Prescribed Home Medical Supplies from Sales Tax 
April 26, 2023 
 
Dear Taxation Committee Members, 
My name is Steven R. Royer, and I am the Vice-President of Pharmacy Services for Kennebec 
Pharmacy and Home Care. Kennebec Pharmacy and Home Care is a MaineCare and commercial 
health insurance provider that provides respiratory services and equipment, incontinent therapy 
supplies, home infusion therapy services, ostomy, ileostomy, urostomy supplies, long-term care 
pharmacy services, retail pharmacy services and complex rehab equipment throughout Maine. 
Kennebec Pharmacy and Home Care., a Maine owned and operated company employing 134 
individuals, provided the above-mentioned services last year to well over 27,000 patients. We 
currently have relationships with various home health agencies, long term care facilities and 
hospitals including but not limited to Maine General, Northern Light, St. Mary’s Regional 
Medical Center, Central Maine Medical Center, Maine Medical Center, Mid Coast Hospital, Togus 
VA Hospital, Redington-Fairview General Hospital and Franklin Memorial Hospital to name a 
few. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on LD 1184, an act to exempt certain prescribed 
home medical supplies from sales tax. This bill should provide sales and use tax exemption for 
medical equipment and supplies prescribed by a health care provider for medical purposes 
when payment is made by an insurance company or specified government program such as 
Medicare or Medicaid.  
Prescribed medical equipment meets the needs of Maine residents with physical and medical 
limitations that need these medical equipment and supplies to survive. This type of medical 
service helps to facilitate the ability of Maine people to stay in their homes. There is a real need 
for these support services to both exist and thrive, so they are available for Maine people to 
access when needed. 
Under current law, the sale of many types of medical equipment and supplies is subject to the 
sales and use tax, even when there is a physician’s order requiring it for treatment. For the items 
that Maine’s current law has defined as taxable, most health insurance companies will not pay 
the sales tax, even though the provider bills the sales tax as a line item. The consumer (patient) 
will not pay the sales tax; it is left for the medical equipment supplier to pay. The only exception 
to this is when the insurer is MaineCare. MaineCare will pay the provider the sales tax for 
incontinence supplies if it is billed to MaineCare as a line item. This is a state cost expenditure 
with no FMAP split and the provider then must process the payment from MaineCare, then sift 
through complex reports and tax logic to pay Maine Revenue Services the sales tax collected. It 
merely creates a 100% State Fund expenditure to the MaineCare expenditure budget, then 
creates  the same amount of revenue for Maine Revenue Services, so it is a net zero impact to 
Maine’s budget. It is not a seamless process, rather it is a very burdensome and cumbersome 
process.  
The process to determine whether medical equipment or supply is taxable or not taxable is 
broken. We experienced that first-hand in 2018 when we were subject to a sales and use tax 
audit with Maine Revenue Services that lasted two years. We met with the Director of the Maine 
Revenue Services Sales  Fuels and Special Taxes Division. These meetings were to provide 
clarification and guidance on whether an item was subject to sales or use tax. After multiple 
meetings with MRS auditors and the Director, we found that the responses were very subjective. 
We received conflicting answers as to whether the item or service was subject to sales or use tax, 
or exempt from sales or use tax. 
As a health care company, we want to be able to provide better living for the people that we 
serve, and not have the added burden of navigating the complex waters of the Maine Revenue 
Services’ sales and use tax laws as it relates to medical equipment and supplies. In the last 
couple of years, we made the tough decision to exit certain lines of business due to the 
increased cost of providing these services, coupled with poor reimbursement rates and the 
added burden of paying the sales and use tax on these items. That is why I am asking for your 
support in passing LD 1184 An Act to Exempt Certain Prescribed Home Medical Supplies from 
Sales Tax. 
Lastly, there are similar exemptions in the state of Maine that supports why this change should 
be made. In the Maine Revenue Services Sales, Fuel, & Special Tax Division Instructional Bulletin 
NO. 41 (See Appendix A), prescription medicines, prosthetic or orthotic devices, crutches and 
wheelchairs, diabetic supplies, positive airway pressure and oxygen delivery equipment 
and supplies, and certain adaptive equipment are exempt from sales and use tax.  
Once again please help us pass this much needed bill so we can keep on servicing the great 
people of the State of Maine. 
Thank you so very much for your time. 
 
 
Steven R. Royer, R.Ph., FASCP 
Vice-President of Pharmacy Services 
Kennebec Pharmacy and Home Care 
sroyer@kpprx.com 
207-373-3300 
