   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in support of LD 1496 , An Act to Prohibit Noncompete Clauses  
Arthur Phillips, Maine Center for Economic Policy   
April 1 9, 2023   
 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee 
on Labor a nd Housing, my name is Arthur Phillips, and I am an analyst at the Maine Center 
for Economic Policy. I am here to testify in support of LD 1 496, which will offer ou r workers  
greater econom ic freedom and enable  them to optimize  their contributions to our 
economy. 
 
As we know, in 2019, Maine banned  noncompete clauses for workers earning less than 
400% of the federal poverty level, which last year covered those earning less than $54,360. 
Earlier this year , the F ederal Trade Commission proposed to ban noncompete clauses 
outright for all workers nationwide.i Shortly thereafter, a bipartisan group of  US Senators 
introduced the Workforce Mo bility Act  to nearly outlaw thes e agreeme nts.ii MECEP 
supports  thes e steps; however , it may be years until federal legislation or rulemaking come 
to fruition, and we should not wait  to em power Maine ’s workers and stimulate innovation . 
 
Noncompete agreements were originally mean t to protect a business ’s trad e secrets and 
confidential information ; however, their use has be com e much more comm onplace to 
extend  beyond such scenarios . These agreeme nts disproportionat ely impact women  and 
people of color for a variet y of reasons , including  those groups ’ lesser willingness to violate 
the terms of such an ag reement  and lesser  likelihood of negotiat ing the terms of the ir 
employ ment. I n areas where there is one leading employer in an industry, these 
agre ements ca n become particularl y harmful. Noncompete agre ements co ntribute to what 
economists  call monopsony, where a small number of  buyer s exert  control over  labor or 
any other market , scenarios in which noncom pete agreements  empower  large  employers  
to offer  workers  lower compensation .  
 
It is widely understood that noncompete agreements are harmful to workers, and not only 
those with lower earnings. However, it is sometimes underappreciated that it also restricts 
entrepreneurship a nd innovation.  Researc h has shown that the free movement of skilled 
knowledge workers contributes  signi ficantly to innovation. For example , studies have 
attributed Silicon Valley ’s dynamism in part to the f act that California did not  enforce 
noncompete agreements .iii This bill would enable  workers to start their own firms and 
contribute to our economy’s dynamism more freely . 
 
We think this bil l sensibly bu ilds on past steps our state has taken and we urge you to 
support it.  Thank you and I welcome any questions you ma y have.  
 
 
   
 Notes  
 
i FTC Proposes Rule to Ban Noncompete Clauses, Which Hurt Workers and Harm Competition , January 5, 2023, 
https://www.ftc.gov/news -events/news/press -releases/2023/01/ftc -proposes -rule-ban-noncompete -clauses -
which -hurt -workers -harm -competition  
ii Workforce Mobility Act of 2023, introduce d 2/1/2023, https://www.congress.gov/bill/118th -congress/senate -
bill/220  
iii Ketan Ahuja , “Innovating Antitrust Law: How Innovation Really Happens and How Antitrust Law Should Adapt ,” 
Roosevel t Institute, October 2 022, https://rooseveltinstitute.org/wp -
content/uploads/2022/09/RI_InnovatingAntitrustLaw_202210.pdf  
 
