STATIZ or MAINE 
DEPARTMIZNT or LABOR 
."‘,;.»,| 54 STATE IIOUSF STATION »l AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0054 
hum ~11 Mms Laura A. Fomiiaii 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Michael Roland, 
Bureau of Labor Standards, Maine Department of Labor 
In Opposition to LD 1496, 
An Act to Prohibit Noncompete Clauses 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing Public Hearing, Wednesday, 
April 19, 2023 
Good morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing. I am Michael Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards for the Maine 
Department of Labor (Department). I am here today to speak on behalf of the Department In 
Opposition to LD 1496, An Act to Prohibit Noncompete Clauses. 
Just over four years ago the Department supported a bill to restrict the use of non-compete 
agreements and to prohibit employers from requiring or permitting certain workers to enter into 
them. The bill was enacted and is now Maine's 26 MRS section 599-A. 
For several reasons, the Department is reluctant to support further amendment of the existing statute 
at this time. First, the current statute seems to be working well, and we have had few inquiries about 
it or complaints of violations. In addition, the Federal Trade Commission is currently promulgating 
rules regarding noncompete agreements, and we would like to learn the results of that process before 
venturing into the same territory again. 
Specifically regarding LD 1496 as written, Section 3-C rendering out-of-state agreements unenforceable 
may prove difficult to interpret or implement. Adding a poster on the subject to the many already 
required will further dilute the impact of them all. There is no provision for the separate enforcement 
of the poster requirement. Were the bill to be enacted, the Bureau would likely require additional 
resources to implement. 
In all, we believe the timing is not right for amending section 599-A, nor are we convinced that 
amending it in this way is necessary. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have now 
or at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to serving Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth. 
PllONE:[2U7] 623-790!) 'l'l\ ustrs callMaiii&'Rela\ 711 l-AX:[Z(17l287 5291 
c Mainc lleparimtnt of L lcr p oiides iqiial oppuituniii in eiripluiiiirni ind piogranis. 
'\llXl Id \ JldS and seivicts aie a\ iil blo upon ICQLICSI to individuals viitli dis liiliiics
