A/Ail“ l\/laineS_treet 
Solutions Government Relations l Public Affairs 
Affiliated Wlil'l \/ernil Dana, LLP 
PETER GORE 45 MEMORIAL CIRCLE. SUITE 202 
SENIOR GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS CONSULTANT AUGUSTA. MAINE 04332-5307 
gt;orerwmaincstreclsolulions com 2()7_(,22_7432 . FAX 2()7_622_3| |7 
Testimony of 
Peter M. Gore 
Government Affairs Consultant 
Maine Street Solutions 
On behalf of the 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
in opposition to 
L.D. 1496, An Act to Prohibit Noncompete Clauses 
April 19, 2023 
Sen. Tipping, Rep. Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing, my name is Peter Gore, and I am a Government Affairs Consultant with Maine Street 
Solutions, and I am here on behalf of my client, the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a 
statewide business association representing both large and small businesses speaking to you 
today in opposition to L.D. 1496, An Act to Prohibit Noncompete Clauses 
In 2019, during the 129"‘ Legislative session, the legislature passed, and the Governor 
signed Public Law, Chapter 513, which had been L.D. 733, An Act to Promote Keeping Workers in 
Maine. As enacted into law, it limits and in certain instances, prohibits the use of "non- 
compete" agreements between certain employers and employees in Maine. In Maine now, 
certain types of workers who make less than 400% of federal poverty cannot be made to sign as 
a condition of hire, or otherwise, noncompete agreements, which are contracts entered into by 
an employee prohibiting the employee from working in the same or a similar profession withina 
time certain after leaving employment with the employer and within a specified geographical 
area and outlines a number of restrictions that would be enacted as part of the bill. 
At the time the bill was introduced in 2019, and debated by this committee of 
jurisdiction, there was little to no evidence there were problems with the use of or requirement 
for non-compete agreements in Maine. To our knowledge nothing has changed to alter this 
understanding since then. As such, we saw the law as unnecessary. LD 1496 goes further still, 
and with very narrow exceptions, if passed would effectively eliminate the use of non-compete 
agreements in Maine. We are opposed to this legislation. 
Currently, certain non-compete agreements are still allowed in Maine, and we believe 
for good reason. Those that protect an employer's trade secrets, that protect an employer's 
confidential information that is not a trade secret, and agreements that protect an employer's 
goodwill, remain permissible under law. However, LD 1469 strikes these protections. We would 
ask, how does an entrepreneur build a business, especially one that is or could be considered
"cutting edge" without the ability to safeguard their investment? The owner invests, 
and cultivates their business, hiring workers as they go along and expand. Lacking some form of 
non-compete agreement to protect their business, the employee(s) gain knowledge of the 
business, maybe the intricate aspects of the business, and under LD 1469, could literally walk 
across the street and set up a competing shop the next day. ls this fair? The fact is non- 
competes serve a need and purpose, and we do not think the state as a matter of policy, should 
eliminate their use here. 
Furthermore, non-compete agreements are limitations on ex-employees right to earna 
living, and as such the courts strictly apply certain tests. The outcome of the courts 
understanding of these tests determines the validity of the non-compete contract. First, the 
employee must receive something of value in exchange for the promise to refrain from 
competition. Depending upon when in the employment relationship the agreement is made, 
this item of value could be the job itself (when the agreement is made at the start of the 
employment relationship) or, if later in the relationship, it could be a promotion or annual bonus 
or other consideration of value to the employee. 
The second test the courts apply is that the agreement protects a legitimate business 
interest of the employer. These could include such interests as trade secrets, confidential 
information about operations or business practices, customer lists, or future plans for products 
or marketing initiatives. The employer has the burden of proof when it comes to determining to 
these business interests are reasonable. Last, the agreement must be reasonable in scope, 
geography, and time. 
According to information provided by the Maine Department of Labor in 2019, the 
following information regarding how courts have interpreted the use of non-compete 
agreements is as follows: 
According to Lawserver (https://wwW.lawserver.com//aw/articles/non-competition- 
agreements- in-Maine), Maine Courts have found the following examples to be valid and invalid, 
respectively: “Examples of non-compete agreements that Maine courts have found to be 
reasonable include: 
A 100-mile radius restriction against the former salesperson of a pipe and valve distributor 
where the distributor sought to enforce the restriction only as to two facilities instead of any of 
its facilities, as the agreement was written. 
A 3-year restriction against the former salesperson of a pipe and valve distributor from 
contacting, soliciting, or doing business with any entities that were customers while the 
salesperson worked for the former employer because it was reasonably necessary to protect the 
employer ’s confidential information. 
A 16-month, 2-mile radius restriction that the employer sought to enforce against a former 
employee optometrist even though, as written, the agreement could have covered a larger area. 
The courts have found the following restrictive covenants unreasonable: 
A 7-year, 60'“mile radius restriction on the sale of insurance. The restriction was mandated bya 
lower court relating to the disposition of an insurance agency during a divorce proceeding. 
A 5-year multi-city restriction against a real estate agent where the agent had only operated in 
one town.
It is our opinion that the use and application of non-compete agreements is well 
established in the Maine courts. To our knowledge, the use or requirement of non-competes is 
relatively limited in Maine, and legislation such a that proposed in LD 1496 is unnecessary and 
produce unintended consequences in the workplace. It is for these reasons we think the bill isa 
solution in search ofa problem and should be rejected. Thank you or your time.
