. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
. (207) 287-1400 
Sophie Warm, TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
P.O. Box1 
Scarborough, ME 04070 
Phone: (207) 450-0765 
Sophia.Warren@legislature.maine.gov 
April 19, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Sophie Warren Presenting 
LD 1496, An Act to Prohibit Noncompete Clauses 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Good moming Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and respected members of the Labor and 
Housing Committee. My name is Sophie Warren, and I represent House district 124. Thank you 
for the opportunity to present LD 1496, An Act to Prohibit Noncompete Clauses. 
The problem this bill seeks to address is not new. I’m talking about our states’ long-standing 
labor shortage. In a state where our workforce participation rate has for a period —— arguably 
spamaing at least thirty years — been declining due to young Mainers leaving the state to take 
their talents to states with greater opportunities, Mainers aging out of the workforce, and our 
inability to sufﬁciently nor sustainably attract new workers. Combine these longstanding labor 
challenges with the pandemic, we need to be doing everything we can to make sure people can 
work in our state. 
This bill offers one such proposal —— free workers in our state of restrictions from noncompete 
agreements. 
Noncompete clauses are often seen as bad for workers and the economy because they can limit 
job mobility and innovation. 
In Maine, noncompete clauses have been a subject of debate because they can be seen asa 
barrier to economic growth and job creation. 
In response to these concems, Maine passed legislation in 2019 that limits the use of noncompete 
clauses in employment contracts. Under the law, employers in Maine cannot require low-wage 
workers, intems, or employees who have been terminated without cause to sign noncompete 
agreements. The law also requires that all noncompete agreements be written in clear and 
concise language and be provided to employees before they accept a job offer. 
The bill before you today takes this effort an important step further. Though you will see a few 
reasonable exceptions modeled by a recent proposal by the FTC proposing a federal ban on 
noncompete clauses released in January of this year, the broader elimination of these clauses isa 
increasingly valuable policy tool our state can choose to address cross-sector and decades-long 
workforce shortages. 
Noncompete clauses can prevent workers from leaving one company for another, even if they 
have skills that are in demand. This can limit workers’ ability to negotiate for better wages and 
District 124: Part of Scarborough
working conditions, and it can also limit companies ’ ability to hire the best talent. This can 
ultimately lead to a less dynamic and less competitive job market. 
Another concem is that noncompete clauses can limit innovation. When workers are bound by 
noncompete agreements, they may be hesitant to start their own businesses or work for startups, 
which can be a major source of innovation and job creation. This can make it harder for Maine to 
attract and retain entrepreneurs and other highly skilled workers who could contribute to the 
state's economy. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of how we can continue and further our efforts to 
address our long-standing labor shortage, keep young Mainers in our state, and attract the 
workers we need to strengthen and sustain our economic development. I am happy to answer any 
questions that you have. 
District 124: Part of Scarborough
