 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 873
S.P. 287 In Senate,  March  8, 2021
Resolve, To  Waive Reductions to Nursing  Facility Reimbursement  
Resulting from  Payroll  Protection Program Loans and Grants
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
DAREK M.  GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BALDACCI of Penobscot.

Page 1 - 130LR1293(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, nursing facilities are facing increased cost pressures from protecting 
4 vulnerable residents from the risks of the coronavirus that causes COVID-19; and
5Whereas, nursing facilities are struggling to remain operational and federal Paycheck 
6 Protection Program funds are intended to keep facilities operational, and reducing or 
7 adjusting allowable MaineCare costs based on Paycheck Protection Program funds the 
8 facilities are receiving is counterproductive; and
9Whereas, nursing facilities may be filing cost reports prior to 90 days after 
10 adjournment; and
11Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
12 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
13 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
14 therefore, be it
15Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to waive potential 
16reductions from Paycheck Protection Program funds.  Resolved:  That the 
17 Department of Health and Human Services shall waive any reduction or adjustment to 
18 allowable MaineCare costs on filed or audited cost reports under department rule Chapter 
19 101: MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapter III, Section 67, Principles of Reimbursement 
20 for Nursing Facilities, that would result from the receipt of a loan or grant from the federal 
21 Small Business Administration under the Paycheck Protection Program established by the 
22 federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act and any subsequent federal 
23 Act.
24Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
25 takes effect when approved.
26SUMMARY
27 This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to waive any 
28 reduction or adjustment to allowable MaineCare costs on filed or audited cost reports that 
29 would result from a loan or grant received under the federal Paycheck Protection Program.27
28
29
