 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 766
H.P. 571 House of  Representatives, March 5, 2021
An Act  To Ensure the Safety of Certain  State Employees by 
Allowing Disclosure of Certain  Confidential Information in  Limited  
Circumstances
Submitted by the Department of  Health and Human  Services pursuant  to Joint Rule 204.
Reference to the Committee on Health  and Human Services suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HARNETT of  Gardiner.

Page 1 - 130LR0071(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA §4008, sub-§2, ¶A-2 is enacted to read:
3 A-2.  An administrator of a social media service, to the extent authorized by a court for 
4 reporting, investigating or removing a threat or serious intimidation attempt directed 
5 against an employee of the department, an employee of the Attorney General's office, 
6 a guardian ad litem or an officer of any court or court system.  The information remains 
7 confidential and the social media service may not redisclose any of the information 
8 provided by the department.  For the purposes of this subsection, "social media service" 
9 means an electronic medium or service through which users create, share and view 
10 user-generated content;
11SUMMARY
12 This bill allows the Department of Health and Human Services, with court 
13 authorization, to release confidential information maintained in its child protective records 
14 to an administrator of a social media service to report, investigate or remove a threat or 
15 serious intimidation attempt directed at department staff, an employee of the Attorney 
16 General's office, a guardian ad litem or a court officer.  The bill also defines the term "social 
17 media service" and prohibits a social media service from redisclosing the confidential 
18 information provided by the department.
