 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 692
H.P. 504 House of  Representatives, March 4, 2021
An Act  To Establish the Operation Game Thief Fund and Allow an 
Applicant for a State  Hunting or Fishing  License  To Make  a 
Donation To Prevent  Illegal Hunting and  Fishing
Received by the Clerk of the House on March 2, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  pursuant  to Joint  Rule  308.2 and ordered printed  pursuant to  Joint  
Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative ORDWAY of Standish.

Page 1 - 130LR0695(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  12 MRSA ยง10268 is enacted to read:
3ยง10268.  Operation Game Thief Fund
4 The Operation Game Thief Fund, referred to in this section as "the fund," is established 
5 within the department as a nonlapsing fund to be used by the commissioner to fund or assist 
6 in funding an organization whose primary purpose is to prevent illegal hunting and fishing 
7 and the unlawful introduction of nonnative fish to lakes, ponds and streams in this State by 
8 offering rewards to individuals who report illegal hunting and fishing.  The commissioner 
9 shall establish on the department's online licensing system a check-off option that allows a 
10 person to donate money to the fund.  The check-off option must be prominently displayed 
11 and contain links to information about how the check-off revenues have been and will be 
12 used.  The commissioner also shall print in a prominent place on every paper application 
13 for a hunting license and for a fishing license a check-off option that allows a person to 
14 donate money to the fund.  Revenues from the checkoffs must be deposited in the fund and 
15 used for purposes of this section.  The commissioner may accept and deposit into the fund 
16 monetary gifts, donations or other contributions from public or private sources for the 
17 purposes specified in this section.  The fund must be held separate and apart from all other 
18 money, funds and accounts.  The department shall report annually to the joint standing 
19 committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over inland fisheries and wildlife matters 
20 on the fund and its utilization.
21SUMMARY
22 This bill creates the Operation Game Thief Fund within the Department of Inland 
23 Fisheries and Wildlife in order to collect money donated through a voluntary check-off 
24 system on state hunting and fishing licenses to support organizations that work to prevent 
25 poaching and the introduction of nonnative fish to lakes, ponds and streams in Maine by 
26 offering rewards to individuals who report violations. It also directs the Commissioner of 
27 Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to establish the check-off system on the online and paper 
28 hunting and fishing license applications.
