 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 64
H.P. 30 House of  Representatives, January 13, 2021
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine Regarding Environmental Rights
Received by the Clerk of the House on January 11, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Environment and  Natural  Resources pursuant to Joint  Rule  308.2 and  ordered printed  pursuant 
to Joint  Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative O'NEIL  of Saco.

Page 1 - 130LR0145(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IX, ยง26 is enacted to read:
5Section 26.  Environmental rights.  The following provisions govern 
6 environmental rights and public natural resources.
71.  Clean and healthy environment.  Every person has a right to a clean and 
8 healthy environment, including pure water, clean air and ecologically healthy habitats, and 
9 to the preservation of the natural, scenic, historic and esthetic qualities of the environment.  
10 The State may not infringe upon these rights, by action or inaction.
112.  Public natural resources.  The State's public natural resources, among them its 
12 waters, air, flora, fauna, climate and public lands, are the common property of all the 
13 people, including both present and future generations.  The State shall serve as trustee of 
14 these resources, and shall conserve and maintain them for the benefit of all people.
153.  In addition to other rights.  This Section and the rights stated in this Section 
16 are in addition to any rights conferred by the public trust doctrine or common law.
17Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
18Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
19 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
20 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
21 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
22 resolution by voting upon the following question:
23 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to grant every person 
24 the right to a clean and healthy environment and require the State to protect 
25 public natural resources?"
26 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
27 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
28 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
29 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
30 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
31 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
32 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
33 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
34Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
35 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
36 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
37SUMMARY
38 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to provide that every 
39 person has a right to a clean and healthy environment.  This includes the right to clean air, 
40 pure water and healthy habitats.  The amendment requires the State to preserve public 
41 natural resources.
