 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 965
H.P. 711 House of  Representatives, March 9, 2021
An Act  Concerning Nondisclosure  Agreements  in Employment
Reference to the Committee on Labor and Housing suggested and  ordered printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HARNETT of  Gardiner.
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT  of Knox and
Representatives: EVANGELOS of Friendship, MORALES of South Portland, PEBWORTH of Blue Hill, Senator:  CARNEY  of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 130LR1162(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  26 MRSA ยง599-C is enacted to read:
3ยง599-C.  Nondisclosure agreements
41.  Employer defined.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, 
5 "employer" means a person in this State that employs individuals and includes the State 
6 and political subdivisions of the State. "Employer" includes a person acting in the interest 
7 of an employer directly or indirectly.
82.  Certain preemployment and employment agreements prohibited.  An employer 
9 may not require an employee, intern or applicant for employment to enter into a contract 
10 or agreement that waives or limits any right to report or discuss discrimination, retaliation 
11 or harassment occurring in the workplace or at work-related events.
123.  Certain settlement, separation and severance agreements prohibited. An 
13 employer may not require an employee, intern or applicant for employment to enter into a 
14 settlement, separation or severance agreement that includes a provision that:
15 A.  Limits an individual's right to report, testify or provide evidence to a federal or state 
16 agency that enforces employment or discrimination laws;
17 B.  Prevents an individual from testifying or providing evidence in federal and state 
18 court proceedings in response to legal process; or
19 C.  Prohibits an individual from reporting conduct to a law enforcement agency.
204.  Mutuality of nondisclosure agreements.  A settlement, separation or severance 
21 agreement may include a provision that prevents the subsequent disclosure of factual 
22 information relating to a claim of discrimination, retaliation or harassment, but only if:
23 A.  The employee, intern or applicant for employment initiates a request for such a 
24 provision;
25 B.  The provision applies to all parties to the agreement to the extent otherwise 
26 permitted by law;
27 C.  The agreement clearly states that the individual retains the right to report, testify or 
28 provide evidence to federal and state agencies that enforce employment or 
29 discrimination laws and to testify and provide evidence in federal and state court 
30 proceedings; and
31 D.  The employer retains a copy of the agreement for 6 years following the execution 
32 of the agreement or the end of employment, whichever is later. Records required to be 
33 kept by this paragraph must be accessible to any representative of the Department of 
34 Labor at any reasonable hour.
355.  Enforcement.  The Department of Labor shall enforce this section.
366.  Penalties.  An employer that violates this section:
37 A.  May be assessed a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of this section, which 
38 must be paid to the Treasurer of State; and
39 B.  Shall pay liquidated damages to the individual in an amount equal to 3 times the 
40 amount of the total assessed fines, except that for an employer's discharge of or refusal 
Page 2 - 130LR1162(01)41 to hire an individual who declines to enter into a contract or agreement that waives or 
42 limits any right to report or discuss discrimination, retaliation or harassment occurring 
43 in the workplace or at work-related events, the individual may elect:
4 (1)  To receive liquidated damages pursuant to this paragraph; or
5 (2)  Employment or reinstatement with back wages.
6SUMMARY
7 This bill prohibits an employer from requiring an employee, intern or applicant for 
8 employment to enter into a contract or agreement that waives or limits any right to report 
9 or discuss discrimination, retaliation or harassment occurring in the workplace or at work-
10 related events.
11 It also prohibits an employer from requiring an employee, intern or applicant for 
12 employment to enter into a settlement, separation or severance agreement that limits an 
13 individual's right to report, testify or provide evidence to a federal or state agency that 
14 enforces employment or discrimination laws, prevents an individual from testifying or 
15 providing evidence in federal and state court proceedings in response to legal process or 
16 prohibits an individual from reporting conduct to a law enforcement agency. This bill 
17 allows a settlement, separation or severance agreement, under certain circumstances, to 
18 include a provision that prevents the subsequent disclosure of factual information relating 
19 to a claim of discrimination, retaliation or harassment.
20 It provides the Department of Labor with the duty to enforce these provisions and 
21 allows an individual to receive liquidated damages or to be employed or reinstated with 
22 back wages when an employer discharges or refuses to hire an individual who declines to 
23 enter into a contract or agreement that waives or limits any right to report or discuss 
24 discrimination, retaliation or harassment occurring in the workplace or at work-related 
25 events.1
2
3
7
8
9
10
