 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 153
H.P. 109 House of  Representatives, January 21, 2021
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to  the Constitution of 
Maine To Change the Number of Legislators  Required To Approve  
a Constitutional Amendment
Received by the Clerk of the House on January 19, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
State and Local Government pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered  printed pursuant to Joint 
Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative KINNEY of  Knox.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  BRADSTREET of Vassalboro, DOLLOFF  of Milton 
Township, HALL  of Wilton, TUELL of East  Machias.

Page 1 - 130LR0413(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. X, Sec. 4 is amended to read:
5Section 4.  Amendments to Constitution.  The Legislature, whenever 2/3 of both 
6 Houses all the members elected to each House shall deem it necessary, may propose 
7 amendments to this Constitution; and when any amendments shall be so agreed upon, a 
8 resolution shall be passed and sent to the selectmen of the several towns, and the assessors 
9 of the several plantations, empowering and directing them to notify the inhabitants of their 
10 respective towns and plantations, in the manner prescribed by law, at the next biennial 
11 meetings in the month of November, or to meet in the manner prescribed by law for calling 
12 and holding biennial meetings of said inhabitants for the election of Senators and 
13 Representatives, on the Tuesday following the first Monday of November following the 
14 passage of said resolve, to give in their votes on the question, whether such amendment 
15 shall be made; and if it shall appear that a majority of the inhabitants voting on the question 
16 are in favor of such amendment, it shall become a part of this Constitution.
17Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
18Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
19 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
20 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
21 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
22 resolution by voting upon the following question:
23 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require a 2/3 vote of 
24 all the members elected to each House of the Legislature, rather than a 2/3 
25 vote of the members present, for the Legislature to propose an amendment 
26 to the Constitution of Maine?"
27 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
28 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
29 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
30 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
31 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
32 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
33 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
34 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
35Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
36 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
37 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
38SUMMARY
39 This resolution proposes an amendment to the Constitution of Maine to require a 2/3 
40 vote of all the members elected to each House of the Legislature, rather than a 2/3 vote of 
41 the members present, for the Legislature to propose an amendment to the Constitution of 
42 Maine.
