 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 82
H.P. 48 House of  Representatives, January 13, 2021
Resolve, To  Provide for Participation of  the State in the Planning 
and Negotiations  for the Atlantic Loop Energy Project
(EMERGENCY)
Received by the Clerk of the House on January 11, 2021.  Referred to the Committee  on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology  pursuant  to Joint Rule  308.2 and ordered printed  pursuant to  
Joint Rule 401.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative KESSLER of South Portland.

Page 1 - 130LR0210(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, the Government of Canada in the 2020 Speech from the Throne announced 
4 the Atlantic Loop, a project that will create a continuous transmission and power supply 
5 interconnection among the 5 provinces and will pass through Maine; and
6Whereas, the Atlantic Loop can provide the State with access to renewable power 
7 supply originating in the affected Canadian provinces as well as access to Canadian markets 
8 for renewable power supply developed and sited in Maine; and
9Whereas, the State has an interest in the project identical to that of the 5 provinces 
10 and will be affected in the same manner; and
11Whereas, the Atlantic Loop, which will have a direct effect on the State, is being 
12 actively pursued with a view to arriving at early agreements soon for its creation; and
13Whereas, ensuring access and treatment for the State's customers, transmission 
14 operators and power suppliers equal to that accorded to the 5 provinces is an objective of 
15 the State and is attainable by the use of its regulatory and other authorities to represent the 
16 economic and environmental interests of the State in the negotiations; and
17Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
18 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
19 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
20 therefore, be it
21Sec. 1.  State to request participation in Atlantic Loop planning and 
22negotiations.  Resolved:  That the Governor shall inform the Prime Minister of Canada 
23 and the premiers of the provinces of New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova 
24 Scotia, Prince Edward Island and Quebec that the State has a direct interest in all aspects 
25 of the Canadian project, referred to in this resolve as "the Atlantic Loop," to link the electric 
26 grids of the provinces of New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, 
27 Prince Edward Island and Quebec for the purpose of increasing access to renewable power 
28 supply and requests participation on an equal footing in the negotiations relative to its 
29 creation, operation and management.
30Sec. 2.  State to develop and pursue policies promoting and facilitating 
31participation in the Atlantic Loop.  Resolved:  That, in participating in the planning 
32 and negotiations on the Atlantic Loop, the Governor, assisted by such state agencies and 
33 other interested parties as the Governor designates, shall develop and pursue policies, 
34 consistent with state law, designed to maximize the benefits that all affected parties in the 
35 State can obtain from it.
36Sec. 3.  Governor to inform the Legislature.  Resolved:  That the Governor 
37 shall report not less than once every 3 months to the joint standing committee of the 
38 Legislature having jurisdiction over electric utility matters on the status and substance of 
39 the State's involvement in all matters relative to the Atlantic Loop.
40Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
41 takes effect when approved.
Page 2 - 130LR0210(01)1SUMMARY
2 This resolve provides for the immediate, direct involvement of the State in the planning 
3 and negotiations on the Atlantic Loop, a Canadian electric transmission and power supply 
4 project intended to pass through the State, enabling possible participation in it on an equal 
5 footing with the Canadian provinces of New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, 
6 Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and Quebec.
