 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper130th MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2021
Legislative Document No. 758
H.P. 563 House of  Representatives, March 5, 2021
Resolve, To  Study Streamlining the Background Check Process for 
State-licensed Professions That  Require  Background Checks
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Criminal  Justice and Public Safety suggested and  ordered 
printed.
ROBERT  B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative McCREA of Fort Fairfield.
Cosponsored by Representatives:  ARATA  of New Gloucester, BRYANT of Windham, 
O'NEIL of  Saco, Senators: CHIPMAN of Cumberland, MIRAMANT of Knox.

Page 1 - 130LR0087(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, currently a number of state departments and agencies require background 
4 checks for their employees and contractors; and
5Whereas, most of these background checks are ultimately conducted by the 
6 Department of Public Safety, State Bureau of Identification, and the process of requiring 
7 and obtaining background checks is inconsistent and confusing; and
8Whereas, it is imperative that this confusion be resolved as soon as possible to ensure 
9 that the purpose of the background checks, namely ensuring the proper security of 
10 employees and contractors, is realized; and
11Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
12 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
13 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
14 therefore, be it
15Sec. 1.  Background check study by State Bureau of Identification; 
16definitions.  Resolved:  That the Department of Public Safety, State Bureau of 
17 Identification shall convene a study of the current system of background checks.
18 As used in this resolve, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have 
19 the following meanings.
20 1. "Background check" means the taking of fingerprints and other criminal history 
21 record information by the bureau pertinent to the identification of individuals who have 
22 been arrested as fugitives from justice or who have been arrested or charged with any 
23 criminal offense under the laws of this State except a violation of the Maine Revised 
24 Statutes, Title 12 or 29-A that is a Class D or E crime other than an alcohol-related or drug-
25 related offense or individuals who have been taken into custody for juvenile crimes under 
26 a uniform interstate compact on juveniles or who have been arrested or charged with 
27 juvenile crimes under the laws of this State.
28 2. "Bureau" means the Department of Public Safety, State Bureau of Identification.
29Sec. 2.  Membership.  Resolved:  That, in addition to an employee of the bureau 
30 involved with the conduct of background checks, the following shall participate in the study 
31 of background checks:
32 1.  The Commissioner of Education or the commissioner's designee;
33 2.  The Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the commissioner's designee;
34 3.  The Commissioner of Public Safety or the commissioner's designee; and
35 4.  The Commissioner of Health and Human Services or the commissioner's designee.
36 The bureau may invite the participation of any other person the bureau determines to 
37 be necessary to the success of the background check study.
38Sec. 3.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the bureau shall study consolidating and 
39 centralizing as many state-required background checks required for employment or as 
40 contractors as possible, including background checks for teachers, state workers, persons 
Page 2 - 130LR0087(01)41 seeking Maine guide licenses and persons hired as contractors, including the statutory 
42 requirements for background checks.
3Sec. 4.   Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 1, 2021, the bureau shall 
4 submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 
5 legislation, for presentation to the Second Regular Session of the 130th Legislature.
6Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
7 takes effect when approved.
8SUMMARY
9 This resolve establishes the Background Check Consolidation Commission to study 
10 consolidating and centralizing as many state-required background checks required for 
11 employment as possible, including background checks for teachers, state workers and 
12 persons seeking Maine guide licenses.1
2
9
10
11
12
